

|SB (PSG - Protection Regulations - Reg 6) Moldova CG [2008] UKAIT 00002     |
|      |                                                                    |
|                                                                            |
|asylum and immigration Tribunal                                             |
|                  |                      |                |                  |
|                  |                      |                |                  |
|the immigration Acts                                                        |
|         |                       |                      |                  |
|Heard at:|Hatton Cross                |Dates of hearing: |25 April 2007     |
|         |                            |                  |& 26 April 2007   |
|         |                      |Determination notified: |                  |
|         |                                                                  |
|                                                                            |
|Before                                                                      |
|                                                                            |
|Senior Immigration Judge Gill                                               |
|Designated Immigration Judge Digney                                         |
|Mr. M. L. James                                                             |
|                                                                            |
|                                                                            |
|Between                                                                     |
|           |                                                   |           |
|           |SB                                                 |Appellant  |
|                                                                            |
|and                                                                         |
|           |                                                   |           |
|           |                                                   |           |
|           |The Secretary of State for the Home Department     |Respondent |
|           |                                                   |           |
|           |                                                   |           |
|                                                                          |


Representation:

For  the  Appellant:      Ms.  P.  Chandran,  of  Counsel,   instructed   by
                    Hammersmith & Fulham Community Law Centre (HFCLC).
For  the  Respondent:     Mr.  P.  Patel,  of  Counsel,  instructed  by  The
                    Solicitor to HM Treasury.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. If individuals  share  a  common  background  which  is  an  immutable
      characteristic they cannot change  and  which  defines  the  group  by
      giving it a distinct identity in the society  in  question  which  has
      nothing to do with the actions of the  future  persecutors,  then  the
      group exists independently of the feared future act(s) of persecution.
      It is not necessary to show general discrimination as  an  identifying
      characteristic of the group.


   2. "Former victims of trafficking" and "former victims of trafficking for
      sexual exploitation" are capable of  being  members  of  a  particular
      social group within regulation 6(1)(d) because of their shared  common
      background or past experience of having been trafficked.


   3. The word "and" in regulation 6(1)(d)  of  the  Protection  Regulations
      should be given its natural meaning.


   4. In the context of Moldovan society, a woman who  has  been  trafficked
      for the purposes of sexual exploitation is a member  of  a  particular
      social group within regulation 6(1)(d), the particular social group in
      question   being   "former   victims   of   trafficking   for   sexual
      exploitation".  Whether  a  particular  individual  is  at   risk   of
      persecution for membership of that group needs to be  decided  on  the
      facts of the case.


Background

1.    This is an up-grade appeal under section  83(2)  of  the  Nationality,
      Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  (as  amended)  by  the  Appellant,  a
      national of Moldova in her  twenties,  against  the  decision  of  the
      Respondent of 4 October 2006 to refuse her application for asylum  and
      to grant humanitarian protection for five  years.  The  Appellant  was
      granted limited leave until 3 October 2011. Under  section  83(2),  an
      appeal may  only  be  brought  on  asylum  grounds.  Accordingly,  Ms.
      Chandran confirmed that previous grounds under Articles 3  and  8  are
      not being  pursued.  The  Respondent's  decision  was  served  on  the
      Appellant on 27 October 2006, that is, after the coming into effect on
      9 October 2006 of the Refugee  or  Person  in  Need  of  International
      Protection   (Qualification)   Regulations   2006   (the    Protection
      Regulations) and Command paper 6918  (Cmnd  6918)  which  amended  the
      Immigration Rules. These implement Council Directive 2004/83/EC of  28
      April 2004 (the Qualification Directive).

Basis of claim

2.    The Appellant had been trafficked into  the  United  Kingdom  for  the
      purposes  of  sexual  exploitation.  She  subsequently  gave  evidence
      against the person responsible for  her  sexual  exploitation  in  the
      United Kingdom (who we will hereafter refer to as Z),  which  resulted
      in the successful prosecution of Z.  Z received a term of imprisonment
      in excess of five years, for offences of controlling prostitution  and
      false imprisonment. Z is now at large. The Appellant fears harm at the
      hands of Z, Z's family and  Z's  associates  if  she  is  returned  to
      Moldova. The Respondent's "Reasons for refusal" letter dated 4 October
      2006 sets out a  detailed  summary  of  the  Appellant's  evidence  in
      relation to her asylum claim.  No  issue  has  been  taken  with  that
      summary, nor is credibility in issue in this  case.  It  is  not  only
      unnecessary but inadvisable for the Tribunal  to  set  out  the  facts
      relating to the Appellant's case in any greater detail.  In  order  to
      preserve anonymity, we will only refer to the subjective facts to  the
      extent necessary for our determination of the  issues  in  this  case.
      This should not, however, be taken as an indication that we  have  not
      considered the subjective evidence fully, or that we have reached  our
      decision in ignorance of  any  particular  aspect  of  the  subjective
      evidence.

3.    At paragraph 29 of the refusal letter, the Respondent stated that  the
      Appellant's case was considered to be exceptional.  The  reasons  were
      the fact of  Z's  trial,  that  Z  has  a  wide  network  of  contacts
      throughout Eastern Europe and the Appellant had  given  evidence  that
      Z's associates are still in Moldova and that the trafficking operation
      is still ongoing. The combination of "the particular  nature  of  this
      gang" and the Appellant's  personal  profile  led  the  Respondent  to
      conclude that the Appellant's  case  is  "exceptional".  However,  the
      Respondent  does  not  accept  that,  in  general  terms,   there   is
      insufficient protection for trafficked  women  or  women  at  risk  of
      trafficking in Moldova, nor does he accept that it would not  be  safe
      generally  for  such  women  to  relocate  internally.  However,   the
      Respondent does accept  that,  whilst  the  Moldovan  authorities  are
      willing to offer protection to the Appellant, they are unable to offer
      sufficient  protection  in  her  particular  case,  because   of   the
      exceptional facts of her case. Before us, Mr. Patel confirmed that the
      Respondent accepts that the Appellant would  not  be  able  to  obtain
      sufficient protection in Moldova and that she would  not  be  able  to
      relocate safely in Moldova.

The hearing before us

4.    At the hearing, the issues between the parties were agreed  to  be  as
      follows:

      (a)   whether the Appellant is a member of a particular social  group;



      (b)   whether the risk of  any  future  persecution  would  be  for  a
           Geneva Convention reason or ground - i.e. whether the  Appellant
           is at real risk of persecution by reason of  her  membership  of
           the particular social group. This is the causation question.

      Application to rely on an unreported determination

5.    Ms. Chandran sought to rely on  an  unreported  determination  of  the
      Immigration Appeal Tribunal (IAT) under reference: 00TH00728, notified
      on 17 May 2000. We will refer to this case as LD Ukraine. Ms. Chandran
      submitted that the Tribunal  would  be  materially  assisted  by  this
      decision, for the reasons set out in the "amended  application"  dated
      24 April 2007 which was served with a cover letter from HFCLC  of  the
      same date. Ms. Chandran wished to rely on paragraphs 28 to  30  of  LD
      Ukraine.

6.    Mr. Patel objected to the application to rely on LD  Ukraine,  because
      paragraphs 17.8 and 17.9 of  the  Practice  Directions  had  not  been
      complied with. In his submission, the Tribunal would not be materially
      assisted by the decision in LD  Ukraine,  for  the  reasons  given  at
      paragraphs 52 to 54 of his skeleton argument.

7.    We decided that we would admit the LD Ukraine decision de  bene  esse,
      as we considered it difficult to assess  whether  the  decision  would
      materially  assist  the  Tribunal  in  isolation  from  the   parties'
      substantive submissions on the issues before us.

8.    We should mention that, at the  commencement  of  the  hearing  on  25
      April 2007, the parties were in agreement  on  one  matter  which  had
      previously been in issue. This concerns the  effect  of  a  successful
      appeal on asylum grounds under section 83(2) on a  previous  grant  of
      humanitarian protection. Mr. Patel  explained  that  the  Respondent's
      position  is  that,  if  the  appeal  is  successful,  the  grant   of
      humanitarian protection  to  the  Appellant  will  convert  to  asylum
      status. In that  event,  the  Respondent's  practice  is  to  issue  a
      confirmatory letter. However, this would not  result  in  any  changes
      (whether in terms of conditions attached or the duration of the leave)
      to the limited leave of 5 years'  duration,  which  has  already  been
      granted. Prior to the last date of the limited  leave,  the  Appellant
      would be able to apply for indefinite leave to remain in the same  way
      as she would have been able to if the protection-status granted to her
      had remained as humanitarian protection. Ms.  Chandran  confirmed  her
      agreement to this.  Accordingly,  this  matter  was  not  pursued  any
      further.

9.    It was initially thought that this appeal  would  be  heard  with  up-
      grade appeals by two Romanian nationals which raised  the  same  legal
      questions we have  set  out  at  paragraph  4  above.  To  assist  the
      Tribunal, the Treasury Solicitor undertook  to  serve  a  consolidated
      bundle of documents (agreed by both parties) for all three appeals. In
      the event, it was not possible to complete the  hearings  of  the  two
      Romanian cases, whereas the hearing  in  respect  of  the  Appellant's
      appeal was concluded on 26 April 2007. This explains the  presence  of
      documentary  material  relating  to  Appellants  "MM"  and  "EM"   and
      background evidence relating to Romania in the bundles before us.

10.   The Tribunal confirms receipt of a letter dated  30  April  2007  from
      HFCLC together with the skeleton argument  of  Mr.  Nicholas  Jariwala
      (who we understand is a Home Office Presenting Officer),  referred  to
      by the expert Ms. Rebecca Surtees in her "comments" dated 13  February
      2007. The expert's evidence is relied upon to support the  Appellant's
      argument that she is  a  member  of  a  particular  social  group.  We
      requested Mr. Jariwala's skeleton argument to be submitted because Ms.
      Surtees referred to it in her "comments".

Submissions

11.   The parties' detailed submissions are  set  out  in  their  respective
      skeleton  arguments.  The  following  is  a  summary  of  their   main
      arguments.

12.   Ms. Chandran suggested three possible "particular social  groups",  as
           follows:

            (i)  women in Moldova;
            (ii) former victims of trafficking in Moldova; and
            (iii)      victims of trafficking for  the  purposes  of  sexual
      exploitation.

13.   Ms. Chandran submitted that discrimination does not need to be one  of
      the identifying characteristics or features  of  a  particular  social
      group. Baroness Hale of Richmond in ex parte Hoxha [2005] UKHL 19  (at
      paragraph 37) said that women who have been victims of sexual violence
      in the past are linked by an immutable characteristic which is at once
      independent  of  and  the  cause  of  their   current   ill-treatment.
      Accordingly, in Ms. Chandran's submission, past experience  of  sexual
      violence is sufficient as an  identifying  characteristic.  It  is  an
      immutable characteristic.  Accordingly, the suggested groups (ii)  and
      (iii) satisfy the definition of "particular social group". It  is  not
      being asserted on the Appellant's behalf that all members of suggested
      groups (ii) and (iii) would be at real risk of persecution in  Moldova
      by reason of their membership of a particular social group.

14.   Ms. Chandran relied on the  fourth  paragraph  from  the  end  of  the
      opinion of Lord Hoffmann in R. v. IAT, ex parte Shah and Islam v. SSHD
      [1999] 2 AC 629, which we quote at paragraph 45  (vi)  below.  In  Ms.
      Chandran's submission, this shows that there  is  no  requirement  for
      state complicity in  discriminatory  action  by  non-state  actors  of
      persecution. In other words, it is not necessary to show that there is
      institutionalised  discrimination,  or  state-sanctioned   or   state-
      condoned discrimination. In the judgment of  the  House  of  Lords  in
      Fornah v. SSHD, K. v. SSHD [2006] UKHL 46, their Lordships approved of
      the UNHCR's Guidelines on Membership  of  a  Particular  Social  Group
      dated 7 May 2002 (the UNHCR's PSG Guidelines) (pages 1568 to  1572  of
      bundle 4). The crux of the Appellant's case rests on paragraph 101  of
      the opinion of Baroness  Hale  of  Richmond  in  Fornah  and  K.  Harm
      directed towards women is  gender-specific  harm.  The  Appellant  was
      trafficked because she is a woman. She is at real risk of serious harm
      in Moldova because she gave evidence  against  her  traffickers.  That
      arose, she submitted, on account of having been trafficked because she
      was a woman living in Moldova.

15.   Ms. Chandran further submitted that the mere fact that  the  Appellant
      has been trafficked does not mean that  the  particular  social  group
      that she belongs to is not independent of the feared persecution.  The
      fact of having been trafficked is a historical fact. It  is  a  common
      characteristic which she shares with other victims of trafficking  and
      which is immutable.

16.   In MP (Trafficking - sufficiency of protection) Romania  [2005]  UKIAT
      00086 the Tribunal concluded that "people who  have  been  trafficked"
      are not members of  a  particular  social  group.  In  Ms.  Chandran's
      submission, the reasons the Tribunal  gave  at  paragraph  95  of  the
      determination for reaching this conclusion are wrong. Whilst it may be
      that the Respondent is correct to say that the Court of Appeal  in  RG
      (Ethiopia) v. SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 339 was  of  the  view  that  state
      complicity or discrimination may be necessary in order to  identify  a
      particular social group, Ms. Chandran submitted that it would be going
      too far to suggest that discrimination must always be present.

17.   Even if discrimination is a necessary identifying characteristic of  a
      particular social group, Ms. Chandran submitted  that  the  background
      evidence relating  to  Moldova  shows  that  women  are  discriminated
      against in Moldova  and  that  the  suggested  group  (i)  above  also
      satisfies the definition of "particular social  group".  Ms.  Chandran
      took us through the background evidence on which she  relied  and  the
      expert evidence of Ms. Surtees. There is evidence of state  complicity
      in the trafficking of women  in  Moldova.  Efforts  to  protect  women
      against trafficking are weak. The government  relies  heavily  on  the
      efforts  of  non-governmental  organisations  (NGOs),  who  cannot  be
      regarded as actors of protection under regulation 4 of the  Protection
      Regulations. There is a lot  of  evidence  of  corruption  within  the
      Moldovan government; indeed, very close to rampant corruption.

18.   In any event, the mere act of singling a person  out  for  persecution
      is an act of discrimination. Unwillingness on the part of the state to
      provide protection may be evidence of  discrimination.  However,  even
      where a state is unable to provide protection, for example, because of
      lack of resources or inefficiency, this can be seen  as  tolerance  by
      the state which enables the discriminatory treatment to be meted  out.
      Ms.  Chandran  relied  on  the  UNHCR's  Guidelines  on  International
      Protection Concerning Gender-Related Persecution dated 7 May 2002 (the
      UNHCR's Gender Guidelines) (pages 1558 to 1572 of bundle 4) which  she
      submitted had been accepted  in Fornah and K.

19.   Ms. Chandran accepted that the social group: "victims  of  trafficking
      for the purposes of sexual exploitation who have given evidence  which
      secured the  conviction  of  their  traffickers"  falls  foul  of  the
      requirement that the particular social  group  identified  must  exist
      independently of the persecution feared in the  future.  However,  Ms.
      Chandran submitted that the Appellant is at real risk of  persecution,
      not only because  she  testified  against  her  trafficker,  but  also
      because she is a woman from Moldova.  The  background  evidence  shows
      that there is a high  level  of  domestic  and  non-domestic  violence
      against women in Moldova, that they are generally unprotected and  are
      highly vulnerable to being  trafficked  for  the  purposes  of  sexual
      exploitation.

20.   On  the  issue  of  causation,  it  is  not  necessary,  Ms.  Chandran
      submitted, for  the  Appellant  to  show  that  her  membership  of  a
      particular  social  group  is  the  primary  reason  for  the   future
      persecution. It is sufficient if it is an  effective  reason  for  any
      further persecution. Ms.  Chandran  accepted  that  discrimination  is
      necessary to establish a causal nexus. In  her  submission,  this  was
      shown by the singling  out  of  the  Appellant  for  persecutory  ill-
      treatment.

21.   For the Respondent, Mr. Patel submitted that it is  incorrect  to  say
      that women are always members  of  a  particular  social  group.  Even
      Baroness Hale did not go as far as to say that at paragraph 101 of the
      judgment  in  Fornah  and  K.  Mr.  Patel  submitted  that  the  legal
      precedents  show  that   discrimination   must   be   an   identifying
      characteristic  of   a   particular   social   group.   Alternatively,
      discrimination must be present to establish causation. With regard  to
      the former point, Mr. Patel submitted that the  reason  why  women  in
      Pakistan were considered by the House of Lords in Shah and Islam to be
      members  of  a  particular  social  group  was  because  societal  and
      institutionalised discrimination against women in Pakistan  was  deep-
      rooted. Not only did the state sanction discrimination against  women,
      there  was  discriminatory  legislation   in   Pakistan.   Mr.   Patel
      particularly relied on specific passages from the opinions in Shah and
      Islam, which we will deal with below. The reason why discrimination is
      a necessary identifying characteristic of a  particular  social  group
      was explained by Lord Steyn by  reference  to  the  preambles  to  the
      Geneva Convention. The preambles show that a premise of the Convention
      was that all human beings shall enjoy fundamental rights and  freedoms
      and that counteracting discrimination was a fundamental purpose of the
      Convention.

22.   Mr. Patel also relied on the judgment of the House of Lords in  Fornah
      and K, referring us to specific passages which we will also deal  with
      below, to the extent we consider necessary. In Mr. Patel's submission,
      if women are always a "particular social group", this would  open  the
      possible grounds of persecution under the Geneva Convention too  wide.
      It is clear from the other four grounds of persecution that there must
      be discrimination of some form. It is clear from the speeches of  Lord
      Steyn and Lord Hope in Shah and Islam that women  are  not  particular
      social groups in all societies. However, women are a particular social
      group in  Pakistan  because  of  the  societal  and  institutionalised
      discrimination against them which is sanctioned  or  condoned  by  the
      state.

23.   In Fornah and K, the House of Lords held that  differential  treatment
      of women must exist for there to exist a particular social group based
      on gender.  The practice of female genital mutilation (FGM) in  Sierra
      Leone reinforces and  expresses  the  inferior  status  of  women,  as
      compared with men, in Sierra Leonean  society.  Paragraph  19  of  the
      judgment explains why the appellant K in Fornah and K was held to fear
      persecution by reason of her membership of a particular social  group,
      namely her husband's family. Paragraph 45 of the judgment explains how
      the  discrimination  requirement  was  satisfied   in   reaching   the
      conclusion that the fear  of  the  appellant  K  was  because  of  her
      membership of a particular  social  group.  At  paragraph  54  of  the
      judgment, Lord Hope explained that discrimination involves the  making
      of unfair or unjust distinctions, to the disadvantage of one group  or
      class of people, as compared with others. Paragraph 86 of the judgment
      of Baroness Hale states that women must have an inferior status in the
      home society before it can be  said  that  women  in  the  country  in
      question are a particular social group. Paragraph 93 of  the  judgment
      sets  out  the  extent  to  which  discrimination  against  women  was
      prevalent in Sierra Leone. At  paragraph  98  onwards,  Baroness  Hale
      considered the UNHCR's PSG Guidelines. It  is  clear,  from  paragraph
      101, that Baroness Hale considered that the Guidelines stop  short  of
      saying directly that women  are  always  a  particular  social  group,
      although they make it clear that, if a woman is persecuted because she
      is a woman and women generally are assigned an inferior status in  the
      society, then she should qualify for recognition as a refugee.

24.   Mr. Patel referred us to the determination of the Tribunal in  Montoya
      (01/TH/00161), in which the Tribunal had laid out a  number  of  basic
      principles, approved of by the Court of Appeal and which should govern
      the assessment of a claim made in  relation  to  a  particular  social
      group. The Tribunal stated that the "particular social  group"  ground
      is limited by the anti-discrimination notions inherent  in  the  basic
      norms of International Human Rights Law; applying the eiusdem  generis
      principle found in the other four grounds, the particular social group
      category  must  be  concerned  with  discrimination  directed  against
      members of that group, because of a common  immutable  characteristic.
      In RG (Ethiopia), the Court of Appeal held it was  not  necessary  for
      the discriminatory treatment to be  part  of  the  law  of  the  land.
      However, Mr. Patel submitted that it is clear from the  judgment  that
      it is, nevertheless, necessary to show that there is discrimination in
      society because it is necessary to be able to set the group apart.

25.   Mr. Patel noted that Ms. Chandran  had  accepted  that  discrimination
      was necessary, although her position was that the  discrimination  did
      not have to be discrimination at the  hands  of  the  state  and  that
      discrimination at the hands of a non-state  agent  would  qualify.  In
      addition, Ms. Chandran contended that the  act  of  persecution  could
      itself amount to discrimination and satisfy the  requirement  for  the
      group to be discriminated against. In Mr. Patel's submission,  it  had
      to be shown that  the  social  group  in  question  was  discriminated
      against, in the sense explained by Lord Hope at paragraph  54  of  the
      judgment in Fornah and K.

26.   At paragraph  120  of  the  judgment  in  Fornah  and  K,  Lord  Brown
      explained that the  group  must  exist  independently  of  the  feared
      persecution; the people in the qualifying group must  share  a  common
      characteristic. This is the  non-circularity  requirement,  which  Mr.
      Patel submitted applies in the instant case.

27.   In Mr. Patel's submission, the narrow social groups  which  have  been
      suggested - i.e. group (ii) (former victims of trafficking in Moldova)
      and group (iii) (victims of trafficking for  the  purposes  of  sexual
      exploitation) - cannot succeed for the following reasons:

      (i)   the group is defined by no more than the persecutory element  of
      trafficking;

      (ii)  the evidence does not establish the discriminatory treatment  of
           victims of trafficking in relation to the lack of protection  by
           the state authorities in Moldova;

      Alternatively, Mr. Patel submitted that causation is not  established.
      The Appellant's fear of persecution arises because she is likely to be
      the  subject  of  reprisals  from  Z  (or  Z's  powerful  family   and
      associates) against whom the Appellant gave  evidence  to  secure  Z's
      conviction in the United Kingdom. In other words, it is not  the  fact
      of having been trafficked, or that the Appellant is a woman, which  is
      the reason for the fear of persecution. The lack of protection against
      the fear is not on account of the Appellant's gender, or the fact that
      she has been trafficked. The state is unable to protect the Appellant,
      because of the powerful reach of Z or Z's family and  associates.  The
      necessary element of discrimination, either because the Appellant is a
      woman or because she is a former victim of  trafficking,  is  missing.
      Accordingly, it has not been shown that the Appellant's membership  of
      her particular social group is the effective reason for  the  lack  of
      state protection.

28.   In Mr. Patel's submission, a social group defined as: "former  victims
      of trafficking who have given evidence against their traffickers"  may
      overcome the causation difficulty.  However,  such  an  identification
      could not establish a particular social group as it  would  also  fall
      foul of the principle that the group must not be solely defined by the
      fear of persecution.

29.   Mr. Patel referred us to the judgment of the Court of Appeal  in  Chun
      Lan Lui [2005] EWCA Civ 249, in which case Lord Justice  Rix  reviewed
      the relevant jurisprudence of the US and  Commonwealth  jurisdictions.
      In particular, Mr. Patel relied on paragraph 29 of  the  judgment.  In
      Mr. Patel's submission, Lord Justice Rix concluded that discrimination
      was an important part of the identification  of  a  particular  social
      group.

30.   Mr. Patel further submitted that  the  comments  of  the  expert,  Ms.
      Surtees, dated 13 February 2007 (at pages 441 to  443  of  bundle  1),
      went against  her  opinion  in  her  letter  dated  13  February  2007
      responding to Home Office submissions of  13  February  2007.  In  the
      first paragraph on page 441 of bundle 1, Ms. Surtees  stated  that  it
      was not "Moldovan women per se that would  qualify  as  members  of  a
      particular social  group  under  the  Geneva  Convention,  but  rather
      Moldovan trafficking victims". In Mr. Patel's submission,  this  is  a
      legal question and not for an  expert  to  decide.  Furthermore,  this
      opinion goes against her later opinion, set out in a letter  dated  25
      April 2007 (page 443a of bundle 1), in which she said that,  based  on
      her experience, she was inclined  to  agree  with  the  argument  that
      "legislative, economic and social provisions in  Moldova  (and/or  the
      lack of enforcement of these provisions)  fail  to  provide  women  in
      Moldova" with effective protection from the harm of domestic and other
      gender-based violence. The fact that Ms. Surtees had changed her  mind
      goes against her credibility.  Mr.  Patel  submitted  that  the  first
      opinion of Ms. Surtees was correct i.e. women in  Moldova  are  not  a
      social group, because the discrimination women face in Moldova is  not
      the same as, or similar to,  the  discrimination  faced  by  women  in
      Pakistan (as found in Shah and Islam), or in Sierra Leone (as found in
      Fornah and K), or in Kenya (as found in P & M [2004] EWCA  Civ  1640).
      In Mr. Patel's submission, it would be rare that women are  persecuted
      by reason of their gender as women, as Lord Millett indicated in  Shah
      and Islam. The circumstances in which  women  would  be  found  to  be
      persecuted by reason of their gender must be akin to the circumstances
      found to exist in Pakistan in Shah  and  Islam,  or  Sierra  Leone  in
      Fornah and K.

31.   In Mr. Patel's submission, the Tribunal's reasoning at  paragraphs  47
      to 49  of  MP  Romania  defeats  the  arguments  relied  upon  on  the
      Appellant's behalf. In response to  the  Tribunal's  reasoning  in  MP
      Romania,  the  Appellant  relies  on  the   UNHCR's   "Guidelines   on
      International Protection: The application of Article 1A(2) of the 1951
      Convention and/or 1967 Protocol relating to the Status of Refugees  to
      Victims of Trafficking and Persons at risk of being trafficked"  dated
      April 2006 (the UNHCR's Trafficking Guidelines) (pages 1541 to 1557 of
      bundle 4) and the unreported case of LD Ukraine. Mr.  Patel  urged  us
      not to admit LD Ukraine. In any event, he submitted  that  LD  Ukraine
      does not assist. It concerned the situation for women  in  Ukraine  in
      April 2000. Furthermore, the  claimant  in  LD  Ukraine  feared  being
      prostituted against her will. In the  present  case,  the  Appellant's
      fear is that  she  would  be  trafficked  again  or  harmed  by  being
      trafficked again. The UNHCR's Trafficking  Guidelines  do  not  assist
      either, because they are guidance and  not  a  substitute  for  proper
      consideration of the issue.

32.   With regard to the background evidence, Mr. Patel submitted  that  the
      Moldovan  authorities  are  making  efforts  to  address  problems  of
      discrimination against women. However, progress is slow. The situation
      is not analogous to or  as  serious  as  the  situation  of  women  in
      Pakistan. Discrimination is not as deep-rooted as  the  discrimination
      which was found to exist against women in Pakistan in Shah  and  Islam
      and in Sierra Leone in Fornah and K.  Mr.  Patel  submitted  that  the
      situation of women in Moldova  is  significantly  different  from  the
      situation  of  women  in  Pakistan,  or  in  Sierra  Leone,  and   not
      significantly different from the situation  of  women  in  Romania  as
      found in MP Romania.

33.   In response, Ms. Chandran submitted that the Appellant does  not  fear
      indiscriminate violence. She fears being singled out for  persecution.
      The act of being singled out for persecution is sufficient  to  amount
      to discrimination identifying the  particular  social  group.  In  the
      opinion of Lord Hope in Fornah and K (paragraph 46 of  the  judgment),
      it would  be  a  mistake  to  insist  on  recognition  within  society
      subjectively that the collection of individuals is a group that is set
      apart from the rest of the community. In his Lordship's opinion, it is
      sufficient for the individual to be  seen  objectively  to  have  been
      singled out by the persecutor or persecutors for reasons of his or her
      membership   of   a   particular   social   group,   whose    defining
      characteristics exist independently of the words  or  actions  of  the
      persecutor. If membership of a particular social group  need  only  be
      one reason for the feared future persecution, then there  is  no  need
      for the particular social group to be the  effective  reason  for  the
      feared persecution. It is sufficient if it  is  an  effective  reason.
      The Appellant is a victim of  trafficking.  She  was  trafficked  only
      because she is a woman.  She  gave  evidence  against  her  trafficker
      because she had been trafficked. Accordingly, Ms.  Chandran  submitted
      that it was not possible to discount the Appellant's  gender,  or  the
      fact that she had been trafficked, as  an  effective  reason  for  the
      feared future persecution. The persecution she fears is that she would
      be re-trafficked, or that retaliatory action would  be  taken  against
      her, because she had given evidence against her trafficker. She  would
      be unprotected because of her gender as a woman. There is a prevalence
      of violence against women and a lack of legislation to outlaw violence
      against women. There are no enforcement measures.  There  are  deeply-
      rooted patriarchal views in Moldova, which mean  that  women  have  an
      inferior position in society. As  a  group,  women  are  discriminated
      against in Moldova because they lack protection  against  gender-based
      harm. The lack  of  protection  perpetrates  violence  against  women.
      Although there have been a number of convictions of traffickers, there
      is no protection offered by the Moldovan government  through  its  own
      funding.

34.   In other words, the Appellant's gender and the fact that she had  been
      trafficked places her in her current position of having a well-founded
      fear of future persecution. The Appellant would also be at  real  risk
      of being re-trafficked, because she would stand out as an  unprotected
      member of society as a person who  has  been  trafficked.  Victims  of
      trafficking are discriminated against in Moldova in social as well  as
      economic  ways.  The  test  is  not  whether  there   is   deep-rooted
      discrimination against the group as an identifying characteristic,  or
      in order to establish causation. Shah and Islam was decided before the
      UNHCR's Trafficking Guidelines. In Shah and Islam, the House of  Lords
      was considering whether women as a gender are members of a  particular
      social group in Pakistan.

35.   In Ms. Chandran's submission, causation relates to the reason for  the
      persecutory action and not the reason for  the  Appellant's  fear.  An
      effective reason for the persecutory action must  be  the  Appellant's
      membership of a particular social group. There was  no  suggestion  in
      Fornah and K that it was necessary for a family  to  be  discriminated
      against before the family could be regarded  as  a  particular  social
      group. The perception of society that a family is a  social  group  is
      enough.

36.   Montoya was decided before  the  UNHCR's  Trafficking  Guidelines  and
      before  the  Court  of  Appeal's  adoption  of  the   UNHCR's   Gender
      Guidelines. It was decided before Fornah and K, in which the House  of
      Lords considered that it was not necessary for both sub-paragraphs (i)
      and (ii) of Article 10.1(d)  of  the  Qualification  Directive  to  be
      satisfied. We questioned whether the observations of  their  Lordships
      in Fornah and K as to whether it would be necessary  to  satisfy  both
      sub-paragraphs (i) and (ii) of Article 10.1(d)  of  the  Qualification
      Directive  were,  strictly  speaking,  anything  other  than   obiter.
      However, neither Ms. Chandran nor Mr. Patel took  the  opportunity  to
      address us on this point, beyond Ms. Chandran saying that  she  relied
      on the fact that their Lordships had said that they considered that it
      would not be necessary to satisfy both sub-paragraphs of Article 10.

37.   In Ms. Chandran's submission, there is no  authority  to  support  the
      proposition that it is necessary for discrimination against  women  to
      be as deep-rooted in a particular society as the discrimination  found
      to exist in Pakistan against women, before women in that society would
      be regarded as members of a particular social group.

38.   We reserved our determination.

Consideration of the issues

39.   Under regulation  2  of  the  Protection  Regulations,  a  refugee  is
      defined by reference to Article 1A(2) of the  Geneva  Convention  (the
      United Nations' Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees),  which
      defines a refugee as person who:

            "owing to a well-founded fear of being  persecuted  for  reasons
           of race,  religion,  nationality,  membership  of  a  particular
           social group or political opinion, is outside the country of his
           nationality and is unable or, owing to such fear,  unwilling  to
           avail himself of the protection of that country."

40.   It is for the Appellant to show,  to  the  standard  of  a  reasonable
      degree of likelihood, that she has a well-founded fear of  persecution
      for one of the qualifying reasons (regulation 5 (3)).

(A)   "Particular social group"

41.    Ms.  Chandran  referred  us  to  Article  10  of  the   Qualification
      Directive. We informed her that we would consider regulation 6 of  the
      Protection Regulations, unless she was able to point us to any  errors
      in transposition of Article 10 into domestic legislation. She informed
      us that she was not aware of any  errors  of  transposition.  We  have
      compared regulation 6 of the Protection Regulations with Article 10 of
      the Qualification Directive. Regulation 6(1)(d) reads:

      "(d)  a group shall be considered to form a  particular  social  group
           where, for example:
            (i)  members of that group share an innate characteristic, or  a
                 common background  that  cannot  be  changed,  or  share  a
                 characteristic or belief that is so fundamental to identity
                 or conscience  that  a  person  should  not  be  forced  to
                 renounce it, and
            (ii)  that  group  has  a  distinct  identity  in  the  relevant
                 country, because it is perceived as being different by  the
                 surrounding society;"

            (our emphasis)

42.   Article 10.1(d) of the Qualification Directive reads the same,  except
      that the words "in particular" are used in place  of  the  words  "for
      example".

43.   Two possible meanings  of  the  word  "discrimination"  were  advanced
      before us. In making his submission that discrimination is a necessary
      identifying characteristic of a particular  social  group,  Mr.  Patel
      explained that he was referring to discrimination as explained by Lord
      Hoffmann in Shah and Islam in the following terms:

            "making  distinctions  which  principles  of  fundamental  human
           rights regard as inconsistent with  the  right  of  every  human
           being to equal treatment and respect...."

      and also as explained by Lord  Hope  of  Craighead  in  Fornah  and  K
      (paragraph 54) in the following terms:

            "Discrimination involves making unfair  or  unjust  distinctions
           to the disadvantage of one group or class of people as  compared
           with others."

44.    Ms.  Chandran  submitted  that,  if  discrimination  is  a  necessary
      identifying characteristic, then the Appellant  contends  either  that
      women in Moldova are discriminated against in the  sense  employed  by
      Mr. Patel or,  alternatively,  that  the  mere  act  of  targeting  an
      individual for  ill-treatment  is  itself  discrimination.  Unless  we
      indicate otherwise, we use the word "discrimination" in the  remainder
      of this determination with the more usual  meaning  of  the  word,  as
      suggested by Mr. Patel.

45.   Mr. Patel relied heavily on the speeches in Shah and Islam and  Fornah
      and K to support the proposition that discrimination  is  a  necessary
      identifying characteristic of a  particular  social  group.  Both  Ms.
      Chandran and Mr. Patel took us through the various speeches at length,
      each emphasising particular aspects of the speeches. It  is  therefore
      appropriate that we should refer to the  speeches,  and  consider  the
      arguments advanced, in some detail. We can  see,  from  the  following
      extracts of the speeches (in particular, the text we have  underlined)
      why it may be said that domestic jurisprudence strongly  points  to  a
      conclusion that discrimination in the wider sense (i.e. the more usual
      meaning of the  word,  as  suggested  by  Mr.  Patel,  as  opposed  to
      discrimination in the form of the act(s) of future persecution feared)
      is a necessary identifying  characteristic  for  a  particular  social
      group under the Geneva Convention:

            From the speech of Lord Steyn in Shah and Islam.
      (i)   ".......... The distinctive feature of  this  case  is  that  in
           Pakistan women are  unprotected  by  the  state:  discrimination
           against women in Pakistan is partly tolerated by the  state  and
           partly sanctioned by the state."
      (ii)  "Women are also disadvantaged generally in the criminal  justice
           system because of their position in society......"
      (iii) "For what may be a small minority, who are convicted  of  sexual
           immorality, there is the spectre of  100  lashes  in  public  or
           stoning to death  in  public.  This  brief  description  of  the
           discrimination against women, which is tolerated and  sanctioned
           by the state in Pakistan, is the defining factual  framework  of
           this case."
           From the speech of Lord Hoffmann in Shah and Islam:
      (iv)  "In  my  opinion,  the  concept  of  discrimination  in  matters
           affecting fundamental rights  and  freedoms  is  central  to  an
           understanding of the Convention. It is concerned  not  with  all
           cases of persecution, even if  they  involve  denials  of  human
           rights, but with persecution which is based  on  discrimination.
           And in the context of a human rights instrument,  discrimination
           means making distinctions which principles of fundamental  human
           rights regard as inconsistent with  the  right  of  every  human
           being to equal treatment  and  respect.  The  obvious  examples,
           based on the experience of  the  persecutions  in  Europe  which
           would have been in the minds of  the  delegates  in  1951,  were
           race, religion,  nationality  and  political  opinion.  But  the
           inclusion of "particular social  group"  recognised  that  there
           might be different criteria for discrimination, in pari materiae
           with discrimination on the other grounds, which would be equally
           offensive  to  principles  of  human  rights.  It  is  plausibly
           suggested that the delegates may have had in  mind  persecutions
           in Communist countries of people who were stigmatised as members
           of the bourgeoisie. But the concept  of  a  social  group  is  a
           general one and its meaning cannot be confined to  those  social
           groups which the framers of the Convention may have had in mind.
           In choosing to use the general term  "particular  social  group"
           rather than  an  enumeration  of  specific  social  groups,  the
           framers of the  Convention  were  in  my  opinion  intending  to
           include whatever groups might be regarded as coming  within  the
           anti-discriminatory objectives of the Convention......."
      (v)   "To what social group, if any, did  the  appellants  belong?  To
           identify a social group, one must first identify the society  of
           which it forms a part. In this case, the society is plainly that
           of Pakistan. Within that society, it seems to me that women form
           a social group of  the  kind  contemplated  by  the  Convention.
           Discrimination against women in  matters  of  fundamental  human
           rights on the ground that they are  women  is  plainly  in  pari
           materiae with discrimination on  grounds  of  race.  It  offends
           against their rights as human  beings  to  equal  treatment  and
           respect."
      (vi)  "I am conscious, as the example which I  have  just  given  will
           suggest, that there are much more difficult cases in  which  the
           officers  of  the  State  neither   act   as   the   agents   of
           discriminatory persecution nor, on the basis of a discriminatory
           policy, allow individuals to inflict persecution with  impunity.
           In countries in which the power of the State is weak, there  may
           be intermediate cases in which groups of people  have  power  in
           particular areas to persecute others on a  discriminatory  basis
           and the State, on account of lack of resources or political will
           and without its agents applying  any  discriminatory  policy  of
           their own, is unable or unwilling to  protect  them.  I  do  not
           intend to lay down any rule for such  cases.  They  have  to  be
           considered by adjudicators on a  case  by  case  basis  as  they
           arise. The distinguishing feature of the  present  case  is  the
           evidence of institutionalised discrimination  against  women  by
           the police, the courts and the legal system, the central  organs
           of the State."
            From the speech of Lord Hope of Craighead in Shah and Islam:
      (vii) "................ a feature which is common to all five  of  the
           Convention reasons which are set out in the paragraph. The first
           preamble to the Convention explains that one of its purposes was
           to give effect to the principle that human  beings  shall  enjoy
           fundamental rights and  freedoms  without  discrimination.  This
           principle was affirmed in the Charter of the United Nations  and
           in the Universal Declaration of Human  Rights  approved  by  the
           General Assembly of the United Nations on 10 December  1948.  If
           one is looking for a  genus,  in  order  to  apply  the  eiusdem
           generis rule of construction to the  phrase  "particular  social
           group," it is to be found in the fact that the other  Convention
           reasons are all grounds on which a person may  be  discriminated
           against by society."
            From  the  opinion  of  Lord  Millett  [His  Lordship's  dissent
           related to  the  question  of  causation  and  not  whether  the
           applicants in that case were  members  of  a  particular  social
           group]:
      (viii)      "Persecution may be indiscriminate.  It  may  be  for  any
           reason or none. It is not, however, enough for an applicant  for
           asylum to show that he  or  she  has  a  well  founded  fear  of
           persecution. The persecution must be discriminatory  and  for  a
           Convention reason. By limiting the persecution in this way,  the
           Convention contemplates that the possibility that there  may  be
           victims of persecution who do not qualify  for  refugee  status.
           Furthermore, if the  reason  relied  upon  is  membership  of  a
           particular social group, it is not enough that the applicant  is
           a member of a particular social group and  has  a  well  founded
           fear of persecution. The applicant must be liable to persecution
           because he or she is a member of the social group in question."
      (ix)  "In interpreting the  expression  "membership  of  a  particular
           social  group"  I  derive  assistance  from  article  2  of  the
           Universal Declaration of Human Rights. This was adopted  by  the
           General Assembly of the United Nations  in  December  1948,  was
           still recent when the terms of the 1951  Convention  were  being
           settled, and is mentioned in the  Preamble  to  the  Convention.
           Article 2 prohibits the denial of the rights  and  freedoms  set
           forth in the Declaration:
                 "without distinction of any kind,  such  as  race,  colour,
                 sex,  language,  religion,  political  or  other   opinion,
                 national or social origin, property, birth or other status"
                 (my emphasis)
           The denial  of  human  rights,  however,  is  not  the  same  as
           persecution, which involves the infliction of serious harm.  The
           1951 Convention was concerned to afford refuge to the victims of
           certain kinds of discriminatory  persecution,  but  it  was  not
           directed to prohibit discrimination as such nor to grant  refuge
           to the victims of discrimination. Moreover, while the  delegates
           in Geneva were willing to extend refugee status to  the  victims
           of discriminatory persecution, they were unwilling to define the
           grounds of persecution which would qualify for refugee status as
           widely as the discriminatory denial of human rights condemned by
           the Universal Declaration. Discriminatory  persecution  "of  any
           kind" would not suffice; the Convention  grounds  are  defining,
           not merely illustrative as in  the  Universal  Declaration.  The
           inclusion of sex as a basis of discrimination in  the  Universal
           Declaration and the  failure  to  include  it  as  a  ground  of
           persecution in the 1951 Convention is noteworthy. It may be  due
           to  the  fact  that,  while  sexual  discrimination  was  widely
           practised in 1951, and women are condemned to a subordinate  and
           inferior status in many societies even today, it is difficult to
           imagine a society in  which  women  are  actually  subjected  to
           serious harm simply because they are women.  But  the  words  in
           article 2 which I  have  emphasised,  "language  .  .  .  social
           origin, property, birth or other status", indicate  to  my  mind
           the kind of characteristics which have commonly been  shared  by
           the victims of persecution and which the delegates must have had
           in  mind  when  including  the  expression  "membership   of   a
           particular social group". They are all matters of status  rather
           than association; they have regard to the personal attributes of
           the victims rather than their behaviour."
            From the speech of Lord Bingham of Cornhill in Fornah and K:

      (x)   "10. ......... It is well-established that the  Convention  must
           be  interpreted  in  accordance  with  its  broad   humanitarian
           objective and having regard to the principles, expressed in  the
           preamble, that human beings should enjoy fundamental rights  and
           freedoms without discrimination......"

      (xi)  "13. Certain important points of  principle  relevant  to  these
           appeals are to be derived from the opinions  of  the  House  [in
           Shah and Islam]. First, the Convention is concerned not with all
           cases of persecution but with  persecution  which  is  based  on
           discrimination, the making of distinctions which  principles  of
           fundamental human rights regard as inconsistent with  the  right
           of every human being: pp 651, 656. .........................."

      (xii) "31. ......... FGM may ensure  a  young  woman's  acceptance  in
           Sierra Leonean society, but she is  accepted  on  the  basis  of
           institutionalised inferiority.............  FGM  is  an  extreme
           expression of the discrimination to which all  women  in  Sierra
           Leone are subject, as much those who have already undergone  the
           process  as  those  who  have  not.  I  find  no  difficulty  in
           recognising women in Sierra Leone as a particular  social  group
           for purposes of article 1A(2)........."
      (our emphasis)
46.   In these two  judgments,  their  Lordships  emphasised  two  important
      points, as follows: firstly, that the Geneva Convention was  concerned
      to  afford  protection  against  persecution   which   is   based   on
      discrimination; and, secondly, that the failure to include  sex  as  a
      ground of persecution in the Geneva  Convention,  notwithstanding  its
      inclusion as a basis of discrimination in article 2 of  the  Universal
      Declaration of Human Rights, may  be  due  to  the  fact  that  it  is
      difficult  to  envisage  a  society  in  which  women   are   actually
      persecuted, simply because they are women.   However,  the  issues  in
      Shah and Islam were whether, given the  discrimination  against  women
      which exists in Pakistan (discrimination in the  wider  sense  against
      women in Pakistan), the appellants in that  case  were  members  of  a
      particular social group and whether  any  future  persecution  was  by
      reason of their membership of a particular social group. The issue was
      not  whether  discrimination  in  the  wider  sense  is  a   necessary
      identifying characteristic of a particular social group, whatever  the
      social group is and whether or not it is a gender-based social  group.
      It should be remembered that, in Shah and  Islam,  the  social  groups
      relied upon or considered by their Lordships  were  all  gender-based,
      namely, "women in Pakistan", or "women who had offended against social
      mores or against whom there were  imputations  of  sexual  misconduct"
      (see paragraph 9 of the  judgment  in  Fornah  and  K  which  usefully
      summarises the social groups considered in Shah and Islam). Similarly,
      the social groups relied upon or  considered  by  their  Lordships  in
      Fornah and K were also gender-based, as follows:

            "young, single Sierra Leonean women" and "young  Sierra  Leonean
           women" (paragraph 9);
            "young  single  women  in  Sierra  Leone  who  are  at  risk  of
           circumcision" (paragraph 28);
            "young single women who have not been circumcised and  who  are,
           therefore, at risk of circumcision" and "women in Sierra  Leone"
           (paragraph 31).

47.   Both parties rely on the Court of Appeal's judgment in  RG  (Ethiopia)
      v. SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 339. Mr. Patel contends that this judgment  is
      further authority for the proposition that discrimination in the wider
      sense is a necessary identifying characteristic. Ms. Chandran contends
      that discrimination against women does not need to be part of the  law
      of the land. In our view, it is important to remember  the  particular
      social group which was argued in RG  (Ethiopia).  In  that  case,  the
      question was whether the Adjudicator was entitled to find  that  women
      and girls constituted a particular social group (see paragraphs 27, 44
      and 46 of the judgment). In other words, the social group advanced was
      the broad one of gender. It was not argued on the  appellant's  behalf
      that her past experience of having  been  raped  was  the  identifying
      feature of the particular social group to which she belonged.
48.   If Mr. Patel is correct in saying that  discrimination  in  the  wider
      sense  is  always  a  necessary  identifying  characteristic  of   any
      particular social group, then it  is  not  easy,  at  least  at  first
      glance, to understand why the family is capable of being regarded as a
      social group. We specifically put this  point  to  Mr.  Patel  at  the
      hearing, asking whether it was the case that  there  was  evidence  of
      discrimination in the wider sense against families in Iran from  which
      K originated. Mr. Patel referred us to paragraph 19 of Lord Bingham in
      Fornah and K, from which we quote:
      "19.  The persecution feared by the first appellant  was  said  to  be
           for reasons of her membership  of  a  particular  social  group,
           namely  her  husband's  family.  In  resisting  her  claim   the
           Secretary of State did not seek to contend that a family  cannot
           be a particular social group for purposes of the Convention.  He
           accepted that it could,  consistently  with  the  submission  of
           counsel on his behalf in Skenderaj v Secretary of State for  the
           Home Department [2002] EWCA Civ 567, [2002] 4 All ER  555,  para
           21, that
                 "a family group could be a particular social  group,  since
                 society recognises the family bond as distinct and attaches
                 importance to it, but only if society also sets it apart in
                 such a way as to stigmatise or discriminate against it  for
                 that reason."
           The Secretary of State's acceptance reflects  a  consensus  very
           clearly  established  by  earlier  domestic  authority  such  as
           Secretary of State for the Home Department v  Savchenkov  [1996]
           Imm AR 28, and also by international authority. In Minister  for
           Immigration and Multicultural Affairs  v  Sarrazola  [2001]  FCA
           263, paras 28-34,  there  was  held  to  be  little  doubt  that
           persecution by reason of being a member of a  particular  family
           could constitute persecution for  reasons  of  membership  of  a
           particular social  group.  In  Thomas  v  Gonzales,  above,  the
           conclusion was reached "that the harm suffered by  the  Thomases
           was not the result of  random  crime,  but  was  perpetrated  on
           account of their family membership, specifically on  account  of
           the family relationship with Boss Ronnie."
           (our emphasis)
49.   Mr. Patel relies on the phrase we have underlined above  in  order  to
      argue that discrimination is a necessary identifying  feature  of  the
      family before the family could be  regarded  as  a  particular  social
      group.  At  the  same  time,  Mr.  Patel  argues  that  the  form   of
      discrimination which must be shown as an identifying characteristic of
      all social groups (including the  family)  is  discrimination  in  the
      wider sense because (Mr. Patel argues) discrimination in the  form  of
      the  feared  future  act  of  persecution  would  fall  foul  of   the
      requirement that the social group must not be identified solely by the
      feared  act(s)  of  future  persecution.  With  respect,  it  is  very
      difficult to see how these propositions can both be correct where  the
      social group being advanced is the family, given  that  there  was  no
      evidence in Skenderaj (see paragraph 30 of that judgment)  or  in  the
      case of K in Fornah and K that there was discrimination in  the  wider
      sense against families as a social group in the relevant countries  or
      that there was discrimination in the wider sense in Iran  against  the
      family of which applicant K was a member. Mr. Patel also  referred  us
      to paragraph 45 of Fornah and K, which he submitted explains  how  the
      discrimination requirement was satisfied in  reaching  the  conclusion
      that the fear of the appellant K was because of her  membership  of  a
      particular social group.  However, paragraph 45 of the judgment, which
      reads:
      45.   It is  universally  accepted  that  the  family  is  a  socially
           cognisable group  in  society:  UNHCR  position  on  claims  for
           refugee status under the 1951 Convention relating to the  Status
           of  Refugees  based  on  a  fear  of  persecution  due   to   an
           individual's membership of a family or clan engaged in  a  blood
           feud,  17  March  2006,  p  5.  Article  23(1)   of   the   1966
           International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights states that
           the family "is the natural and fundamental group unit of society
           and is entitled to protection by society  and  the  State."  The
           ties that bind members of a family together, whether by blood or
           by marriage, define the group. It is  those  ties  that  set  it
           apart from the rest of society. Persecution of a  person  simply
           because he is a member of the same family as someone else is  as
           arbitrary and capricious, and just as pernicious, as persecution
           for reasons of race or religion. As a social  group  the  family
           falls naturally into the category of cases to which the  Refugee
           Convention extends its protection.
      does not show that any discrimination other than in the  form  of  the
      feared act of persecution was relied upon. Accordingly,  paragraph  45
      does not help Mr. Patel. It may be that the answer lies  in  the  fact
      that, given that the family is a quintessential social group or  given
      that it already exists independently, it is not  necessary  to  invoke
      any other characteristic or circumstance in order to define the  group
      as a particular social group. Since the  family  exists  as  a  social
      group independently of the actions of the persecutor,  the  imputation
      of circularity is avoided.
50.   Mr. Patel also relied on the  judgment  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in
      Montoya. In Montoya, the Court referred to the summary by the  IAT  in
      the proceedings below in the same case of the  basic  principles  that
      should govern an assessment of a claim based on the  membership  of  a
      particular social group. One of these principles was stated by the IAT
      as follows:
           "(vi)        the  PSG  ground  is   further   limited   by   the
           Convention's integral reliance  on  anti-discrimination  notions
           inherent in the basic norms of International Human Rights Law;
           applying the eiusdem generis principle to the other  4  grounds,
           the PSG category must be concerned with discrimination  directed
           against members of the  group  because  of  a  common  immutable
           characteristic;
           a broad range of  groups  can  potentially  qualify  as  a  PSG,
           including private landowners;"

51.   We do not consider that the judgment in Montoya supports  Mr.  Patel's
      argument that discrimination in the wider sense must be shown to exist
      in order to identify a particular  social  group,  for  the  following
      reasons:

      (a)   Mr. Patel submitted that the Court  of  Appeal  in  Montoya  had
           approved of the IAT's "PSG guidelines". We do not consider  that
           it can be said that the Court of Appeal  did  approve  of  these
           guidelines.  At  paragraph  15,  Lord  Justice  Schiemann,   who
           delivered the judgment of the Court, said:

           "15.  We were addressed by both sides  on  the  basis  that  the
                 Tribunal's summary of the basic principles as  set  out  in
                 their paragraph 55B was a broadly correct  summary  of  the
                 existing law binding on this Court. This we are content  to
                 do."
           In the end, the Court in Montoya  did  not  decide  whether  Mr.
           Montoya was a member of a particular social group. Schiemann  LJ
           said, at paragraph 26, that a possible approach in that case was
           to assume two matters in Mr. Montoya's favour; first, that he is
           a member of a particular social group; and, second, that he  has
           a well-founded fear of being persecuted. Even on this basis, the
           Court concluded that Mr. Montoya had not established  his  claim
           because the necessary causal nexus was  not  established  -  see
           paragraphs 27 to 33 of the judgment. Accordingly,  it  is  clear
           that the Court in Montoya did not find it  necessary  to  decide
           whether the claimant was a member of a particular social  group.
           In our view, it is for this reason that the Court was  "content"
           to proceed on the basis that the  IAT's  summary  of  the  basic
           principles in establishing whether  a  particular  social  group
           exists was a broadly correct summary of the case-law.
      (b)   Further, and in  any  event,  there  is  nothing  in  the  IAT's
           summary of "principle" (vi) which suggests that the IAT  had  in
           mind that discrimination in the  wider  sense  was  a  necessary
           identifying  characteristic  of  a  particular   social   group,
           whatever the social group is and whether or not it is a  gender-
           based group.

52.   Another difficulty for Mr. Patel was the following  extract  from  the
      speech of Baroness Hale of Richmond in ex parte Hoxha [2005] UKHL 19:
       "37. If what they fear is capable of amounting to persecution, is  it
           for a Convention reason? It is certainly capable of being so. In
           R v Immigration Appeal Tribunal and another, Ex p Shah [1999]  2
           AC 629, this House held that women  in  Pakistan  constituted  a
           particular  social  group,  because  they  shared   the   common
           immutable  characteristic  of  gender  and  were   discriminated
           against as a group in matters of fundamental human rights,  from
           which the State gave them no adequate protection.  The  fact  of
           current persecution alone is not enough to constitute  a  social
           group: a group which is defined by nothing other than  that  its
           members are currently being persecuted would  not  qualify.  But
           women who have been victims of sexual violence in the  past  are
           linked  by  an  immutable  characteristic  which  is   at   once
           independent of and the cause  of  their  current  ill-treatment.
           They are certainly capable of constituting a  particular  social
           group under the Convention."
      (our emphasis)

      Although we acknowledge that Baroness Hale was specifically  referring
      to  women  who  have  suffered  sexual  violence  in  the  past,   her
      formulation  supports  the  proposition  that  it  is   possible   for
      individuals who share a past experience to show that they  are  linked
      by an immutable characteristic (i.e.  their  common  past  experience)
      which is capable of being  independent  of  and  the  cause  of  their
      current ill-treatment. This would be consistent with  the  wording  of
      regulation 6(1)(d)(i),  which  refers  to  the  sharing  of  a  common
      background which cannot be changed.

53.   In our view, the following propositions  appear  to  emerge  from  the
           authorities:

      (a)   the family already exists in society  as  a  social  group;  the
           ties which bind members of the family together define the  group
           and set it apart from the rest of society.  Accordingly,  it  is
           not necessary to invoke any other characteristic or circumstance
           in order to define the particular social group. If, contrary  to
           our view, discrimination is necessary, then  the  feared  future
           act(s) of persecution can provide the  necessary  discriminatory
           element without falling foul of the  principle  that  the  group
           must not be solely defined by the fear  of  persecution  because
           the family already exists as a social group;

      (b)   where the particular social  group  being  relied  upon  is  the
           broad one of gender or where any further features to narrow  the
           group are gender-based, then discrimination against  the  gender
           (i.e. discrimination in the wider sense) must be shown to exist.
           Further, in the words of Lord Justice  Keene  in  RG  (Ethiopia)
           (paragraphs 24 and 32), some  degree  of  state  involvement  is
           important, although the P and  M  case,  [2004]  EWCA  Civ  640,
           lessens the need for discrimination to be part of the law of the
           land before women can be regarded as a particular social  group,
           if there is in practice a  systematic  lack  of  protection.  In
           addition, there must be an absence of adequate  protection  when
           the persecution is alleged to emanate from non-state  actors  of
           persecution. These observations would apply to the first of  the
           three suggested groups in this case - i.e. "women  in  Moldova".
           (It is possible for a particular social group involving  men  to
           be gender-based. If that is  the  case,  discrimination  in  the
           wider  sense  must  be  shown  to  exist   as   an   identifying
           characteristic of the particular social group);

      (c)   In cases where the members of a  social  group  share  a  common
           background which is an immutable characteristic and  which  they
           cannot change  (for  example,  the  sharing  of  a  common  past
           experience) or they ought not to be required to change,  it  may
           be that such common background defines the group by giving it  a
           distinct identity in the  society  in  question  (see,  further,
           paragraphs 67 to 74 below) which has  nothing  to  do  with  the
           actions of the would-be persecutors. If this is the  case,  then
           the group exists independently of the feared  future  act(s)  of
           persecution and circularity is avoided (see paragraph 37 of  the
           speech of Baroness Hale in ex parte  Hoxha.  If  an  element  of
           discrimination is necessary, it can be provided  by  the  feared
           act(s) of persecution without leading to circularity.  In  other
           words,  a  particular  social  group  which  shares   a   common
           background is defined not  only  by  their  description  of  the
           members but also, in part, by their place in society.

54.   With regard  to  (c),  it  may  be  that,  in  some  cases,  the  past
      experience or common background is not connected in any way  with  the
      gender  of  individuals  who  share  the  past  experience  or  common
      background. In other cases, gender may  have  been  a  reason  or  the
      reason for the past experience in question. We consider the  following
      three examples: - "aristocrats", "former victims of  trafficking"  and
      "former victims of trafficking for sexual exploitation".  A  group  of
      "aristocrats" may have  a  common  background  which  is  plainly  not
      connected in any way to gender. In the  case  of  "former  victims  of
      trafficking"  and  "former   victims   of   trafficking   for   sexual
      exploitation", the key feature that members of these groups  share  is
      their common background or past experience of having  been  trafficked
      or of having been trafficked  for  sexual  exploitation.  This  common
      background  or  past  experience  is  within  the  express  terms   of
      regulation 6(1)(d)(i) and also within paragraph 37 of  the  speech  of
      Baroness Hale of Richmond in  ex  parte  Hoxha.  Given  that,  in  our
      understanding, individuals may  be  trafficked  for  the  purposes  of
      sexual exploitation as well as for other purposes (such as for  labour
      and for begging) and given, further, that there is evidence  that  men
      have also been trafficked, although  on  a  smaller  scale  (see,  for
      example, the reference to men  who  were  trafficked  for  sexual  and
      labour exploitation in Moldova in 2003 at page 454 of bundle  2),  the
      second and third examples, of  "former  victims  of  trafficking"  and
      "former victims of  trafficking  for  sexual  exploitation",  are  not
      necessarily gender-based, nor do they have any  gender-based  features
      to narrow the group. Whilst it would clearly be the case that, in  the
      case of an individual who was trafficked for the  purposes  of  sexual
      exploitation, the individual's gender would  have  been  an  important
      aspect of the circumstances which gave rise to  the  individual  being
      trafficked, this does not mean that the social group  relied  upon  is
      the broad one of gender; it is still the  past  experience  of  having
      been trafficked which is the immutable characteristic which (depending
      on the country evidence) is capable of identifying the group and being
      independent  of  the  future  ill-treatment.  It  would  then  not  be
      necessary to show, as an identifying  characteristic,  that  there  is
      discrimination in the  wider  sense  against  the  former  victims  of
      trafficking in the society in question. To  conclude  otherwise  would
      effectively result in imposing an additional and unjustified hurdle on
      individuals (men or women) who  share  a  common  background  or  past
      experience of having  been  trafficked  for  the  purposes  of  sexual
      exploitation, but not on other  groups  of  individuals  who  share  a
      common  background  or  past  experience,  such   as   (for   example)
      aristocrats.

55.   Furthermore, both men and women can be trafficked for the purposes  of
      sexual exploitation. Both men and  women  can  be  victims  of  sexual
      violence.  If  discrimination  in  the  wider  sense  is  a  necessary
      identifying characteristic of a social group  whose  members  share  a
      common background, it is difficult  to  see  how  men  who  have  been
      subjected to sexual violence can be members  of  a  particular  social
      group by virtue of sharing a past experience. It is very difficult  to
      how a man would be able  to  show  that  members  of  his  gender  are
      discriminated against in the wider sense in a particular  society.  We
      do not think that it would be suggested, in the case of a male who  is
      a  former  victim  of  trafficking  for  sexual   exploitation,   that
      discrimination against men (in the wider  sense)  in  the  country  in
      question  must  be  shown  to  exist  as   a   necessary   identifying
      characteristic of the group. There is, therefore, no reason to  insist
      that former victims of trafficking for sexual exploitation who  happen
      to be women must establish that women  are  discriminated  against  in
      their country. The imposition of such a requirement runs the  risk  of
      being based on an assumption that only  women  would  fall  into  this
      group. It would also conflate the characteristic which identifies  the
      social group (i.e.  that  they  share  a  common  background  or  past
      experience) with their gender.

56.   Accordingly, in our view, and subject to what we say at paragraphs  67
      to 74, former victims of trafficking and former victims of trafficking
      for sexual exploitation are capable of being members of  a  particular
      social group  because  of  their  shared  common  background  or  past
      experience of having been trafficked. However, we emphasise  that,  in
      order for "former  victims  of  trafficking"  or  "former  victims  of
      trafficking for sexual exploitation" to be  members  of  a  particular
      social group, the group in question must have a distinct  identity  in
      the society in question. It  should  also  be  noted  that  our  third
      example ("former victims of trafficking for sexual  exploitation")  is
      not precisely the same  as  the  third  possibility  advanced  on  the
      Appellant's behalf ("victims of trafficking for the purposes of sexual
      exploitation"). Our use of the word "former" makes it  at  once  clear
      that it is the common background  or  past  experience  which  is  the
      common characteristic of the group, whereas Ms. Chandran's formulation
      of the third possibility does not make that clear and runs the  danger
      of being interpreted as a group which  relies  on  the  feared  future
      persecution as the identifying characteristic.
57.   Mr. Patel contended that the second suggested group falls foul of  the
      principle that the  group  must  exist  independently  of  the  feared
      persecution. We do not agree, because that confuses  the  individual's
      past experience (which cannot be changed)  with  the  reason  for  the
      feared future acts of persecution. Baroness Hale of Richmond explained
      in ex parte Hoxha that earlier persecution of one  sort  may  lead  to
      later persecution of a different sort  (see  paragraph  30)  and  that
      women who have been victims of sexual violence in the past are  linked
      by an immutable characteristic which is at once independent of and the
      cause of their current ill-treatment (see paragraph 37).
58.   Mr. Patel relied on Chun Lan Liu v.  SSHD  [2005]  EWCA  Civ  249,  in
      which Rix LJ reviewed  US  and  Commonwealth  authorities.  Mr.  Patel
      submitted that  Rix  LJ  concluded  that  discrimination  must  be  an
      identifying characteristic of a particular social group. The  relevant
      paragraphs are paragraphs 29 and 30 of the  judgment,  which  we  will
      quote:
      "29.  In my judgment, there are at least two strands apparent in  this
           jurisprudence. The  first  relates  to  what  can  amount  to  a
           defining characteristic of a particular social  group.  In  this
           connection Acosta, Ward [(1993) 2 SCR 689] and Cheung [Cheung v.
           Canada (Minister of Employment & Immigration) (1993) 2  FC  314]
           are of particular interest and are probably saying much the same
           thing. In Islam and Shah Lord Hoffmann adopted the  language  of
           Acosta (at 651e/f):
                 "where it was said that a social group for the purposes  of
                 the Convention was one distinguished by:
                       "an  immutable  characteristic...[a   characteristic]
                       that either is beyond the power of an  individual  to
                       change or that is so fundamental to his  identity  or
                       conscience that it ought not to  be  required  to  be
                       changed."
                 This was true of the other four grounds enumerated  in  the
                 Convention. It is because they are either immutable or part
                 of an individual's fundamental right to choose for  himself
                 that  discrimination  on  such  grounds  is   contrary   to
                 principles of human rights."
      30.   The second strand relates to how the characteristic and thus the
           particular social group in question may be identified. It may be
           identified by discrimination  and  even  in  part  by  means  of
           discrimination amounting  to  persecution:  but  that  will  not
           matter as long as such persecution is  not  the  sole  means  of
           definition or  identification.  It  may  be  identified  by  the
           recognition or perception of the surrounding society in  general
           that the group in question shares a  particular  characteristic.
           Or it may be that the distinguishing characteristic and thus the
           group  in  question  may  simply  be   objectively   observable,
           irrespective of the insight of the general society in  which  it
           is placed. It may be said that these concepts have not yet  been
           fully worked out in the jurisprudence.
      (our emphasis)

59.   However, in our view, what we have said at paragraphs 53 to  57  above
      is consistent with the judgment in Chun Lan Liu.  We do  not  consider
      that this judgment supports Mr. Patel's argument, that  discrimination
      in the wider sense must be shown to exist against  the  social  group.
      There  is  nothing  to  suggest  that  Rix   LJ   was   referring   to
      discrimination in the wider sense.

60.   Mr. Patel also relied on paragraph 95  of  MP  Romania,  the  relevant
      part of which reads:


      "95)  ................... The social group was "people  who  had  been
           trafficked".  The required immutable characteristic, which could
           not be changed, was the fact that she had been  trafficked.   It
           was because she was a member of that social group that she would
           be targeted.  Alternatively, causation was made out because  she
           would be denied the protection generally  available  in  Romania
           because she was someone who had been trafficked.  We  note  that
           he did not seek to argue that  there  was  a  particular  social
           group of "women in Romania" or even "women in Romania  who  have
           been trafficked".  We find that the  Adjudicator  was  right  to
           conclude that the Appellant did not  fall  within  a  particular
           social group.  Firstly, "people who have been trafficked"  falls
           foul of the principle that the group must exist independently of
           the persecution it fears.  Such a group is defined  by  no  more
           than the persecutory  element  of  trafficking.   Secondly,  for
           reasons to which we will return in connection  with  sufficiency
           of protection, the country material before us does not establish
           discriminatory treatment of the victims of  trafficking  by  the
           Romanian state analogous to that of women in Pakistan."
61.   We are of the view that the  first  reason  which  the  Tribunal  gave
      confuses an individual's past  experience  with  the  reason  for  the
      future  act(s)  of  persecution.  The  second  reason   confuses   the
      characteristic of the social group relied upon (i.e. the  common  past
      experience)  with  the  gender  of  those  who   share   that   common
      characteristic. Accordingly, we concluded that  MP  Romania  does  not
      assist the Respondent, as it was wrongly decided.
62.   Paragraph 50 of Mr. Patel's  skeleton  argument  also  refers  to  the
      Tribunal's Determination in JO (internal relocation - no risk  of  re-
      trafficking) Nigeria  [2004]  UKIAT  00251.  At  paragraph  18  of  JO
      Nigeria, the Tribunal said that it agreed that trafficked women do not
      qualify as a particular social group, because what  defines  them  is,
      essentially, the fact of persecution.  We  make  two  points  in  this
      regard. Firstly, this remark  was  clearly  made  by  way  of  obiter.
      Secondly, and in any event, we are of the view that this reasoning  is
      wrong because it conflates the individual's past experience  with  the
      reason for the future acts of persecution.
63.   We will now deal briefly with the IAT determinations to which we  have
      been referred:
      (i)   SK (Albania) [2003] UKIAT 00023 does not  assist  the  Appellant
           because, as Mr. Patel contends and as explained by the  Tribunal
           in VD (Trafficking)  Albania  CG  [2004]  UKIAT  00115,  the  SK
           Albania case turned on its own particular facts; and

      (ii)  VD Albania does not help because that was a case about the  risk
           of being trafficked in the future. The Tribunal did not consider
           whether the appellant was a member of a particular social group.
64.   Having said all this, we admit that  the  judgment  of  the  Court  of
      Appeal in Skenderaj gives us some difficulty. We were rather surprised
      that we were not referred specifically to the judgment.  The  claimant
      in that case (Mr. Skenderaj) was a member of a land-owning  family  in
      Albania involved in a blood feud with a neighbouring family.  In  that
      case, the Court of Appeal considered the issue whether  discrimination
      is a necessary  identifying  characteristic  of  a  particular  social
      group. This was referred to at paragraph 19 of the judgment as a "live
      issue" in that case. We  set  out  the  following  extracts  from  the
      judgment of Lord Justice Auld,  who  delivered  the  judgment  of  the
      Court:
      "19.  .............We acknowledge that the protection provided by  the
           refugee test  as  a  whole  is  undoubtedly  inspired  by  anti-
           discrimination notions; see, e.g., Refugee Appeal  No  71427/199
           and ex p. Shah.  But we have held back on them  for  the  moment
           because they have been live issues in this appeal and because we
           believe  it  is  open  to  question  whether,  in  a   non-state
           persecution  case  as  here,  it   is   a   necessary   defining
           characteristic of a particular social group. ...................

      23.   Now that we have identified the area of dispute on  this  issue,
           we return to ex p. Shah.   There  was  clear  discrimination  of
           Pakistani women in that case, but we doubt whether  that  factor
           was necessary to the House of Lords' determination that they  or
           some of them constituted a particular  social  group.  The  main
           reason for the resort to anti-discriminatory principles  was  to
           dismiss the notion that cohesiveness was a necessary element  of
           such a group. Given the approach of the US Board of  Immigration
           and Appeals in Acosta and of the reasoning of La  Forest  J.  in
           the Supreme Court of Canada in  Attorney-General  of  Canada  v.
           Ward [1993] 2 SCR 689 on which their Lordships drew  heavily  in
           ex p. Shah, it may be that, on this part of the refugee test  at
           least, discrimination was not  an  essential.   Thus,  as  Lords
           Steyn  and  Hoffmann   mentioned,   at   1026e-h   and   1033b-h
           respectively, in Acosta, the Board said that a particular social
           group was one distinguished by an immutable characteristic;  and
           in Ward, La Forest J. said simply,  and  by  reference,  to  the
           whole refugee concept, that it could include individuals fearing
           persecution on "such bases as gender, linguistic background  and
           sexual orientation".

      24.   Lord Hope seemingly did not regard the notion of  discrimination
           as essential to the definition of a particular social group,  as
           distinct from the whole concept of refugee status.  He said,  at
           1038e-g and1039c-d:
                 "In general terms a social group may be said to exist  when
                 a group of  people  with  a  particular  characteristic  is
                 recognised as a distinct group by society.  The concept  of
                 a group means that we [are] dealing here  with  people  who
                 are grouped together because they  share  a  characteristic
                 not shared by  others,  not  with  individuals.   The  word
                 'social' means that we are being asked to identify a  group
                 of people which is recognised  as  a  particular  group  by
                 society. ...
                 The rule that the group must  exist  independently  of  the
                 persecution is useful, because persecution alone cannot  be
                 used to define the group.   But  it  must  not  be  applied
                 outside its proper context.   This point has been well made
                 by Goodwin-Gill ...  He  observes  at  pp  47-48  that  the
                 importance, and therefore the identity, of a  social  group
                 is an open-ended one, which can be expanded in favour of  a
                 variety of different classes susceptible to persecution ...
                 Persecution may be but one facet of  broader  policies  and
                 perspectives, all of which contribute to the group and  add
                 to its pre-existing characteristics."

      25.   Lord Millett, in his dissenting  speech  (which  turned  on  the
           reason for persecution of the women applicants), clearly found a
           degree of difficulty in the  overlap  of  the  two  concepts  of
           discrimination  and  persecution,  a  difficulty   which,   with
           respect, we share. Persecution of members of a particular social
           group only qualifies as persecution for a Convention  reason  if
           it is for reasons of such membership, which of necessity must be
           discriminatory. It is otiose and circular that the group  should
           have  to  be  defined  by  some  discriminatory  element  before
           consideration of whether  it  is  persecuted  for  that  reason.
           Providing that there is a social group in the Acosta sense,  the
           discrimination is to be found in the persecution.  Lord  Millett
           said, at1043f-g and 1044d-e:
                 "... it is not enough  for  the  applicant  for  asylum  to
                 establish that he or she is a member of a particular social
                 group and is liable to  persecution.   The  applicant  must
                 also establish that he or  she  is  liable  to  persecution
                 because he or she is a member of the group.  The  applicant
                 must be the subject of attack, not for himself  or  herself
                 alone, but because he  or  she  is  one  of  those  jointly
                 condemned in the eyes of their persecutors  for  possession
                 of the characteristic which is common to the group. ...
                 Whether the social group is taken to be that contended  for
                 by the appellants, however, or the wider one  of  Pakistani
                 women who are perceived to have transgressed social  norms,
                 the result is the same.  No cognisable social group  exists
                 independently  of  the  social  conditions  on  which   the
                 persecution  is  founded.   The  social  group  which   the
                 appellants identify  is  defined  by  the  persecution,  or
                 accurately (but just  as  fatally)  by  the  discrimination
                 which  founds  the  persecution.   It  is   an   artificial
                 construct called into being to meet the exigencies  of  the
                 case.  [my emphasis].

      26.   We also draw strength in this regard from the  judgment  of  the
           High Court of Australia in Chen, where one  of  the  issues  was
           whether black children in China constituted a particular  social
           group.  The Court was firmly of the view that discrimination  is
           not an essential defining characteristic of a particular  social
           group:

                 "22 ...the group constituted  by  children  born  in  those
                 circumstances is defined other than  by  reference  to  the
                 discriminatory treatment or  persecution  that  they  fear.
                 And so much was recognised by the Tribunal in  its  finding
                 that a 'child  is  a  black  child'  irrespective  of  what
                 persecution may or may not befall him or her.
                 23 The circumstance that 'black children'  receive  adverse
                 treatment in China is descriptive of their  situation  and,
                 as McHugh J pointed out in Applicant A, that may facilitate
                 their recognition as a social group for the purposes of the
                 Convention but it does not define it.   Accordingly,  there
                 was no error  in  the  Tribunal's  finding  that,  for  the
                 purposes of the Convention, the appellant is a member of  a
                 particular social group."  [our emphasis]

       27.    There  is  plenty  of  scope  for  giving  effect   to   anti-
           discriminatory principles underlying the protection of  refugees
           when considering whether membership of  such  a  group  attracts
           persecution of all or, as in Shah, some of them.    Put  another
           way, it is not necessary to  insist  upon  discrimination  as  a
           defining element of a particular social group to satisfy  McHugh
           J's proposition in Applicant A, at 401,  that  the  latter  must
           exist independently of, and not be defined by, persecution."
      (our emphasis)
65.   As  can  be  seen,  Auld  LJ  expressed  some  doubts  as  to  whether
      discrimination of women in Pakistan was  necessary  to  the  House  of
      Lords' determination in Shah and Islam  that  they  or  some  of  them
      constituted a particular social group. It is clear that  Auld  LJ  was
      referring to discrimination in the  wider  sense.  In  his  Lordship's
      view, the main  reason  for  the  resort  to  the  anti-discriminatory
      principles was to dismiss the notion that cohesiveness was a necessary
      element of such a group (paragraph 23 of the judgment). His Lordship's
      analysis of the judgment in Shah and Islam was that discrimination was
      not  always  an  essential  requirement  for  the  identifying  of   a
      particular social group, although it was clearly part of the reasoning
      as to particular social group in that case. Again, it  is  clear  that
      Auld LJ was referring to discrimination in the wider sense. Giving his
      conclusion on the question whether Mr. Skenderaj was  a  member  of  a
      particular social group, Auld LJ said:
      "30.  In our view, on the evidence accepted  by  the  adjudicator  and
           not challenged before the Tribunal, Mr. Skenderaj has  not  made
           out his claim that he was a member of a particular social  group
           so as to engage the other elements of the test of a  refugee  in
           Article 1A(2).  We say that,  not  for  the  reason  principally
           relied on by Miss Grey  that  there  was  no  setting  apart  or
           stigmatisation of, or discrimination against, the family outside
           the persecution alleged since, for the reasons we have given, we
           do not regard that as a necessary part of the  definition  of  a
           particular social group, particularly in a non-state persecution
           case.  We say it because,  as  Miss  Grey  also  submitted,  the
           Skenderaj family  was  not  regarded  as  a  distinct  group  by
           Albanian society any more than, no doubt, most other families in
           the country.

      31.   If, contrary to our view,  some  element  of  discrimination  is
           required to establish the Skenderaj family as particular  social
           group, it could not be found in  the  state's  non-intervention,
           since that would arise, if at all,  only  as  a  result  of  the
           private persecution and then in the context of the  second  limb
           of the definition of refugee concerned with lack of  protection.
           Nor could it be found in the other family's persecutory attitude
           since, again, it is impermissible  to  rely  on  persecution  to
           establish the group  for  Convention  purposes  where  no  other
           distinguishing feature other than that it is a  family  is  made
           out.  As Miss Grey observed, unless every land-owning family  in
           Albania were to constitute a particular social group,  which  is
           not Mr. Skenderaj's case, only the start of a feud can mark such
           a family group out."
      In other words, Auld LJ was saying that, if  discrimination  (and,  in
      this regard, it should be remembered that his Lordship  was  referring
      to discrimination in the  wider  sense)  is  a  necessary  identifying
      characteristic of a particular social group, then  private  landowners
      are unlikely to qualify as members of particular social group.
66.   Whilst this judgment causes us some difficulty,  our  analysis  is  in
      line with the judgments of their  Lordships  in  Shah  and  Islam  and
      Fornah and K. Accordingly, if Auld LJ was saying  that  discrimination
      is not a necessary identifying characteristic of a gender-based social
      group, then we must  respectfully  disagree.  Furthermore,  the  final
      sentence of paragraph 30 of the judgment appears to be  at  odds  with
      Fornah and K.
67.   We now turn to  consider  whether  a  social  group  based  on  common
      background must satisfy any requirement in addition  to  their  common
      background, or past experience, in order to qualify as a social group.
      This  depends  upon  an  interpretation  of  regulation  6(1)(d),   in
      particular, the words "for example" and the adjunctive  "and"  between
      sub-paragraphs (i) and (ii)  of  regulation  6(1)(d).  To  assist  the
      reader, we will quote regulation 6(1)(d) again at this point:

      "(d)  a group shall be considered to form a  particular  social  group
           where, for example:
            (i)  members of that group share an innate characteristic, or  a
                 common background  that  cannot  be  changed,  or  share  a
                 characteristic or belief that is so fundamental to identity
                 or conscience  that  a  person  should  not  be  forced  to
                 renounce it, and
            (ii)  that  group  has  a  distinct  identity  in  the  relevant
                 country, because it is perceived as being different by  the
                 surrounding society;"

            (our emphasis)

68.   In Fornah and K, the House of Lords made observations  on  Article  10
      of the Qualification Directive. Lord Bingham suggested (paragraph  16)
      that it was not necessary for a group to satisfy the criteria in  sub-
      paragraph (i) as well as the criteria in sub-paragraph (ii) of Article
      10.1 of the Qualification Directive, because  such  an  interpretation
      would  propound  a  more  stringent  test   than   is   warranted   by
      international authority. At paragraph 15 of the judgment in Fornah and
      K, Lord Bingham referred to the UNHCR's PSG Guidelines thus: that  the
      UNHCR's PSG Guidelines were "clearly based" on a  careful  reading  of
      the international authorities, provide a  very  accurate  and  helpful
      distillation of  their  effect".  Lord  Hope  in  Fornah  and  K  also
      suggested (see paragraph 46) that it is not necessary to show there is
      recognition within the  society  in  question  subjectively  that  the
      collection of individuals is a group that is set apart from  the  rest
      of  community.  Lord  Brown  of   Eaton-Under-Heywood   accepted   the
      definition of a particular social group in paragraph 11 of the UNHCR's
      PSG Guidelines, according to which a particular social group:

             ".......  is  a  group  of   persons   who   share   a   common
           characteristic other than their risk of being persecuted, or who
           are perceived as a group by  society.  The  characteristic  will
           often  be  one  which  is  innate,  unchangeable,  or  which  is
           otherwise fundamental to identity, conscience or the exercise of
           one's human rights."

      (our emphasis)

69.   In other words, it appears that Lord Brown  also  considered  that  it
      was not always necessary to show that a group is perceived as a  group
      by society. However, the observations of their Lordships were  obiter,
      although very persuasive, because it is clear that their Lordships did
      not decide the cases under regulation 6(1)(d) or  Article  10.1(d)  of
      the Qualification Directive. We did raise the point  at  the  hearing,
      although neither party took the opportunity to advance  any  arguments
      in this regard (see our paragraph 36 above). It seems to  us  that  to
      conclude that it is not necessary to satisfy  sub-paragraphs  (i)  and
      (ii) of regulation 6(1)(d) would not be consistent with the fact  that
      the House of Lords has also insisted, in Fornah and K and as  well  as
      in Shah and Islam, that  the  determination  of  the  question  as  to
      whether a particular social group exists in a society must  always  be
      considered within the context of the society in question.

70.   We turn now to consider the wording of regulation 6(1)(d) itself.  The
      words "for example" which introduce sub-paragraphs  (i)  and  (ii)  of
      regulation 6(1)(d) may cast some light on the meaning to be  given  to
      the word "and" between  sub-paragraphs  (i)  and  (ii)  of  regulation
      6(1)(d). There are two possible  interpretations  of  the  words  "for
      example", as follows:

      (a)   that sub-paragraphs (i)  and  (ii)  of  regulation  6(1)(d)  are
           separate examples of  situations  in  which  a  group  shall  be
           considered to form part of a particular social  group  and  that
           the reason for the use of  the  adjunctive  "and"  between  sub-
           paragraphs (i) and (ii) of regulation 6(1)(d)  is  that  it  was
           intended to provide the reader with two separate examples,  each
           of which would qualify as social  groups  under  the  Protection
           Regulations; and

      (b)   that the adjunctive "and", as well as the  words "for  example",
           were  used  advisedly  and  intentionally,  to  mean  that   any
           particular social group must satisfy two criteria, the second of
           which (i.e. sub-paragraph (ii) of regulation 6(1)(d)) is  always
           necessary whereas the first would be satisfied if an  individual
           falls within any one or more of the five examples of  particular
           social groups given in sub-paragraph (i) of regulations 6(1)(d).
           On this interpretation, given that the five  examples  are  only
           examples, a particular social group may be  shown  to  exist  in
           other circumstances subject  to  eiusdem  generis  principle  of
           interpretation, by reference to the five examples given in  sub-
           paragraph (i) of regulation 6(1)(d).

71.   Interpretation (a) would be supported by the obiter remarks  of  their
      Lordships in Fornah and K concerning Article 10 of  the  Qualification
      Directive. However, it would not only do violence  to  the  adjunctive
      "and" (this was not an argument which weighed heavily with us) but  it
      would also be inconsistent with the insistence in the jurisprudence we
      have considered  that  the  question  as  to  whether  a  group  is  a
      particular social group for the purposes of the Geneva Convention must
      always be considered in the context of the society in  question  (this
      argument did weigh heavily with us). On the other hand, interpretation
      (b) would give meaning not only to the words "for example" and to  the
      adjunctive "and", it would also be consistent with the insistence that
      the  question  whether  a  particular  social  group  exists  must  be
      considered in the context of the society in question.

72.   In the end, we decided that the fact that it was  emphasised  in  Shah
      and Islam and also Fornah and K that the  question  as  to  whether  a
      group is a particular social group for  the  purposes  of  the  Geneva
      Convention must be decided in the context of the society  in  question
      is decisive. If sub-paragraphs (i) and (ii) are alternatives, then  it
      may be said that it is possible to identify a particular social  group
      without reference to evidence relating to any particular country.  For
      example, it may be  said  that  "former  victims  of  trafficking"  or
      "former victims of trafficking for sexual exploitation" are,  per  se,
      members of a particular social group without the need to consider  the
      evidence relating to the society in question, which does not  seem  to
      us to make sense. It is possible that "former victims  of  trafficking
      for sexual exploitation" may be members of a particular  social  group
      in one country, but not in another. If it is necessary to conduct  any
      examination of the evidence relating to the society in which a  social
      group is said to exist, it is difficult to see how anything  short  of
      satisfying the requirement in sub-paragraph (ii) of regulation 6(1)(d)
      would be consistent with the jurisprudence we have considered. Another
      example which supports our conclusion is  the  example  of  the  left-
      handed men used by McHugh J in Applicant A v. Minister for Immigration
      and Ethnic Affairs 71 A.L.J.R. 381, 402, to explain the limits of  the
      principle that a particular social group must exist  independently  of
      the persecution feared. We can use the same example,  to  support  our
      conclusion as to the correct interpretation of regulation 6(1)(d).  In
      many societies, the attribute of being left-handed does  not  lead  to
      any persecutory action. However, if in any particular  society,  left-
      handed people are persecuted because they are left-handed,  then  (and
      here we borrow from, and quote, the words of  McHugh  J  himself,  see
      paragraph 79 of the judgment in Fornah and K):

            ".....they would no  doubt  be  quickly  recognisable  in  their
           society as a particular  social  group.  Their  persecution  for
           being left-handed would create a  public  perception  that  they
           were a particular social group."

73.   Whilst an  application  of  interpretation  (b)  would  lead  to  this
      conclusion, an application of interpretation (a)  could  lead  to  the
      conclusion that left-handed people may be a  particular  social  group
      without any need to examine the evidence relating to  the  society  in
      question. In our view, that cannot be correct.

74.   Accordingly, and not without a great deal of hesitation having  regard
      to the observations of Lord Bingham,  Lord  Hope  and  Lord  Brown  in
      Fornah and K, we concluded that  the  adjunctive  "and"  between  sub-
      paragraphs (i) and (ii) of regulation 6(1)(d) means what it says:  for
      a particular social group to exist, sub-paragraph (ii)  of  regulation
      6(1)(d) must always be satisfied. In order  for  a  particular  social
      group to exist, the  group  must  have  a  distinct  identity  in  the
      relevant society because it is perceived as  being  different  by  the
      surrounding society. We emphasise  both  that  the  particular  social
      group must have a distinct identity as well as  the  requirement  that
      the distinct identity of the group must arise  because  the  group  is
      perceived as being different by the surrounding society.  Although  it
      would not be necessary for the whole of a given  society  to  perceive
      the group to be different from it, it is not necessary for us  to  lay
      any guidelines in this respect in this case.

(B)   Causation

75.   Article 9.3 of the Qualification Directive states:

            "In accordance with Article 2(c), there  must  be  a  connection
           between the reasons mentioned in Article  10  and  the  acts  of
           persecution as qualified in paragraph 1."

      and regulation 5(3) of the Protection Regulations states:

      "(3)  An act of persecution must be committed for at least one of  the
           reasons in Article 1A of the Geneva Convention."

76.   It was accepted before us that a simple "but for"  test  of  causation
      is inappropriate. The answer to the causation  question  involves  the
      application of common sense notions, rather than mechanical rules.  It
      was also accepted that the ground on which the  claimant  relied  need
      not  be  the  only  reason,  or  even  the  primary  reason,  for  the
      apprehended persecution, although (in Ms.  Chandran's  submission)  it
      must be an effective reason and (in Mr. Patel's submission) it must be
      the effective reason. In Fornah and K, Lord Bingham said at  paragraph
      17 that it is enough if the ground relied upon is an effective  reason
      for the further acts of persecution.

77.   Mr. Patel also submitted that, if discrimination in  the  wider  sense
      is not the identifying characteristic of the social group in question,
      discrimination must be shown to be  present  to  establish  causation,
      i.e.  that  the  lack  of  protection  against  non-state  actors   of
      persecution is due either to the Appellant's gender (if the wide group
      of women in the country is relied upon) or the  fact  of  having  been
      trafficked (if the  second  suggested  group  of  "former  victims  of
      trafficking" or the third suggested group of "victims  of  trafficking
      for the purposes of sexual exploitation"  is  relied  upon).   In  our
      view, this contention is not consistent  with  paragraph  102  of  the
      judgment in Fornah and K at which Baroness  Hale  of  Richmond  quoted
      from paragraph 21 of the UNHCR's PSG Guidelines, as follows:

      "102. In cases where there is a risk of being persecuted at the  hands
           of a non-State actor (eg husband,  partner  or  other  non-State
           actor) for reasons which are related to one  of  the  Convention
           grounds, the causal link is  established,  whether  or  not  the
           absence   of   State   protection   is    Convention    related.
           Alternatively, where the risk of being persecuted at  the  hands
           of a non-State actor is unrelated to a  Convention  ground,  but
           the inability or unwillingness of the State to offer  protection
           is for reasons of a Convention ground, the causal link  is  also
           established."

      (our emphasis)

78.   We note that regulation 5(3) employs the words "for at  least  one  of
      the reasons ....." and, although  we  would  not  directly  apply  the
      Qualification Directive especially as it has not been  suggested  that
      there are any errors of transposition, we note also that  Article  9.3
      of the Qualification  Directive  uses  the  words  "there  must  be  a
      connection between the [Geneva Convention reasons]  and  the  acts  of
      persecution ....."  We do not consider  that  there  is  any  material
      difference between the two.  In the Geneva Convention,  the  causative
      element is provided for by the  words  "for  reasons  of...."  in  the
      phrase "owing to well-founded fear of  being  persecuted  for  reasons
      of......." in Article 1A(2). At paragraph 102 of the  judgment  in  ex
      parte Hoxha, Baroness Hale quotes the phrase "for  reasons  which  are
      related  to  one  of  the  Convention  grounds..."  which  appears  in
      paragraph 21 of the UNHCR's PSG Guidelines.  We  have  concerns  about
      moving from the words "for reasons of...." in the Geneva Convention to
      the words "for reasons  which  are  related  to...".  In  saying  that
      paragraph 21 of the UNHCR's  PSG  Guidelines  is  consistent  with  or
      directly derived from the decision in Shah and  Islam,  Baroness  Hale
      was (in our view) focusing on the  question  whether  the  absence  of
      state protection must be for  a  Geneva  Convention  ground,  and  not
      whether there was a difference in meaning between "for reasons  of..."
      and "for reasons which are related to..."

79.   It is not necessary for us to decide whether the phrase  used  in  the
      Geneva Convention is materially different  from  the  phrase  used  in
      paragraph 21 of the UNHCR's PSG Guidelines, or whether  these  phrases
      are materially different from the phrase used in regulation  5(3).  On
      any of these formulations, our decision would be  the  same,  for  the
      following reason:  In his speech in Shah and Islam  dealing  with  the
      issue of causation, of Lord Hoffman said that  "......there  are  much
      more difficult cases in which the officers of the State neither act as
      the agents of discriminatory  persecution  nor,  on  the  basis  of  a
      discriminatory policy, allow individuals to inflict  persecution  with
      impunity. In countries in which the power of the State is weak,  there
      may be intermediate cases in which groups  of  people  have  power  in
      particular areas to persecute others on a discriminatory basis and the
      State, on account of lack of resources or political will  and  without
      its agents applying any discriminatory policy of their own, is  unable
      or unwilling to protect them" (see the quote at our  paragraph  45(vi)
      above). His Lordship considered that  such  cases  would  have  to  be
      decided on a  case by case basis. In the context of Moldova and having
      regard to the background evidence as to state-protection generally, we
      are prepared to assume that anyone who is at a heightened risk of ill-
      treatment (and it should be  remembered,  in  this  regard,  that  the
      Respondent accepts that the Appellant is at real risk of serious  harm
      at the hands of Z and Z's associates) which is shown to  be  at  least
      related to the individual's past experience of having been  trafficked
      constitutes harm for a Geneva  Convention  reason  provided  that  the
      individual  is  a   member  of  a  social  group  which   is   defined
      independently of the feared act of future persecution.  We  would  not
      want to be read as implying that  the  same  would  apply  in  another
      country with a better protection system, or that  state-protection  is
      generally insufficient or inadequate in Moldova.


(C)   Country evidence relating to Moldova

80.   In considering the Appellant's appeal,  we  will  need  to  apply  the
      general legal principles  with  regard  to  the  identification  of  a
      particular social group in the context of the background  evidence  in
      Moldova.

81.   The first point we should make is that, in this  appeal,  we  are  not
      concerned with the secessionist region which  lies  east  of  Dniester
      River along the border with Ukraine which declared itself  independent
      in 1990. This region is known as the "Transdniester Moldovan Republic"
      or "Transnistria". Although this is not an internationally  recognised
      state, the Moldovan government has no authority in  Transnistria  (see
      the U.S. State Department (USSD) Report on Moldova for  2006  dated  6
      March 2007 on page 753  of  bundle  2  (the  2006  USSD  Human  Rights
      Practices Report)). All references we  make  to  Moldova  exclude  the
      secessionist region, unless otherwise indicated.

82.   We have been supplied with a large number of background documents  for
      Moldova. It is not possible to refer to them all, although we make  it
      clear that we have considered the documents we have been referred  to.
      In general terms, we make the observation that the background evidence
      shows that trafficking is a particular problem in Moldova, albeit more
      so in the breakaway region of Transnistria. We also make  the  general
      observation that the background evidence also  shows  that  corruption
      within the  state  sector  is  a  problem  in  Moldova,  although  the
      government is taking steps to address the problem.

83.   Before moving on to consider the background evidence  in  any  detail,
      we  will  make  some  general  observations  about  Ms.  Surtees.   We
      acknowledge that her curriculum vitae shows that she has worked on the
      issue of trafficking in various capacities  since  1998  and  has  had
      experience in South-eastern Europe including Moldova,  Southeast  Asia
      and West Africa. In 2004 and 2005, she managed the  Regional  Clearing
      Project Point Programme (RCP) established through the organisation for
      Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) under  its  Stability  Pact
      for South-eastern Europe Task Force on  Trafficking  in  Human  Beings
      which was tasked with improving trafficking programmes and polices  in
      the South-eastern European region, with particular  attention  to  the
      assistance and protection needs of trafficking victims. We  note  that
      Moldova was one of the RCP's project countries and  that  Ms.  Surtees
      conducted field research there in late 2004 and was in regular contact
      with   non-governmental   organisations   (NGOs)   and   international
      organisations in the country for the duration of the project. We  note
      that  she  is  currently  engaged  in  two  anti-trafficking  research
      projects which include Moldova, the first is a  study  of  traffickers
      and trafficking patterns and the second is  a  study  about  why  some
      trafficking victims decline assistance  and  protection  services.  We
      therefore acknowledge that Ms. Surtees  has  relevant  experience  and
      knowledge to give  an  opinion  about  the  situation  of  trafficking
      victims in Moldova.

84.   Having said this, we agree with Mr.  Patel  that  the  fact  that  Ms.
      Surtees changed her opinion on the question as to whether women are  a
      particular social group in Moldova reduces the weight to be  given  to
      her opinion on  the  situation  of  trafficked  victims.  Her  initial
      opinion on  the  question  as  to  whether  women  in  Moldova  are  a
      particular social group was clearly that  it  is  not  the  case  that
      women, per se, would qualify as members of a particular social  group,
      but rather that Moldovan trafficking victims would (see her "comments"
      dated 13 February 2007, page 441 of bundle 1). However,  on  25  April
      2007, she changed her mind, saying that she is not an  expert  on  the
      country of Moldova, but a trafficking specialist with knowledge of the
      situation of trafficking victims in Moldova. The relevant paragraph of
      her letter dated 25 April 2007 reads:

            "......In my comments of February 13, I  noted  that  while  the
           Home Office had listed examples of legal and policy  initiatives
           which suggest gender equality in Moldova, my experience was that
           the implementation of these laws and polices was generally weak.
           As such, based on my experience in the country, I am inclined to
           agree with the argument that legislative,  economic  and  social
           provision in Moldova (and/or the lack of  enforcement  of  these
           provisions) fail to provide 'women in  Moldova'  with  effective
           protection from the harm  of  domestic  and  other  gender-based
           violence."

85.   In changing her opinion, Ms.  Surtees  relies  on  the  same  material
      (i.e. the examples of legal and policy initiatives listed by the  Home
      Office) and her experience of their implementation. There was  nothing
      before us to indicate that the evidence from the Home Office on  which
      Ms. Surtees relied was any different  as  at  25  April  2007  to  the
      evidence which was before her less than a  fortnight  earlier,  on  13
      February, nor was there anything to indicate that  the  experience  of
      Ms. Surtees was any different on the date of her first opinion to  her
      experience as at the date of the changed opinion. Accordingly,  we  do
      not consider that we have been given any satisfactory explanation  for
      this change of opinion.  This  does  not  inspire  confidence  in  her
      opinion as to the situation faced by trafficked  victims  in  Moldova.
      This tended the persuade us to attach less weight to her opinion as to
      the situation faced by trafficking victims in Moldova.  On  the  other
      hand, she is the author of the Second  Annual  Report  on  Victims  of
      Trafficking  in  South-eastern  Europe  2005  of   the   International
      Organisation for Migration (the  IOM)  referred  to  at  paragraph  92
      below. Although she was not the author of the more useful IOM research
      report referred to at paragraphs 94 to 100 below, the contents of  the
      Second Annual Report on Victims of Trafficking in South-eastern Europe
      2005 indicate that her opinion  as  to  the  situation  of  trafficked
      victims in Moldova cannot be dismissed simply because she changed  her
      opinion within the space of a fortnight on the question as to  whether
      women are a particular social group in Moldova. Accordingly, we accord
      some weight to her opinion, though this is a little  reduced  for  the
      reasons we have given.

86.   Moldova is described in the Home Office Operational Guidance  Note  on
      Moldova dated 9 October 2006 as Europe's poorest nation (page  795  of
      bundle 2). The USSD  Report  entitled  '2006  Trafficking  in  Persons
      Report: Moldova country Narrative' dated 5 June 2006 (pages 772 to 773
      of bundle 2) (the 2006 USSD Trafficking  Report)  and  the  2006  USSD
      Human Rights Practices Report (pages 752 to 771 of bundle  2)  give  a
      fair picture of the background situation in Moldova.  The  earlier  of
      the two documents is the 2006 USSD  Trafficking  Report,  extracts  of
      which we set out below:
           "Moldova is a major source country for trafficking in women  and
           girls for  the  purpose  of  sexual  exploitation.  Victims  are
           trafficked throughout Europe and the Middle  East,  increasingly
           to Turkey, Israel, the U.A.E., and Russia. To a  lesser  extent,
           Moldova serves as a transit country to European destinations for
           victims trafficked from other former Soviet states.  Reports  of
           internal trafficking of  girls  from  rural  areas  to  Chisinau
           continued. The small breakaway region of Transnistria in eastern
           Moldova is outside the central government's control and remained
           a  significant  source  and  transit  area  for  trafficking  in
           persons.
           The Government of Moldova does not fully comply with the minimum
           standards for the elimination of  trafficking;  however,  it  is
           making significant efforts to do so.  In  2005,  the  government
           continued to improve its law  enforcement  response,  increasing
           trafficking investigations and convicting more  traffickers.  It
           passed comprehensive anti-trafficking  legislation  and  updated
           and improved its National Action Plan. However,  the  government
           showed a lack of anti-trafficking leadership by depending almost
           exclusively on NGOs to carry out  its  work  on  prevention  and
           protection. The government, through its  National  Committee  on
           Trafficking in Persons, should implement the new National Action
           Plan, devote increased  resources  to  prevention,  and  provide
           victims with protection and assistance.
           Prosecution
           The Government of Moldova made modest progress in its efforts to
           punish acts of trafficking over  the  last  year.  Although  the
           Moldovan  criminal  code   contains   specific   penalties   for
           trafficking, some prosecutors continued to use  lighter  pimping
           charges. In December 2005, the government  passed  comprehensive
           anti-trafficking   legislation,   criminalizing   both    sexual
           exploitation and forced labor trafficking.  However,  successful
           implementation of the law remains unclear without  a  commitment
           of resources from the government. The government  increased  its
           law enforcement efforts, investigating 386 cases of  trafficking
           in  2005.  Of  the  314  cases  referred  for  prosecution,   58
           traffickers were convicted, an increase from 23  convictions  in
           2004. Only 36 traffickers received actual imprisonment; the rest
           paid  fines  or  were  granted   amnesty.   Unfortunately,   the
           government increased its use of  suspended  sentences  in  2005.
           Although  some  suspended  sentences  resulted  from  inadequate
           investigations, others  continued  to  be  related  to  judicial
           corruption.  During  the  reporting   period,   the   government
           disbanded the Ministry of Interior's Anti-Trafficking  Unit  and
           replaced it with a new inter-agency Center to Combat Trafficking
           in Persons. Allegations of trafficking related corruption  among
           some  law  enforcement   officials   continued,   although   the
           government  did  not  take  action.  In  2005,  the   government
           sentenced a police  officer  accused  of  collaborating  with  a
           Turkish trafficker to 10 years  in  prison.  A  former  Moldovan
           policeman charged with trafficking women to the  U.A.E.  remains
           free on bail pending completion of his trial  after  deportation
           from the Emirates.
           Protection
           The Government of Moldova's efforts to protect  and  reintegrate
           trafficking  victims  remained  weak  throughout  the  reporting
           period. The government did not fund NGOs providing  shelter  and
           assistance to trafficking victims, but it continued to cooperate
           with them on  a  limited  basis.  In  June  2005,  the  Moldovan
           Parliament amended a law on employment and social protection  to
           allow trafficking victims and other  vulnerable  populations  to
           receive government benefits; however,  the  government  did  not
           report providing any benefits to trafficking  victims.  Contrary
           to what was stated in last year's Report, the government did not
           provide space in state buildings for a rehabilitation center run
           by IOM  [the  International  Organization  for  Migration].  The
           government's  witness  protection  law   remained   inadequately
           implemented and thus, while in some cases police  posted  guards
           outside witnesses' homes,  many  victims  did  not  feel  secure
           enough to testify against their  traffickers.  No  progress  was
           made in the development of a formal  referral  system;  however,
           the police informally referred 88  victims  to  IOM  during  the
           reporting period. Overall, IOM reported  assisting  464  victims
           during the reporting period. In January 2006, the government, in
           partnership with IOM, launched a program to build  the  capacity
           of Moldovan consular officers abroad  to  assist  potential  and
           actual victims of trafficking.
           Prevention
           NGOs and international organizations continued  to  conduct  the
           bulk of anti-trafficking prevention and education  campaigns  in
           2005, with  periodic  participation  from  the  government.  NGO
           prevention efforts included outreach  to  potential  victims  of
           trafficking in the mass media and in  rural  areas  as  well  as
           education  efforts  in  schools.  The  National   Committee   on
           Trafficking  in  Persons  continued  to  meet  to   review   the
           government's anti-trafficking efforts, but met less often during
           the reporting period. In August 2005, the government approved  a
           new National Action  Plan  based  on  regional  best  practices,
           developed with the active guidance of a local NGO."
87.   In this report, Moldova was assigned a 'Tier 2'  rating.  The  various
      tiers are described in the following terms (page 773 of bundle 2).
           "THE TIERS
           TIER 1: Countries whose governments fully comply with the  Act's
           minimum standards. [detailed on p. 288]
           TIER 2: Countries whose governments do not fully comply with the
           Act's minimum standards but are making  significant  efforts  to
           bring themselves into compliance with those standards.
           TIER 2 SPECIAL WATCH LIST: Countries whose  governments  do  not
           fully comply with the Act's minimum  standards  but  are  making
           significant efforts to bring  themselves  into  compliance  with
           those standards, and:
           a) The absolute number of victims of severe forms of trafficking
           is very significant or is significantly increasing; or
           b) There is a failure to provide evidence of increasing  efforts
           to combat severe  forms  of  trafficking  in  persons  from  the
           previous year; or
           c) The  determination  that  a  country  is  making  significant
           efforts  to  bring  themselves  into  compliance  with   minimum
           standards was based  on  commitments  by  the  country  to  take
           additional future steps over the next year.
           TIER 3: Countries whose governments do not fully comply with the
           minimum standards and are not making significant efforts  to  do
           so."
88.   It is relevant to note that, whilst Moldova  was  assigned  a  Tier  2
      rating, it was not assigned to the "Tier 2 Special Watch List".

89.   The section entitled: "Trafficking in Persons" in the 2006 USSD  Human
      Rights Practices Report (page 767 of bundle 2) reads:

           "Trafficking in Persons


           The law prohibits trafficking in persons and it carries criminal
           penalties. However, trafficking remained a serious  problem  and
           the  country  is  a  major  source   for   trafficked   persons,
           particularly women and girls for sexual exploitation.


           To a lesser extent the country  is  also  a  transit  point  for
           trafficking victims, and there were  reports  of  some  internal
           trafficking of girls from rural areas to the capital.


           A significant amount of trafficking continued to  occur  in  the
           breakaway region  of  Transnistria,  which  is  outside  of  the
           government's  control.  The   separatist   region   remained   a
           significant source and transit area for trafficking in persons.


           Women and children were trafficked for sexual exploitation,  and
           men and children  were  trafficked  to  Russia  and  neighboring
           countries for forced labor and begging. The country was  also  a
           transit point for victims trafficked from Ukraine. Victims  were
           increasingly trafficked to Russia and countries  of  the  Middle
           East, such as Turkey,  Israel,  and  the  United  Arab  Emirates
           (UAE). According to  International  Organization  for  Migration
           (IOM), 12 percent of the trafficking victims  it  assisted  were
           minors under 18 years of  age.  The  IOM  also  noted  that  the
           percentages of victims trafficked from  rural  and  urban  areas
           closely corresponded to residence statistics from the  country's
           2004 census. Most victims had suffered some form  of  sexual  or
           physical abuse at home and were willing to face significant risk
           to escape abuse.


           The government's newly-formed Center to  Combat  Trafficking  in
           Persons (CCTIP) stated that information indicated that men  were
           trafficked for agricultural and construction work to the  Baltic
           States and to the  Commonwealth  of  Independent  States  (CIS).
           There also were reports that women were trafficked  to  Lebanon,
           Greece, Macedonia, Serbia (including  Kosovo),  and  Montenegro,
           Bosnia and Herzegovina, Poland,  Croatia,  the  Czech  Republic,
           Belarus, France, the United Kingdom, and Austria.


           ...........................


           The law provides criminal penalties for trafficking ranging from
           seven years to life imprisonment depending on the  circumstances
           and severity of the offense.


           During the first 11 months of the year, authorities  opened  333
           trafficking-related investigations. According to  CCTIP,  during
           the year authorities convicted 62 persons  for  trafficking,  85
           for pimping, 13 for organizing begging, seven for trafficking in
           children, four for organizing illegal  migration,  and  two  for
           forced labor. Of the 173 convictions, 67 persons  were  sent  to
           prison, 36 received a suspended sentence, 59 were fined, and  11
           were amnestied or acquitted.


           During the first eight months of the year the interior  ministry
           reported that it conducted 35 raids to inspect  143  travel  and
           employment agencies;  it  withdrew  the  licenses  of  four  for
           suspected trafficking.


           In  2005  the  government   merged   the   interior   ministry's
           antitrafficking section into a new national entity,  the  CCTIP,
           which  is  composed  of  senior  officials  from  all   relevant
           government ministries and includes  prosecutors,  analysts,  and
           investigators. There is also a multiagency task force under  the
           leadership  of  the  prosecutor  general's  office  to   monitor
           trafficking law enforcement activities, coordinate intelligence,
           provide witness protection, and provide  advice  on  prosecuting
           complex cases.


           During the year the government improved cooperation  with  other
           member  countries  of   the   Southeast   European   Cooperative
           Initiative, Interpol, and  with  other  trafficking  destination
           countries such as Italy, the United  Arab  Emirates  (UAE),  and
           Turkey, resulting in a number of convictions.


           On February 8, the government ratified an agreement with  Turkey
           to combat trafficking as part of a broad effort to fight illegal
           drug trafficking, international terrorism, and  other  organized
           crime.


           There have been longstanding  reports  of  involvement  by  some
           government officials in trafficking. On October 18, the Ministry
           of Interior dismissed several senior officials for  trafficking,
           including a former CCTIP deputy director,  Ion  Bejan,  who  was
           under investigation on charges of protecting a major trafficker.
           According   to   the   interior   ministry,   other   government
           investigators  and  prosecutors  were  also  involved   in   the
           protection scheme and are under investigation. The ministry also
           reported  that,  in  the  first  11  months  of  the  year,   it
           investigated and eradicated 39 trafficking networks. Turkey  was
           the destination country in 14 of the cases; UAE in five;  Russia
           in five; the  Kosovo  region  of  Serbia  in  three;  and  other
           countries in the remaining 12.


           Elsewhere in the country,  widespread  corruption  and  lack  of
           resources prevented adequate border control  and  monitoring  of
           traffickers, particularly in areas near Transnistria.  Observers
           alleged that corrupt  low  and  high-level  Moldovan  government
           officials  were  either  involved  in   or   routinely   ignored
           trafficking crimes. In September trafficking charges  levied  in
           November 2004 against a former policeman who was  deported  from
           the UAE back to the country were downgraded to pimping;  he  was
           amnestied. The prosecutor and the victims' lawyer  appealed  the
           court decision.


           On June 20, police arrested Alexander Covali, an alleged  leader
           of a trafficking ring. He was  charged  with  trafficking  after
           police found confined women on his properties. He  was  released
           on bail and arrested again on August  4  when  an  investigation
           revealed that he had received police protection. He remained  in
           jail in year's end awaiting a court hearing.


           On December 27,  Ion  Gusin  was  convicted  of  trafficking  in
           persons and sentenced to 22 years in jail for his role  as  pimp
           and translator for a foreign sex tourist.


           On October 20, the finance ministry created a  special  fund  to
           pay for free social services for trafficking victims,  including
           modest medical and psychiatric services, new identity  documents
           and residence permits, legal  counseling,  vocational  training,
           and professional counseling. The fund is part of a comprehensive
           trafficking in persons law passed by parliament in October 2005.




           The government had no other programs to assist victims.  Several
           NGOs offered repatriation  assistance,  temporary  housing,  and
           medical care for victims, as well as job training. The NGO  Save
           the  Children  worked  with  trafficking  victims,  particularly
           repatriated  girls.  The  NGO   La   Strada   Moldova   provided
           informational and educational services as  well  as  a  national
           toll-free hotline.


           During the first eight months  of  the  year  IOM  assisted  193
           returned trafficking victims, the  majority  of  whom  had  been
           trafficked to Turkey, Russia, and the UAE.


           The government took some steps to  prevent  the  trafficking  of
           persons and to assist victims through its  network  of  national
           antitrafficking committees. Local committees in each  region  of
           the country and officials from a variety of ministries and local
           governments  were  required  to   present   reports   on   their
           antitrafficking efforts. In August 2005 the government  approved
           a new national action plan for combating trafficking in persons,
           which  was   developed   in   conjunction   with   international
           organizations.


           Local NGOs operated public  school  programs  to  educate  young
           women about the dangers of prostitution. During  the  year,  the
           IOM  continued  its  information  program  aimed  at   providing
           information   to   help   citizens   going   abroad   to   avoid
           exploitation."

90.   Overall, we consider that the 2006 USSD Human Rights Practices  Report
      confirms the 2006 USSD Trafficking Report. It also shows  that,  since
      the 2006 Trafficking Report, the Moldovan government has taken further
      steps to prosecute traffickers, as indicated by  the  re-arrest  on  4
      August 2006 of Alexander Covali and conviction on 27 December  of  Ion
      Gusin. In addition, there is reference to the creation  of  a  special
      fund to pay for free social services for victims of trafficking.

91.   The report of Amnesty International for 2006 dated 23 May 2006  (pages
      775 to 776 of bundle 2) refers to Moldova having reportedly  increased
      the number of convictions for trafficking in human beings. However, we
      also note that the report states that protection for  the  victims  of
      trafficking remained inadequate and the government did not implement a
      1998 witness protection law.

92.   The Moldova  section  of  the  Second  Annual  Report  on  Victims  of
      Trafficking in South-eastern Europe 2005 of the IOM begins at page 446
      of bundle 2.  This report  gives  some  pointers  as  to  the  general
      profile of potential victims of  trafficking.  Victims  are  generally
      aged between 18 years and 25 years. This has  been  fairly  consistent
      since the year 2000 (page 454 of bundle 2). Unmarried women  accounted
      for the majority of assisted Moldovan victims  trafficked  for  sexual
      exploitation as well as an increasing percentage of victims over  time
      (page 458 of bundle 2). The economic composition of  Moldovan  victims
      of sexual exploitation changed in  recent  years,  with  more  victims
      describing themselves as coming from either "very poor"  to  "average"
      economic backgrounds (page 460 of bundle 2). Violence within the  home
      appears to serve  as  an  important  catalyst  for  some  migration  /
      trafficking (page 461 of bundle 2). The vast majority of victims lived
      with their families at the time of recruitment  -  a  fact  which  the
      report states is not  surprising  given  that  so  many  victims  were
      unmarried at recruitment and that most unmarried women in Moldova live
      with their families until marriage (page 463 of  bundle  2).  On  this
      basis, the report suggests that  "not  only  does  living  with  one's
      family  seemingly   not   protect   many   victims,   various   family
      configurations and dynamics may in fact impel  women  to  migrate  and
      face the risk of being trafficked".  At page 478, the report states:

            "Overall, it is reasonable to assert that  re-trafficking  is  a
           common phenomenon in a source country like Moldova. Many victims
           report attempting to migrate again shortly after return  because
           of the need to earn money, lack of opportunity  or  problems  in
           the home. Another contributor to re-trafficking may also be  the
           difficulties faced in reintegration, including stigma and  shame
           associated with sexual exploitation as well  as  dissatisfaction
           with the material conditions at home......."

93.   Overall, the  victims  of  trafficking  were  mainly  women,  although
      children were also trafficked. As we have said at paragraph 54  above,
      there was also some evidence of men having been trafficked.  This  IOM
      report, which relates to the year  2005,  indicates  that  individuals
      were trafficked mainly for sexual exploitation. However, the later and
      more recent IOM report indicates that only a small proportion  of  the
      overall numbers of trafficked individuals have been trafficked for the
      purposes of sexual exploitation (see below). In this  appeal,  we  are
      not  concerned  with  deciding  whether  individuals  who  have   been
      trafficked for purposes other than sexual exploitation are members  of
      a particular social group. In any event, on the whole of the  evidence
      before us (including the evidence referred to after  this  paragraph),
      we do not consider that the evidence before us shows that  individuals
      who have been trafficked for the purposes of labour, or  begging,  are
      perceived differently by the surrounding society. There  was  just  no
      evidence on this. Accordingly, the second of the  suggested  groups  -
      "former  victims  of  trafficking"  -  does  not  satisfy   regulation
      6(1)(d)(ii) of the Protection Regulations.

94.   More  recently,  the  IOM  carried  out  research,  partly  to  devise
      estimates on the numbers of trafficked people in five Eastern European
      countries (Belarus, Bulgaria,  Moldova,  Romania  and  Ukraine).  This
      report is entitled:  'Research  Shows  Significant  Figures  on  Human
      Trafficking' dated 16 February 2007 (pages 777 to 793 of bundle 2). We
      have found this report particularly helpful, partly because  it  is  a
      recent report and partly because of the  detail  supplied  within  the
      report. The report claims that an estimated 225,000 people have fallen
      victim to the crime, with the Ukraine having  the  largest  number  of
      estimated victims (about 117,000 people). The figures  for  the  other
      countries were: Moldova  (57,000  people),  Romania  (28,000  people),
      Belarus (14,000 people) and  Bulgaria  (9,500  people)  (page  777  of
      bundle 2). In other words, we note that Moldova  was  second  in  this
      list of five countries. The point is also made  in  this  report  that
      sensitivities and stigma attached  to  sexual  exploitation  may  have
      resulted in an underestimation of figures  related  to  this  type  of
      human trafficking. The information in the second column on table 10 on
      page 37 of the report (page 790 of bundle 2) indicates that the figure
      of 57,000 for Moldova does not include  the  secessionist  Transnistra
      region. The estimated numbers of victims in each of the five countries
      must  be  considered  against  the  population  statistics  for  those
      countries, which are given at table 5 on page 35 of the  report  (page
      788 of bundle 2). On the basis of these figures, the estimated numbers
      of trafficking victims as percentages of  the  general  population  in
      each of the five countries are as follows:

            Moldova    1.28 % of the general population of Moldova
            Ukraine    0.25 % of the general population of the Ukraine
            Belarus    0.14 % of the general population of Belarus
            Bulgaria   0.128 % of the general population of Bulgaria
            Romania    0.125 % of the general population of Romania

95.   In other words, if the estimated numbers of  trafficking  victims  are
      expressed  as  percentages  of  the  general  population   for   these
      countries, the figure for Moldova is five times that for the  Ukraine,
      9.14 times that in Belarus, ten times that in Bulgaria and  just  over
      ten times that in  Romania.   We  therefore  acknowledge  that,  after
      adjusting for population size in the relevant  countries,  Moldova  in
      fact tops the table of these five problem countries. This deduction is
      consistent with the information at table 4 on page 33  of  the  report
      (page 786 of bundle 2).

96.   The information in table 1 on page 28  of  the  report  (page  781  of
      bundle 2) shows that, for the five countries  mentioned,  Moldova  has
      the highest proportion of the population which  perceives  that  human
      trafficking is a problem  in  the  country.  The  first  paragraph  of
      section 7 on page 32 of the report (page 785 of bundle 2) states  that
      high levels of awareness about human trafficking were observed for all
      the countries; however, Moldovans and Bulgarians were overall the most
      aware of the human trafficking phenomena. The  first  paragraph  below
      table 3 on the same page states that Moldovans are the most  concerned
      with the human trafficking problem. These are potential indicators  as
      to whether trafficked victims are perceived as being different by  the
      surrounding  society.  On  the  other  hand,  the  mere  fact  that  a
      particular issue is a big problem in a particular country or the  mere
      fact that there are high levels of awareness of a  particular  problem
      in a given society does not  mean that those members of society in the
      problem group  are  perceived  to  be  different  by  the  surrounding
      society.

97.   We also noted the information in the second bullet point from the  top
      of 28 of the report (page 781 of bundle 2) reads:

            "Public opinion with regard to whether human trafficking  should
           be blamed on personal irresponsibility of its victims or on poor
           social institutions differs across the  countries.  In  Moldova,
           Ukraine and Romania public opinion blames human  trafficking  on
           poor legal environment and  corruption,  while  in  Belarus  and
           Bulgaria it is blamed on recklessness and  imprudence  of  human
           trafficking  victims.  Consequently,  trafficking   victims   in
           Belarus and Bulgaria may face more difficulties in their  social
           adaptation after the human  trafficking  case  has  happened  to
           them......"

98.   In other words, the report makes a link between the ease or  otherwise
      of social adaptation in each of the five countries with whether public
      opinion blames human trafficking on the individuals  who  have  fallen
      victim  to  human  trafficking  or  on  poor  legal  environment   and
      corruption. In our view, this is also  an  indication  as  to  whether
      trafficked victims are perceived as being different by the surrounding
      society. The fact that Moldovans do not blame the victims  as  opposed
      to other reasons for their experience of having been trafficked may be
      an indication that victims may not be  perceived  differently  by  the
      surrounding society.  On  the  other  hand,  the  evidence  of  social
      stigmatisation in Moldova (see below) against persons  who  have  been
      trafficked for sexual exploitation tends to go against any  assumption
      along these lines.

99.   We turn now to the evidence concerning  trafficked  victims  who  have
      returned to Moldova. At page 747 of bundle 2, there is an e-mail  from
      a Ms. Liliana Sorrentino who appears to work for the OSCE dated 16 May
      2006 to a Ms. Zofia Duszynsk who appears to be a caseworker at  HFCLC.
      The subject of the e-mail is said to be: "Re: Trafficking  victims  in
      Moldova". Ms. Sorrentino says:

      "To my knowledge in Moldova in the  past  there  have  been  cases  of
           reprisals and retaliation  against  victims  of  trafficking  or
           their loved ones from criminals and there is  a  possibility  of
           being re-trafficked.......

      Additionally, according to information from NGOs there have been  also
           individual cases of abuse and sexual violence  against  returned
           victims  of  trafficking.  In  general  trafficked  persons  are
           stigmatised upon return by the community and/or  the  family  in
           Moldova..............."

100.  No information has been given as to the  background  or  expertise  of
      Ms. Sorrentino, nor have we been told what she bases her view that "in
      general  trafficked  persons  are  stigmatised  upon  return  by   the
      community and/or the family in Moldova". In the circumstances,  we  do
      not place much weight on this e-mail correspondence.

101.  We return to the IOM report of 2005, which we  considered  briefly  at
      paragraph 92 above. This has an information section on the  assistance
      framework in Moldova for returned  victims  of  trafficking.  We  have
      considered this evidence carefully in order to see what  it  tells  us
      about how victims are  perceived  by  the  surrounding  society.  This
      section of the  report  was  compiled  from  information  relating  to
      victims  assisted  in  2004  and  earlier.  Although  we   take   this
      information into account, we note that it is now somewhat  dated.  The
      assistance, mainly provided by the IOM and other  local  NGOs,  ranges
      from the very basic (i.e. initial accommodation and  return  transport
      to the home community) to a more comprehensive package  of  assistance
      (i.e. accommodation,  legal,  medical  and  psychological  assistance,
      vocational training, job placement) (page 501 of bundle 2).  Generally
      speaking, only short-term assistance with accommodation  is  provided;
      long-term housing assistance is largely non-existent in Moldova.  Much
      of the information in this section of the report appears to relate  to
      female victims who have been trafficked for sexual  exploitation.  For
      example, the final paragraph on page 506  of  bundle  2  states  that,
      where a victim is unable to return to  "her"  family,  "she"  has  few
      options and that, in  such  cases,  service  providers  encourage  the
      victim to locate another family member or friend who  can  accommodate
      "her". The first full paragraph on page 504 states that victims rarely
      receive follow-up counselling in their home communities, both  because
      services are lacking outside  of  Chisinau  and  because  victims  are
      concerned that members of their home communities will learn  of  their
      experience. This paragraph refers to the need to ensure  that  victims
      can avail themselves of long-term support  services  without  fear  of
      stigmatisation. According to the second full paragraph  on  page  507,
      although most victims at the NGO shelters stay at the  shelter  first,
      undertaking mutual visits with their family before returning to  their
      families and although social assistants  at  the  shelters  help  with
      mediation with family members where this is  needed,  most  trafficked
      victims do not wish to reveal their trafficking  experience  to  their
      family members (page 507 of bundle 2). Re-trafficking is said to be  a
      prominent issue in Moldova for all forms of trafficking (page  448  of
      bundle 2). Various reasons are mentioned in the first  full  paragraph
      on page 478, including the need to earn money, lack of opportunity  or
      problems in the home. This paragraph  goes  on  to  state  that  other
      contributors may be the need to repay debt as well as the difficulties
      faced in reintegration including  stigma  and  shame  associated  with
      sexual exploitation as  well  as  dissatisfaction  with  the  material
      conditions at home. Although this report is  broadly  consistent  with
      the more recent report from Ms. Surtees (see, in particular, page  428
      of  bundle  1),  which  also  refers  to   short-term   provision   of
      accommodation  and  to  victims  only   rarely   receiving   follow-up
      counselling in their home communities due, in part, to their  concerns
      that members of their home communities will learn of their trafficking
      experience, we approach  the  statistical  information  given  by  Ms.
      Surtees with care, given  that  the  table  on  page  427  is  clearly
      extracted from table 1 in the IOM report of 2005 (see table 1  of  the
      IOM report of 2005, at page 450 of bundle 2) which  is  now  over  two
      years old and is based on information gathered in 2004 or earlier.

102.  The report of Ms. Surtees dated 21 June 2006  also  refers  to  social
      stigmatisation, as follows (page 429 of bundle 1):

       "Prostitution  is  socially  stigmatised  and  most  people  do   not
           differentiate between someone who has worked in prostitution and
           someone who was trafficked and forcibly sexually exploited. Both
           are stigmatised and face  serious  problems  when  dealing  with
           family and community members and  when  attempting  to  socially
           reintegrate.  The  issue  of  stigma  also  directly  informs  a
           victim's access to assistance, with some  victims  unwilling  to
           accept services from anti-trafficking [sic] organization as they
           fear stigma associated with trafficking.

      Much reintegration depends on the  support  of  the  victim's  family.
           While accommodation is available in the short term, returning to
           one's family is the most common strategy and often the only real
           option available to victims.......

      Communities stigmatise returning  victims,  often  labelling  them  as
           prostitutes rather than victims of exploitation, and victims may
           not  feel  comfortable  returning  home  where  they  will  face
           questions  about  their  experience  abroad.  With   communities
           increasingly aware  of  sex  trafficking,  there  is  often  the
           assumption that any woman who has returned home from abroad  has
           been working in prostitution.  Community  stigma  can  impede  a
           victim's ability to  receive  training,  find  employment,  find
           housing   options    and    socially    reintegrate    in    the
           community..........."

103.  In her "comments" of 13 February 2007 (page  441  of  bundle  1),  Ms.
      Surtees states that it is important to note the "high level of  social
      stigma and ostracism that women trafficked for  prostitution  suffer".
      She quotes the following passage from a report,  to  be  published  in
      2007, co-authored by her and A. Brunosvkis entitled: "Leaving the past
      behind: why some trafficking victims decline assistance" (page 441  of
      bundle 1):

      "In some areas the stigma associated with  prostitution  is  so  acute
           that it is almost impossible for the  woman  to  lead  a  normal
           life. In Moldova, for example, service providers referred  to  a
           practice of  identifying  'prostitutes'  (and,  by  implication,
           often also trafficking victims) by painting the woman's gate  in
           black. The tradition is  closely  connected  with  prostitution,
           with  women  working  in  prostitution  seen  as  'dirty'.  This
           organisation had assisted several victims who had been subjected
           to this ostracism......   ." Stigma  can  also  have  very  real
           physical consequences. One psychologist explained  that  one  of
           her clients who had been abroad was brutalised in her  community
           because of the stigma associated with her (forced) prostitution:
           ....."[She] did not tell anything,  but  there  were  a  lot  of
           people suspecting because she had been away for four years.  She
           went to a party in the village, and guys there took her out  and
           raped her - 'you were there and did this for money, why  not  do
           it for us free of charge'. She  came  here  very  depressed.  So
           stigmatisation is a very serious problem". "

104.  Considering all of the  evidence  in  the  round,  we  can  draw  some
      observations. However, before doing so, we remind  ourselves  that  we
      are not concerned with deciding whether there is a real risk  of  ill-
      treatment of former victims of trafficking  for  sexual  exploitation,
      although any ill-treatment such  individuals  do  experience  will  of
      course help to decide whether they are perceived  differently  by  the
      surrounding society. Secondly, we remind ourselves  that  we  are  not
      concerned with deciding whether  it  is  reasonably  likely  that  the
      surrounding society would know that  an  individual  is  a  victim  of
      trafficking for the purposes of sexual exploitation.

105.  In our view, the fact that Moldova is Europe's  poorest  nation  taken
      in conjunction with other factors (such as family relations,  lack  of
      employment, lack of awareness of the dangers of  being  trafficked  as
      well as corruption which enables traffickers to operate) go  some  way
      towards explaining the reasons why individuals are pressurised to,  or
      feel compelled to, enter into arrangements which result in their being
      trafficked. Given that the estimated number of  individuals  who  have
      been trafficked, as a percentage of the  general  population,  is  the
      highest for Moldova amongst the  five  countries  in  which  it  is  a
      problem, we conclude that human trafficking is a particular problem in
      Moldova. It is, therefore, not surprising that Moldova has the highest
      proportion of the population which perceives human  trafficking  as  a
      problem in the country. Whilst we were  initially  encouraged  by  the
      fact that public opinion in Moldova blames human  trafficking  on  the
      poor legal environment and corruption, rather than on the  individuals
      (which as we stated at paragraph 98 above, may be an  indication  that
      victims are not perceived differently  by  the  surrounding  society),
      this was not borne out when we considered other evidence referring  to
      social  stigmatisation  of   victims   of   trafficking   for   sexual
      exploitation and the fact  that  victims  of  trafficking  for  sexual
      exploitation rarely availed themselves of follow-up assistance because
      of concerns about members of their  home  communities  learning  about
      their experience. Social stigmatisation is mentioned  as  one  of  the
      difficulties faced in any reintegration process, as well as one of the
      reasons  for  the  phenomena  of  re-trafficking,   described   as   a
      "prominent" issue in Moldova. We are not told whether the practice  in
      Moldova of "identifying prostitutes" by painting the woman's  gate  in
      black is widespread. Nevertheless, the existence of such a practice is
      indicative of societal attitudes towards prostitutes  in  Moldova.  We
      note that the quote at  our  paragraph  103  suggests  that  the  term
      "prostitutes" by implication often includes trafficked victims,  which
      is  supported  by  the  experience   of   the   individual   mentioned
      subsequently in the same paragraph.

106.  On the whole of the evidence, and  although  we  had  some  misgivings
      about the evidence before us (as we have explained  already),  we  are
      persuaded that individuals who have been trafficked for  the  purposes
      of sexual exploitation are reasonably likely to be perceived as  being
      different by the surrounding society if the fact that  they  had  been
      trafficked for the purposes of sexual exploitation  is  known  to  the
      surrounding society. We are persuaded that  it  is  reasonably  likely
      that a social group of  "former  victims  of  trafficking  for  sexual
      exploitation" does have a distinct identity in  Moldova,  because  the
      group is reasonably likely to be perceived as being different  by  the
      surrounding society. This group is not quite the same as the third  of
      Ms. Chandran's suggested groups of "victims of trafficking for  sexual
      exploitation", because we have added the word "former". The reason for
      doing so is to make it clear that it is the past experience of  having
      been trafficked which is the common background. Without this addition,
      it may be argued that it is the risk of being trafficked in the future
      which is relied upon, and that would fall foul of the  principle  that
      the group must exist independently of the feared persecution.

107.  Accordingly, having considered the background  evidence  and  for  the
      reasons given above, we are satisfied that the Appellant is  a  member
      of a particular social group this group, namely,  "former  victims  of
      trafficking for the  purposes  of  sexual  exploitation".  This  group
      satisfies both limbs of  regulation  6(1)(d)  within  the  context  of
      Moldovan society and is independent  of  the  reason  for  the  feared
      future acts of persecution. (It is not necessary for  us  to  consider
      whether women are discriminated against in Moldova. We make  it  clear
      that we do not lay down any guidance in this respect.)

108.  We set out  below  a  summary  of  our  conclusions.  Because  of  the
      agreement between the parties as to the existence of a  real  risk  of
      persecution in this case, this decision  should  not  be  taken  as  a
      decision to the effect that former victims of trafficking  for  sexual
      exploitation are in general at real risk of persecution in Moldova, or
      that they are at such risk by reason of  membership  of  a  particular
      social group,  or  that  there  is  in  general  an  insufficiency  of
      protection for former victims of trafficking for  sexual  exploitation
      in Moldova, or that former victims of trafficking  in  Moldova  cannot
      internally relocate within paragraph 339O of the Immigration Rules. We
      envisage that, in the generality of cases, the  outcome  of  the  case
      would  depend  on  these  issues,  rather  than  whether  there  is  a
      particular social group. As we have stressed above, the facts of  this
      case are highly unusual. The evidence which emerged at Z's  trial  was
      such that the Respondent accepted that the Appellant would be at  real
      risk of serious harm in her particular case from Z and Z's  associates
      and family,  that  there  would  be  insufficient  protection  in  her
      particular case  and that she would not be able to internally relocate
      in her particular case.

109.  It is evident from our reasoning above  that  we  have  been  able  to
      reach a conclusion (in  the  Appellant's  favour)  on  the  particular
      social group issue without having to consider the LD Ukraine case.  It
      follows that that decision did not materially assist us and  therefore
      that paragraph 17.8 of  the  Practice  Directions  is  not  satisfied.
      However, we noted that the determination in LD Ukraine was promulgated
      before the system of reporting determinations of  the  IAT  commenced.
      Accordingly, it would seem that the applicable paragraph was paragraph
      17.10 of the Practice Directions, and not  paragraphs  17.6  to  17.8.
      However, paragraph 17.10 had not been complied with either. In all  of
      these circumstances,  the  application  to  rely  on  the  LD  Ukraine
      decision is formally refused, although this does  not,  in  our  view,
      disadvantage the Appellant.

110.  Whilst we have found the UNHCR's Trafficking  Guidelines  (pages  1541
      to 1557 of bundle 4) informative, they did not provide much assistance
      in enabling us to determine whether, as a matter  of  legal  analysis,
      "former victims of trafficking" or "former victims of trafficking  for
      sexual exploitation" are capable of  being  members  of  a  particular
      social group. This does not disadvantage  the  Appellant,  because  we
      have reached the conclusion that "former victims  of  trafficking"  or
      "former victims of trafficking for sexual exploitation" are capable of
      being members of a particular social  group.  Similarly,  the  UNHCR's
      Trafficking Guidelines were not of any assistance in  enabling  us  to
      decide whether these  groups  are  particular  social  groups  in  the
      context of Moldovan society. With regard to the UNHCR's PSG Guidelines
      (pages 1568 to 1572 of bundle 4) and  the  UNHCR's  Gender  Guidelines
      (pages 1558 to 1567 of bundle 4), we take issue with the suggestion at
      paragraph 11 of the PSG Guidelines (repeated in the Gender Guidelines)
      that a particular social group is a group of persons who either  share
      a common characteristic other than their risk of being  persecuted  or
      who are perceived as a group by society, for reasons we  have  already
      given at paragraphs 67 to 74 above. In addition, as we have  said,  we
      have reservations as to whether the words "related to" in paragraph 21
      of the PSG Guidelines is consistent  with  the  Geneva  Convention  or
      regulation 5(3) of the Protection Regulations or Article  9.3  of  the
      Qualification Directive.


111.  We turn now to consider the issue  of  causation  in  the  Appellant's
      case. As we have said in  paragraph  78  above,  we  are  prepared  to
      assume, in the context of Moldova and having regard to the  background
      evidence as to state-protection generally, that anyone  who  is  at  a
      heightened risk of ill-treatment which is shown to be at least related
      to  the  individual's  past  experience  of  having  been   trafficked
      constitutes harm for a Geneva  Convention  reason  provided  that  the
      individual  is  a   member  of  a  social  group  which   is   defined
      independently of the feared act of future persecution. The  Respondent
      accepts that the Appellant is at real risk of  serious  harm.  In  the
      Respondent's view, the Appellant is  at  real  risk  of  serious  harm
      because of the combination of the "particular nature of the gang"  (by
      which the Respondent refers to the fact that Z and Z's associates have
      a powerful reach in Moldova and that their  trafficking  operation  is
      still ongoing in Moldova, see paragraphs  3  and  27  above)  and  the
      Appellant's  personal  profile  (by  which  the  Respondent  must   be
      referring to the fact that the Appellant had been trafficked by Z  and
      Z's associates and had given evidence in the trial against  Z).  There
      may be other reasons, for example, that the Appellant has successfully
      fled from the clutches of Z and Z's associates. However, the important
      point is that, given the Respondent's acceptance of the future risk of
      serious harm, the Appellant is at a heightened risk  of  ill-treatment
      in Moldova which  (on  the  basis  of  the  Respondent's  reasons  for
      accepting that the Appellant is at real risk of serious  harm)  is  at
      least in part related to her experience of having been trafficked  for
      the purposes of sexual exploitation in the past, that  is,  it  is  at
      least in part related to the fact that she is a member of a particular
      social group (comprised of "former victims of trafficking  for  sexual
      exploitation"), although this does not mean that there is insufficient
      protection in general from the state in Moldova. Accordingly,  we  are
      satisfied that  there  is  the  necessary  causal  nexus  between  the
      Appellant's membership of her particular social group and an effective
      reason for the future acts of persecution.

(D)   Summary of general conclusions:

112.  (a)   (i) Given that the  family  is  a  quintessential  social  group
           which exists independently in society, it is  not  necessary  to
           invoke any other characteristic  or  circumstance  in  order  to
           define it. This means that it is not necessary to  show  general
           discrimination as an identifying characteristic  of  the  group.
           If, contrary to our view, discrimination is necessary, then  the
           feared future act(s) of persecution can  provide  the  necessary
           discriminatory element without falling  foul  of  the  principle
           that the group must  not  be  solely  defined  by  the  fear  of
           persecution because the dam already exists as a social group;

            (ii) Similarly, in cases where the members  of  a  social  group
           share a common background which is an  immutable  characteristic
           and which they cannot change (for  example,  the  sharing  of  a
           common past experience) or they ought  not  to  be  required  to
           change, then if the  common  background  defines  the  group  by
           giving it a distinct identity in the society in  question  which
           has nothing to do with the actions of  the  future  persecutors,
           then the group exists independently of the feared future  act(s)
           of persecution and circularity is avoided. It is  not  necessary
           to show general discrimination as an identifying  characteristic
           of the group. If an element of discrimination is  necessary,  it
           can be provided  by  the  fear  act(s)  of  persecution  without
           leading to circularity.

      (b)   Where the particular social group relied upon is the  broad  one
           of gender or a group  with  gender-based  identifying  features,
           then discrimination in the wider sense against the  gender  must
           be shown to exist as an identifying feature of the group.

       (c)    "Former  victims  of  trafficking"  and  "former  victims   of
           trafficking  for  sexual  exploitation"  are  capable  of  being
           members of a particular social group within  regulation  6(1)(d)
           because of their shared common background or past experience  of
           having been trafficked. MP Romania should no  longer  be  relied
           upon, as it was wrongly decided. However, we emphasise that,  in
           order for "former victims of trafficking" or "former victims  of
           trafficking  for  sexual  exploitation"  to  be  members  of   a
           particular social group, the  group  in  question  must  have  a
           distinct identity in the society in question.

      (d)   The adjunctive "and" in regulation  6(1)(d)  of  the  Protection
           Regulations should be given its natural meaning.

      (e)   In the context  of  Moldovan  society,  a  woman  who  has  been
           trafficked for the purposes of sexual exploitation is  a  member
           of a particular social  group  within  regulation  6(1)(d),  the
           particular social group in question  being  "former  victims  of
           trafficking for sexual exploitation".

      Decision

113.  The appeal is allowed.





Ms. D. K. GILL
Senior Immigration Judge                     Date:  31 October 2007

Approved for electronic distribution


     |Country background materials considered by the       |Date           |
|Tribunal                                             |               |
|Kartusch, Thompson and Sorrentino: Trafficking in    |2003           |
|Persons, Witness Protection and the Legislative      |               |
|Framework of the Republic of Moldova                 |               |
|International Organisation for Migration: Moldova    |2004           |
|Poppy Project: When Women are Trafficked             |April 2004     |
|R Surtees: Report for Nexus Institute                |21.6.2005      |
|Raviv and Andreani: The Changing  Patterns and Trends|July 2005      |
|of Trafficking in Persons in the Balkan Region       |               |
|R Surtees: Second Annual Report on Victims of        |2005           |
|Trafficking in South-Easter Europe                   |               |
|Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada: Victims of  |17.2.2006      |
|Organised Crime and State Protection et seq          |               |
|E-mail from L Sorrentino                             |16.5.2006      |
|E-mail from A Andreani                               |17.5.2006      |
|US State Department:  2006 Trafficking in Persons    |6.6.2006       |
|Report: Moldova                                      |               |
|Amnesty International Report 2006: Moldova           |23.6.2006      |
| UN Committee: Report  on Elimination of             |16.8.2006      |
|Discrimination against Women                         |               |
|United Nations: Concluding Comments of the Committee |25.8.2006      |
|on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women.  |               |
|UK Home Office IND: Operational Guidance Note:       |9.10.2006      |
|Moldova                                              |               |
|United Nations: Domestic Violence in Moldova Ending  |11.10.2006     |
|the Silence                                          |               |
|E-Mail from R Surtees and newspaper articles         |30.10.2006     |
|OSCE Mission to Moldova: Anti-Trafficking in Human   |2006           |
|Beings                                               |               |
|Extracts from US State Department Report on Victims  |2006           |
|of Trafficking                                       |               |
|Normative Acts: Trafficking in Human Beings in       |2006           |
|Moldova                                              |               |
|UNDP Human Development Report 2006:  Moldova         |2006           |
|UNDP Human Development Indicators Country Fact Sheets|13.2.2007      |
|E-mail from Rebecca Surtees                          |13.2.2007      |
|International Organisation for Migration: Research   |16.2.2007      |
|Shows Significant Figures on Human Trafficking       |               |
|International Organisation for Migration: Human      |16.2.2007      |
|Trafficking Survey                                   |               |
|US State Department: Country Reports on Human Rights |6.3.2007       |
|Practices in Moldova - 2006                          |               |
|Extracts from La Strada                              |Undated        |
|Extract from www.protectionproject.org               |Undated        |


