
ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at: Field House
Date of Hearing: 02 October 2008

                                   Before:


                      SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE MOULDEN
                      SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE PERKINS
                               MR M E A INNES

                                   Between

                                      OY
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the Appellant:           Mr T Hodson, Legal Representative from
Elder Rahimi, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


Despite existing country guidance, there are circumstances in which a
female Muslim Chechen may be at risk and may not be able to relocate within
Russia.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    The appellant is a citizen of the Russian  Federation  born  in  1977.
    She is of predominantly  Chechen  but  part  Russian  ethnicity  and  a
    Muslim.  Her husband is a citizen of the Russian Federation of  Russian
    ethnicity.  He is her dependant for the purposes of this appeal.

2.    The appellant and her husband arrived in  the  United  Kingdom  on  29
    January 2007 and claimed asylum the next day.  On 27 February 2007  the
    respondent refused the appellant's  asylum  claim  and  indicated  that
    directions would be given for her removal to Russia.  The  reasons  for
    refusal letter is dated 21 February 2007.

The Previous Proceedings

3.    The appellant appealed and her appeal  was  heard  by  an  Immigration
    Judge on 30 April 2007.  Both parties were represented at  the  hearing
    and the appellant gave evidence.  The Immigration Judge found that  the
    appellant was, in most material respects, not a credible witness.   She
    found against the appellant in relation  to  the  asylum,  humanitarian
    protection and human rights grounds and dismissed the appeal.

4.    The appellant sought and obtained an order  for  reconsideration.   At
    the first stage reconsideration hearing on 3  December  2007  a  Senior
    Immigration Judge found that there were material  errors  of  law.   He
    said:


           "1.   The appellant is a citizen of Russia.   She  was  born  in
               [1977].  She is nominally  Muslim  and  ethnically  Chechen.
               Her husband is ethnically Russian.


           2.    It is accepted that the appellant was detained in 2002 and
               again in 2006 and she was ill treated during each detention.


           3.    It is the respondent's case that she can return to  Russia
               and relocate to a place of safety.  This finding is  support
               [sic] by the case of AV (IFA - Mixed Ethnicity  Relationship
               - Russian/Chechen) Russia CG  [2002]  UKIAT  05260  but  the
               decision  is   challenged   by   background   evidence   and
               particularly by the expert report of Rob[ert] Chenciner.


           4.    Before me it  was  agreed  that  the  Immigration  Judge's
               consideration of the background  material  and  particularly
               the evidence of Rob[ert] Chenciner was  so  inadequate  that
               the determination was unsafe.


           5.    I  further  find  that  the  Immigration  Judge's  adverse
               credibility findings are unsound because they  are  reasoned
               inadequately and made in the light of inadequately  reasoned
               findings about conditions in Russia.


           6.    The deficiency will be remedied by further hearing.


           7.     The  positive  credibility  findings  will  stand  unless
               necessarily displaced  by  any  further  evidence  that  the
               parties chose [sic] to serve."

The Hearing

5.    It is unfortunate that these reasons do not appear to have  been  sent
    to the representatives, but we gave them copies at the beginning of the
    hearing.  Having seen these, Mr Kandola  withdrew  his  application  to
    depart from the factual concessions contained in paragraph  11  of  the
    reasons for refusal letter that the appellant  had  been  arrested  and
    detained on two occasions and physically harmed and his indication that
    he wished to cross-examine the appellant as  to  her  credibility.   He
    indicated that  he  would  limit  his  cross-examination  to  questions
    relating to the appellant's  ability  to  return  and  relocate  within
    Russia.

6.    The appellant gave evidence through  a  Russian-speaking  interpreter,
    was cross-examined and we asked her some questions.  In his submissions
    Mr Kandola did not argue that the appellant  lacked  credibility.   Our
    reading  of  the  reasons  for  refusal  letter  is  that,  whilst  the
    respondent specifically accepted the elements to which we have referred
    in paragraph 11, there  was  no  specific  attack  on  the  appellant's
    credibility and no implied criticism of this.  The main thrust  of  the
    reasons for refusal letter was that the appellant could relocate  in  a
    part of Russia outside her home area.

The appellant's evidence and credibility

7.    It has not been suggested that there are any  inconsistencies  in  the
    appellant's evidence and there are none which are obvious to  us.   Her
    evidence is broadly consistent with and supported by that of the expert
    witness, Mr Chenciner.  We find the appellant to be a credible  witness
    and we  accept  the  core  ingredients  of  her  account  although  not
    necessarily all her opinions.  We summarise our  findings  of  fact  in
    relation to the appellant's evidence.

8.    The appellant was born in 1977 in Grozny, Chechnya.   Her  father  was
    Chechen and her mother of mixed ethnicity.   The  appellant's  maternal
    grandfather was Chechen and  her  maternal  grandmother  Russian.   The
    appellant had a sister who died before she was born.  She has no living
    siblings.

 9. The  appellant  attended  an  economics  college  and  qualified  as  a
    financial economist.  She is married but has no children.   She  is  of
    the Muslim faith and wears a headscarf in public.

10. The appellant's husband was born in 1968 in Kazan.  He is  Russian  and
    has worked as a builder and engineer.  They married in 1999.

11. Russian forces invaded Chechnya in November 1994.   The  appellant  and
    her mother fled to Ingushetia but her father remained in Chechnya.  The
    appellant and her mother went to live with her Russian  grandmother  in
    Nazran in Ingushetia.  Many Chechens had to live in refugee  camps  and
    they could be registered as refugees.  Because the appellant was living
    outside a refugee camp she was not able to register as a refugee.   The
    appellant's mother was able to register in Ingushetia because  she  had
    been born and lived there until her marriage.

12. The first war came to an end  in  1996  and,  in  September  1996,  the
    appellant and her mother returned to  Grozny.   Their  home  was  badly
    damaged but partially habitable.  The appellant's father returned home.
     He had been wounded  in  the  war.   The  appellant  and  her  parents
    restored their home and began to return to normality.

13. The appellant went to college in 1997 and graduated in June  1999.   In
    1998 she met her husband-to-be at a wedding of a relative in Astrakhan.
     He is an ethnic Russian who had served in the Russian army.  His  home
    was in Kazan.

14. The appellant and her husband married in Grozny  in  1999.   He  stayed
    there for only two days because it was not safe for him to  remain  any
    longer.  As the appellant was an only child and at her father's request
    she retained her maiden name.  Her husband's mother objected to her son
    marrying a  Chechen  girl  and  has  never  become  reconciled  to  the
    marriage.  He is still in touch with his parents.

15. The appellant and her husband went to live in his flat in  Kazan.   The
    appellant and her husband managed to register her  locally,  presenting
    the appellant's internal passport, birth  certificate,  certificate  of
    secondary education,  marriage  certificate  and  student  card.   They
    remained there from January to May 1999.

16. The appellant returned to Grozny in  May  1999  in  order  to  sit  her
    examinations and receive her diploma.  She  stayed  with  her  parents.
    Her husband joined her at the beginning of August and left at  the  end
    of the month.  The appellant remained because her father was very  ill.
    In September 1999 Russian  forces  attacked  Chechnya  and  Grozny  was
    bombed.  The appellant decided that she could not leave her parents and
    they hid in basements and cellars during the bombings.  On  28  October
    1999 the appellant attempted to escape to Ingushetia.  She  arrived  at
    the border with her parents, her father being seriously  ill,  but  the
    border was closed.

17. Russian soldiers drove the refugees, including the  appellant  and  her
    parents, away from the border.  On 29 October 1999, having been  turned
    back into Chechnya, the appellant  and  her  parents  narrowly  avoided
    being killed in a bombing  attack  on  the  road  on  which  they  were
    travelling.

18. Instead of returning to Grozny the appellant and her  parents  went  to
    Alkhan-Yurt.  The Russian attacks and bombings  of  Chechnya  continued
    from November 1999 to February 2000.  The appellant remained  with  her
    parents until the end of 2001.  She could not leave her parents or  get
    out  of  Chechnya  to  join  her  husband.   During  ethnic   cleansing
    operations by the Russian forces the appellant and her parents hid in a
    cellar under a shed.  On 9 December 2001  Russian  soldiers  surrounded
    the village and then attacked.  About 20 soldiers burst into the house,
    tied up the occupants including the appellant,  looted  the  house  and
    took the appellant's father and another relative away.   Four  or  five
    days later three bodies were found in a wooded  area  nearby.   One  of
    them was that of the appellant's father.  They buried him in the garden
    because there was no access to the cemetery.

19. The appellant and her mother decided to leave the area.  They travelled
    by cart to Argun district where there was a Chechen camp.  Humanitarian
    organisations were helping refugees.  The appellant learned that, after
    1 April 2001, Chechen refugees would not be able to register  in  other
    parts of Russia.

20. On 5 February 2002 the appellant and her mother managed  to  travel  to
    Dagestan and from there to Ingushetia and her grandmother's home.   The
    appellant was able to send a telegram to her husband.  Two  days  later
    he joined them.  He helped the family  financially  and  expressed  the
    hope that the appellant  and  her  mother  would  join  him  in  Kazan.
    However, the appellant's mother did not wish to leave her mother.   She
    remained in Igushetia.

21. The appellant and her husband travelled to Kazan over 2� days  from  15
    February 2002.  The appellant was not aware that  her  registration  in
    Kazan had been annulled.  A few days later a local  policeman  saw  her
    and asked her to go to the police station.  The next day the  appellant
    went to the police station with her husband and was told that  she  had
    lost her right to residency in Kazan because she had  been  absent  for
    more than six months.  She would have to re-apply.

22. The following day the appellant went to the agency with  her  documents
    in order to apply for  residency.   Her  passport,  birth  certificate,
    marriage certificate, two photographs and application letter were taken
    from her.  The  appellant  was  told  that  her  application  would  be
    considered but in the meantime the documents were  retained.   She  had
    copies of none of them other than her marriage  certificate.   She  was
    told that she had to report to the police station every  month.   As  a
    result she was living in Kazan illegally.

23. The appellant reported to the police  station  every  month.   She  was
    forced to wait, was questioned and insulted.

24. In October 2002 Chechens seized a theatre in Moscow and took  hostages.
    That night two men came to the place where she  and  her  husband  were
    living.  One was a policeman and the other was in plain  clothes.   The
    appellant was interrogated about  a  group  of  Chechen  women  suicide
    bombers known as "Black Widows".  The  appellant  had  never  heard  of
    them.  The man in civilian clothes was Russian and did not believe that
    the appellant knew nothing about Black Widows.

25. The appellant was questioned about her whereabouts since the  beginning
    of the war and what she had been doing.  She told the truth but was not
    believed.  She was taken to the police  station  where  she  was  shown
    photographs of young Chechen women and men.  She could not identify any
    of them but was not believed.  She was beaten up.

26. The appellant was kept at the police station for 17  days  after  which
    she was sent to Ingushetia on a journey which was  intended  to  return
    her to Chechnya.  Her husband did not know  that  she  had  gone.   The
    appellant left Kazan on 10 November 2002 and arrived in  Ingushetia  on
    12 November.  When the appellant arrived in Nazran  in  Ingushetia  she
    was released and told that she should make her way to Chechnya  because
    very soon  all  Chechens  anywhere  in  Russia  would  be  deported  to
    Chechnya.  The appellant had no money and no documents.   She  went  to
    the nearest place she could think of which was  where  her  mother  and
    grandmother were living.  The appellant's mother sent a telegram to the
    appellant's husband.  A week later the appellant's husband joined  her.
    They decided that he would sell  his  flat  in  Kazan,  find  different
    accommodation in Kazan and then come  back  with  a  car  to  take  the
    appellant there.  The appellant and her husband decided that  it  would
    not be safe for her to apply for registration in Kazan and for the time
    being she would remain in Ingushetia.

27. Many Chechens who had fled  Chechnya  were  forced  to  return  by  the
    Russians even though conditions in Chechnya were  dire.   It  took  the
    appellant's husband more than six months to sell his flat in Kazan  and
    during that time the appellant remained with her mother and grandmother
    in Ingushetia.  On 9 May 2003 the police came to the  place  where  the
    appellant was living and told  her  that  if  she  did  not  return  to
    Chechnya voluntarily she would be sent forcibly.  They did not pay  any
    attention to the appellant's protestations that she was  married  to  a
    Russian and would soon  be  joining  him.   The  appellant  called  her
    husband who came to Ingushetia on 20 May 2003 and drove  the  appellant
    to Kazan where he had found another flat.  The appellant believed  that
    if she had not left Ingushetia she would have been forced to return  to
    Chechnya.  She lived with her husband in a rented flat after  which  he
    bought a flat.  Terrorist activities by Chechens in  various  parts  of
    Russia during July and August 2003 had a seriously  adverse  effect  on
    Russian  perceptions  of  Chechens.   The   appellant's   husband   was
    registered in the new accommodation but did not say anything about  the
    appellant.  Whilst they would have liked to have started a family, they
    decided that the appellant should not become pregnant.  If she had  she
    would need to go to a clinic and see a doctor, which would bring her to
    the notice  of  the  authorities.   The  appellant  left  the  flat  as
    infrequently as possible and then  only  to  shop.   She  never  needed
    medical treatment.  She was unable to work.   She  became  nervous  and
    unwell, fearing that she would be discovered.

28. In September 2005 the appellant went with her  husband  to  Nalchik  to
    attend the circumcision of  the  son  of  one  of  her  husband's  army
    friends.  The appellant's husband rented a flat for  a  month  and  her
    mother came to join her.  The appellant's husband had  to  go  back  to
    Kazan but said that  he  would  rejoin  her  in  about  a  month.   The
    appellant's mother remained with her until 12  October  2005  and  then
    left, prior to the appellant's husband return.  On 13  October  2005  a
    curfew was declared in Nalchik because of the  activity  of  militants.
    There was shooting in the city.  Her husband was  not  able  to  rejoin
    her.  After three days the landlord demanded that the  appellant  leave
    the flat.  The appellant stayed with the mother  of  a  friend  of  her
    husband and a week later her husband managed to get back to Nalchik and
    rescue her.  They returned to Kazan.  In October 2006 the appellant and
    her husband hired an advocate to try and deal with her registration  in
    Kazan.  They thought it would be safer than trying to do it themselves.
     The advocate started work on the case but  soon  after  two  policemen
    came to the appellant's home.  They took her to the police station  and
    beat her up.  They told her that no advocate would be able  to  help  a
    Chechen.  They prepared documents which the appellant was  not  allowed
    to read but was made to sign.  Later she discovered that she had signed
    a confession to being in possession of half  a  kilogram  of  marijuana
    which she was selling outside a school.  The police told her  that  she
    was likely to end up behind bars.  She  was  not  allowed  to  see  her
    husband or the  advocate  and  the  police  told  her  that  they  were
    preparing a prosecution.

29. The  appellant's  husband  managed  to  find  somebody  in  the  Public
    Prosecutor's Office and offered him a large bribe for her release.   He
    paid about �3,000 to arrange the appellant's release.

30. The appellant and her husband decided to escape from Russia.   She  was
    released on 10 December 2006.  The appellant's  husband  had  sold  his
    business.  An agent was found to take them to  a  safe  country.   They
    left Kazan on 20 January 2007 and arrived in Vilnius  Lithuania  on  23
    January 2007.  On 25 January 2007 they were hidden  in  a  lorry  which
    arrived in London on 29 January 2007.   The  appellant  claimed  asylum
    with her husband as her dependant.

31. The appellant thinks that her mother may still be living in  Ingushetia
    but has lost  touch  with  her.   As  an  observant  Muslim  woman  the
    appellant feels compelled to wear a headscarf in public.

Documents and Evidence

32. The documents and evidence before us are set out  in  the  Schedule  to
    this determination.

Evidence of Mr Robert Chenciner

33.   There are two reports from an expert  witness,  Mr  Robert  Chenciner,
    dated 13 April 2007 and 9 September 2008  to  which  he  added  further
    documents at the hearing.  Mr Chenciner has given evidence to  the  AIT
    in a number of cases  and  his  evidence  is  referred  to  in  Country
    Guidance cases.  He is  a  Senior  Associate  Member  of  St  Anthony's
    College, Oxford and an  Honorary  Member  of  the  Russian  Academy  of
    Sciences, Daghestan Filial.   His  knowledge  extends  to  the  Russian
    Federation, former Soviet countries,  and  in  particular  the  Eastern
    Caucasus, Georgia,  Chechnya,  Azerbaijan,  Crimea,  Ukraine,  Belarus,
    Moldova, Armenia and other central Asian countries.  Mr Kandola did not
    call into question Mr Chenciner's expertise and we found  his  evidence
    to be  objective,  on  the  whole  well  sourced  and  helpful.   Where
    necessary we compare and contrast his  evidence  with  other  objective
    material before us.  We give his evidence substantial weight.

34.   In his oral evidence, amplifying the  written  reports,  Mr  Chenciner
    said that the appellant's family name would, in Russia,  indicate  that
    she was of the Muslim faith and from the Caucasus.   If  she  tried  to
    change her name and was able to do so this would be recorded  with  her
    earlier name and the rest of her history.  Ethnic Russians  would  look
    at her and conclude that her facial  features  were  not  those  of  an
    ethnic Russian.  They were likely to conclude that she came from either
    Chechnya or somewhere in the Northern Caucasus.   Many  Russians  would
    describe her with the pejorative word  "Chorny"  which  means  "black".
    Russians apply this to Caucasians.  They apply  different  but  equally
    pejorative terms to black Africans and  Asians.   Many  Russians  would
    view a woman wearing  a  headscarf  as  linked  to  Wahibi  terrorists.
    Moderate, devout Muslim women who wear hijabs or headscarves are  often
    targeted as Wahibi extremist terrorists by the Russian authorities.

35. Mr Chenciner said that he had heard  the  appellant  give  evidence  in
    Russian.  It was clear that another  Russian  would  recognise  her  as
    having a Caucasian accent.  Virtually every Russian of an age  to  have
    performed military service would have served in  Chechnya.   Many  were
    wounded and very often there were strong anti-Chechen feelings  amongst
    those who had served  and  their  families  and  friends.   Russia  had
    compulsory conscription and virtually every policeman in Russia of  the
    appropriate age was likely to have served in  Chechnya.   There  was  a
    widespread perception in Russia  that  Chechens  and  others  from  the
    Northern Caucasus were Wahibi Muslims, except possibly those from North
    Ossetia.  President Putin won the first Presidential election on a wave
    of anti-Chechen feeling after the Moscow apartment bombings.   In  1999
    the Mayor of Moscow asked people to  report  on  Caucasian  neighbours.
    The roots of racism in Russia go back a long way, in some ways  as  far
    back as the Russian/Chechen wars of  1800  to  1860.   The  appellant's
    first arrest after the Moscow  theatre  siege  was  consistent  with  a
    perceived threat from "Black Widows".  Even though there had not been a
    report of a Black Widow suicide bombing attack since  2004,  they  were
    still regarded as a continuing threat by many Russians and the  Russian
    authorities.

36. Asked whether the authorities would see the appellant  as  a  potential
    threat, Mr Chenciner  said  that  there  were  two  important  factors.
    Firstly, she would be perceived as a Muslim woman trying to  settle  in
    non-Islamic Russia.  Secondly, she would be returned  from  the  United
    Kingdom which the Russian authorities perceive as a hotbed  of  Islamic
    terrorism.   If  the  appellant  was  returned  to  an  airport  in  St
    Petersburg or Moscow with a one-way ticket from a British  carrier  and
    an unusual travel document that, with her appearance, would excite  the
    adverse interests of the border police.  They would be likely to detain
    her.  If she did not tell the truth as to who she was or where she came
    from they would check whatever story she gave and would soon find it to
    be untrue.  If they found it untrue she would be interrogated and  ill-
    treated and, when the truth was discovered, they would  make  enquiries
    of the local police, which would reveal her previous dealings with  the
    police and the authorities.  In the light of this  information  it  was
    likely that she would be  detained  without  charge  and  subjected  to
    violent questioning as to  what  she  had  been  doing  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  If she was fortunate and somehow managed to get  through  the
    airport it was inevitable that sooner or later she would be stopped  by
    the police, mainly because of her appearance.  She would be  asked  for
    her Russian internal documents and would be  unable  to  produce  them.
    She would then be subjected to the  same  enquiries  which  would  have
    resulted from her being stopped at the airport.  Questioning was likely
    to be brutal and abusive.

37. Asked to clarify the position in  relation  to  Russian  passports,  Mr
    Chenciner said that there were two sorts of passports; the external one
    issued by the Russian authorities for travel abroad  and  the  internal
    passport or identification document which had  to  be  carried  by  all
    Russians in which an internal residence stamp for a particular area  (a
    propiska) would  be  inserted.   It  was  possible  to  get  short-term
    propiskas in some areas, he thought for three months in Moscow.  It was
    possible that it could be six months in  Kazan.   Any  North  Caucasian
    trying to obtain a propiska, even if he or she did not have an  adverse
    record with the authorities, was bound to  encounter  difficulties  and
    lengthy delays.  If the appellant went to the Russian Embassy in London
    to try and obtain an external passport she would  have  to  complete  a
    number of forms and it was inevitable that the authorities would  check
    back with the police in Moscow and through them the police in her  home
    area.  She might get a temporary Russian travel document but this would
    alert the border authorities on her return.  Such an external  passport
    or temporary travel document would not entitle her to live  in  Russia.
    It would not in any way equate to an internal passport or the  propiska
    stamp.

38. Mr Chenciner said it was plausible that the appellant would  have  been
    able to obtain her release on payment  of  a  bribe  but  it  was  most
    unlikely that her record and the adverse interest  in  her  would  have
    been expunged from the records.  Asked whether the appellant could live
    somewhere in Russia other than Kazan, Mr Chenciner said that  it  would
    be possible for her to live  in  Muslim  North  Caucasus  but  not  her
    husband.  Whilst there were a  large  number  of  Russian  soldiers  in
    Chechnya they were there on duty and were rarely if ever  seen  out  of
    uniform on the streets.  If the appellant's husband went to Chechnya it
    was likely that he would be detained and questioned with violence.   He
    would be at risk of being killed by ordinary Chechens.

39. In cross-examination Mr Chenciner was asked  whether  a  Chechen  woman
    married to an ethnic Russian male would present to the authorities as a
    potential Black Widow.  He said that the appellant was the more  likely
    to be thought of as a potential Black Widow because her father had been
    killed by the Russians.  It was likely that the authorities would  know
    this.  Inter-ethnic marriage between a  Muslim  Chechen  woman  and  an
    ethnic Russian man was extremely rare.  Chechens would  tend  to  think
    that it insulted their womanhood for one of them  to  marry  a  Russian
    man.  The other way round, with a Chechen man marrying a Russian  woman
    might be slightly more acceptable to Chechens.  Russians would tend  to
    regard her as a "prostitute" largely for  racist  reasons.   At  street
    level her husband would be regarded as having betrayed his ethnicity by
    marrying a Chechen woman.

40. Mr Chenciner did not think that it would help the appellant if she  was
    returned to Moscow or St Petersburg with her husband.  The  authorities
    might not believe they were married.  Asked  whether  he  knew  of  any
    Chechens encountering difficulties on return to  Russia,  Mr  Chenciner
    said that he was  not  aware  that  any  Chechens  had  been  returned.
    Referred to the UNHCR Report which indicated that there was no risk  to
    returning failed asylum seekers to Russian and asked for the source  of
    his information Mr Chenciner pointed to the context, which was that the
    United Kingdom was considered to be a source of Chechen terrorism.   If
    the appellant got back to Kazan she would undoubtedly be  subjected  to
    police checks.  The fact  that  she  had  signed  a  statement  falsely
    confessing to the possession of drugs would not  make  it  less  likely
    that she would be regarded as a  potential  terrorist.   This  sort  of
    trumped-up charge, hiding the authorities' real interest, was a  common
    device used by the police.  Even if the police records did  not  reveal
    their former suspicions these would re-surface because of  her  obvious
    Chechen ethnicity.  Mr Chenciner was sure that  the  authorities  would
    keep a note of their suspicions but he did not know the extent to which
    these would be immediately accessible.

41. In  relation  to  the  risk  of  the  appellant  being  detained  in  a
    "filtration camp" Mr Chenciner did not agree that this was only applied
    to those against whom  there  was  clear  evidence  or  as  an  extreme
    measure.  He was of the view that people who had not been charged  were
    sent to such camps and tortured.  He was unable to give any estimate of
    the number of people in Russia who might be undocumented.  However,  he
    said that it  would  be  difficult  to  escape  detection  if  one  was
    undocumented.  There were frequent checks and road blocks outside  most
    towns.  People in Russia were supposed to carry their internal passport
    at all times.

42. Asked whether the appellant would be able to get any sort  of  job,  Mr
    Chenciner said that there was a black economy.  The appellant would not
    be able to get a government or official job and  any  regular  employer
    would get into trouble if employing an individual without  a  propiska.
    Asked whether the appellant could renew her internal passport in  Kazan
    or Chechnya Mr Chenciner said that what the  authorities  portrayed  as
    the official position was often not the reality on the  ground.   There
    was no doubt that if the appellant applied  for  an  internal  passport
    anywhere checks  would  be  made  at  the  place  where  she  was  last
    registered.   The  registration  regulations  might  be  less  strictly
    applied for ethnic Russians but would not be relaxed  for  somebody  of
    Chechen origin.

43. Mr Chenciner said that in theory it would be simple to get  replacement
    documents which she  would  need  to  present  in  connection  with  an
    application for a propiska but in practice there could be many  delays.
    It was likely that the originals  of  the  appellant's  documents  were
    still held in Kazan and application would  be  made  to  Kazan  if  she
    applied for registration anywhere else.  The authorities would make  it
    as difficult as possible for her.

44. In reply to our question, Mr Chenciner said that he was  familiar  with
    the 2002 propiska system.  He was not  familiar  with  the  details  of
    subsequent changes but was  aware  of  how  practices  applied  on  the
    ground.  He considered that the appellant would be in difficulties with
    the registration process because of her  history  and  because  of  her
    marriage.  Whilst it was unlikely that an English person would describe
    the appellant as "black", many ethnic Russians would conclude that  she
    was not an ethnic Slav  but  "swarthier".   People  from  the  Northern
    Caucasus including Dagestanis, Georgians, Azeris and Balcaris were  all
    regarded as "black".

45. If the appellant had no adverse history with the authorities she  would
    still have difficulties on return from  the  United  Kingdom.   It  was
    likely that the authorities would know that her father had been killed.
     When asked whether the authorities could identify the  characteristics
    of a "Black Widow" Mr Chenciner said that all too often they would  not
    bother.  They would assume from the  appellant's  characteristics  that
    she was likely to be one and they would take no risks.

Submissions

46. Mr Kandola relied on the reasons for refusal letter and accepted  that,
    as conceded in paragraph 11, the appellant had been arrested,  detained
    and ill-treated on two occasions.  He argued that the  main  issue  was
    the question  of  risk  on  return  to  an  airport  in  Moscow  or  St
    Petersburg.  It is unfortunate that, although the respondent  had  been
    directed to produce a skeleton argument, she had failed to do so.

47. Mr Kandola referred to Mr Chenciner's report and  the  suggestion  that
    the appellant would be thought to be a Black Widow suicide bomber.   He
    argued that there was no real risk that she would be perceived as such.
     There was no direct evidence of Chechens being ill-treated  on  return
    on account of having  been  returned  by  the  UK.   In  reply  to  our
    question, Mr Kandola said that he  had  no  evidence  of  any  Chechens
    having been returned to Russia by the United Kingdom and accepted  that
    if this had happened the respondent was in the best position  to  know.
    On return the appellant would be accompanied by her husband who, as  an
    ethnic Russian, would contradict any impression of her being an Islamic
    extremist.  Mr Kandola  accepted  that  there  were  real  problems  in
    relation to Chechens obtaining propiskas to live in  Russia.   However,
    the evidence showed that there were many internally  displaced  persons
    in Russia who were obtaining UNHCR assistance.   We  were  referred  to
    page 56 of the respondent's bundle but, in reply to  our  question,  Mr
    Kandola accepted that there was no clear reference  to  refugees  being
    able to obtain refugee registration documents.  He submitted  that  the
    appellant had never been charged with any offence related to terrorism.
     She had been released on payment of a bribe.  The reference at page 75
    of the appellant's bundle to the internal passport  system  changes  in
    December 2006 indicated that the appellant might  not  have  to  go  to
    Chechnya to obtain a propiska.  She could obtain it locally.   All  she
    lacked was her birth certificate.  He pointed out, relying on  page  76
    of the respondent's bundle, that internal passports  no  longer  stated
    the individual's ethnicity.  He accepted that the same report  referred
    to difficulties encountered by Chechens  in  obtaining  propiskas.   He
    argued that any difficulties which the  appellant  might  encounter  in
    obtaining a propiska did not of themselves  mean  that  her  Article  3
    human rights would be infringed.

48. Mr Hodson has  submitted  a  lengthy,  detailed  and  helpful  skeleton
    argument on which he relied.  He argued that there was nothing  in  the
    evidence taken today or the submissions which undermined the  arguments
    in the skeleton.  Indeed, he argued that they had become the  stronger.
    In the light of the appellant's particular history she would be at risk
    on return.  He was not arguing that all Muslim women would be  at  risk
    on return to Russia.  It was clear that the Russian authorities  played
    it safe in taking action against those they suspected of any connection
    with terrorism.  He accepted that there was a lack  of  evidence  about
    the treatment of returnees.

49. Mr Hodson submitted that Mr Chenciner was a well-known  expert  witness
    who had provided a great deal of evidence to the IAT and the AIT.   The
    appellant had been closely questioned about the Black Widows after  she
    had been picked up from the house where she was living with her Russian
    husband.  The appellant and her husband wanted to start a family but it
    would not be safe for her to do so while she did  not  have  legitimate
    residence status.  The appellant's profile would put  her  at  risk  on
    return and it would be unduly harsh to expect her  to  live  in  Russia
    whilst undocumented.  We were asked to allow the appeal.

Discussion

50. Whilst in his submissions Mr Kandola argued only that  the  main  issue
    was the question of risk on return  to  an  airport  in  Moscow  or  St
    Petersburg we  must  deal  with  this  and  the  question  of  internal
    relocation raised in the reasons for refusal letter.

51. Mr Kandola argued that there was no risk that the  appellant  would  be
    perceived as a  Black  Widow  suicide  bomber  but  did  not  draw  our
    attention to any material in support of this argument.  In relation  to
    "Black Widows" paragraph 2.1.1 of Mr Chenciner's report states:

           "2.1.1 "Black Widows" and funding
           The Appellant stated that she had been accused of being a "black
           widow" Chechen extremist suicide bomber.
           While there is nothing unusual about seeking consolation through
           religion after bereavement, as her father had  been  killed  and
           she and her mother had been raped by Russian police, even if she
           did not wear a hijab, both  Russian  forces  and   local  people
           might have feared that the  Appellant  was  becoming  a  Wahhabi
           suicide bomb candidate or Shahid. Black widows of Chechnya  were
           demonised as suicide bombers by Pravda in May 2003. (As a result
           of the changes in Chechnya, 7 September  2004,  Andrei  Tsunsky,
           Expert Group contracted by Financial Times,  How  the  Guerillas
           Lost Chechnya; Explaining  the  Black  Widows  of  Chechnya,  11
           December 2003, Brenda Stardom, Portugal) At the  Moscow  Theatre
           siege women with hijabs and apparently wearing  explosive  belts
           were photographed among the hostage-takers."


52.   In paragraph 2.6 he said:

           "2.6 Black Widows

           Wherever the  Appellant  went  in  Russia,  alone  or  with  her
           husband, in addition to  anti-Caucasian  racism,  she  would  be
           characterized as a potential Black Widow suicide  bomber  and/or
           Wahhabi terrorist.


           The most recent attacks by Chechen black widow  suicide  bombers
           were in August-September 2004. However, as in the  aftermath  of
           9/11, which  occurred  in  2001,  there  is  constant  fear  and
           vigilance to  avoid  future  attacks.  There  are  two  somewhat
           similar articles published in 2007 and 2008 on Black  Widows  by
           the respected commentator, Nabi Abdullaev, a Daghestani, working
           for Transparency International in US. (Women to the forefront in
           Chechen  terrorism,  1  September  2008,  Nabi  Abdullaev,   ISN
           Security Watch; Chechen Black  Widows  organized  or  driven  by
           despair?, 2007, Nabi Abdullaev, 2007, Moscow Defense Brief 3(9),
           Centre for Analysis of Strategies and Technologies  (CAST),  US)
           Also a  paper  by  Irina  Bazaria  at  the  April  2008  Chicago
           conference, presumably a follow-up on a  similar  paper  "Female
           Suicide Bombers: Case Study of the Chechen 'Black Widows'" which
           she gave there on 21 April 2006. ("Female Suicide Bombers:  Case
           Study of the Chechen 'Black Widows'" aka "Chechen Female Suicide
           Bombers: A Diagnostic  Approach",  (when  presented  at  another
           conference of American Political Science Association on 21 April
           2008), 9  May  2008,  I.  Bazaria,  APA  Citation,  The  Midwest
           Political Science Association, Chicago conference April 2008) In
           October 2006, RFE/RL published a follow-up piece on  the  second
           anniversary of Nord-Ost theatre attack in 2004.  (Russia:  Nord-
           Ost Anniversary Recalls  Ascent  Of  Female  Suicide  Bomber  27
           October 2006,  Irina Lagunina, RFE/ RL) It is accordingly likely
           that security services vigilance to prevent black widow  suicide
           bombers continues both in Chechnya and the rest of Russia."



53.   Mr Kandola argued and Mr Chenciner accepted that there was  no  direct
    evidence of ill-treatment of Chechen women on return  from  the  United
    Kingdom.  Mr Chenciner suggested that this was because  there  had  not
    been any such returns.  Mr Kandola was not able to assist us,  although
    if there had been such returns we would expect the Secretary  of  State
    to have known about them.

54.   Mr Kandola argued that on return to Russia  the  appellant's  position
    would be improved and she would be less  likely  to  be  regarded  with
    suspicion if she was accompanying her husband who is an ethnic Russian.
     Mr Chenciner's evidence, in cross-examination, was that this  was  not
    likely to assist the appellant.  Marriage between an ethnic Russian man
    and a Muslim, Chechen woman was rare.  Russians would  tend  to  regard
    him as having betrayed his ethnicity by marrying a Chechen woman.  They
    were likely to regard her as a prostitute for largely racist reasons.

55.   In his reports  Mr  Chenciner  addressed  the  questions  of  why  the
    appellant would be recognised by the Russian authorities on  return  to
    an airport in Russia, her name, risk as a returned failed asylum seeker
    as well as the situation because she had left Russia without permission
    or correct documentation in paragraphs  2.1.2,  2.1.2.1,  2.1.2.2,  and
    2.1.3 in the following terms:

           "2.1.2 Why Appellant would be recognized by Russian  Authorities
           on return at the airport. This lists a combination  of  reasons,
           in addition to the background reason that president Putin thinks
           that UK is a  haven  for  Chechen  terrorists.  (subsection  2.2
           above) It could equally apply to why almost  any  ethnic-Chechen
           or former Chechen resident woman returned from UK  would  likely
           be at risk. An exception would be if the person was a  supporter
           of the pro-Russian Kadyrovsky Chechen militia, which has not yet
           come across my desk.


           2.1.2.1 Name
           ...............  (- Russianised feminine form ending in -ova) is
           an Islamic name, mainly from the  Caucasus,  for  example  Leila
           Yunus or Yunusova the oppositionist  politician,  historian  and
           human rights activist in Azerbaijan. Olga  is  a  Russian  first
           name.


           2.1.2.2 Risk as a returned failed asylum seeker.
           When Russian citizens who do not have a  passport  are  returned
           from UK, the Russian Embassy will issue them  with  a  temporary
           travel document, as opposed to a few years ago when the Russians
           used to accept an EU extraordinary travel document issued by the
           UK government, which was no better for concealing the fact  that
           the person  was  a  failed  asylum  seeker.  I  understand  from
           discussion with solicitors about various post-Soviet cases  that
           the document is obtained by the following  procedure,  which  is
           plausible. The Home  Office  contacts  the  Russian  Embassy  in
           London with details of the  Appellant.  The  Appellant  is  then
           supposed to go to  the  embassy,  which  of  course  is  legally
           Russian territory, to fill in form(s) giving full information on
           name, names of parents, former address in Russia. It  is  likely
           to be obvious to  a  Russian  official  that  if  a  Chechen  or
           Chechnya resident is being removed from UK, then he or she is an
           unsuccessful  asylum  claimant.  This  means  that   they   have
           complained publicly about human rights abuses in Russia,  which,
           to infer from the murder of Anna Politovskaya and the closure of
           Russian Chechen Friendship society NGO after oppression  of  its
           staff (section 1.1), to give examples from October  2006,  means
           that  as  a  punishment,  they  will  be   psychologically   and
           physically abused by the Russian authorities. There is no direct
           evidence because I am not aware  that  any  Chechens  have  been
           returned, and even if one was, it is unlikely  that  he  or  she
           would be in  a  position  to  give  a  free  interview  of  what
           happened.


           2.1.3   Leaving   Russia   without   permission    or    correct
           documentation.
           The airport authorities would want to know when she left Russia,
           and when they found out that she did not have a  visa  or  other
           permission, she would have committed an offence  and  be  liable
           for a six-month sentence. (section 3.1)"


56. Furthermore, the attitude of the Russian authorities would be  affected
    by the fact that the appellant was returning from the  United  Kingdom.
    In paragraph 2.2 of his report Mr  Chenciner  expressed  the  following
    opinion:

           "Sub-section 2.2 Allegations by Russian authorities that  London
           is a recruiting ground for Chechen rebels
           It is plausible that any Chechen especially a young woman  whose
           father was killed by Russian forces and who had been  repeatedly
           abused in a Russian SIZO detention center in 2002 and 2006,  who
           arrived from London is considered by Russians to be a  suspected
           terrorist and to be part of the anti-Russian propaganda  war  in
           Britain. In Russia there is a negative perception of London as a
           haven for Russian asylum seekers who are connected with  protest
           and conscientious objection  against  the  Chechen  war.  On  22
           November 2004, Moscow Times reported on UK IAT Krotov  decision.
           (Britain  grants  Russian  soldier  asylum,  22  November  2004,
           Anatoly Medetsky, The Moscow Times)"

57. Mr Kandola accepted that  there  were  real  problems  in  relation  to
    Chechens obtaining propiskas to live in Russia but  argued  that  there
    were many internally displaced persons in  Russia  who  were  obtaining
    UNHCR assistance.  He referred us to page 56 of the appellant's  bundle
    and the UNHCR Global Report for 2007  in  which  the  relevant  passage
    reads:

           "In the  northern  Caucasus,  UNHCR's  intervention  focused  on
           providing legal  protection  and  housing  assistance  to  IDPs.
           Until early 2007 most  IDPs  cited  security  concerns  and  the
           absence of the rule of law in Chechnya as the major  impediments
           to return.  UNHCR and its implementing partners worked with  the
           judiciary, legal bodies and the Ombudsman's office in the region
           to build both capacity and trust.  As a result, by  the  end  of
           2007, the major impediments for return had changed  to  lack  of
           shelter and employment.


           UNHCR-supported legal counselling centres  provided  free  legal
           advice and lawyers to accompany complainants to the courts.  The
           Office also worked to find  legal  remedies  for  the  remaining
           undocumented refugees."

58.   This passage does not, in our judgement, indicate that  Chechen  women
    who would  have  difficulty  in  obtaining  internal  passports  and/or
    propiskas would be likely to obtain these with the assistance of UNHCR.
     The report from the Internal Displacement Monitoring  Centre  of  June
    2008 at page 61 of the appellant's bundle indicates, in  the  Executive
    Summary:

           "Executive summary


           This report focuses on the  situation  of  internally  displaced
           people (IDPs) from the Chechen Republic living  outside  of  the
           North Caucasus.  The  Internal  Displacement  Monitoring  Centre
           (IDMC)  visited  the  Russian  Federation  in  March  2008,  and
           interviewed IDPs of various ethnic backgrounds and  their  legal
           representatives in seven locations.   The  report  is  based  on
           these interviews and information publicly available on the  IDMC
           website.  The observations outlined  here  are  consistent  with
           information published by Russian human  rights  non-governmental
           organisations, notably the Civic Assistance Committee.


           Regardless of their ethnic background,  IDPs  are  unwilling  to
           return to Chechnya because they believe their physical  security
           there would be at risk, yet they struggle to settle outside  the
           north Caucasus due to specific circumstances  which  they  often
           share.


           Many IDPs lack the documents necessary to lead  a  normal  life.
           They  struggle  to  acquire  residence  registration,   internal
           passports and other documents necessary  to  access  employment,
           services and entitlements such as  government-provided  housing,
           free medical care and pensions.  The inconsistent interpretation
           and respect of legislation by local officials and  courts  makes
           the application process unpredictable.  As a result most of  the
           displaced work in the informal market, rent  what  housing  they
           can find in the private sector, pay for all medical services and
           do not receive  their  full  pension  entitlements.   Most  have
           difficulty making ends meet as their income is barely enough  to
           pay the rent, let alone cover other expenses.  The  issuance  of
           documents  to  IDPs  should  be  facilitated  without   imposing
           unreasonable conditions that IDPs cannot meet because they  have
           been displaced.


           IDPs are  still  denied  lasting  housing  solutions  despite  a
           government property compensation  and  housing  programme.   The
           property  compensation  paid  out  to  some  IDPs   has   become
           increasingly insufficient for them to buy  alternative  housing.
           IDPs who have received this compensation have lost their  status
           as forced migrants and so have had to leave government  housing,
           but have been unable to buy housing with the  compensation  they
           received.  For different reasons, other IDPs have been put under
           pressure or forced to leave their housing in the private sector.
            A new  federal  housing  programme  has  proven  unreliable  in
           providing IDPs with permanent housing, due to lack of funds  and
           slow implementation.  Additional funds should  be  allocated  to
           the programme and IDPs still in need of permanent housing should
           be included regardless  of  whether  they  have  forced  migrant
           status or received property compensation.


           Ethnic Chechen IDPs face  particular  difficulties  in  securing
           rental accommodation,  residence  registration,  forced  migrant
           status and jobs.  They have been forced to  move  frequently  by
           landlords unwilling to rent to  them  for  extended  periods  or
           register them as resident in the dwelling.  Some claim they were
           denied forced migrant status and employment  because  they  were
           from Chechnya.  The freedom of movement of displaced Chechen men
           is limited as the police frequently check their passports on the
           street".

59.   Whilst this shows that some Chechen IDPs are able to  live  in  Russia
    it is clear that they can do  so  only  by  working  within  the  black
    economy, under considerable difficulties and under pressure  to  return
    to Chechnya.

60.   Mr Chenciner's assessment of the current position in Russia  needs  to
    be read against the background set out in paragraph  2.1  in  which  he
    said:

           "2.1 Russia Background
           There is no sign  that  Dmitry  Medvedev,  Putin's  prot�g�  and
           nominee for president who took office on 7 May 2008, following a
           flawed election on 2 March 2008, represents any force for change
           with regard to this case.
                 Russian propaganda in 2007 about Chechnya aimed to  publish
           the idea that under the  new  young  president  Ramzan  Kadyrov,
           appointed 2 March 2007 after a short period as acting  president
           from 15 February 2007, peace was blooming and reconstruction  is
           proceeding apace. While  there  is  reconstruction  of  much  of
           central  Grozny  (as   observed   by   my   Daghestan   academic
           collaborator Dr Magomedkhanov  who  visited  there  in  December
           2007) which appears to be part of an aid-deal between Putin  and
           Kadyrov and his support  base,  the  peace  appears  to  be  the
           silence of a reign of terror. This is the background to  the  23
           May 2007 Amnesty International detailed monograph 'What  justice
           for Chechnya's disappeared?' which I  attach  in  summary  form.
           (Russian Federation: What justice for  Chechnya's  disappeared?,
           23 May 2007, Amnesty International, AI Index: EUR 46/015/2007  -
           5 page Executive Summary, AI Index: EUR 46/020/2007)
                 In a further twist, the  rapidly  deteriorating  relations
           between UK and Russia, described in section 2.7 imply  that  all
           official relations with Russia, for  example  return  of  asylum
           seekers have an added political  dimension.  These  are  further
           aspects of what several international Western  commentators  are
           debating: that  Yury  Baluyevsky,  the  Russian  army  chief  of
           staff's,  threat  on  15  February  2007,  that   Moscow   might
           unilaterally withdraw from the 1987  Intermediate-range  Nuclear
           Forces treaty marked a return  to  the  Cold  War.  During  late
           October 2007 Putin was using Russia's veto on  the  UN  Security
           Council to block UK and US efforts to apply pressure on Iran  to
           cease developing nuclear weapon capability. The closure  of  the
           British Council is a distraction compared to military  strategic
           and energy threats.
                 A TV  reporter  Abdullah  Alishaev,  who  was  critical  of
           Wahhabist Islam, was shot dead in Daghestan on 3 September 2008.
           On 31 August in Ingushetia an  independent  news  website  owner
           Magomed Yevloyev was shot dead by police while being taken to  a
           police station in Nazran  the  capital  of  Ingushetia.  He  had
           criticized Russian state policy and the tight  military  control
           over neighbouring Chechnya.  (Reporter  shot  dead  in  Russia's
           restive Dagestan province, 3 September  2008,  eFluxMedia  News,
           New York)"


61.   In his overall assessment of the position Mr  Chenciner  set  out  the
    following summaries in his two reports:

           "5. Summary

           The context of the Appellant's Statements is plausible. Mrs  Y's
           surname is non-Russian and Islamic, and her coming from  Grozny,
           mean that she is accordingly recognisably Chechen  or  Caucasian
           to Russian border police and other authorities in all  parts  of
           Russian Federation or Chechnya. They do not distinguish  between
           different Caucasian ethnicities whom  they  perceive  as  chorny
           blacks.


                 In addition she statedly was detained twice at a SIZO pre-
           trial detention centre in  Kazan  her  ethnic-Russian  husband's
           home  city  in  2002  and  in  December  2006.  With  regard  to
           resettlement elsewhere in Russian Federation, it is notable that
           Kazan capital of Republic of Tatarstan which has  a  significant
           Muslim population of Tatars and Bashkirs, as well  as  Russians,
           with widespread intermarriage, is likely to be one of  the  most
           sympathetic places to live in Russian Federation for couples  of
           Islamic-Orthodox mixed marriages. This evidently does not  apply
           to Chechens such as the Appellant.

                 If she were returned to  Russia,  in  Chechnya,  and  other
           parts of the Russian Federation  sooner  or  later  her  Chechen
           ethnicity and former residence in Chechnya would  become  known.
           Because of anti-Chechen racism she likely would not be  able  to
           get a registration from the police to live  in  other  parts  of
           Russian Federation. Because her  husband  is  ethnic-Russian  he
           would risk murder if he tried to  live  in  Chechnya  where  any
           civilian  Russians  are  targets  for  revenge  of  killings  of
           Chechens by the Russians in both  wars  -  1994-1996  and  1999-
           present. Even though as International Herald  Tribune  reported,
           three commercial  flights  a  week  each  with  capacity  of  68
           passengers, started on 8 March 2007 after suspension since 1999,
           it is extremely  unlikely  that  any  Russian  men  outside  the
           security forces have re-settled in Chechnya.
                 In  a  climate  of  increasing   anti-Caucasian   prejudice
           throughout Russia were she returned she  would  risk  arrest  at
           Moscow Airport or  other  entry  point,  and  detention  without
           trial, transfer again to a notorious 'filtration' camp, torture,
           rape and death because of her Islamic name,  Chechen  ethnicity,
           residence in Chechnya, being daughter of a dead  Chechen  likely
           suspected rebel, travel without permission and return from UK  a
           perceived  center  of  Chechen  terrorism.  If   under   violent
           questioning it came out  that  she  had  been  in  a  SIZO,  and
           irregularly released (i.e. by a  bribe),  she  would  likely  be
           accused as a suspected potential suicide bomber, and  she  would
           be treated as guilty of conspiring to terrorist acts. To  expand
           on risk because she was  returned  from  UK,  because  president
           Putin has declared London to be a centre of  Chechen  terrorism,
           since UK granted asylum to Mr Akhmed  Zakhaev,  the  late  Aslan
           Maskhadov's envoy, whose house was  attacked  in  October  2004.
           (Attack on Chechen envoy in  London,  16  October  2004,  Andrew
           Cawthorne, Reuters; Russians blast US-UK Sponsorship of  Chechen
           Terror,  17  September  2004,  Webster   Griffin   Tarpley,   US
           commentator and author)  She  would  be  suspected  of  being  a
           potential terrorist such as those seen on TV during the Dubrovka
           Theatre siege in Moscow in November 2002.
                 Mrs Y's risk from the Russian authorities and public is the
           same as when she fled Russia in January 2007, as a result of the
           following. Maskhadov's successor Sadulayev was killed on 18 June
           2006 and the war-lord/terrorist Basayev on 10 July 2006;  former
           president Maskhadov was killed on 8 March  2005  that  polarized
           the Chechen leadership and in August 2005 terrorists Basayev and
           Ugudov were made  ministers  in  the  rebel  government  by  new
           Chechen separatist president Sadulayev; the Beslan school  siege
           tragedy in September 2004 when over 500 were killed;  the  metro
           bomb in Moscow on 6 February 2004 (blamed on Chechens and  other
           ethnic-Caucasians)  with  dozens  dead  (Metro  bomb  blamed  on
           Chechens, on 6 February 2004, Geert Koerkamp, Netherlands  World
           Radio). These were in addition to previous attacks: the car bomb
           in Vladikavkaz (capital of North Ossetia) on  4  February  2004.
           (Investigators looking into car bomb motive,  5  February  2004,
           AP, The Moscow Times) and the commuter train bombs  in  southern
           Russia and Moscow in December 2003; more than  166  people  were
           killed in Russia in  nine  suicide  bombings  from  May  to  the
           commuter train bomb in southern Russia on 3 September 2003;  the
           October 2002 Moscow theatre kidnap, suicide bombings  in  Grozny
           December 2002 and elsewhere in Chechnya; and almost tripling the
           number of Russian forces in Chechnya.
                 Lawlessness and abuse of human rights continue in  Chechnya
           and anti-Caucasian (especially anti-Chechen)  racism  throughout
           Russia has increased with the additional widespread  resentments
           of and by Chechen war 'veterans' and casualties. If returned she
           would be unable to safely  settle  in  Chechnya  and  unable  to
           settle elsewhere in Russia, (that includes Ingushetia).
                 She would not be likely to be able to relocate elsewhere in
           Russian Federation because as an ethnic-Chechen  ex-resident  of
           Chechnya with a perceived Islamic surname she would  not  likely
           be  allowed  by  police  or  FSB  (formerly  KGB)  to  obtain  a
           resident's permit propiska, at an address outside  Chechnya  and
           under present conditions she would be discriminated  against  by
           the Russian public.
                 In a previous IAT  report  in  September  2004,  the  Home
           Office confirmed that the Russian authorities refused to  accept
           EC extraordinary travel documents (ETDs), but  wanted  to  issue
           their own ETDs unless the  returnee  had  valid  Russian  travel
           documents. To this end the Home Office were  giving  details  to
           the Russian Embassy in London and/or the returnee was to fill in
           forms at the Russian Embassy. This would  of  course  alert  the
           Russian authorities that the returnee was a failed asylum seeker
           and give them time to check out the returnees  record  with  the
           FSB in Moscow, increasing the likelihood of detention at  Moscow
           airport. She would likely  be  accused  of  publicly  slandering
           Russia by claiming asylum on  human  rights  ground  related  to
           Chechnya.
                 In the unlikely event of her walking  through  the  airport
           police, it would be impossible for her to relocate  anywhere  in
           Russia outside Chechnya, because as a Chechen she would  not  be
           granted a propiska resident's permit. She would also not even be
           allowed to resettle in Ingushetia for reasons given in  response
           to Country Guidance June 2006, provided at  the  start  of  this
           report.
                 I am  aware  that  I  have  a  duty  to  the  Court  to  be
           independent and I follow the  recommendations  regarding  expert
           witnesses in the starred Determination of  Sir  Andrew  Collins,
           President of The Immigration Appeal Tribunal, dated 21 December,
           2000; and AIT Practice Directions 13 November  2006.  I  have  a
           duty to the court to provide an impartial expert opinion and  to
           assist the Court in reaching a decision. I have neither met  nor
           communicated with the appellant.  'I confirm that insofar as the
           facts stated in my report are within my  own  knowledge  I  have
           made clear which they are and I believe them  to  be  true,  and
           that the  opinions  I  have  expressed  represent  my  true  and
           complete professional opinion'. I have read  the  tests  for  an
           expert witness listed re The Ikarian Reefer and I have  done  my
           best to follow them.
                 In addition  I  confirm  that  this  report  has  not  been
           prepared on the basis that payment will  only  be  made  in  the
           event of the appeal succeeding."


           And .....


           "3. Summary
           The Appellant is likely  at  risk  of  detention  and  abuse  if
           returned to Russia as a Chechen suspected suicide bomber  "Black
           Widow". With regard to relocation elsewhere in  Russia,  in  the
           unlikely event of her not being arrested on arrival, because  of
           anti-Caucasian racism, xenophobia and Islamophobia,  exacerbated
           by the long Chechen war  and  continuing  terrorist  attacks  in
           Chechnya and elsewhere in Russian Federation, she  would  likely
           be unable  to  obtain  a  propiska  resident's  permit  to  move
           elsewhere in Russia. This is supported by evidence presented  in
           section 2 which updates and reconfirms the evidence presented in
           the first report of  April  2007.   If  she  attempted  to  live
           without  propiska  which  is  illegal,  she  would   be   denied
           accommodation, employment, medical care, child care, and  police
           protection, such as it is.
                 In addition, if she tried to change her propiska she  would
           have to de-register at her previous police station  which  would
           also alert the police.
                 I am aware  that  I  have  a  duty  to  the  Court  to  be
           independent and I follow the  recommendations  regarding  expert
           witnesses in the starred Determination of  Sir  Andrew  Collins,
           President of The Immigration Appeal Tribunal, dated 21 December,
           2000. I have a duty to the court to provide an impartial  expert
           opinion and to assist the court in reaching a decision.  I  have
           neither met nor communicated with the  appellant.  (except  over
           the telephone at Instructing Solicitors' office,  to  listen  to
           her Russian accent)  'I believe that the facts I have stated  in
           this report are true and that the opinion I  have  expressed  is
           correct.' I have read the tests for an expert witness listed  re
           The Ikarian Reefer and I have done my best to follow them.
                 In addition  I  confirm  that  this  report  has  not  been
           prepared on the basis that payment will  only  be  made  in  the
           event of the appeal succeeding."


Current and Continuing Country Guidance

62.   The appellant's and respondent's bundles contain a number  of  country
    guidance cases.  These are: RM (Young Chechen Male - Risk - IFA) Russia
    CG [2006] UKAIT 00050, EM & LM (IFA - Chechen) Russia CG  [2003]  UKIAT
    00210, AV (IFA - Mixed Ethnicity Relationship - Russian/Chechen) Russia
    CG [2002] UKIAT 05260, OA (IFA - Unduly Harsh - Chechens -  Relocation)
    Russia CG [2002] UKIAT 03796 and [2003] UKIAT 00073 C (Russia).  We are
    in no position to comment on RM which related to a young Chechen  male,
    not a woman except to the limited extent set out in paragraphs  66,  67
    and 68 in relation to relocation to Ingushetia as an IDP.  We are in no
    position to comment on EM & LM which related  to  women  but  women  of
    Russian ethnicity living in Chechnya.  AV related to a woman of Russian
    ethnicity whose partner was a male Chechen.  OA related to a male pilot
    who feared persecution because he had refused to fly planes for Chechen
    rebels.  C (Russia) is a case which turned on very different facts.  In
    the circumstances whilst the  present  determination  provides  updated
    information in relation to some aspects of the  situation  in  Chechnya
    and Russia it does not replace any country guidance cases before us.

Burden and Standard of Proof

63.   We must decide whether there are substantial  grounds  for  concluding
    that, if removed in  consequence  of  the  respondent's  decision,  the
    appellant would be subjected to persecution for  a  Refugee  Convention
    reason and/or a real risk of treatment amounting to torture or  inhuman
    or degrading treatment  or  punishment.   Article  3  is  absolute  and
    permits no justification.  The burden of proof falls on the  appellant.
    The standard of proof in determining the likelihood of the  risk  of  a
    breach of the appellant's protected rights under Article 3 or Article 8
    is the same low standard (that is, that of a reasonable likelihood)  as
    it is for persecution for a Convention reason.   If  the  appellant  is
    entitled to succeed on Refugee Convention grounds she does not need and
    is not entitled to humanitarian protection.

Risk on return

64. In assessing the evidence and submissions we begin with the position of
    a female Chechen failed asylum  seeker  returning  to  Russia.   It  is
    common ground that return would be to an airport either in  the  Moscow
    or St Petersburg areas.  Such an individual is likely to be  returning,
    voluntarily or compulsorily, with a one-way ticket and a one-way travel
    document issued by the Russian  authorities  in  London.   She  is  not
    likely to have an external Russian passport.  We do not  have  evidence
    as to what the position would be for a female Chechen returning with  a
    legitimate  external  Russian  passport.   We  accept  Mr   Chenciner's
    evidence that the steps which would have to be taken to obtain  a  one-
    way travel document from the Russian authorities in London  would  mean
    that those authorities would, before issuing  such  a  document,  check
    with the central authorities in Russia who would in turn check with the
    authorities where the individual was last registered.  That information
    would be fed back to the embassy in  London.   If  the  individual  was
    issued with a one-way travel document  this  document  would,  with  or
    without a one-way ticket and with or without obvious compulsory return,
    put the authorities at the airport on notice that  the  individual  was
    likely to be a returning failed asylum seeker.  If,  in  addition,  the
    individual  presents  as  being  of  North  Caucasian   ethnicity,   in
    particular Chechen,  she  is  likely  to  be  stopped  and  questioned.
    Factors which might contribute to the conclusion  that  the  individual
    was of Chechen ethnicity would  be  her  name,  mode  of  dress  if  it
    indicated that she was likely to be of the  Muslim  faith  and  accent.
    Being accompanied by an ethnic Russian spouse or partner is not  likely
    to reduce the authorities' suspicions.  We find that  a  Chechen  woman
    returning in these circumstances is likely  to  be  stopped,  held  and
    questioned.  There is a real risk of serious ill-treatment amounting to
    persecution and infringement of  her  Article  3  human  rights  during
    questioning whether or not the  enquiries  which  the  authorities  are
    bound to make  of  the  police  in  her  home  area  or  area  of  last
    registration indicate that  anything  is  recorded  against  her.   The
    Convention reasons would be a combination of  her  race,  religion  and
    perceived political opinions.  If an individual who  presents  in  this
    way gives false information, for example name, date of birth  or  place
    of residence then the enquiries will reveal the falsehoods and lead  to
    further serious ill-treatment whilst the individual's true identity and
    antecedents are sought.  If, when these are obtained, they  show  cause
    for suspecting that the individual  might  be  a  Black  Widow  suicide
    bomber, have information about Black Widows or a perception  arises  of
    any connection with Chechen  insurgents,  then  she  is  likely  to  be
    detained for a lengthy period and suffer further serious ill-treatment.

65. If, through some fortunate chance, such an individual is able  to  pass
    through the airport without being stopped, and Mr Chenciner  considered
    that this was possible but unlikely, giving as a possible scenario  one
    which he had encountered where the  airport  security  staff  were  all
    drunk, then it is likely that an individual with these  characteristics
    but without an internal passport  bearing  a  propiska,  would,  sooner
    rather than later, be stopped and questioned by  the  authorities  with
    the same results as if she had been stopped at the airport.

Risk on the journey to Chechnya

66. If a Chechen woman  with  the  characteristics  we  have  described  is
    fortunate enough to be able to pass through the airport on  arrival  it
    is not likely that without an internal passport she would  be  able  to
    travel to Chechnya without being stopped, identified and detained  with
    the same outcome as if she had been stopped at the  airport.   Even  if
    she was able to reach Chechnya she would be at risk  from  the  Russian
    supported authorities.  Such an individual would not be able to live in
    Chechnya with a husband or partner  of  Russian  ethnicity  because  he
    would be at constant risk from the authorities  who,  whilst  they  are
    supported by the  Russian  central  government,  are  also  Chechen  in
    outlook and attitude.  He would also face a real risk of death  at  the
    hands of the Chechen population.

Internal Relocation

67.   In assessing internal relocation in the light of the  evidence  before
    us we apply the guidance set out by the House  of  Lords  in  Januzi  v
    Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2006]  UKHL  5.   In  its
    briefest form the test is whether it would be unduly harsh to expect an
    individual to relocate within his or her own country.  In paragraphs 23
    to 24 of its judgement the Court said:

           "23.  Relocation in a safe haven will not provide an alternative
               to seeking refuge outside the  country  of  nationality  if,
               albeit that there is no risk  of  persecution  in  the  safe
               haven, other factors exist which  make  it  unreasonable  to
               expect the person fearing persecution to take refuge  there.
               Living conditions in the safe haven may  be  attendant  with
               dangers or vicissitudes which pose  a  threat  which  is  as
               great or greater than the risk of persecution in  the  place
               of habitual residence.  One cannot reasonably expect a  city
               dweller to go to live in a desert in  order  to  escape  the
               risk of persecution.  Where the safe haven is not  a  viable
               or realistic alternative to the place where  persecution  is
               feared, one can properly say that a refugee who has fled  to
               another country is 'outside the country of  his  nationality
               by reason of a well-founded fear of persecution'.


           24.   If this approach is adopted to the possibility of internal
               relocation, the nature of the  test  of  whether  an  asylum
               seeker could reasonably have been expected to have moved  to
               a safe haven is clear.  It involves a comparison between the
               conditions prevailing in the place of habitual residence and
               those which prevail in the safe haven, having regard to  the
               impact  that  they  will  have   on   a   person   with   he
               characteristics of the asylum seeker.  What  the  test  will
               not  involve  is  a  comparison   between   the   conditions
               prevailing in the safe haven and  those  prevailing  in  the
               country in which asylum is sought...."

68.   In RM (Young Chechen Male - Risk - IFA) Russia CG [2006]  UKAIT  00050
    the Tribunal came to the conclusion that it would not be  unduly  harsh
    for a young Chechen male who was  not  wanted  by  the  authorities  to
    relocate to an IDP camp  in  Ingushetia.   However,  the  position  has
    changed since then.  Mr Chenciner's report of 13 April 2007 states,  at
    SP4:

               "Another reaction to the Chechen attack (above) on  22  June
           2004 was that the local Ingush authorities used it as an  excuse
           to drive out most of the remaining Chechen  refugees.   This  is
           not a climate where new refugees would  be  accepted.   (Chechen
           refugees leaving Ingushetia, 5 July 2004, Information Center  of
           the Council of NGOs, Caucasian  Knot/News)  RFE/RL  reported  in
           March 2004 that the remaining 4,000 to 7,000  displaced  persons
           from Chechnya were being pressured  to  return  -  a  far  lower
           number than in 2002 -  as  part  of  the  Moscow-backed  Chechen
           Kadyrov  regime's  policy  supported  by  Putin's  president  of
           Ingushetia, Zyazikov.  (Chechen displaced persons under pressure
           to return, 11 March 2004, Liz Fuller, RFE/RL Newsline)
               Before 2002, it might be thought that a Chechen  male  could
           go to a refugee camp in Ingushetia.  However the way  there  and
           the camps are controlled by the Russian military  forces.   Also
           the current increased  Russian  invasion  has  been  matched  by
           attempts  to   return   Chechen   refugees   from   neighbouring
           Ingushetia.
               ...
               In August 2002 Zyazikov said  that  90,000  of  the  157,000
           Chechen refugees were left after 27,000  'voluntarily'  returned
           to Chechnya during the preceding 15 months, ...".


69.   In his later report, dated 9 September 2008, Mr  Chenciner  said  that
    by July 2008 the number of refugees remaining in Ingushetia had dropped
    to approximately 23,000.  Furthermore,


            "Local authorities throughout Russian are pressuring IDPs  from
           Chechnya to return to Chechnya, even just to obtain an  internal
           passport (i.e. a valid ID), which under Russian law any  Russian
           citizen should be able to obtain at his or her current place  of
           residence.  Many IDPs choosing to leave the  region  and  settle
           elsewhere in  the  Russian  Federation  regularly  face  serious
           discrimination, hostility and even violence."


70.   We find that a Chechen woman could not now relocate to an IDP camp  in
    Ingushetia.

71.   We turn to the question of whether it would be unduly harsh to  expect
    a Chechen  woman  to  relocate  to  some  other  part  of  the  Russian
    Federation.  We find that if she lacked an internal passport  it  would
    be unduly harsh to expect her to attempt to relocate.  She would not be
    able to live anywhere in Russia for any length of time without  running
    a real risk of being stopped, identified as Chechen, having the lack of
    a registration document  discovered  and  being  forced  to  return  to
    Chechnya.  Without a registration document she would  not  be  able  to
    obtain a government job, normal employers would not  run  the  risk  of
    employing her and whilst she might be able to find work  in  the  black
    economy she would not be able to access medical services or any of  the
    services provided to legitimate residents in Russia.  If  accommodation
    could be found it is  likely  to  be  much  more  expensive  than  that
    available to a legitimate resident and for older women and men refugees
    from Chechnya pensions to which  they  are  legitimately  entitled  are
    often much reduced or even unobtainable.  Whilst it is clear that  some
    Chechen refugees do manage to exist outside Chechnya we  find  that  it
    would be unduly harsh for a Chechen woman without internal registration
    documents to  relocate.   She  would  have  no  realistic  prospect  of
    obtaining an internal passport with a propiska and, if she applied  she
    would face a  real  risk  of  questioning,  serious  ill-treatment  and
    forcible return to Chechnya.

Assessment of the specific claim

72.   We turn to the particular facts of this appeal.   We  have  found  the
    appellant to be a credible witness.  We have set out the facts  of  her
    case.  We find that on return to an airport in St Petersburg or Moscow,
    with or without her husband, the appellant would face a  real  risk  of
    detention and serious ill-treatment  amounting  to  persecution  and  a
    breach of her Article 3 human rights.  Enquiries would be made and  her
    past history discovered after which there is a  real  risk  of  further
    questioning, serious ill-treatment and  long-term  detention.   In  the
    unlikely event that she was able to pass through the airport she  would
    not be able to live anywhere for very long without being discovered and
    the same treatment would ensue.  This would be the case in Chechnya  as
    much as elsewhere with the added factor that in  Chechnya  her  husband
    could not live with her.  He would face a real  risk  of  serious  ill-
    treatment at the hands of the authorities and the Chechen population at
    large.  They would not tolerate  an  ethnic  Russian  living  in  their
    midst.

73.   The appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.

74.   The appeal is dismissed on humanitarian protection grounds.

75.   The appeal is allowed on Article 3 human rights grounds.




Signed



Senior Immigration Judge Moulden





                     SCHEDULE OF DOCUMENTS AND EVIDENCE
                             BEFORE THE TRIBUNAL

|DATE               |SOURCE           |TITLE                                           |
|Documents relating to this appellant                                                  |
|17 April 2007      |Appellant OY     |Witness statement                               |
|13 April 2007      |Robert Chenciner |Country expert report with reference to this    |
|                   |                 |appellant                                       |
|09 September 2008  |Robert Chenciner |Updated country expert report with reference to |
|                   |                 |this appellant                                  |
|Country background documents                                                          |
|Undated          |                   |                                                |
|                 |                   |                                                |
|Undated          |Wikipedia.com      |Entry on Ramzan Kadyrov                         |
|Undated          |Russian Federation |The Criminal Code of the Russian Federation     |
|Undated          |IBRU University of |Map of the Caucasus and central Asia            |
|                 |Durham             |                                                |
|Undated          |GUGK, Moscow       |Extracts from Atlas Kavkaz                      |
|1990             |                   |                                                |
|05 February 1990 |Time.com           |Soviet Union occupational disease               |
|2000             |                   |                                                |
|20 January  2000 |Human Rights Watch |Rape allegations surface in Chechnya            |
|30 March  2000   |Human Rights Watch |More evidence of rape by Russian forces in      |
|                 |                   |Chechnya                                        |
|21 August  2000  |UNHCR              |Guidelines on asylum seekers from Chechnya      |
|                 |                   |                                                |
|2001             |                   |                                                |
|20 April  2001   |The Initiative     |Open appeal to the President of the Russian     |
|                 |Group, Common      |Federation                                      |
|                 |Action             |                                                |
|2002             |                   |                                                |
|                 |                   |                                                |
|2002             |Moscow Helsinki    |Living conditions in penitentiaries             |
|                 |Group              |                                                |
|January 2002     |UNHCR              |Asylum seekers from the Russian Federation in   |
|                 |                   |the context of the situation in Chechnya        |
|                 |                   |(introduction and conclusions)                  |
|10 January 2002  |Human Rights Watch |Russia Federation: Serious violations of women's|
|                 |                   |human rights in Chechnya                        |
|25 January 2002  |Amnesty            |Russian Federation: Women and girls - daily     |
|                 |International      |victims in the cycle of violence and impunity   |
|18 March 2002    |Human Rights Watch |Memorandum to the UN Commission on Human Rights |
|10 April 2002    |Human Rights Watch |Russia: Investigate sexual violence by troops in|
|                 |                   |Chechnya                                        |
|2003             |                   |                                                |
|February 2003    |UNHCR              |Asylum seekers from the Russian Federation in   |
|                 |                   |the context of the situation in Chechnya        |
|05 February 2003 |UNHCR              |Letter                                          |
|06 February 2003 |IWPR               |The mental scars of Chechnya's children         |
|20 February 2003 |UNHCR              |Letter                                          |
|13 March 2003    |BBC News           |Palestinians get Saddam funds                   |
|29 April 2003    |The Chechen Times  |UN denies human rights violations in Chechnya!  |
|                 |                   |List of people who are refused justice after    |
|                 |                   |death                                           |
|May 2003         |Campaign against   |Payments to Palestinians                        |
|                 |Sanctions on Iraq  |                                                |
|                 |CASI               |                                                |
|26 September 2003|Prima News Agency  |Pogroms of Chechens in Kabardino-Balkaria       |
|11 December 2003 |Brenda Stardom     |Explaining the Black Widows of Chechnya         |
|2004             |                   |                                                |
|15 January 2004  |Norwegian Refugee  |IDPs in northern Caucasus endure violence and   |
|                 |Council            |destitution                                     |
|16 January 2004  |Relief Web         |Russia to shut down Chechen refugee camps ahead |
|                 |                   |of presidential vote                            |
|29 January 2004  |Human Rights Watch |Briefing to the 60th session of the UN          |
|                 |                   |Commission on Human Rights                      |
|01 March 2004    |Amnesty            |Statement on the situation of Chechen           |
|                 |International      |asylum-seekers                                  |
|12 April 2004    |Human Rights Watch |Russia: Nine civilians extra-judicially executed|
|                 |                   |in Chechnya                                     |
|23 June 2004     |BBC News           |Ingushetia mourns rebels' victims               |
|07 September 2004|Andrei Tsunsky,    |As a result of the changes in Chechnya          |
|                 |expert             |                                                |
|17 September 2004|Webster Griffin    |Russians blast US-UK sponsorship of Chechen     |
|                 |Tarpley            |terror extracts only                            |
|26 September 2004|The Telegraph      |Moscow steps up its reign of terror in Chechnya |
|                 |                   |after the horrors of Beslan siege               |
|01 October 2004  |Christian Science  |Ethnic Chechens face revenge attacks in Moscow  |
|                 |Monitor            |                                                |
|22 October 2004  |UNHCR              |Position regarding asylum seekers and refugees  |
|                 |                   |from the Chechen Republic, Russian Federation   |
|2005             |                   |                                                |
|Summer 2005      |Middle East        |How Chechnya became a breeding ground for terror|
|                 |Quarterly          |                                                |
|March 2005       |Human Rights Watch |Worse than a war: 'Disappearances' in Chechnya -|
|                 |                   |a crime against humanity                        |
|March 2005       |Kate Desormeau     |The Outside Inside: Chechen IDPs, Identity      |
|                 |                   |Documents and the Right to Free Movement in the |
|                 |                   |Russian Federation                              |
|27 May 2005      |Prague Watchdog    |Mop-up takes place in Martan-Chu                |

|17 June 2005     |Radio Free Europe  |Pro-Moscow Chechen official confirms atrocities |
|30 June 2005     |IPS News Agency    |Chechnya: 'Dark' record on disappearances       |
|                 |                   |brought into the light                          |
|05 July 2005     |Prague Watchdog    |Spate of abductions of women in Chechnya        |
|September 2005   |Human Rights Centre|Human rights violations during anti-terrorist   |
|                 |Memorial           |operations in the Republic of Ingushetia        |
|                 |                   |(introduction)                                  |
|17 September 2005|Voice of America   |Upsurge in attacks in regions near Chechnya,    |
|                 |                   |separatist leader killed                        |
|14 October 2005  |IWPR               |Counting the cost of Nalchik's 24-hour war      |
|04 November 2005 |Radio Free Europe  |Nalchik raids trigger new wave of harassment    |
|                 |                   |against Muslims                                 |
|08 November 2005 |Amnesty            |Russian Federation: 'Disappearances' and        |
|                 |International      |abductions in the Chechen Republic              |
|July 2005 -      |Svetlana           |On the situation of Chechens outside Chechnya   |
|February 2006    |Gannushkina, The   |                                                |
|                 |Memorial HRC       |                                                |
|2006             |                   |                                                |
|2006             |UK Foreign and     |Human Rights Annual Report 2006: Russia         |
|                 |Commonwealth Office|                                                |
|                 |(FCO)              |                                                |
|25 May 2006      |IWPR               |Chechnya: Living with a vengeance               |
|01 June 2006     |Human Rights Centre|Special operation in Stanitsa Nesterovskaya of  |
|                 |Memorial (Russia)  |Ingushetia: Security servicemen publicly commit |
|                 |                   |a summary execution                             |
|27 July 2006     |Reuters Foundation |European Court condemns Russia in Chechen case  |
|10 August 2006   |BBC Monitoring     |Mass arrests in Chechnya after pro-Moscow police|
|                 |Central Asia       |desert to rebels                                |
|04 September 2006|BBC News           |Russian town hit by race violence               |
|05 September 2006|Radio Free Europe  |Violence leaves two dead in Karelia             |
|06 September 2006|Radio Free Europe  |Russia uneasy quiet continues in Kondopoga      |
|27 September 2006|Prague Watchdog    |Hostage-taking still rife in Chechnya           |
|12 October 2006  |Voice of America   |US on Politkovskaya murder                      |
|                 |News               |                                                |
|12 October 2006  |UK Foreign &       |Human Rights Annual Report 2006: Russia         |
|                 |Commonwealth Office|                                                |
|13 October 2006  |Amnesty            |Russian Federation: Russian Chechen Friendship  |
|                 |International      |Society closed under new NGO law                |
|27 October 2006  |Radio Free Europe  |Russia: Nord-Ost anniversary recalls ascent of  |
|                 |                   |female suicide bomber                           |
|14 November 2006 |Home Office        |Operational Guidance Note on the Russia         |
|                 |                   |Federation                                      |
|03 December 2006 |Boston.com         |Peace in Chechnya comes at brutal cost  SP68    |


|2007             |                   |                                                |
|2007             |Nabi Abdullaev     |Chechen 'Black Widows' organised or driven by   |
|                 |                   |despair?                                        |
|2007             |UNHCR              |Global report - Russian Federation              |
|2007             |US State Department|Country Reports on Human Rights Practices 2007: |
|                 |                   |Russia                                          |
|06 January 2007  |Prague Watchdog    |Practice of extortion at 'Kavkaz' checkpoint    |
|                 |                   |stops                                           |
|23 January 2007  |Prague Watchdog    |Russian soldiers conduct 'mop-up' in            |
|                 |                   |Serzhen-Yurt                                    |
|19 January 2007  |Home Office        |COIS Report on Russia                           |
|02 February 2007 |Union of Councils  |Murders and abductions continue in Chechnya     |
|                 |for Jews in the    |                                                |
|                 |Former Soviet Union|                                                |
|01 March 2007    |BBC News           |Torture 'systematic' in Chechnya                |
|14 March 2007    |Amnesty            |Russian Federation must end torture,            |
|                 |International      |ill-treatment, 'disappearances' and arbitrary   |
|                 |                   |detention in Chechnya                           |
|23 March 2007    |ECRE               |Guidelines on the treatment of Chechen IDPs,    |
|                 |                   |asylum seekers and refugees in Europe           |
|23 May 2007      |Amnesty            |Russian Federation: What justice for Chechnya's |
|                 |International      |disappeared?                                    |
|30 May 2007      |OHCHR              |Report of the Special Rapporteur on contemporary|
|                 |                   |forms of racism, racial discrimination,         |
|                 |                   |xenophobia and related intolerance on his       |
|                 |                   |mission to the Russian Federation               |
|04 June 2007     |Prague Watchdog    |Mop-up in Nazran                                |
|06 June 2007     |Radio Free Europe  |Hundreds rally against Chechens in southern     |
|                 |                   |Russia                                          |
|12 July 2007     |IWPR (UK)          |Upsurge of fighting in Chechnya                 |
|03 September 2007|BBC News           |New data on Russia race attacks                 |
|01 November 2007 |Amnesty            |Day of National Unity - a day to challenge      |
|                 |International      |racism                                          |
|2008             |                   |                                                |
|25 January 2008  |Amnesty            |Urgent Action 22 August: 147 internally         |
|                 |International      |displaced families reportedly told to leave at  |
|                 |                   |short notice                                    |
|03 February 2008 |Prague Watchdog    |Slayings of innocent people continue in         |
|                 |                   |Ingushetia                                      |
|25 February 2008 |Prague Watchdog    |Self-styled ID checks underway on the eve of    |
|                 |                   |elections in Chechnya                           |
|11 March 2008    |US State Department|Country Report on Human Rights Practices        |
|                 |                   |(extracts)                                      |
|20 March 2008    |Radio Free Europe  |Chechen resistance launches major attack        |
|15 April 2008    |Human Rights Watch |Council of Europe failing on Russia             |
|22 April 2008    |UNHCR / ACCORD     |Chechnya: Summary of the ACCORD-UNHCR Country of|
|                 |                   |Origin Information Seminar, Vienna, 18 October  |
|                 |                   |2007                                            |
|05 May 2008      |Radio Free Europe  | Five police killed by roadside bomb in Grozny  |

|25 June 2008     |Human Rights Watch |'As if they fell from the sky':                 |
|                 |                   |Counterinsurgency, rights violations and rampant|
|                 |                   |impunity in Ingushetia (summary only)           |
|26 June 2008     |North Caucasus     |Increase in Chechen attacks linked to broader   |
|                 |Weekly             |North Caucasus strategy                         |
|30 June 2008     |IDMC (Norwegian    |Struggling to integrate: Displaced people from  |
|                 |Refugee Council)   |Chechnya living in other areas of the Russian   |
|                 |                   |Federation                                      |
|06 August 2008   |Amnesty            |Urgent Action 218 August (abduction of          |
|                 |International      |Makhmadsalors Delilovich Masaev)                |
|07 August 2008   |North Caucasus     |Chechen and Federal authorities declare Sulim   |
|                 |Weekly             |Yamadaev a fugitive                             |
|12 August 2008   |SOVA Centre        |Compliance of the Russian Federation with the   |
|                 |                   |Convention on the elimination of all forms of   |
|                 |                   |racial discrimination: Russian NGOs' alternative|
|                 |                   |report                                          |
|15 August 2008   |North Caucasus     |Wanted Chechen commander leads his battalion    |
|                 |Weekly             |against Georgian forces                         |
|18 August 2008   |Xinhua News Agency |Sarkozy urges rapid Russian withdrawal from     |
|                 |                   |Georgia                                         |
|26 August 2008   |Times Online       |Dimitri Medvedev raises spectre of new Cold War |
|27 August 2008   |FIDH               |UN Committee demands to halt increasing racial  |
|                 |                   |discrimination and violent practices against    |
|                 |                   |ethnic minorities                               |
|01 September 2008|Nabi Abdullaev     |Women to the forefront in Chechen terrorism     |
|02 September 2008|Committee to       |Website owner killed in police custody in       |
|                 |Protect Journalists|Ingushetia                                      |
|03 September 2008|BBC news           |New data on Russian race attacks                |
|03 September 2008|Efluxmedia.com     |Reporter shot dead in Russia's restive Dagestan |
|                 |                   |province                                        |
|06 September 2008|Kavkaz Center      |Cheney visits Ukraine amid crisis               |
|07 September 2008|Kavkaz Center      |Vladimir Putin set to bait US with nuclear aid  |
|                 |                   |for Tehran                                      |
|23 September 2008|BBC News           |Ingushetia abuses 'may spark war'               |


