
YT (HC 395 paragraph 44 - extension of stay) Belarus [2009] UKAIT 00003

Asylum and Immigration Tribunal


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |                             |
|On 28 November 2008                           |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                       SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE ALLEN

                                   Between

                                     yt

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No representative
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      Paragraph 44 of HC 395 is not limited in its  application  to  persons
    in the United Kingdom on visitors visas.

    [Note: The wording of paragraph 44 was changed by HC 1113  with  effect
    from 27 November 2008 (after the decision of the IJ in this case).  The
    new wording reverses (by new para 44 (iii)) the effect of  the  present
    decision, for decisions made after that date.]

1.     The  appellant  is  a  national  of  Belarus.   He  appealed  to   an
    Immigration Judge against the Secretary of State's decision refusing to
    vary leave to remain.

2.    The appellant originally entered the United Kingdom on  11  July  2005
    with entry clearance and a work permit under the sector  based  scheme.
    He went back to Belarus during the currency of that leave but  returned
    to the United Kingdom on 18 March 2007 with entry clearance and a  work
    permit, again under the sector based  scheme.   This  leave  was  valid
    until  17  March  2008.   On  14  March  2008  the  appellant  made  an
    application through his representatives for variation  of  leave  under
    paragraph 44 of the Immigration Rules as he wished to spend six  months
    in the United Kingdom as a visitor.  This application was  rejected  by
    the Secretary of State.   The  appellant  appealed  to  an  Immigration
    Judge.

3.    The  Immigration  Judge  found  the  appellant  to  be  credible.   He
    accepted his evidence entirely.  He noted the appellant's evidence that
    he had not had the opportunity to travel in the United  Kingdom  whilst
    he had been working and wished  to  spend  six  months  in  the  United
    Kingdom as a visitor  and  then  return  to  Belarus  as  he  had  done
    previously.  He said he had applied for a visit visa as he had  friends
    working on the same scheme who had done the same thing.

4.    The Immigration Judge considered that, as he  put  it,  there  was  no
    legal impediment to the appellant switching from leave under the sector
    based scheme to leave as  a  visitor.   He  commented  that  the  Rules
    allowed for situations where a person who originally intended to  leave
    at the end of his work permit now wished to stay on for a short time as
    a visitor.  He therefore disagreed with the Secretary of  State's  view
    that since the appellant had not returned to Belarus but  had  made  an
    application to remain as a visitor, he did not have a genuine intention
    to return and had breached the  conditions  attached  to  his  previous
    grant of leave.  The appeal was allowed.

5.    The Secretary  of  State  sought  reconsideration  of  this  decision,
    arguing that paragraph 44 of HC 395 related  only  to  people  who  had
    previously been granted leave to enter as a visitor  and  were  seeking
    further  leave  as  a  visitor,  referring  to   relevant   Immigration
    Directorate  Instructions  (IDIs).   It  was  also  argued   that   the
    Immigration Judge failed to have regard to whether he had  jurisdiction
    to hear the appeal on the basis that the appellant lacked the  relevant
    immigration  document  as  specified  in  Section   88(2)(b)   of   the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  Thirdly it was contended
    that the Immigration Judge did not  adequately  reason  his  conclusion
    that the appellant intended to leave the United Kingdom at the  end  of
    the leave for which he had applied.

6.    A Senior Immigration Judge ordered reconsideration on all grounds.

7.    The appeal was originally listed for  hearing  on  9  September  2008.
    The appellant appeared unrepresented.  In light  of  the  points  being
    made on behalf of the Secretary of  State  I  considered  it  would  be
    appropriate for him to seek to obtain legal representation since  there
    were legal points of some potential difficulty with which I anticipated
    he would have some problems  in  dealing.   The  appeal  was  therefore
    adjourned to enable him to get legal representation.

8.    The matter was re-listed for hearing before me on  28  November  2008.
    Mr L Tarlow appeared on behalf of the Secretary of State.  There was no
    appearance by or on behalf of the appellant.  I  ascertained  from  the
    file that notice of the date, time and place of hearing had  been  sent
    to the  appellant  on  27  October  2008,  by  first  class  post.   No
    explanation had been provided for his absence.  I  accordingly  decided
    that it was appropriate to go ahead with the hearing.

9.    Mr Tarlow argued that it was clearly implied in  paragraph  44  of  HC
    395 that a person had to be a visitor to get an extension of stay as  a
    visitor.  He also referred to paragraph 135L and  the  wording  of  the
    sector based scheme and the opportunities for extensions in that regard
    and argued that again the wording limited the appellant to being in the
    United Kingdom as set out in  paragraph  135L(iv).   He  accepted  that
    there was a lack of clarity in the wording of  the  Rules,  but  argued
    that the header to paragraph 44 implied that the person in question had
    to be in the United Kingdom initially in the capacity of a visitor.

10.   I reserved my determination.

11.   It will be helpful  to  set  out  in  full  the  relevant  provisions.
    Paragraph 44 of HC 395 states as follows:

        "Requirements for an extension of stay as a visitor


        44.      Six months is the maximum permitted  leave  which  may  be
             granted to a visitor.  The requirements  for  an  extension  of
             stay as a visitor are that the applicant:


             (i)  meets the requirements of paragraph 44(ii) - (vii); and


             (ii) has not already spent, or would not  as  a  result  of  an
                 extension of stay spend, more than six months in  total  in
                 the United Kingdom as a visitor.  Any  period  spent  as  a
                 seasonal agricultural worker and as a student  visitor  are
                 to be counted as a period spent as a visitor; and


             (iii)     was not last admitted to the United Kingdom under the
                 Approved Destination Status Agreement with China."

12.   Paragraph 135L of HC 395 states as follows:

        "Requirements for an extension  of  stay  for  Sector-Based  Scheme
        employment


        135L     The requirements for an extension of stay for Sector-Based
              Scheme employment are that the applicant:


              (i)      entered the United Kingdom with a valid Home  Office
                  immigration employment document issued under the  Sector-
                  Based scheme; and


              (ii)     has written approval from the Home  Office  for  the
                  continuation of his  employment  under  the  Sector-Based
                  scheme; and


              (iii)    meets the  requirements  of  paragraph  135I(ii)  to
                  (vi); and


              (iv)     would not, as a result  of  the  extension  of  stay
                  sought, remain in the  United  Kingdom  for  Sector-Based
                  scheme employment to a date beyond twelve months from the
                  date on which he was given  leave  to  enter  the  United
                  Kingdom on this occasion in this capacity."

13.   The particular requirement of paragraph 44 with  which  the  Secretary
    of State took issue in the appellant's case was  the  question  of  his
    intention to leave the United Kingdom at the end of the period of visit
    as stated by him, set out at paragraph 41(ii).  It is relevant also  to
    note that at the earlier hearing Mr Gulvin, who appeared on  behalf  of
    the Secretary of State, said that he was not pursuing the  jurisdiction
    point, and the matter was not renewed by Mr Tarlow.

14.   I do not propose to set out the relevant IDIs.  They  do  not,  in  my
    view, take matters any further  beyond  the  wording  in  the  relevant
    Immigration Rules.  It is also relevant to note the recent  remarks  of
    Laws LJ in AM (Ethiopia) and Others [2008] EWCA Civ 1082  at  paragraph
    38.  There he said the following:

        "It is thus in the  nature  of  the  Immigration  Rules  that  they
        include no overarching implicit purposes.  Their only purpose is to
        articulate the Secretary of State's specific policies  with  regard
        to immigration control from time to time, as to which there are  no
        presumptions, liberal or restrictive."

15.   It is in my view sufficiently clear from  paragraph  135L  of  HC  395
    that that is concerned with a person seeking an extension of  stay  for
    Sector-Based Scheme employment.  It does not therefore directly concern
    itself with the position of a person who, having  come  to  the  United
    Kingdom for Sector-Based Scheme employment, seeks an extension of  stay
    in the capacity of a visitor.  It is not,  however,  without  relevance
    that the limitation at (iv) of paragraph 135L precludes a person  as  a
    result of the extension of stay sought from  remaining  in  the  United
    Kingdom for Sector-Based Scheme employment  to  a  date  beyond  twelve
    months from the date upon which he was given leave to enter the  United
    Kingdom on this occasion in that capacity.  That, however,  as  I  read
    it, imports a restriction purely on the length  of  time  for  which  a
    person can  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  for  Sector-Based  Scheme
    employment and is silent on the question of whether or not  he  or  she
    can stay on for a different purpose, in this case for the purpose of  a
    visit.

16.   The next issue concerns the ambit of paragraph 44.  Mr  Tarlow  argued
    that guidance as to the proper meaning of this  can  be  found  in  the
    header "Requirements for an extension of  stay  as  a  visitor".   That
    seems to me however to be entirely ambiguous.   It  does  not  say,  as
    indeed it could have done if it had been thought  necessary,  that  the
    only people entitled to extensions of stay in the capacity  of  visitor
    are people already in the  United  Kingdom  as  visitors.   It  is  not
    without relevance to bear in mind the reasons the  appellant  gave  for
    wishing an extension of stay as a visitor in this case.  He had not had
    the opportunity to travel in the  United  Kingdom  while  he  had  been
    working here and presumably he regarded it as much more  convenient  to
    remain in the United Kingdom and travel around rather than to  have  to
    go home and then make a separate application for  entry  clearance  for
    the purpose of a visit.   I  can  see  no  good  reason,  nor  anything
    particular in the scheme, format or content of  the  Immigration  Rules
    which would make such a requirement desirable or necessary.  I can  see
    nothing in paragraph 44 or elsewhere in HC 395 to require a person who,
    like the appellant, has been in the United Kingdom in the capacity,  as
    in his case, of Sector-Based  work,  to  leave  the  country  and  make
    application for a visit permit.  The wording of paragraph 44 does  not,
    in my view, preclude a person in his position from seeking an extension
    of stay as a visitor.  The only part of paragraph  41  with  which  the
    Secretary of State appeared to take issue was paragraph 41(ii),  and  I
    consider that the Immigration Judge came to proper findings on that and
    I do not think that the challenge in that regard in the grounds is made
    out.  Otherwise, the appellant proposes to do no more  than  spend  six
    months in the  United  Kingdom  as  a  visitor.   It  would  have  been
    perfectly possible, had the construction argued for by the Secretary of
    State been the  appropriate  one,  for  paragraph  44(ii)  rather  than
    limiting the amount spent in total in the United Kingdom as  a  visitor
    to six months, to limit the amount of  time  to  spent  in  the  United
    Kingdom in its entirety to  six  months  or  some  other  period.   The
    absence of any express preclusion in the Rules of a  variation  of  the
    kind sought by the  appellant  in  this  case  persuades  me  that  the
    Immigration Judge did not materially err in this case and therefore his
    decision allowing this appeal on all grounds is maintained.


    Signed



      Senior Immigration Judge Allen
