
ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at:  Field House                                   Date of Hearing:
                                                        22 January 2008 &
                                                        22 April 2008


                                   Before:


 Mr C M G Ockelton, Deputy President of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
                       Senior Immigration Judge Grubb

                                   Between

                                     AM
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the Appellant:      Mr S. Unigwe, instructed by Matthew Wokeson & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:     Mr J Gulvin, Home Office Presenting Officer (22
January 2008)
                  Mr G Saunders, Home Office Presenting Officer (22 April
           2008)




Section 88(2)(d) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002
restricts the grounds of appeal to those mentioned in s 88(4) if and only
if the reason cited has some relationship to the application.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1.  This  appeal  provides  yet  another  example   of   uncertainty   and
    maladministration resulting from the casual promotion  and  publication
    of "policies" by the Secretary of  State.   In  R  (Tozlukaya)  v  SSHD
    [2006] EWCA Civ 379 the Court of Appeal found that a change in a policy
    had not been properly implemented and was trenchantly critical  of  the
    resulting confusion.  In OS [2006] UKAIT 00031 the Tribunal found  that
    the Secretary of State's published policy denied the existence  of  the
    relevant Immigration Rules.  More  frequently,  the  Immigration  Rules
    have been simply overridden by declarations  of  policy,  most  notably
    perhaps in the case of degree-level  students.    In  HH  [2008]  UKAIT
    00051 the Tribunal was shown a policy, apparently clear  on  its  face,
    and not withdrawn (until the hearing in HH itself), which the Secretary
    of State and apparently all her officers had forgotten.  In the present
    case the problem is different: the policy was  published  in  different
    versions to different groups of interested people, with the result that
    the Secretary of State's officers were  themselves  not  aware  of  its
    terms.  It has become in general apparent that litigation is now  often
    necessary  to  enable  even  the  government  to  discover   what   its
    immigration policies are.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of  Ghana.   He  appealed  to  the  Tribunal
    against the decision of the respondent on 17 July 2007 refusing to vary
    his leave.  The  Immigration  Judge  dismissed  his  appeal  under  the
    Immigration  Rules  but  allowed  it  on  human  rights  grounds.   The
    respondent sought and obtained an order for reconsideration.  Thus  the
    matter comes before us.

 3. Although the order for reconsideration was made  solely  on  the  basis
    that the Immigration Judge may have erred in failing  to  set  out  the
    basis upon which he found that a refusal of the appellant's application
    would breach his human rights, a number of issues were canvassed before
    us, including questions relating to whether the appellant had  a  right
    of appeal at all, and the respondent's decision -making process.

 4. The appellant had always  wanted  to  be  a  soldier.   He  obtained  a
    visitor's visa in Ghana  on  23  September  2003  and,  using  it,  was
    admitted to the United Kingdom on 10 November 2003.  His visa thereupon
    took effect as leave to enter until 23 March 2004.  In order to  obtain
    the visa the appellant must have persuaded the Entry Clearance  Officer
    that he met the requirements of para 41 of the Statement of Changes  in
    Immigration Rules, HC 395, including  that  he  was  genuinely  seeking
    entry as a visitor for a limited period as stated by him, not exceeding
    six months, that he intended to leave the United Kingdom at the end  of
    that period, and that he did not  intend  to  take  employment  in  the
    United Kingdom.  The visa is endorsed "no work or  recourse  to  public
    funds".

 5. Within a few days the appellant had  made  enquiries  about  enlistment
    into the British Armed Forces.  A person reading the Immigration  Rules
    might think that such enquiries would put the appellant  in  danger  of
    having his leave  curtailed  and  of  being  removed  from  the  United
    Kingdom.  He had, after all, demonstrated that he  no  longer  met  the
    requirements of the Rules relating to visitors and indeed  his  conduct
    might be thought to raise a suspicion  about  his  intentions  when  he
    obtained his visa.  For some reason, however, nobody suggested anything
    of the sort.  That may have perhaps been because the Secretary of State
    appears to abandon immigration control in the case of those  who  apply
    for enlistment in the armed forces after arrival.  Chapter 15, s 1 para
    3 of the Immigration Directorate Instructions  contains  the  following
    passage:

      "A person admitted in another capacity (e.g. visitor, student) who
        wishes to join HM Forces should be advised to contact them directly
        - enlistment is entirely a matter for the armed force concerned."

 6. The last clause is obviously true: what is apparent is that an  enquiry
    about enlistment is regarded as perfectly appropriate for a person  who
    has been admitted to the United Kingdom  for  other  reasons  and  with
    conditions inconsistent with an intention to work.  We put  the  matter
    in that  way  because  actual  service  in  the  armed  forces  creates
    exemption from immigration control under s 8(4)(a) of  the  Immigration
    Act 1971.  Enlistment is not, however, an instantaneous process and  it
    seems to us that a person seeking enlistment in  the  armed  forces  is
    indeed demonstrating that it is no longer the case  that  he  does  not
    intend to work in the United Kingdom.

 7. The appellant's enlistment was quite protracted, and, his  leave  as  a
    visitor having expired, he was granted a further period of  leave  (the
    IDIs describe this as "under code 3") outside the Rules from 10 May  to
    10 November 2004.

 8. He became a member of HM Armed Forces, and so subject to  military  law
    and exempt from immigration control, on 18 October 2004.  According  to
    his witness statement, he  had  suffered  an  injury  whilst  in  basic
    training.  Certainly his injury became troublesome  by  the  middle  of
    2005, and there are in evidence numerous  army  documents  relating  to
    medical examinations.  An assessment dated  24  August  2006  indicates
    that he "almost certainly" passed out of training erroneously.  He  had
    not been able to take part in any  organised  physical  activity  other
    than mild remedial training "from the very first day he  arrived".   He
    was discharged as unfit on 2 February 2007.  It is clear that the  Army
    regarded his case as unusual and various officers did all they could to
    ensure that on discharge he had a pension, as indeed he does.

 9. On his discharge he became  subject  to  immigration  law  again.   His
    passport shows that on 10 April 2007 he was  granted  leave  to  remain
    until 8 May 2007, again on condition that he maintain  and  accommodate
    himself without recourse to public funds and that he would  not  engage
    in employment paid  or  unpaid,  or  in  any  profession.   During  the
    currency of that leave he made an application for leave to remain as  a
    discharged soldier.  Under s 3C of the 1971 Act the  application,  made
    as it was during the currency of existing  leave,  has  the  effect  of
    extending that leave and its conditions.  We have not been told whether
    the appellant is complying with the conditions.  We do not know  if  he
    is in receipt of public funds.   We  do  know  that  he  claims  to  be
    employed in an unpaid capacity by an Oxfam shop.  In the event, it  was
    that application that was refused on 17 July 2007.  The terms of notice
    of decision are as follows:

      "Refusal to vary leave or variation of leave
      Paragraph 322(1) of HC 395 (as amended)
      ...
      You applied for indefinite leave  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom
        following medical discharge from HM Forces,  but  your  application
        has been refused.

      There is no provision in the Immigration Rules for you  to  remain  in
        the United Kingdom to receive medical  treatment  on  the  NHS  and
        therefore  the  Secretary  of  State  is  not  satisfied  that  the
        variation of leave that you have sought is for a  purpose  that  is
        covered by the immigration rules.

      Your application is therefore being refused because you
         . Are seeking to remain in the United Kingdom for a purpose  other
           than  one which entry or remaining is permitted  by  immigration
           rules [section 88(2)(d)]
        Therefore, your right to appeal this decision under  section  82(1)
        of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 is  limited  by
        operation of section 88 of this Act."

10. It is surprising that the application was refused on  the  ground  that
    the appellant was seeking to remain in the United Kingdom in  order  to
    receive NHS treatment.  In his application he gives a number of reasons
    why he should be allowed to remain.  He mentions the  treatment  he  is
    receiving and, no doubt, if he is allowed to  remain  he  will  benefit
    from whatever medical treatment he can get.  But there is no suggestion
    in his application that that is the purpose of it.

11. Under para 322(1) of the Statement of Changes in Immigration Rules,  HC
    395, refusal is obligatory if a person  seeks  leave  to  remain  of  a
    purpose not covered by the Immigration Rules; and s 88(2) provides that
    a person may not appeal against an immigration decision which is  taken
    on the grounds he "(d) is seeking to enter  or  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom for a purpose other than one for which entry  or  remaining  is
    permitted in accordance with Immigration Rules," but s 88(4)  preserves
    a right of appeal on human rights, race  relations  or  asylum  grounds
    only.  It was therefore argued  by  Mr  Saunders  before  us  that  the
    appellant has no right of appeal save (for present purposes)  on  human
    rights grounds against the respondent's decision of 17 July 2007.

12. That submission is particularly troubling in view of the facts which we
    have set out.  If it is correct, it has the effect that  the  Secretary
    of State can deprive an applicant of  a  right  of  appeal  against  an
    adverse decision by asserting that the decision is  made  on  a  ground
    which  has,  as  in  the  present  case,  no  bearing  at  all  on  the
    application. We would be unwilling  to  accede  to  that  view  in  the
    absence of the clearest statutory provisions. We  recognise  of  course
    that if s 88(2) on its true construction deprived the  appellant  of  a
    right of appeal in these circumstances, we are without jurisdiction  to
    consider any grounds other than those  set  out  in  s  88(4),  however
    obvious the  mistake  and  however  unjust  the  respondent's  decision
    appears to be.

13. Neither party was able to give us very much assistance on this point.

14. As we have indicated, the words of the statute exclude  the  appeal  if
    the decision is taken on the grounds identified.  The phrase is not "is
    stated to have been taken".  One would normally expect  the  notice  of
    decision to be, or  to  include,  the  authoritive  indication  of  the
    grounds upon which a decision has been taken.  Whilst  not  wishing  to
    depart from that principle as  a  general  rule,  the  wording  of  the
    statute does not in our view require us to treat the notice of decision
    as authoritive in every case.  In the present case, although the reason
    is given in the notice of decision, that is a reason which  appears  to
    bear no relation to the application.  Despite the wording of the notice
    of decision, the reason is  not  one  upon  which  the  decision  could
    properly have been taken.  The reason given must be a mistake.  In  the
    (we hope) unusual circumstances of this case, we have decided  that  we
    can safely ignore the assertion in the  notice  of  decision  that  the
    ground for it was that the application was being made for a purpose not
    covered by  the  Immigration  Rules.   Instead,  we  can  look  at  the
    realities of the case.

15. This is an unusual case, because the ground stated is  one  which  does
    not appear to have been open to the decision maker as arising from  the
    application that was made.  Where the ground cited is one  which  could
    arise from the application, we think it very unlikely  indeed  that  it
    will be right for the ground given in the  notice  of  decision  to  be
    ignored.  That is not the position here.  In so far as the refusal  was
    an appropriate - and hence lawful - response to the application, it  is
    a refusal which must have been on grounds other than those alleged.

16. To put that another way, in  our  judgment  s  88(4)(d)  restricts  the
    grounds of appeal if the reason  cited  is  a  lawful  (albeit  perhaps
    wrong) response to the application. If the reason cited has nothing  to
    do with the applications, s 88(2) (d) is of no effect. In the result we
    have concluded that the appellant's right of appeal is  not  restricted
    by s 88(2), and accordingly that we have jurisdiction to deal with  all
    grounds.  If we are wrong about that (and we may be) it should make  no
    difference to the appellant or the respondent, for the  reason  we  set
    out at para 25 below.  We now turn to the  merits  of  the  appellant's
    appeal.

17. At the hearing on  22  January  2008,  the  appellant's  representative
    produced what was said to be a copy of a  memorandum  from  Colonel  KT
    Haugh at the Directorate of Personnel Services (Army), dated 7 November
    2007.  It is headed  "Support  to  Foreign  and  Commonwealth  Citizens
    serving in the British Army and their Families - Change to Home  Office
    Policy  in  Cases  of  Medical  Discharge  Directly   Attributable   to
    Operational Injuries".  Following its statement of the change  in  that
    policy, the memorandum sets  out  further  information.   The  relevant
    paragraphs are as follows:

      2.  c.  Medical  Discharge  as  a  Result  of  Injuries  Sustained  on
        Operations. Where a non-British member of  the  Army  is  medically
        discharged as a direct result of injury sustained in an operational
        theatre, the Home Office requirement for  them  to  have  completed
        four years service towards a grant of Indefinite  Leave  to  Remain
        (ILR)  will  in  future,  normally  be  waived.   It   means   that
        individuals that qualify under these circumstances  may  now  apply
        for ILR even if they have not completed 4 years Army Service.   The
        accompanying dependent spouse/civil partner and children will  also
        normally qualify for ILR at the same time.  This is a new and  most
        welcome change of policy confirmed at Reference B  and  follows  on
        from recent discussions  between  the  Army  and  the  Home  Office
        seeking to resolve this situation.

      d. Home Office Re-Consideration  of  Cases  Previously  Refused.   The
        Home Office have also confirmed that cases which meet the  criteria
        at Para 2c but which were previously refused and which are  brought
        to  their  attention  will  be  re-considered  sympathetically  and
        discretion exercised where appropriate.

      e.   Other Forms of Discharge with Less than Four Years Army  Service.
          The Home Office have confirmed that an individual discharged with
        less than four  years  service  for  reasons  other  than  injuries
        directly sustained on operations leading to medical  discharge  may
        continue to seek discretionary leave to remain in the UK.  This  is
        no change to the existing  policy.   Each  case  will  be  examined
        sensitively on its merits and in the  light  of  the  evidence  and
        supporting documentation produced by the applicant.  There  may  be
        cases, where the circumstances  are  complicated  -  for  instance,
        those discharged for inappropriate  behaviour,  and  misconduct  or
        criminal  activity  and  such  applications  will  be  investigated
        thoroughly by the Home Office and then decided  on  a  case-by-case
        basis.

18. Mr Gulvin, who represented the Home Office, having  taken  instructions
    and having consulted  his  colleagues,  confirmed  that  he  could  not
    confirm either the new policy set out  in  para  2.c  or  the  existing
    policy set out in para 2.e.  A letter  from  the  Tribunal  to  Colonel
    Haugh produced  a  response  from  Giles  Ahern,  the  Deputy  Director
    Personnel.  He confirmed that the information contained  in  paras  2.c
    and 2.e "was provided by and cleared with the Operational  Policy  Unit
    of the Borders and Immigration  Agency  (BIA)  whose  policy  has  been
    cited".  The letter goes on to  set  out  the  history  of  the  policy
    change, concluding as follows:

      "On 23 October the HO announced that the requirement for  Commonwealth
        and ROI personnel who are medically discharged as a  direct  result
        of injuries sustained in Operational theatres to  have  served  for
        four or more years before they sought ILR would normally be waived.
         At the same time, the HO re-affirmed that their policy of allowing
        those who are  medically  discharged  with  less  than  four  years
        service for reasons other than injuries  sustained  in  Operational
        theatres to apply for discretionary leave to remain would  continue
        and would be assessed on a case by case basis.  Furthermore, the HO
        confirmed that they  would  be  prepared  to  re-assess  any  cases
        brought to their attention where individuals  medically  discharged
        with less than four years service who  have  previously  had  their
        applications denied.  I  attach  a  copy  of  the  HO  statement  -
        Reference B of Colonel Haugh's letter.

      The BIA has confirmed that when the revised policy was announced  they
        requested that applications and  Judicial  Review  cases  involving
        medical discharge were put on hold until  their  new  guidance  was
        ready.  It may therefore be that this request did  not  cascade  to
        the Presenting Officer Units.  In terms of this  information  being
        accessible to the public, the HO has  advised  that  they  hope  to
        publish the revised guidance on their website shortly."

19. The Tribunal had not previously seen the Home Office statement that was
    Reference B of Colonel Haugh's letter.  When the matter came before the
    Tribunal again on 22 April 2008, Mr Saunders, then  appearing  for  the
    respondent, produced what he said was the Home  Office's  statement  of
    its policy.  It reads, in full, as follows:

      "We are extremely proud of  armed  forces,  including  those  men  and
        women from the Commonwealth.

      In recognition of  this,  where  a  member  of  our  Armed  Forces  is
        medically discharged as a direct result of injury sustained  during
        operations, the requirement for them to have completed four  years'
        service in order to qualify for settlement will normally be waived.

      If any cases of service men  or  women  being  refused  settlement  in
        these circumstances are brought to  our  attention,  we  will  look
        again at their applications sympathetically.

      There may be cases,  of  course,  where  the  circumstances  are  more
        complicated and such applications would  need  to  be  investigated
        thoroughly and then decided on a case-by-case basis."

20. We have to say that we were somewhat surprised by the production of the
    policy in that form, given the rather different form in  which  it  had
    been provided to the Army and in which Giles Ahern had sent it  to  us.
    Mr  Saunders' document is only about one-third the length of  the  full
    version, which continues, after the quotation by the "BIA spokesperson"
    acknowledged by Mr Saunders, as follows:

      "Q & A lines
      What about their dependants?
      The dependant spouse/civil partner and children of a former member  of
        the  Armed  Forces  granted  settlement  would  also  qualify   for
        settlement in line.

      Would this also apply to someone who was injured in training?
      Again, where an injury leading  to  medical  discharge  was  sustained
        outside the operational theatre, such applications would need to be
        investigated thoroughly and then decided on a case-by-base basis.

      What happened before?
      To qualify for  settlement  under  the  immigration  rules,  a  former
        member of the Armed Forces needs to have completed 4 years  service
        prior to their date of  discharge.   Applications  for  leave  from
        those discharged before completion of 4 years have been  considered
        outside the rules on their  individual  merits  on  a  case-by-case
        basis.

      What change to policy are you actually making?
      Where a member of the  Armed  Forces  is  medically  discharged  as  a
        direct result of injury sustained in an  operational  theatre,  the
        requirement in the settlement rules for them to have completed four
        years service will normally be waived.  New  detailed  guidance  on
        the circumstances in which it is appropriate for discretion  to  be
        exercised is being prepared.




      Why are you changing this now?
      The changes have taken place as a result of ongoing  dialogue  between
        MoD and BIA caseworkers to ensure that specific guidance exists for
        exercising discretion in these types of cases.

      What change is there for those already refused?
      Where cases are brought to our attention, they will  be  re-considered
        sympathetically and discretion will be exercised where appropriate.

       What  is  happening  with  cases  that  might  currently   be   under
        consideration?
      Any  current  applications  involving  a  medical  element  where  the
        applicant has not completed  4  years  are  currently  being  held,
        pending the completion of revised guidance.

      What about non-Commonwealth nationals serving in the Armed Forces?
      The main statement only refers to Commonwealth nationals in the  Armed
        Forces but the same consideration will  apply  to  non-Commonwealth
        members of HMAF, including members of the Brigade of Ghurkas."

21. We do not suggest for a moment that Mr Saunders gave us anything  other
    than the fullest information that he had.  It is, however,  clear  that
    that information, obtained after inquiry within  the  Home  Office,  on
    notice, was incomplete.  So it appears that although the Home Office is
    prepared to give information to the Army that is designed for cascading
    to all those concerned, in order to  assure  them  about  the  decision
    making-process in various classes  of  case,  the  information  is  not
    subsequently made available  to  those  who  might  have  to  make  any
    evaluation of that  decision-making  process  after  it  has  occurred.
    Indeed, as we have noted, those who advised  Mr  Gulvin  on  the  first
    occasion completely denied the existence of the policy,  whereas  those
    advising Mr Saunders on the second occasion were apparently  not  in  a
    position to produce it in full.  We regard this state of  affairs  with
    the gravest concern.  It is difficult to know the basis upon which  the
    Tribunal or any other part of the judicial system can  be  expected  to
    operate if important material, which has previously been disclosed,  is
    first denied and then abbreviated by the government.

22. Be that as it may, and despite the respondent's  best  efforts,  we  do
    have the full policy.  It is not said that the claimant  was  medically
    discharged as a direct result of injury  sustained  during  operations.
    The claimant's injury appears to have occurred during training.  He  is
    not directly affected by the change in policy.  The importance  of  the
    policy documents is their recording of an  existing  policy  and  their
    assertion of its continuance.  That is the policy set out in  para  2.e
    of the Colonel Haugh's memorandum.  Individuals such as  the  appellant
    "may continue to seek discretionary leave to remain in the UK.  This is
    no  change  to  the  existing  policy.   Each  case  will  be  examined
    sensitively on its  merits  and  in  the  light  of  the  evidence  and
    supporting documentation produced  by  the  applicant".   In  the  full
    statement  of  the  new  policy,  under  the  question  "What  happened
    before?," it is  asserted  that  "Applications  for  leave  from  those
    discharged before completion of 4 years have  been  considered  outside
    the rules on their individual merits on  a  case-by-case  basis".   The
    only change  heralded  in  the  next  paragraph  is  related  to  those
    medically discharged as a direct  result  of  injury  sustained  in  an
    operational theatre who have less than four years service.  As that  is
    the only change recorded, it follows that the policy recorded under the
    heading "What happened before?" continues in relation to others.   That
    is entirely  consistent  with  the  understanding  of  Colonel  Haugh's
    memorandum.  And, in any event, as Giles Ahern's letter indicates, para
    2.e of that memorandum was cleared with the BIA.

23. On the basis of the information before us  we  have  no  hesitation  in
    finding  that  the  respondent's  declared  policy  is  that  where   a
    Commonwealth soldier is medically discharged with less than four  years
    service  for  reasons  other  than  injuries  directly   sustained   on
    operations, there will be individual consideration of whether leave  to
    remain should be granted outside the Rules.  The consideration will  be
    on a case-by-case basis, on the merits of the case and sensitive.

24. We further have no doubt in saying that no such consideration has taken
    place in the appellant's case.  Indeed, it is difficult to see how  the
    respondent's treatment of the appellant  is  anything  other  than  the
    opposite of what was suggested in the policy.  Instead of  receiving  a
    sensitive consideration of his case on the merits, his application  was
    summarily refused for a  reason  entirely  unrelated  to  it.   In  the
    circumstances the Secretary of State's decision in his case was not  in
    accordance with the law and on that  basis  we  allow  the  appellant's
    appeal.

25. Earlier in this determination we have recorded our view that the notice
    of decision issued to the appellant did, contrary to what  is  asserted
    in it, carry a right of appeal.  We indicated that that conclusion  was
    not beyond doubt.  If it is  wrong,  the  appellant  has  no  right  of
    appeal, although that does not of course make the Secretary of  State's
    decision in his case any more lawful.  There ought to be no  difference
    in the way the appellant is treated now, however, because  Mr  Saunders
    did indicate that  the  respondent  was  content  to  re-determine  the
    appellant's application in any event.  So, whether or not the appellant
    has a right of appeal, he now has an expectation that  his  application
    will be properly dealt with.

26. For the reasons we have given, however, we conclude that the  appellant
    has a right of appeal.  The  Immigration  Judge  erred  in  failing  to
    consider whether the appeal ought to be allowed on the ground which  we
    have identified.  We substitute a determination allowing the appeal  on
    that ground.





                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT



