

     SK (FGM - ethnic groups) Liberia CG [2007] UKAIT 00001

Asylum and Immigration Tribunal

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 17 November 2006                             |On 08 January 2007         |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                        Senior Immigration Judge Lane
                        Senior Immigration Judge King
                             Miss R I Emblin JP

                                   Between



                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss C. Hinwood, Refugee Legal Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr G. Saunders, Senior Home Office Presenting
                    Officer

    (1)  Women in Liberia belonging to those ethnic groups (or  sub-groups)
        where Female Genital  Mutilation  is  practised  are  a  particular
        social group for the purposes of the 1951  Geneva  Convention.  All
        uncircumcised women in Liberia are not as such at real risk of FGM.
        A woman will be at real risk if she comes from an ethnic group  (or
        sub-group) where FGM is practised and the  evidence  shows  she  is
        reasonably likely to be required by her  parents  or  others  in  a
        position of power and influence over her to undergo FGM. Those  who
        practise FGM are  not  reasonably  likely  (particularly  in  urban
        areas) to seek to inflict it upon women from non-practising  ethnic
        groups (or sub-groups).


     2) Internal relocation will be available in Liberia to a woman who  is
        at real risk of FGM in her home area if the evidence shows (i)  she
        is not reasonably likely  to  encounter  anyone  in  the  place  of
        relocation who would be in a position of power and  influence  over
        her and who would use that power or influence  to  require  her  to
        undergo FGM and (ii) she can reasonably be expected to live in that
        place, having regard to the general circumstances prevailing in  it
        and to the personal circumstances of the appellant (paragraph  339O
        of HC 395 (as amended)). In the case of a woman from a  rural  area
        in Liberia, internal relocation to Monrovia  or  some  other  urban
        centre will not be available unless her circumstances are such that
        she will be able to survive economically (see Januzi v Secretary of
        State for the Home Department &  Ors  [2006]  UKHL  5)  and  resist
        pressure from any family or other members of her ethnic  group  who
        may be in that place. Such instances are likely to  be  rare.  They
        cannot, however, be ruled out; eg. where the woman has a husband or
        other male protector.


     3) Individual  credibility,  as  well  as  country  information,  will
        usually have an important part to play  in  determining  whether  a
        woman is at real  risk  of  FGM.  The  subjective  element  remains
        relevant.




                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a national of Liberia, born on 24 July  1976.    On  5
    January 2005, she lodged an application for permission to appeal to the
    Immigration Appeal Tribunal against the determination of Miss M.  Watt,
    an Adjudicator, who dismissed her appeal on  asylum  and  human  rights
    grounds against the decision of the respondent of 28 July 2004 to  give
    directions for her removal from the United Kingdom.

2.   On 27 June 2005,  the  Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal  refused  the
    appellant's application.  The appellant renewed her application to  the
    Administrative Court.  On 6 September 2005, Bean  J  ordered  that  the
    Tribunal reconsider its decision on the appeal.    He  stated  that  it
    was arguable that the appellant has a valid Article 3 claim based on  a
    real risk of subjection to female genital mutilation (FGM) and that the
    judgment of the Court  of   Appeal  in   "Fornah  (unless  reversed  on
    appeal) defeats her refugee claim" on this basis.

3.   On 13 February 2006, the  case  was  listed  before  the  Tribunal,  to
    decide whether there was a material error of law in  the  Adjudicator's
    determination.    The  Tribunal  on  that  occasion  comprised   Senior
    Immigration Judge Gill, Mr D.R. Bremmer JP and Mr M.E. Olszewski.   The
    appellant was represented then by Miss E. Storey of the  Refugee  Legal
    Centre. The respondent was represented by Mr B. Montilla, a Senior Home
    Office Presenting Officer.

4.   The parties agreed (and the Tribunal found) that  the  Adjudicator  had
    erred in law in failing to consider, in  the  light  of  the  objective
    evidence and her findings of fact on the appellant's  subjective  fear,
    whether the appellant was at real risk of being subjected to FGM.   The
    parties agreed that this issue related only to the Article 3 claim  and
    that that was the sole issue before the Tribunal.    The  parties  also
    agreed that the Tribunal would be able to determine the  issue  on  the
    objective evidence.  Miss Storey agreed that the  appellant  would  not
    give oral evidence.

5.   In normal circumstances, the Tribunal would not  have  adjourned  part-
    heard where the sole issue was one which could  be  determined  on  the
    objective evidence. However, there were occasions when it is  necessary
    to adjourn part-heard and the Tribunal considered  that  this  was  one
    such occasion. Mr Montilla did not have  the  file  in  the  case  and,
    although the Tribunal was able to provide copies of the  documents,  he
    did not feel  able  to  argue  the  respondent's  case.   The  Tribunal
    expressed itself as grateful to Miss Storey, who was  conscious  of  Mr
    Montilla's   difficulties   and   who   agreed   to   an    adjournment
    notwithstanding the fact that the appellant has been waiting some  time
    for the appeal.

6.   At  this  point,  it  is  necessary  to  set  out  the  nature  of  the
    appellant's claim and the Adjudicator's findings of fact in relation to
    it.    The  appellant  said  that  she  left  Liberia  in  April  2000,
    travelling by train and lorry, proceeding to Guinea, where she  boarded
    a plane. Having changed planes in Brussels, she arrived in  the  United
    Kingdom on 16 June 2000.  She did so using a British passport to  which
    she was not entitled.  The appellant claimed asylum over  three  months
    later.

7.   The appellant said that her  family  had  been  accused  of  supporting
    rebels in Liberia and that the  militia  had  attacked  the  house  and
    murdered the appellant's entire family.    She said that she  hoped  to
    qualify as a nurse but could not do that  if  she  were  to  return  to
    Liberia.  Interviewed on 29 April 2004, she said that her  parents  had
    been killed by rebel troops from the MPFL in March 2000  and  that  she
    had left in April 2000. She did not know that she  was  coming  to  the
    United Kingdom until the day before she was due  to  travel.   She  had
    been a student in Liberia and was of Krahn ethnicity.  She had lived in
    Monrovia.

8.   She further said that she had been attempting to  trace  her  aunt  and
    cousins through the Red Cross, but they had not been found.  The  Krahn
    had been accused of supporting the former president,  Samuel  Doe,  and
    his party.  She had not voted in elections in Liberia.

9.   So far as FGM was concerned, she said her tribe practised it  and  that
    after the age of twenty-four it was not good for her  health.   It  was
    meant to be done by the age of twenty but it had been  delayed  due  to
    the civil war in Liberia. If returned,  she  asserted  that  she  would
    'have to do it' (paragraph 3.7 of the determination).

10.  The respondent, in refusing the appellant's claim, noted the  cessation
    of hostilities in Liberia and that the appellant had not shown that she
    would be of adverse interest to the government or any rebel  group.  As
    regards the issue of FGM, the respondent noted that the  Krahn  were  a
    southern-based ethnic group.  According to the US State Department, FGM
    was traditionally performed on young girls  in  northern,  western  and
    central ethnic groups in Liberia, particularly in rural areas. The view
    was therefore taken by the respondent that FGM would not be imposed  on
    the appellant.

11.    Before   the   Adjudicator,   the   appellant's    credibility    was
    comprehensively put in issue by the respondent.    At  paragraphs  12.1
    and 12.2 of her determination, the Adjudicator set out her  credibility
    findings.   She noted that the appellant  claimed  at  first  that  her
    family had been  accused  of  supporting  the  rebels  associated  with
    Alhadji Kromah. His rebel group  had  undergone  various  splits.   The
    Adjudicator set out the relevant history at paragraph 12.1(a)  to  (d).
    That history did not,  according  to  the  Adjudicator,  fit  with  the
    accounts  the  appellant  had  given  of  the  attack  on   her   home.
    Furthermore, the appellant did not appear to be aware that the National
    Patriotic Party of Charles Taylor was in power in Liberia in 2000.

12.  In addition, the Adjudicator noted  that,  even  with  the  benefit  of
    hindsight, the appellant was unable to give an approximate date for the
    attack. There were also discrepancies regarding the timescale  for  her
    leaving Liberia and making  her  way  to  the  United  Kingdom.     The
    appellant belatedly decided to claim that she had, in fact, worked as a
    prostitute in Guinea, earning $1,500 to pay for her trip.

13.   At  paragraph   12.2,  having  considered  all  the  evidence  and  in
    particular the core of her claim, which was the attack on  her  parents
    and the burning of her home, the Adjudicator was  unable  to  find  the
    appellant credible.  The Adjudicator cited as reasons the vagueness  of
    the evidence as to  the  event  itself  and  the  way  it  took  place,
    inconsistencies in the evidence regarding the appellant's  journey  and
    the appellant's failure to apply for  asylum  for  three  months  after
    arriving in this country, despite being a fluent English speaker.    In
    short, the Adjudicator concluded that 'this is a fabricated claim'.

14.  The Adjudicator then turned to the issue of FGM.   The Adjudicator  had
    before her a report of a journalist called  Ticky  Monekosso,  who  had
    spent three weeks in Liberia in 1997 in order to monitor  the  national
    election.  Since then, she claimed  to  have  regular  contact  with  a
    number of UN staff members, social workers, friends and colleagues  and
    journalists living in Liberia, 'from  whom  she  can  have  first  hand
    information' (paragraph  10.1).

15.  According to Ms Monekosso's report, in Liberia a circumcised  woman  is
    considered part of the women's society - a 'clean' and  'proper'  adult
    eligible for marriage and capable of child bearing, as  well  as  being
    able to  hold important societal  offices.    The  report  referred  to
    information from the World  Health  Organisation  that  FGM  reportedly
    affected about 50% of the female population in Liberia.   Elsewhere  in
    the report, however, Ms Monekosso asserted that FGM is  'quite  common'
    in Liberia and is practised  'by  an  estimated  95%  of  all  Liberian
    women'.

16. The appellant claimed to belong to the Sinoe branch or sub-division  of
    the Krahn. Miss Monekosso's report had this to say:

             'Sinoe is locate (sic) at the south-west of the country and it
             is a very popular place. The figure  of  95%  of  the  country
             women undergone (sic) FGM could not exclude that, some  ethnic
             groups of the southern region of Liberia did not undergo FGM.


             Sarpo  and  other  Krahn  grass-root  communities  live  in  a
             profound respect of their culture and  tradition  compared  to
             those  from  the  urban  cities   such   as   Monrovia   where
             colonisation and Creoles from America  have  changed  people's
             life perception.


             [The appellant's] family names and the names  sound  typically
             of the area, Sinoe and the ethnic groups Sarpo/Krahn she comes
             from. Sarpo is one of the most conservative communities and is
             strongly attached to traditional beliefs and customs. FGM is a
             long standing traditional  practice  as  I  highlight  in  the
             section above.'

17.  Later on, the report observed that while the practice of FGM  has  been
    part of the 'custom and tradition in the  more  remote  areas'  it  was
    noted that 'among many of the educated and  in  the  urban  areas,  the
    practice has not been as strong'.  So far  as  initiation  rights  were
    concerned, it was difficult to obtain information on these  as  members
    were sworn to secrecy.   Ms Monekosso  considered  that  the  appellant
    'will be obliged to go through the  whole  traditional  process  before
    their community (sic) accepts her. And  it  is  a  shame  if  there  is
    something wrong, according to the ancestor's guidelines'.  Later in the
    report, it is stated that the President of the 'Association  of  Female
    Lawyers of Liberia' regarded FGM as 'a sticky issue because 85% of  the
    population practice it'.

18.  At paragraph  12.3  of  her  determination,  the  Adjudicator  assessed
    future risk to the appellant as a single pregnant female (she has since
    given birth) and the  widespread  practice  in  Liberia  of  FGM.   The
    Adjudicator accepted that the  appellant's  last  address  was  in  the
    capital, Monrovia, and 'that it is reasonably likely that her family is
    still there'.    At paragraph 12.4, the Adjudicator accepted 'that  the
    appellant ethnically as a Krahn' belongs to a tribe 'which  is  located
    in the south west of Liberia. The  tribe  is  conservative  and  relies
    heavily upon the tradition of FGM.'  The Adjudicator plainly took  that
    information from Ticky Monekosso's report.   She also noted  from  that
    report that 'in more urbanised and populated areas such as in Monrovia,
    whether or not [FGM] was practiced,  depended on  education  and  class
    and how close the family's  ties  were  to  rural  life'.   Drawing  on
    information from the COI report on Liberia, the Adjudicator found  that
    prior to the onset of civil war in that country in 1989,  approximately
    50% of women in rural areas between the ages of eight and eighteen were
    subjected to FGM, but that  many  experts  believed  incidents  of  FGM
    dropped to as low as 10% as a result of the secret societies performing
    it being undermined by the war.  However,  traditional  societies  were
    now re-establishing themselves throughout the country.

19.  The Adjudicator's conclusion on the material relating to  FGM  was,  as
    has already been found, legally inadequate. It amounted to this  single
    sentence at the end of paragraph 12.4:-

             'I am unable to find that the  circumstances  in  Liberia  are
             distinguishable from those in Sierra Leone to any degree  that
             a social group exists which would include this appellant'.

20.  The Adjudicator failed in particular to consider whether the  appellant
    would be at real risk of Article 3  ill-treatment  in  undergoing  FGM,
    whether or not she was a member  of  a  particular  social  group.  The
    reference in paragraph 12.4 of the determination  to  Sierra  Leone  is
    explicable by the fact that there was at the time of the  Adjudicator's
    determination, case law dealing with FGM in Sierra Leone.   As we shall
    later see, however, the position in that regard  has  changed,  in  the
    light of the House of Lords' opinions in K and Fornah [2006] UKHL 46.

21.  Prior to the adjourned reconsideration hearing  on  17  November  2006,
    the Tribunal gave directions to the parties.   Those directions  stated
    that the Adjudicator's findings of fact in relation to the  appellant's
    account of her experiences should stand.  For the avoidance  of  doubt,
    those findings included  that  the  appellant  is  a  person  of  Krahn
    ethnicity who grew up in Monrovia.  They excluded, however, the finding
    at paragraph 12.4 of the determination, that the Krahn originated  from
    south-west Liberia.    At what became an interlocutory  hearing  on  20
    September  2006, it was agreed that that particular finding,  which  as
    can be seen was based on the evidence of Ms Monekosso, required  to  be
    revisited in the light of the US State  Department  Report  :  Liberia:
    Report on Female Genital Mutilation (FGM)  or  Female  Genital  Cutting
    (FGC) of 1 June  2001.  In that report it is stated that:

             'The major groups that practice [FGM]   are the Mande speaking
             peoples of western Liberia such as the Gola and Kissi.  It  is
             not practiced by the Kru, Grebo or Krahn in the southeast,  by
             the Americo-Liberians (Congos) or by Muslim Mandingos.'

22.  At  the  hearing  on  17  November  the  appellant  spoke  to  a  short
    additional witness statement of 7 November 2006.   There, she said that
    she understood that the respondent was saying that the Krahn tribe  did
    not practise FGM. She had always believed the practice to be  something
    that was undertaken by members of her tribe (Sinoe, which the appellant
    believes to be a subgroup of the Krahn).    She  said  that  she  'just
    assumed this, as I know that my family practices it'.   About  the  age
    of 10, the appellant was told by her mother about FGM, and that it  had
    been done to her mother and to the appellant's aunt, when they lived in
    a village in Sinoe.    The appellant was told that the  family  had  to
    take her there in the next few years in order to have  it  done.    The
    family were living in Monrovia at the time.   Having spoken to some  of
    her school friends about FGM, the appellant  discovered  that  some  of
    them had undergone it.   The appellant was told by her father,  on  one
    occasion, that she would have to have it done, as it was 'necessary'.

23.  A few years after she had been told that she needed to  return  to  her
    village for the operation to be performed, the war started and thus the
    appellant never had the opportunity to go to Sinoe.  The appellant  now
    has a daughter and is expecting a second  child.  She  fears  that  her
    daughter would be at risk of  being  forced  to  undergo  FGM.      She
    believes that she would still have to undergo the procedure herself  if
    she were returned to Liberia. Even if  her  family  were  still  alive,
    which the appellant says they are not, the appellant's daughter and she
    herself would need to undergo FGM in order to be accepted and supported
    by that family.    She  said  that  this  would  be  the  case  if  the
    appellant were living in Monrovia, or if she  were  to  return  to  her
    village:   'We would not have a choice'.

24.  Cross-examined, the appellant  said  that  during  the  civil  war  the
    family moved from place to place and she never had a proper adult life.
      She did not, however, consider that the family had moved outside  the
    area around Monrovia.   The family would return to their home from time
    to time.  When 'army men' arrived,  the  family  would  flee  and  then
    return when it was once again safe.

25.  The appellant said that it was a girl's mother who decided whether  the
    girl should undergo FGM. The appellant could not remember how  old  she
    was when her parents spoke to her about  FGM.     It  was  put  to  the
    appellant that she was in Liberia until she was twenty-four years  old.
     The appellant replied that she had been told by her  mother  that  she
    needed to have it done by the age of fifteen.  Asked  who  would  force
    her to have it done now, the appellant replied that she would  need  to
    go to their village.  Asked who  would  force  her  to  go  there,  the
    appellant said she believed it would be her family.   This was  because
    she would have to go to look for her extended family in Sinoe.

26.  Asked what would happen if the appellant decided not to go to Sinoe  to
    look for her extended family, she said that she would need to look  for
    that family in order to obtain assistance for herself and her children.
     This was so, even though she feared FGM.   Asked if anyone other  than
    the family would force her to undergo FGM, the appellant said it  would
    depend upon where one went and where one lived.   Asked  why,  and  who
    else would perform it on her, the  appellant  hesitated  before  saying
    that she did not know.

27.  The appellant asserted that FGM occurred in Monrovia.   She  was  asked
    about the report of Ms Efua Dorkenoo OBE, which had been  submitted  on
    behalf of the appellant in connection with the reconsideration hearing.
     The appellant was referred to paragraph 2.2 of that report,  where  it
    was stated that girls 'under' [presumably between]  the  ages  of  5-18
    years are forced by their parents to go through FGM. The appellant  was
    asked why, in the light of this, she did not  find  herself  forced  to
    undergo FGM before 1991.  The appellant replied that she was told  that
    one had to go to a special person and she  did  not  know  the  way  to
    Sinoe, as it would have to be  undertaken  there.   She  did  not  know
    whether FGM could be inflicted on her by some other means in  Monrovia.



28.  The appellant said that the father of her daughter was  'no  longer  in
    the picture' but that the father of her unborn second child was present
    at the Tribunal.  She did not, however, live  with  him.  If  she  were
    returned to Liberia, the appellant was asked whether he would send  her
    money.  She replied that she thought he would but he could not go there
    because he had a kidney condition and could not live in a hot place. He
    was a British citizen but originally came from Ghana.

29.  The appellant said that the decision  on  whether  she  would  have  to
    undergo FGM would depend on her condition at the time in Liberia.  Such
    qualifications as she had obtained in the United Kingdom would  not  be
    recognised there. She might have to undergo FGM before she could become
    accepted but it all would depend on the circumstances.

30.  Re-examined, the appellant said that she considered  that  people  with
    her surname would be likely to be related as part of an extended family
    and that the surname originated from a particular district,  where  the
    inhabitants had rules. For example, in some tribes, one was not allowed
    to do anything on a Saturday, in others people would eat fish,  and  so
    on.  The appellant said that 'I would not know if FGM is a rule  of  my
    tribe'.

31.  In answer to a question from the Tribunal, the appellant said that  she
    would seek her extended family by going to  Sinoe  and  asking  people,
    having given them her name.

32.  During the civil war the appellant and her family considered it  to  be
    safer to stay in the Monrovia area than to travel  further  field;  for
    instance, to Sinoe. She had had no contact with anyone in Sinoe  whilst
    she was living in Monrovia. She had been living in her house  with  her
    family for some three months before the attack in  2000.    During  the
    war the family would move between their house and the bush  some  three
    times a year.

33.  We have already referred to the written report of  Ms  Dorkenoo.    She
    describes herself as a bio-social scientist in public health, a  gender
    expert and a researcher.  She has acted as adviser on  FGM  to  several
    United Nations agencies and  government  bodies.   She  has  also  held
    positions at the World Health Organisation in Geneva. She is the author
    of books entitled 'Cutting the rose.  Female  genital  mutilation.  The
    practice and its prevention'  and  'Genital  mutilation.  Politics  and
    prevention'.

34.  Paragraph 1.1 of the report notes that evidence-based data  on  FGM  in
    Liberia is scant, as the country  has  had  no  national  surveys  that
    provide detailed data on the distribution of FGM and the  circumstances
    surrounding it.   Based on a limited survey, the national prevalence of
    FGM in Liberia is assessed (according to an unpublished 1984 study)  at
    being between 50-70%.    Many believe that the civil war disrupted  the
    social structure and traditional  institutions,  including  the  secret
    societies that performed FGM, thereby bringing about a reduction in its
    practice.  It is, however, known that these institutions have returned,
    following the civil war in  Liberia,  and  Ms  Dorkenoo  considers  the
    practice to be 'very much alive today'.  The most common type of FGM is
    that known as Type II, involving the ablation of the clitoris  and  the
    labia menorah.

35.  Turning to the issues of the  ethnic  groups  practising  FGM  and  the
    circumstances surrounding its practice, Ms Dorkenoo states that African
    tribes constitute 95% of the Liberian population.   There  are  twenty-
    eight ethnic groups, but three main groups: the  Mande  people  in  the
    north and far west; the Kru tribes (including the Krahn)  in  the  east
    and south-east, and the Mel in the north-west.  The Krahn  are  amongst
    the largest of the ethnic groups.   Americo-Liberians,  descendants  of
    former slaves from the USA, account for about 2.5% of  the  population.
    Finally there are the Mandingos,  itinerant  Muslim  traders,  and  the
    Fanti fishermen from Ghana.

36.  Mention has already been made of paragraph 2.2 of the report, where  it
    appears Ms Dorkenoo considers that girls between the ages of  five  and
    eighteen are forced by their parents to go through FGM, usually at  the
    hands of the Sande society,  a  female  secret  society,  traditionally
    found among the Bassa, Gola, Kapelle, Loma, Mano and Vai tribes.  Older
    women who refuse to be part of the Sande or oppose it can  be  forcibly
    humiliated by Zoes, described as soothsayers, herbalists and leaders of
    the Sande.   A case in Monrovia is recorded of the forced FGM by a  Zoe
    of a Grebo girl  from  a  non-practising  ethnic  group.   The  Zoe  in
    question was taken to court and fined $500.

37.  Ms Dorkenoo has no actual knowledge of the  Sinoe,  but  believes  that
    they may be a small ethnic group which is, as  the  appellant  asserts,
    part of the Krahn.   Sinoe County is adjacent to Grande Gedeh County in
    the south-east of Liberia.   On this basis, it is  considered  possible
    that the Sinhoe referred to by the appellant as her tribe is a  sub-set
    of the Krahn who extend into Sinhoe County from  Grande  Gedeh  County,
    where  Western  Krahn  is  spoken.   Having  undertaken   a   telephone
    conversation in October 2006 with Mrs Kimba, Programme Manager  of  the
    National Committee on Harmful Practices, Monrovia, Ms Dorkenoo  learned
    that Mrs Kimba considers it likely that there is a small group  by  the
    name of Sinhoe.  The language which  the  appellant  claims  to  speak,
    Sarpo, is an alternative name for the language Sapo, which  is  one  of
    the indigenous languages spoken in Sinhoe and Grande Gedeh County.

 38. The report then turns to the question of whether FGM  is  practised  by
    the appellant's ethnic group in Sinoe County. Ms Dorkenoo refers to the
    US State Department Report of June 2001, relied upon by the  respondent
    (see above), which states that the Krahn are one of the  ethnic  groups
    that do not practise FGM. Ms Dorkenoo notes that there is no source for
    this information given in the US State  Department  Report.   Paragraph
    2.4 of Ms Dorkenoo's report then continues as follows:

             'Given the limited scientific information on FGM  in  Liberia,
             it is difficult to be categorical that all the sub-sets  under
             the Krahn ethnic group do not practice  FGM  as  there  is  no
             large survey of FGM in Liberia that includes a  representative
             sample  of  the  ethnic  [groups]  and  their  subgroups.  The
             literature ... notes that there  are  twenty-eight  indigenous
             ethnic groups but only the largest groups  which  include  the
             Krahn group of people are mentioned  [in  the  2001  US  State
             Department Report]. A wide number of dialects  are  spoken  by
             the Krahn  speaking  people  (Gorbo,  Kanneh,  Konobo,  Tchien
             (Chiehn), Sarpo and Central Gu�r�, Gbo,  Gbaeson,  Plo,  Biai,
             Gbarbo, Gborbo (Gbobo), Kpeaply).    Apart  from  the  lexical
             similarity  between  Gorbo  and  Konobo,  there   is   minimal
             intelligibility between some of the  dialects  which  suggests
             that there are sub-sets amongst the Krahn with  possibly  sub-
             cultures.  Data on FGM from other countries  corroborates  the
             fact  that  there  is  a  variation  of  the  practice  within
             practicing ethnic groups. For example, the Yoruba's who are  a
             large ethnic group in  the  South  of  Nigeria  practice  FGM,
             whereas the Ijebus which is a subset of  the  Yoruba,  do  not
             practice FGM.  Equally in Ghana, the Akan ethnic group,  which
             is composed of a number [of] sub-groupings, do  not  generally
             practice FGM but the practice  has  been  reported  amongst  a
             pocket of the Akan ethnic group in the Banda Ahenkro  area  of
             Brong Ahafo Region.   No explanation is given as to  why  this
             occurs except that the practice could  be  introduced  through
             intermarriage of non-practising groups with practising groups.
              It is noted that in Liberia because of intermarriage  and  an
             aggressive national unification  program  in  Liberia,  tribal
             divisions  are  rapidly  becoming  less  distinct,  especially
             around capital towns although there is a strong tendency among
             the indigenous people to preserve their tribal identities.  It
             is also known that  practitioners  of  traditional  indigenous
             religions among the Grebo and the Krahn ethnic groups who  are
             concentrated in the southeastern counties most commonly engage
             in ritual killings that involves removal of  body  parts  that
             includes the genitals.  This suggests that the concept of  FGM
             is not a  totally  alien  concept  to  some  indigenous  Krahn
             people.'

39.  At paragraph 2.5, Ms Dorkenoo  turns  to  consider  the  risks  to  the
    appellant of having to undergo FGM in  Monrovia  or  in  Sinoe  County.
    She notes that Monrovia, as the capital of  Liberia,  'is  cosmopolitan
    and mixed'.   Reference is made to the US State  Department  Report  on
    FGM which notes that in the more urbanised and populated areas such  as
    Monrovia, whether or not FGM is practised 'depended  on  education  and
    class and how close the family's ties were to rural  life.   One  well-
    educated female lawyer in Monrovia underwent the procedure just  before
    she married because she came under strong pressure  from  an  upcountry
    grandmother.' Ms Dorkenoo considers that away from the direct  pressure
    from the extended family in Sinoe County, it would be much  easier  for
    the appellant to avoid FGM than if she were to live with  relatives  in
    her village in Sinoe County.   However, the appellant's

             'ability to live in Monrovia will depend  on  whether  she  is
             able to economically fend for herself independent of family or
             if she has well off family in Monrovia to  support  her.   The
             former is possible  if  she  is  professionally  qualified  to
             attract a regular job in the capital.  Regarding  the  latter,
             during the Liberian civil war, the Krahn ethnic group became a
             hated group as the late Mr Samuel Doe, a former  president  of
             Monrovia was a Krahn.  Many Liberians of the different  ethnic
             groups felt that he gave privileges to members of  his  ethnic
             group, the Krahn.  Many Krahn were killed  or  they  fled  the
             country during the civil war to avoid  persecution  under  the
             rule of Mr Charles Taylor,  an  American-Liberian  who  seized
             power from Mr Doe. If [the appellant] cannot attract a job and
             has no relatives left in Monrovia to  support  her,  her  main
             avenue for survival  will  be  prostitution  or  sex  work  as
             poverty ... is high;  and gainful employment for women in  the
             informal sector in Monrovia is hard to find.  If she does  not
             want to engage in prostitution, she has no choice  but  to  go
             and live with her  extended  family  relatives  in  her  natal
             village in the Sinoe County where she will no  doubt  have  to
             conform to traditions such as FGM i.e. if it is  practiced  by
             her group.'

 40. Ms Dorkenoo's report ends by referring to the dual system of  statutory
    law, based on Anglo-American common law, and customary  law,  based  on
    unwritten tribal practices for indigenous peoples, both of which  exist
    in Liberia.  Customary law is said to the law  which  is  pervasive  in
    women's lives, particularly in rural  areas.   It  relegates  women  to
    minors within the extended family household which is  the  family  form
    that persists amongst the indigenous people  in  rural  Liberia.     Ms
    Dorkenoo stresses that there is no specific law against FGM in  Liberia
    although section 242 of the Penal Code, which refers to  'mayhem',  can
    be used to deal with FGM.

41.   The 2001 US State Department Report also has this to say:

             'Many poor families did not engage in [FGM] because they could
             not afford for their daughter(s) to remain six months (and  in
             some cases up to a year)  in  a  secluded  traditional  school
             where girls were prepared  and  initiated  into  adulthood  by
             older female members of the secret societies.


             Many believe the civil war has  caused  a  reduction  in  this
             practice, estimating that the incidence has dropped to as  low
             as 10 percent.  The war caused most of the population to  flee
             to neighbouring  countries  or  become  internally  displaced.
             Social structures and traditional institutions,  such  as  the
             secret societies that  often  perform  this  procedure  as  an
             initiation rite, were also undermined by the war.


             With  the  civil  war  ended  and  traditional  societies  re-
             establishing themselves throughout the country, practices such
             as FGM/FGC are expected to increase again in rural  areas  for
             those groups for who it has been a significant  and  important
             rite of passage.  The extent to which these practices might be
             revived to pre-war levels is yet unknown.'

         42.  Also of relevance is the following passage:

             'The practice of  FGM/FGC  has  been  a  part  of  custom  and
             tradition in the more remote areas.  However,  among  many  of
             the educated and in the urban areas, the practice has not been
             as strong.  It  is  performed  during  initiation  rites  into
             womanhood by older trained members of secret societies.  It is
             difficult to  obtain  information  on  the  actual  rights  as
             members are sworn to secrecy. Some girls have said they looked
             forward to  the  procedure  and  becoming  a  full  member  of
             society, while others have expressed their fear when  learning
             that close friends have bled to death after the procedure  was
             performed.


             Because of the civil war in Liberia, it was  not  possible  to
             hold special schools and initiation rites in  rural  areas  as
             before.  From 1990-92, however, a  large  school  operated  in
             Monrovia on Bushrod Island behind the brewery.  The school was
             destroyed in 1992 during a major attack on the capital.


             Today there are three such small schools, reportedly the  only
             ones in Liberia, operating periodically in Monrovia.   Instead
             of six to twelve  months  in  the  schools,  female  initiates
             reportedly spend a weekend in a Sande house.   It is  reported
             that the age of initiation into womanhood, which used to occur
             when a child was between eight and fourteen years of age,  has
             dropped to between three and  seven  years  of  age.  Children
             younger than three have sometimes been initiated.'

43.  The report, which we note was prepared by  the  Office  of  the  Senior
    Coordinator for International Women's Issues, ends by stating that  'we
    are unaware of any cases where women have sought protection from  being
    subjected to this procedure'.

44.  The US State Department Report on  Human  Rights  Practices  for  2005,
    published on 8 March 2006, lists FGM as one of a number of human rights
    problems reported in Liberia.  So far  as  FGM  is  concerned,  no  new
    information is set out in the 2005  report,  except  to  say  that  the
    government 'took no action against FGM during the year'.

45.  The issue of ritualistic killings has been mentioned by  Miss  Dorkenoo
    in her report as suggesting that FGM is not a 'totally  alien  concept'
    to the Krahn.    The 2005 US State Department Report has this to say on
    the matter:

             'Incidents of ritualistic killings were  reported  during  the
             year. Little reliable information was readily available  about
             traditions associated with the practice in  which  body  parts
             used in indigenous rituals were removed from the victim.   The
             number of such killings  was  difficult  to  ascertain,  since
             police often described deaths as accidents  or  suicides  even
             when  body  parts  were  removed.   It   was   believed   that
             practitioners of traditional indigenous religions amongst  the
             Grebo and Krahn ethnic groups concentrated in the southeastern
             counties most commonly engaged in ritualistic  killings.   The
             victims were usually members of the religious group performing
             the ritual, and often included women and children.  Body parts
             removed from a family member whom the  group  believed  to  be
             powerful were considered to be the most effective ritually.'

46.  In assessing the likelihood of the appellant and/or her daughter  being
    subjected to FGM, if returned to Liberia, it is necessary  to  consider
    the issue of the camps for internally displaced persons, which exist in
    that country.  According to the 2005 US State Department Report:

             'Relief agencies estimated that as of December,  approximately
             272 thousand IDPs have returned home since the end of the war,
             and approximately 54 thousand were  awaiting  repatriation  in
             camps, settlements, and communities  throughout  the  country.
             Conditions at most IDP camps were fair, but food,  sanitation,
             and security was sometimes inadequate.  During  the  year  the
             government worked with international organisations  to  return
             IDPs to their homes and planned to resettle 15 thousand to  20
             thousand IDPs per month. However, road  conditions,  elections
             and intermittent funding gaps temporarily  halted  the  return
             process and angered thousands of IDPs who  planned  to  return
             home before the elections.  Some IDPs chose to stay  in  camps
             because conditions were better than in  the  communities  from
             which they came, while others remained to  see  whether  peace
             would  be  sustained  after  the  elections.   Unlike  in  the
             previous year, there were no reports  that  former  government
             and  rebel  combatants  subjected  IDP  populations  to  rape,
             battery, arbitrary  arrest,  extortion,  and  theft.  However,
             there were reports of rape in IDP camps,  primarily  committed
             by other IDPs or members of the surrounding community.'

47.  Amnesty International's 2006 report on  Liberia,  in  its  synopsis  of
    problems affecting that country, makes no reference to FGM.    Instead,
    it refers to sporadic outbreaks  of  violence  continuing  to  threaten
    prospects for peace and to the fact that those  responsible  for  human
    rights abuses during the war continued to enjoy impunity.    Under  the
    hearing 'Violence  against  Women',  AI  noted  that  a  law  on  rape,
    sponsored by women's groups, was  debated  in  parliament  and  passed.
    The definition of rape was broadened and bail was to be  denied  anyone
    charged with raping a minor. Penalties for the  most  serious  offences
    were increased, allowing life imprisonment to  be  imposed.    A  press
    report from 25 June 2006, however, described alleged child  rapists  as
    paying their way  out  of  jail,  whilst  court  officials  and  police
    officers demanded bribes from families of child rape victims who wished
    to see their attacks arrested and prosecuted.

48.  The Home Office's Operational Guidance Note on Liberia  (5  May  2006),
    after noting how the civil war  'saw appalling human rights  abuses  by
    all sides,' recorded that President  Charles  Taylor  stood  down  from
    office and left Liberia in August  2003,  following  which  a  National
    Transitional Government of Liberia  was  established.  A  comprehensive
    peace agreement came into being in 2004 and Liberia's first  peace-time
    Presidential elections occurred in October 2005,  when  Ellen  Johnson-
    Sirleaf was elected President.   She was  sworn  in  in  January  2006,
    stating her intention to pursue  reconciliation  and  make  efforts  to
    address the various ethnic disputes still festering since  the  end  of
    the civil war in 2003.   The human rights situation, however,  remained
    precarious as a result  of  frequent  criminal  acts  in  the  face  of
    inadequate police and civil authorities; striking deficiencies with the
    judicial  systems;  financial  short  falls;  and  continued   regional
    instability.

49.  At  paragraph  5,  the  Guidance  Note  made  reference  to  the  UNHCR
    maintaining its position (as at August  2005)  that  although  not  all
    Liberian asylum seekers should be granted refugee status,  they  should
    be considered  favourably  for  other  forms  of  protection.    Whilst
    acknowledging that the UNHCR's position 'provides a broad assessment of
    the situation in Liberia and we do  not dispute  that  it  presents  an
    accurate overview of the general humanitarian situation and the  social
    and security problems inherent in a country which, until recently,  was
    dominated by civil war,' the Guidance Note pointed out that asylum  and
    human rights claims 'are not  decided  on  the  basis  of  the  general
    situation - they are based  on  the  circumstances  of  the  particular
    individual and the risk to that individual. We do not therefore  accept
    UNHCR's conclusion, based on the overview of the general  situation  in
    Liberia, that all persons originating from Liberia are in need of  some
    form of international protection.'

50. Since the reconsideration hearing on 17  November,  a  new  Operational
    Guidance Note on Liberia has been published  (30  November).  No  fresh
    matters relevant to the present appeal arise from that Note.

51. It was common ground at the hearing on 17 November that the question to
    be decided by the Tribunal on reconsideration was whether, on the issue
    of FGM, the appellant is to be regarded as a refugee or a person  whose
    return to Liberia would violate Article 3  of  the  ECHR.  Humanitarian
    protection did not arise because there was  no  dispute  that,  if  the
    appellant was at real risk of undergoing  FGM,  the  Geneva  Convention
    would be  engaged,  with  the  result  that  a  grant  of  humanitarian
    protection could not be made (see paragraph  339C(ii)  of  HC  395  (as
    amended). Conversely,  if  the  appellant  was  not  at  real  risk  of
    persecution, she would not be eligible for humanitarian protection  (or
    an Article  3  finding  in  her  favour)  because  there  would  be  no
    substantial grounds for believing that she would, if returned,  face  a
    real risk of serious harm (paragraph 339C(iii)).

52.  Although the Tribunal, at the reconsideration hearing on  13  February
    2006, did not consider refugee status to be relevant, the position  has
    changed since the delivery of the opinions of the House of Lords  in  K
    and Fornah.  Those opinions lay to rest the difficulties that had beset
    the jurisprudence relating to membership of a particular social  group,
    in the context of the Geneva Convention,  which  arose  from  what  was
    perceived to be a definition of such a  group  that  was  arguably  not
    independent of the feared persecution.  A  group  that  could  only  be
    defined by reference to the persecution of its members was thought  not
    to be capable of being a particular social group for  the  purposes  of
    Article 1A(2) of that Convention.    But as Baroness Hale stated:-


             '113. This is a peculiarly cruel version of Catch 22:  if  not
                  all the group are at risk, then the persecution cannot  be
                  caused by their membership of the group;  if the group  is
                  reduced to those who are at risk, it is  then  defined  by
                  the persecution alone.  But the reasoning is fallacious at
                  a number of levels.  It is the persecution, not the  fear,
                  which has to be "by reason of" membership  of  the  group.
                  Even if the group is reduced to those  who  are  currently
                  intact, its members share many characteristics  which  are
                  independent of  the  persecution  -  their  gender,  their
                  nationality,    their    ethnicity.      It    is    those
                  characteristics which lead to  the  persecution,  not  the
                  persecution itself which leads to  those  characteristics.
                  But there is no need to reduce the group to those at risk.
                  It is well settled that not all members of the group  need
                  be at risk. There is nothing in the Convention to say that
                  all members have to be susceptible.  It should not  matter
                  why they are  not  at  risk.   If  the  authorities  of  a
                  particular state have a  policy  of  mutilating  all  male
                  members of a particular tribe or sect by cutting off their
                  right hands, we would still say that intact members of the
                  tribe or sect face persecution because of their membership
                  of  the  tribal  sect  rather  than   because   of   their
                  intactness. ...


             114. For these reasons, the particular social group might best
                  be defined as Sierra  Leonean  women  belonging  to  those
                  ethnic groups where FGM is practised:  then  it  is  quite
                  clear  that  the  reason  for  the  persecution   is   the
                  membership of that group. But it matters not  whether  the
                  group is stated more widely, as all Sierra Leonean  women,
                  or more narrowly, as  intact  Sierra  Leonean  women  from
                  those ethnic groups.   For all of them, the group  has  an
                  existence independent of the persecution.'

53.  As we have already indicated, in the present case, Mr Saunders for  the
    respondent did not seek to suggest that, if the  appellant  could  show
    that she was at real risk of FGM in Liberia, she would not fall  within
    a particular social group analogous to one of those identified by their
    Lordships in K and Fornah, in the  context  of  FGM  in  Sierra  Leone.
    Whilst the position of women in Liberia is, we find, improving in  many
    respects, in particular as regards the action  being  taken  to  punish
    those who commit rape, there is  nevertheless  sufficient  evidence  of
    societal discrimination against women to make them a particular  social
    group in Liberia. The Tribunal,  however,  prefers  to  categorise  the
    particular social group in  the  present  case  in  the  way  in  which
    Baroness Hale did at paragraph 114 of the opinions:  namely,  women  in
    Liberia belonging to  those  ethnic  groups  where  FGM  is  practised.
    Either way, however, the  appellant  has  to  show  that  she  faces  a
    reasonable likelihood or  real  risk  of  having  to  undergo  FGM,  if
    returned.

54.  In the present case, the evidence plainly shows that not all  women  in
    Liberia are at real risk of FGM.   It is only  those  from  the  ethnic
    groups which practise such mutilation who face such a risk.    That  is
    the clear implication of Ms Dorkenoo's report and of the 2001 US  State
    Department Report.  In so finding, we are aware  of  what  Ms  Dorkenoo
    says at paragraph 2.4 of her document.   Whilst  it  can  generally  be
    said that some ethnic groups do not practise FGM and others  do,  there
    is the possibility of exceptions arising within small  sub-groups;  for
    instance, as a result of inter-marriage.   Given the significant  lower
    incidence of FGM in urban, as opposed to  rural,  areas,  the  Tribunal
    considers Ms Dorkenoo's comments about intermarriage and an  aggressive
    national unification programme in Liberia, as a result of which 'tribal
    divisions are rapidly becoming less distinct,' indicate that  anomalies
    in the correlation of FGM with particular ethnic  groups  are,  in  the
    Liberian context, far more likely  to  take  the  form  of  pockets  of
    persons not  practising  FGM,  who   might  otherwise  be  expected  to
    practise it, rather than the reverse.

55.  It is against this background  that  we  must  assess  the  appellant's
    assertion that, even though as a general matter the Krahn tribe may not
    practise FGM, she comes from a small sub-set known as the Sinoe, who do
    practise it. On this issue, the Tribunal does  not  consider  that  any
    significant weight can be placed upon the report  of  Ticky  Monekosso.
    Ms Monekosso's description of where Sinoe (the  place)  is  located  is
    accepted on behalf of the appellant to be  wrong.     Furthermore,  the
    passage of her report in which she deals  with  Sinoe  generally  lacks
    coherence.

56.  Ms Dorkenoo's report is, on the other hand, more balanced  and  plainly
    well-informed.   Her conclusion, that it is possible that a Sinoe  sub-
    group of the Krahn exists, is  tentative.   At  paragraph  2.3  of  the
    report, she considers that, because there are numerous small groups  in
    Liberia which are not documented,  the  appellant  could  be  right  in
    asserting that the Sinoe are one such small group.   Ms  Dorkenoo  also
    has regard to the language spoken  in  Grande  Gedeh  County  as  being
    Western Krahn. Her conclusion in this regard,  however,  does  no  more
    than confirm that the Sinoe (if they exist as such) are  a  sub-set  of
    the Krahn; not that they have the unusual characteristic of  practising
    FGM, unlike the rest of the Krahn.   The same is true of Ms  Dorkenoo's
    conversation with Mrs Kimba.

57.  Towards the end of paragraph 2.4 of Ms Dorkenoo's report (paragraph  38
    above), a possible connection is sought to be  drawn  between  FGM  and
    ritual killings. However, as can be seen from the passage in  the  2001
    US State Department Report cited at paragraph  45  above,  the  Krahn's
    approach to ritual killing appears to regard as significant the  taking
    of body parts from a family member who is viewed by  the  rest  of  the
    community as powerful. FGM is profoundly different. As the opinions  in
    K and Fornah expose, behind the supposed justification of the  practice
    as  a  path  to  adult  status  and  the  false  parallels  with   male
    circumcision, the  reality  is  that  FGM  "powerfully  reinforces  and
    expresses the inferior status of women as compared to men" (paragraph 7
    (Lord  Bingham)).  At  paragraph  93,  Baroness  Hale  found  that  the
    underlying purposes of FGM are "to lessen the  woman's  sexual  desire,
    maintain her chastity and virginity before marriage  and  her  fidelity
    within it, and possibly to increase male sexual  pleasure".  In  short,
    ritual killing, as pursued by the Krahn, and FGM are  so  different  in
    nature and purpose as to preclude the drawing of any inference  that  a
    tribe which practises  ritual  killing  has  shown  itself  predisposed
    towards FGM. Indeed, such evidence as there is on  the  Krahn  suggests
    the contrary.

58.  The only independent  support  that  Ms  Dorkenoo's  report  gives  the
    appellant's assertion, that the Sinoe is a  sub-group  which  practises
    FGM, lies in the description at paragraph 2.4 of  the  report  of  what
    might be described as cultural  fluidity.   But,  as  we  have  already
    observed, when Miss  Dorkenoo  goes  into  detail  about  the  possible
    reasons for such fluidity, her comments suggest that it  is  a  process
    which is more likely to result in a reduction in FGM, rather  than  the
    opposite.

59.  But even if this is not the case, all Miss Dorkenoo's report  shows  is
    that it is possible that the appellant is telling the  truth.   At  its
    highest, the report is not one which compels the  conclusion  that  the
    appellant, who (as we have already seen) was found by  the  Adjudicator
    not to be a witness of truth, is nevertheless reasonably likely  to  be
    belong to a sub-group of the Krahn, which practises FGM.

60.  No challenge has been made to the adverse credibility findings  of  the
    Adjudicator, concerning the appellant's account of her  experiences  in
    Liberia.  In the light of AH (Scope  of  s103A  reconsideration)  Sudan
    [2006] UKAIT 00038, and Ahmed Saeed Mukarkar v  SSHD  [2006]  EWCA  Civ
    1045, we are entitled to reach our findings as to the real risk to this
    appellant, on return, having  regard  to  those  credibility  findings.
    We also have had regard to what the appellant said in oral evidence  to
    us.   In particular, although she sought to make it a main plank of her
    claim that she would be compelled by economic vicissitude to go to find
    her extended family in Sinoe, and subject herself and her  daughter  to
    FGM at their hands, the appellant said in re-examination that she would
    not know if FGM was a rule of her tribe.

61.  The  chronology  given  by  the  appellant,  both  to  us  and  to  the
    Adjudicator, also does not fit with the expert and other evidence.   If
    the appellant's parents had been members of a sub-group  of  the  Krahn
    that practises FGM, and who wished her to go to Sinoe in  order  to  be
    initiated by a secret society, which would perform the mutilation  upon
    her, her parents would have had ample opportunity  to  take  her  there
    before the onset of the civil war in 1989, rather than waiting  several
    years from  the point when they had told her of their  intentions,  and
    when according to the objective evidence she was within the  age  range
    for undergoing FGM.

62.  Accordingly, whilst women who belong to ethnic groups in  Liberia  that
    practise FGM may be at real risk,  this appellant has not shown herself
    to be at such risk.   Further, even if it were reasonably likely to  be
    true that the Sinoe exist as a sub-group and that they  undertake  FGM,
    it is not reasonably likely  that  the  appellant  would  find  herself
    having to  travel  to  that  part  of  south-eastern  Liberia,  through
    economic vicissitude, in order to  throw  herself  upon  the  mercy  of
    whatever extended family she might be able to locate there.  The  first
    reason we say this is because, like the Adjudicator, we do not  believe
    that the appellant's family in Monrovia has  disappeared.    Given  the
    adverse credibility findings  regarding  the  appellant,  there  is  no
    reason to accept this aspect of her account. If, as we consider  highly
    likely, the appellant's family remains alive, they are  not  reasonably
    likely to subject her to FGM.  That is so, even if  (which  we  do  not
    accept) her parents came from a background where such  a  practice  was
    common. If they did come from such a background, then the fact that the
    appellant remained intact long after she reached the age for FGM, at  a
    time when travelling to Sinoe would not have been impracticable,  shows
    that, consistently with Ms Dorkenoo's report, the  appellant's  parents
    had become urbanised Monrovians who, as a  result  of  the  'aggressive
    national unification programme in Liberia', placed little  weight  upon
    tribal divisions and the practices of the those in rural areas.

63.  Even if, however, the appellant's family in Monrovia  has  disappeared,
    the Tribunal does not accept that  she  would  be  driven  by  economic
    necessity to make the journey to Sinoe.  As  has  already  been  noted,
    camps for internally displaced persons exist, where the evidence  shows
    that the appellant and her children would not be reasonably  likely  to
    face serious harm, which crosses the Article 3 threshold. The US  State
    Department Report of 2005 paints a picture of the camps  which,  whilst
    clearly  not  without  problems,  shows  that  they  generally  provide
    reasonable living conditions. In so finding, the Tribunal is  aware  of
    the comments regarding rapes within the camps.  Whilst these may occur,
    we are unaware of any evidence that  suggests  that  in  general,  lone
    women within such camps are as such at real risk of rape.

64.  The evidence indicates, however, that the appellant is  not  reasonably
    likely to go to live  in  such  a  camp.  Although  not  professionally
    qualified as a nurse, as she would like  to  be,  the  appellant  is  a
    healthy  and  obviously  resourceful  woman   of   some   intelligence.
    Notwithstanding the difficult employment position in  Monrovia,  we  do
    not find that she faces a stark choice between  having  to  work  as  a
    prostitute and subjecting herself  to  whatever  awaits  her  in  Sinoe
    County.  In so finding, we also take account of her oral  evidence,  in
    which she said she thought that her current  (non-cohabiting)  partner,
    who is the father of her unborn child, would send  her  money,  if  she
    were to go to Liberia.

65.  Finally, we need to say something of  the  position  regarding  FGM  in
    Monrovia.    The US State Department Report of  2001  refers  to  three
    small schools, which hold initiation rights  involving  FGM,  operating
    periodically in Monrovia.  We have  no  reason  to  assume  that  those
    schools have ceased to exist since 2001.     Looking at the documentary
    evidence as a whole, however, we find that it  is  plain  that  in  the
    capital  and  its  environs,  attitudes  towards  FGM  are  in  general
    different from those which prevail in the rural areas.    The  schools'
    presence in Monrovia  is,  we  consider,  evidence  that  persons  from
    Liberian ethnic groups living in that city, who practise  FGM  and  who
    wish to have their daughters undergo that mutilation, are able to do so
    by making use of such a school in Monrovia, instead of having to return
    to their tribal homelands. The presence of the schools is in no way  to
    be equated with a real risk to a women living in  Monrovia,  regardless
    of ethnic group and of familial disposition towards FGM.

66. The incident in Monrovia involving the forced FGM of a Grebo girl  by  a
    Zoe soothsayer(paragraph 2.2 of  Ms  Dorkenoo's  report;  paragraph  36
    above)  is  sourced  from  Rahman  and  Toubia's  book  Female  Genital
    Mutilation. A guide to the laws and policies  worldwide,  published  in
    London in 2000. We do not know when the incident in  question  occurred
    or in what circumstances, but if it were regarded as anything more than
    an unusual and isolated occurrence, we would have expected  someone  to
    have said so. The Tribunal does not regard the incident as in  any  way
    showing that there is a real risk to women from  non-practising  ethnic
    groups. On the contrary, the unusual nature of the incident  is  likely
    to be the  reason  why  it  was  specifically  recorded.  The  Zoe  who
    committed the act was, moreover, punished.

67. The 2001 US State Department Report (as recorded in paragraph 2.5 of  Ms
    Dorkenoo'sreport and paragraph 39 above) states that whether or not FGM
    is practised in Monrovia and other  urbanised  and  populous  areas  of
    Liberia depends on education, class and the closeness of family ties to
    rural life. The example of a  lawyer  in  Monrovia  who  underwent  the
    procedure as a result of strong pressure from an upcountry  grandmother
    suggests that  family  ties  may  be  important  in  individual  cases.
    However, the evidence from all the reports before us shows that a woman
    from an ethnic group that does not practise FGM will not face community
    or societal pressure to submit to mutilation. This is  so  whether  the
    woman is living in an urban environment or amongst her ethnic group  in
    the countryside. In the case of a woman living in an urban area who  is
    from an ethnic group that traditionally practises FGM,  the  risk  will
    depend on an individual assessment  of  her  particular  circumstances,
    taking account of how far both she and those who are in a  position  to
    bring pressure to bear on her have become distanced from their cultural
    roots.

68.  On the evidence and our findings, it  is  clear  that  the  appellant's
    daughter (or daughters, should her unborn child be female) will not  be
    at real risk on return to Liberia.   The appellant,  as  their  mother,
    will have  control  over  whether  they  undergo  FGM.    There  is  no
    reasonable likelihood of the appellant being  compelled  by  any  third
    party to subject her daughters to mutilation.

69.  The Tribunal's conclusions may be summarised as follows:

    (1)  Women in Liberia belonging to those ethnic groups (or  sub-groups)
        where FGM is practised  are  a  particular  social  group  for  the
        purposes of the 1951 Geneva Convention. All uncircumcised women  in
        Liberia are not as such at real risk of FGM. A  woman  will  be  at
        real risk if she comes from an ethnic group  (or  sub-group)  where
        FGM is practised and the evidence shows she is reasonably likely to
        be required by her parents or others in a  position  of  power  and
        influence over her to undergo FGM. Those who practise FGM  are  not
        reasonably likely (particularly in urban areas) to seek to  inflict
        it upon women from non-practising ethnic groups (or sub-groups).

    (2)   Internal relocation will be available in Liberia to a  woman  who
        is at real risk of FGM in her home area if the evidence  shows  (i)
        she is not reasonably likely to encounter anyone in  the  place  of
        relocation who would be in a position of power and  influence  over
        her and who would use that power or influence  to  require  her  to
        undergo FGM and (ii) she can reasonably be expected to live in that
        place, having regard to the general circumstances prevailing in  it
        and to the personal circumstances of the appellant (paragraph  339O
        of HC 395 (as amended)). In the case of a woman from a  rural  area
        in Liberia, internal relocation to Monrovia  or  some  other  urban
        centre will not be available unless her circumstances are such that
        she will be able to survive economically (see Januzi v Secretary of
        State for the Home Department &  Ors  [2006]  UKHL  5)  and  resist
        pressure from any family or other members of her ethnic  group  who
        may be in that place. Such instances are likely to  be  rare.  They
        cannot, however, be ruled out; eg. where the woman has a husband or
        other male protector.


     (3)  Credibility will usually  have  an  important  part  to  play  in
        determining whether a woman is at real risk of FGM.



70.  For the reasons we have given, the appellant has  not  shown  that  she
    falls within paragraph 69(1).

71.  The Adjudicator's determination contains a material error of law.    We
    substitute a determination  of  our  own,  dismissing  the  appellant's
    appeal on asylum and human rights grounds.    For the reasons  we  have
    given at paragraph 51 above, the appellant is not entitled to the grant
    of humanitarian protection.








Signed                                  Date
Senior Immigration Judge Lane

                                  Appendix


               Background materials considered by the Tribunal


US State Department (Office of  the  Senior  Coordinator  for  International
Women's Issues): Liberia: Report on  Female  Genital  Mutilation  (FGM)  and
Female Genital Cutting (FGC) (1 June 2001)
Amnesty International Report:  Liberia,  covering  events  from  January  to
December 2003 (2004)
Amnesty International: Female Genital Mutilation in Africa:  Information  by
Country (2004)
Liberia: Major effort needed to address gender-based  violence  (16  January
2004)
UN Security Council: Third Progress Report of the Secretary-General  on  the
UN Mission in Liberia (26 May 2004)
Liberia Press: Liberian girls face rape, abuse despite  war's  end  (3  June
2004)
Letter from UNHCR, re: UNHCR position on return of failed asylum seekers  to
Liberia (28 July 2004)
Liberia: One year after Accra - immense human rights challenges  remain  (18
August 2004)
Health Action in Crises Monthly Report, Issue  35,  Afro  West  Africa  Sub-
Region (September 2004)
BBC News: Mass arrest after Liberian riots (1 November 2004)
Amnesty International Report: Liberia (2006)
All Experts Free Encyclopaedia: entry on Krahn (2006)
Human Rights Watch Events of 2005: Liberia (January 2006)
International Crisis Group Update Briefing,  Liberia:  Staying  Focused  (13
January 2006)
Inter-Parliamentary Union: One out of five parliamentarians elected in  2005
is a woman (27 February 2006)
US State Department  Report:  Liberia  -  Country  Report  on  Human  Rights
Practices (8 March 2006)
Home Office COI Report: Liberia (April 2006)
Home Office Operational Guidance Note: Liberia (5 May 2006)
UN Population Fund: Liberian men and women unite  to  fight  rape  (21  June
2006) IRIN: Liberia child rapists walk free  for  a  few  dollars  (25  July
2006)
Home Office Operational Guidance Note: Liberia (30 November 2006)
Political map of Liberia
Tribal map of Liberia


