
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal

                  SA and IA (Undocumented Kurds) Syria CG [2009] UKAIT 00006


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Bradford
On 10-11 November 2008


                                   Before

                      Senior Immigration Judge Batiste
                       Senior Immigration Judge Taylor


                                   Between



                                     SA
                                     IA

                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the First Appellant:  Mr N S Stanage, instructed by Messrs Jackson &
Canter.
For the Second Appellant:  Mr R O'Ryan, instructed by the Newcastle Law
Centre.
For the Respondent:  Ms R Pettersen, Presenting Officer.


1. The discrimination and deprivations experienced by Syrian Kurds  are  not
such as to amount  to  persecution  or  breach  of  their  human  rights  if
returned to Syria.
2. A person with an actual or perceived profile of being  anti-regime  would
be at real risk of persecution by the authorities on return  to  Syria.  The
greatest risk is to Islamists but the risk extends to other groups  such  as
Kurdish or human rights or democracy activists.
3. There is no internal relocation option for a person who is  perceived  by
the Syrian authorities to have an anti-regime political profile.
4. Anti-regime activities undertaken by Syrians abroad, which  are  held  to
be credible and of which the Syrian authorities are aware,  will  contribute
to their risk profile on return and will be  taken  as  seriously  as  prior
anti-regime activity in Syria.
5. A rare attendance at a crowded demonstration outside the  Syrian  Embassy
by a person with no other political involvement or activity  from  which  he
might be identified (for example by  a  person  who  is  simply  seeking  to
bolster an otherwise weak asylum claim) will not constitute a real  risk  of
coming to the adverse attention of the Syrian authorities.  However  regular
attendances at such demonstrations over  a  lengthy  period  of  time  would
increase the risk profile, as would membership of and active involvement  in
other  overt  political  activities  and/or  organisations  which  might  be
penetrated by informers. The greater  and  more  varied  the  activity,  the
greater the risk. The extent of the risk is fact sensitive in each case
6. There is no real risk that leaving Syria illegally would, in the  absence
of  additional  aggravating  factors,  result  in  ill-treatment  on  return
amounting to persecution or a breach of human rights.
7. A failed asylum seeker will not be perceived as being an opponent of  the
regime simply by reason of having claimed asylum  abroad  and  will  not  as
such  be at real risk of persecutory ill-treatment on return.
8. A stateless, undocumented, Kurd who left Syria illegally and is a  failed
asylum seeker but is not perceived by the Syrian authorities  as  having  an
anti-regime profile, will not be at real risk of  persecutory  ill-treatment
or a material breach of his human rights on return


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

  1. This is the determination of the Tribunal.  The  Appellants  (hereafter
     referred to as "SA" and "IA" respectively) are from Syria  and  are  of
     Kurdish ethnicity. Their separate appeals were  listed  together,  with
     the consent of the parties, for the reconsideration of their individual
     appeals,    and    additionally    to    provide    the    basis    for
     reviewing/supplementing the country guidance concerning the position of
     Syrian Kurds, last considered in AR (Kurd: not risk per  se)  Syria  CG
     [2006] UAKIT 00048 - in the light  of  the  current  country  evidence.
     Initially, a third appeal that of AK - appeal  number  AA/07648/2006  -
     was listed for reconsideration with them, with Mr  O'Ryan  representing
     AK as well as SA.

COUNTRY GUIDANCE IN AR

  2. In AR the Tribunal summarised its conclusions as being  that  a  Syrian
     Kurd with no political history does not face a real risk of persecution
     or breach of his  human  rights  on  return  to  Syria.   Its  material
     conclusions were as follows.

           "88. Taking these matters together we have  concluded  that  the
           deprivations experienced by Syrian Kurds  are  not  such  as  to
           amount to  persecution  or  breach  of  their  human  rights  if
           returned to Syria.  It  is  not  without  significance  in  this
           regard  that  the  appellant  at  interview  said  that  he  had
           experienced no problems as a Kurd prior to the  events  of  2004
           which were disbelieved by the Adjudicator.    Clearly  he  would
           have had to put up with deprivations of the kind we have set out
           above but we do not consider that these  materially  damaged  or
           would damage the quality of his  life  and  nor  could  anything
           different be said with regard to  the  situation  of  any  other
           person living as a stateless Kurd whether Ajanib  or  Maktoumeen
           in Syria.

           92. We assess risk to the appellant on return on the basis first
           of all that he has no political history  in  the  light  of  the
           Adjudicator's findings in this regard which were not effectively
           challenged.    There  is  no  evidence  to  indicate  that   the
           authorities would be aware that he has applied for asylum in the
           United Kingdom.  As Mr Ouseley suggested, Dr George's  views  on
           this were essentially speculative  as  to  the  ability  of  the
           security services in Syria monitoring the activities of  Syrians
           in the United Kingdom.  In our view the evidence shows that  the
           appellant would  face  no  more  than  a  risk  of  imprisonment
           potentially up to a period of three months.  We do not  consider
           that the evidence shows a real risk of ill-treatment giving rise
           to a breach of his protected rights on return  in  that  regard.
           Accordingly we do not consider that the risk factor with  regard
           to this aspect of his claim is such as to place him  at  a  real
           risk of persecution or breach of his human rights.   We  see  no
           reason to disagree with the earlier conclusions of the IAT in SY
           (Kurd - No Political Profile) Syria CG  [2005]  UKIAT  00039  to
           similar effect,  and  this  decision  should  be  understood  as
           updating SY, therefore.

  3. This decision replaced the earlier country guidance in SY  (Kurd  -  No
     Political Profile) Syria CG [2005] 00039.

PRELIMINARY MATTERS


  4. At a case management review hearing  on  3  June  2008  for  all  three
     appeals originally listed, Mr Stanage (then speaking in the absence  of
     Mr  O'Ryan  for  all  the  Appellants),  and  Ms  Donnelly   (for   the
     Respondent),  confirmed  their  agreement  on  the  following  matters,
     subject to the directions given.

        1. All appeals  were  for  reconsideration  on  the  basis  of  the
           findings of fact made by the original Immigration Judges.


        2. Mr Stanage maintained that the Court of  Appeal  had  identified
           the material errors of law in the appeals of SA and  IA  as  the
           failure to consider  adequately  the  objective  evidence.  This
           would apply also to AK. Ms Donnelly was inclined  to  agree  but
           this was subject to confirmation after she had had the chance to
           read all the files. Ms  Donnelly  was  directed  to  inform  the
           Tribunal and the Appellants' Representatives within  7  days  if
           the Respondent agreed that the material error  of  law  in  each
           case is inadequate consideration of the objective  material.  If
           it is not so agreed, then there will  need  to  be  another  CMR
           hearing.

        3. As there  were  no  challenges  to  the  respective  Immigration
           Judges' credibility findings and therefore there will be no need
           for oral evidence from any of the Appellants except possibly for
           IA on the refugee sur place claim as he claims he has  continued
           his political activity in the UK. The direction  was  made  that
           IA's  Representative  shall  provide  within  14  days  to   the
           Respondent and to the Tribunal an updated written statement  and
           the Respondent's Representative shall indicate  within  14  days
           after receipt, whether it is intended to challenge the facts  as
           set out in the statement..

        4. Subject to this, the oral evidence will  come  from  the  expert
           witness, Mr George, as per his written report. There  may  be  a
           second witness on  the  propensity  of  the  Syrian  Embassy  to
           photograph demonstrators. This is not yet certain but  will  not
           involve any substantial increase in hearing time. It was further
           directed that if such a witness were to be called a full written
           statement capable of standing in  place  of  evidence  in  chief
           shall be served not later than 14 days before  the  hearing  and
           that if this witness is a refugee, his Home Office number  shall
           be indicated on the statement.

  5. However, at the outset  of  the  hearing  before  us,  Mr  O'Ryan  (who
     represented both AK and SA  but  had  not  attended  the  CMR  hearing)
     indicated that AK's position had not been correctly understood  at  the
     CMR hearing. He maintained that the adverse credibility findings by the
     Immigration Judge concerning AK's claim were flawed by a material error
     of  law  and   were   unsustainable,   and   that   consequently   full
     reconsideration of his claim would  be  required.  This  would  involve
     hearing his oral evidence in full. This was open under the terms of the
     order for reconsideration. In the light of Mr O'Ryan's submission,  the
     Tribunal accepted that there must have been a genuine  misunderstanding
     at the CMR hearing. Nevertheless, the time needed potentially  to  hear
     AK's appeal on its own specific facts had not at the CMR been  factored
     into to the time allocated for the country guidance hearing.  In  these
     circumstances we decided, with the agreement  of  the  Representatives,
     that the appeal of AK would be heard and decided by Senior  Immigration
     Judge Taylor sitting alone immediately  after  the  conclusion  of  the
     country guidance hearing.  It  would  be  the  subject  of  a  separate
     determination made in the light of  the  present  determination  if  it
     resulted in  it  being  country  guidance  (Practice  Direction  18.2).
     However, as Mr O'Ryan also represented SA and as the  country  evidence
     produced by him for  AK  is  of  general  relevance  to  the  remaining
     appeals, it would be taken fully into account in the  country  guidance
     determination. Additionally any questions  to  the  expert  witness  Dr
     George, that might affect AK specifically could also be put to  him  in
     the course of the country guidance hearing, and  would  be  taken  into
     account for the purposes of his separate determination by Ms Taylor.

THE APPELLANTS' CLAIMS

  6. The appeals of SA and IA come to us from the Court of Appeal where,  in
     IA (Syria) & SA (Syria) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
     [2007] EWCA Civ 1390, they  were  linked.  Toulson  LJ  gave  the  lead
     judgment and summarised the material facts in each case as follows.

           "2. The Appellants, SA and IA, both come from Syria and  are  of
           Kurdish ethnicity. Kurds are the largest  non-Arab  minority  in
           Syria, comprising approximately 10% of the  population  of  18.5
           million. Many  are  denied  Syrian  nationality  by  the  Syrian
           Government. The Appellants are both  stateless,  and  unable  to
           obtain travel documents for travel outside Syria.


           3. SA arrived in the UK on 22 March 2005, and claimed asylum the
           next day. His application was refused.  He appealed to the  AIT,
           which dismissed his appeal. He claimed to  have  taken  part  in
           anti-government activities and to have fled from Syria  when  he
           knew that security forces were on his  track.   His  account  of
           those matters was disbelieved by the AIT, and there is no appeal
           against that finding.  The basis of his appeal, in  summary,  is
           that the Tribunal fail to deal properly with the risks he  would
           face on return as a Kurd who had left Syria unlawfully and  made
           an unsuccessful claim for asylum.


           4. IA arrived in the UK on 11 February 2004 and  claimed  asylum
           five days later.  His claim was rejected and  he  appealed.   He
           claimed that he had been threatened by officials of  the  Ba'ath
           party with torture unless he joined the party.   Under  threats,
           he agreed to report on the activities of  fellow  Kurds  in  the
           area, but instead he fled the country.  At the first hearing  of
           his appeal,  this  account  was  rejected  and  the  appeal  was
           dismissed.  Reconsideration was ordered because the Tribunal had
           failed properly to consider the risk to him on his return  as  a
           failed asylum seeker.


           5. A further matter was raised  on  the  reconsideration.   From
           2005, IA took part in a number of anti-government demonstrations
           outside the Syrian Embassy.  It was argued on  his  behalf  that
           this would heighten the risk to  him  if  he  were  returned  to
           Syria.  The AIT on reconsideration dismissed  his  appeal.   The
           basis of his appeal to this court is that the Tribunal failed to
           deal properly with the risk he would face on return both (as  in
           SA's case) as a Kurd who has left Syria unlawfully and  made  an
           unsuccessful claim for  asylum,  and  also  on  account  of  his
           political activities in the UK."


  7. Toulson LJ reached the following conclusions concerning these appeals.

           "22. I am troubled by the points raised by both Appellants,  and
           I regret that the Respondent has not  been  able  to  put  those
           troubles to rest, in my judgement. In relation to  SA  I  accept
           that there is substance in both the main criticisms advanced  by
           Ms Plimmer. To treat the Amnesty International letter as  if  it
           was simply a letter written with no identifiable foundation  was
           not a satisfactory way of  approaching  the  document.   Amnesty
           International is a body of high  repute  and  the  document  did
           indicate, in broad terms, its sources of information.


           23.   Inevitably,  in   the   areas   that   such   bodies   are
           investigating, there may be difficulties in  obtaining  evidence
           from fully identifiable sources, but Amnesty  International  are
           well aware of that.  It does not  follow  that  a  Tribunal  was
           bound to share their opinions on any particular matter, but  the
           substance of that report did require the  Tribunal  properly  to
           engage with it.  The way in which the determination  dealt  with
           the report of Ms Laizer was so cursory as not  in  substance  to
           engage with its content on the relevant point at all.


           24.  In the  case  of  IA  there  is  again,  in  my  judgement,
           substance in both the main  points  made  by  Mr  Stanage.   The
           evidence put forward by Dr George, about the  likelihood  of  IA
           being identified by the Syrian authorities as someone hostile to
           the regime  for  his  activities  outside  the  Syrian  Embassy,
           contained enough substance to require the Tribunal to address it
           properly.  It could not simply be dismissed as not amounting  to
           evidence.  Similarly the letter from Amnesty  International  did
           apply to IA, and its cogency needed to  be  evaluated.   It  was
           not.


           25.  For those reasons, I would allow both appeals,  and  direct
           that they be remitted for reconsideration.  I do  so  with  some
           regret, because the process has already been protracted.   I  am
           conscious in the case of IA that this is the second occasion  on
           which  the  case  will  have  to  be  sent  back   for   further
           consideration.  Nothing that  I  have  said  in  this  judgement
           should be taken to indicate any view on my part that the appeals
           are likely to be successful in the final  analysis.   I  am  far
           from saying that on the  material  before  either  Tribunal  the
           appeals ought necessarily to have been  allowed,  but  I  regret
           that there were, in my judgement, serious errors in the  way  in
           which the Tribunals dealt with the issues, for the reasons  that
           I have set out.


           26.  There is further material before this Court to suggest that
           the position in Syria may have been changing.  There is a report
           from the  Foreign  Office,  which  suggests  that  although  the
           picture is not wholly good  or  wholly  bad,  in  some  material
           respects things have become worse since 2006.  We are told  that
           there is another country guidance case,  supposedly  due  to  be
           heard in the not too distant future.  I am aware that  Tribunals
           are overburdened with cases, but  it  does  seem  to  be  highly
           desirable that there should be a fresh look at the  position  of
           the state of Syrian Kurds who applied unsuccessfully for asylum,
           as soon as possible.  The issues which have been raised  in  the
           Amnesty International report need to be evaluated.   The  sooner
           they are fully evaluated the better."

  8. Thus, as is confirmed in the  respective  Appellants'  Representative's
     skeleton arguments, the Appellants claim that they  would  be  at  real
     risk on return as stateless, undocumented Syrian Kurds,  who  had  left
     Syria illegally and were failed asylum seekers. IA claims  additionally
     to be at  real  risk  on  return  as  being  perceived  by  the  Syrian
     authorities as a political opponent, as a result of his attendance at a
     number of anti-regime demonstrations  outside  the  Syrian  Embassy  in
     London. IA claims that anti-regime activities conducted  outside  Syria
     are regarded by the regime as  seriously  as  those  undertaken  within
     Syria.

THE SUBSTANTIVE HEARING

  9. On this basis we proceeded with the substantive hearing.  Ms  Pettersen
     confirmed the Respondent's acceptance  that  there  had  been  material
     errors of law by the Tribunal in the appeals of SA  and  IA  which,  as
     stated by the Court of Appeal, were the failure to consider  adequately
     the objective evidence. We agree, and on that basis proceeded to second
     stage reconsideration of both these appeals.

 10. Ms Pettersen also confirmed that  she  did  wish  to  cross-examine  IA
     briefly concerning the matters contained in his written statement of  4
     November 2008 about his claimed political activities in the UK.

 11. We heard in succession oral evidence from Dr George and from IA, all of
     which is fully set out in our record of proceedings. We shall refer  to
     the material aspects of this evidence in our conclusions. It  was  then
     agreed that each of  the  Representatives  would  supply  full  written
     submissions and, if they considered appropriate, replies. On that basis
     we reserved our decision.

 12. The bundles/documents provided to us  by  the  Representatives,  either
     before, during or after the hearing are as listed  below.  A  reference
     list of each specific item of country evidence provided, all  of  which
     we have taken into account, is contained in the appendix hereto.
           1. The trial bundle for AK
           2. The trial bundle for SA
           3. The trial bundle for IA
           4. The country guidance case of AR Syria
           5. The Court of Appeal judgement in IA(Syria) and SA (Syria)
           6. AK's bundle
           7. SA's bundle
           8. IA's bundle
           9. Appellants' objective bundle
          10. AK's further bundle
          11. Skeleton argument for SA and AK
          12. COI letter
          13. Chronologies
          14. Home Office statistics on returnees
          15. Originals of the copy photographs in bundle 8
          16. Written submissions for SA and AK
          17. Written submissions for IA
          18. Written submissions for the Respondent
          19. Supplementary written information from Dr George in  response
              to questions raised at the hearing
          20. Further written submissions by way of reply for IA

THE REPRESENTATIVES' WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS

 13. Mr O'Ryan's written submissions for SA are as follows.

      "1    At a hearing at Bradford AIT on 10.11.08, SIJ  Batiste  and  SIJ
           Taylor directed, following oral evidence from Dr Alan George and
           Appellant IA, that written submissions should be provided by the
           parties to the appeals.


      2     The Tribunal resolved that the appeal of AK will  be  heard  and
           determined solely by  SIJ  Taylor,  as  a  'follower'  case,  as
           matters of credibility arise in that appeal such that it  should
           not be determined jointly with SA and IA. Oral evidence from  AK
           is to be heard by SIJ Taylor  on  11.11.08.  However,  there  is
           evidence submitted in the appeal of AK relevant to  the  Country
           Guidance issue (Kurd; illegal exit  from  Syria;  failed  asylum
           seeker); not least the updated expert report of Dr. Alan  George
           dated 5.11.08. It is presumed that whilst the AK's case is to be
           determined separately from SA and IA, such  evidence  (specified
           in more detail below) in  AK's  case  relevant  to  the  Country
           Guidance issue will be taken into account.


           Previous Tribunal consideration of  risk  on  return  to  Kurds,
           exiting Syria illegally and having claimed asylum in the  United
           Kingdom.


      3     It is clear that Kurdish ethnicity may be an exacerbating factor
           for those who come to the adverse attention of the Syrian  state
           authorities (see para 8 ZB and AK (Kurds - Article 3  -  Risk  -
           IFA) Syria [2004] UKIAT 00217). The Tribunal noted in that  case
           the reasons for the Respondent conceding the appeals:


                 "11. It was on the basis of this filed evidence that in the
                 case  of  both  B  and  K  and  having  regard   to   their
                 characteristics which we have identified  earlier  in  this
                 determination, the Secretary of State  conceded  that  each
                 would be likely to be identified as a failed asylum  seeker
                 who had left the country illegally and was  being  returned
                 on the basis of temporary papers obtained for that  purpose
                 from the Syrian Embassy. This would lead  to  a  real  risk
                 that each would be stopped and detained on return. The real
                 possibility of prosecutory [sic] treatment for the combined
                 reasons of ethnicity and  perceived  or  imputed  political
                 opinion contrary to the Refugee  Convention  1951,  and  of
                 treatment  prohibited  by  Article  3   of   the   European
                 Convention of 1950, must be accepted to exist.
                 12. On the basis of the concessions made by  Mr  Morris  it
                 accordingly follows that in the case of B the Secretary  of
                 State's  appeal  is  dismissed  and  B's  cross  appeal  is
                 allowed; in the case of K his appeal  is  allowed  on  both
                 asylum and human rights grounds." (emphasis added)


      4     In SY (Kurd-No Political Profile) Syria CG [2005]  UKIAT  00039,
           it was held:


                 "21. It would seem to us to be implicit in  the  concession
                 made on behalf of the Secretary of State in ZB and AK  that
                 a Syrian citizen of Kurdish ethnicity who has  an  accepted
                 past political profile and who left Syria illegally may  be
                 at risk on return on account of those factors.  Equally  it
                 is clear to our mind from RS that a person who  left  Syria
                 with their own passport and with a proper exit stamp  would
                 not be at risk on return as there would  be  no  reason  to
                 suspect any opposition to the Syrian state by dint of  that
                 departure and subsequent return. The relevant  risk  issues
                 are well set out in the Canadian document at  page  122  of
                 the Appellant's bundle. Clearly the nature of the departure
                 and the profile and background of  the  individual  are  of
                 importance. It seems that an application would have  to  be
                 made  either  by  the  Appellant  or  on  his  behalf   for
                 documentation from the Syrian authorities in order for  him
                 to be returned. There must be a  risk  that  a  Syrian  who
                 approaches  the  Syrian  Embassy  or  on  whose  behalf  an
                 approach is made for documentation might be regarded by the
                 authorities as somebody who had sought asylum in the United
                 Kingdom. Equally it is clear that no  information  to  that
                 effect would be made available to the Syrian authorities.


                 22. We do not consider that it can properly  be  said  that
                 there is a real risk of an inference  of  this  kind  being
                 drawn.  The  Appellant,  on   the   Adjudicator's   adverse
                 credibility findings, is a  person  who  has  no  political
                 profile in Syria. Any check of Syrian records that might be
                 made by the authorities as a consequence of an  application
                 being made for travel documents would reveal nothing to his
                 discredit. It is in our view purely speculative and  indeed
                 fanciful  to  suggest  that  nevertheless  there  would  be
                 inferred to him an attitude adverse to the interests of the
                 Syrian state by the fact that he was in the United  Kingdom
                 and needed travel documentation in order to return. It  may
                 be that it would come to light that he had left the country
                 illegally in which case he would face up to  three  months'
                 imprisonment, but  on  the  one  hand  that  would  involve
                 prosecution and on the other hand would not  to  our  mind,
                 given that it is unclear whether such  a  person  would  be
                 sentenced at all, quite apart  from  how  long  within  the
                 three months maximum they might be in prison, be such as to
                 give rise to a real risk of breach  of  Article  3  rights.
                 ..." (Emphasis added)
      5     The Appellants would not necessarily agree with the  observation
           within paragraph 21 of SY that the concession made in ZB and  AK
           was dependent upon those appellants having (some  limited)  past
           political profile - it appeared to be on the basis  merely  that
           they would be identified as failed asylum seekers who  had  left
           Syria illegally and were  being  returned  on  temporary  travel
           documents.
      6     Certainly, in SY, the proposition that there would be a risk  of
           serious harm to Kurds who had left  illegally  and  were  failed
           asylum seekers was not rejected by the Tribunal - the reason for
           the appeal failing was that the  accepted  risk  that  a  Syrian
           approaching the Syrian Embassy or on whose  behalf  an  approach
           was made for documentation might be regarded by the  authorities
           as somebody who had sought asylum in the United Kingdom was not,
           in the assessment of the Tribunal on the basis of  the  evidence
           before it, a real risk (para 22).
      7     The issue was revisited at paragraphs 89-92  of  AR  (Kurd:  not
           risk per se) Syria CG [2006] UAKIT 00048. It was asserted  in  a
           letter from the British Embassy in Damascus inter alia  that  it
           was 'important not to assume that the Syrian  authorities  would
           automatically know that an individual had applied for asylum  in
           the United Kingdom' (para 89). Dr Alan George gave  evidence  in
           that appeal (summarised at paragraph 90 of AR),  citing  various
           reports including a September 2003 Canadian IRB document that if
           it became known that a person had applied for asylum abroad  the
           consequences to a returnee may be severe.
      8     However, it is clear that the Tribunal's reason  for  dismissing
           the appeal in AR is  contained  in  paragraph  92,  wherein  the
           Tribunal recorded their view that  there  was  'no  evidence  to
           indicate that the authorities would be aware that he has applied
           for asylum in the United Kingdom", and the Tribunal were of  the
           view that the appellant would  face  no  more  than  a  risk  of
           imprisonment potentially of up to  three  months  for  illegally
           exit, which would not result in Article 3 mistreatment.
      9     The Appellants aver that there is now  further  evidence  before
           the Tribunal establishing to a reasonable degree  of  likelihood
           that a past claim for asylum in the United Kingdom would come to
           the attention of the Syrian authorities either due to  enquiries
           made at the Syrian embassy in London or on return to Damascus.
      10    Such evidence is contained inter alia within the  expert  report
           of Dr Alan George in AK dated 5.11.08 (bundle 10,  pages  8-38),
           supported by his oral evidence.
      11    When the appeal of AK was first heard by SIJ Drabu, IJ  T  Jones
           and Dr J O de Barros on 7.2.07, the Tribunal had ' no hesitation
           in finding (Dr George) as being a man of  specialist  knowledge.
           His credentials of expertise are impeccable, and we found him to
           be measured and objective  in  his  oral  evidence"  (para  18).
           (Regrettably, the Tribunal then  proceeded  to  err  in  law  by
           failing to have sufficient regard to his evidence and  a  letter
           dated 4.10.06  from  Amnesty  International,  resulting  in  the
           present reconsideration of AK's case).
      12    Dr George's expertise is such that the UK Foreign Office have on
           several occasions invited him to attend  briefing  sessions  for
           new British Ambassadors to Middle Eastern  countries,  including
           Syria, prior to their posting (bundle 10, page 10 para 12).
      13    In AR at paragraph 78 the Tribunal questioned the  efforts  made
           by Dr George to confirm the truth or lack thereof of suggestions
           that significant numbers of stateless Kurds were to  be  granted
           citizenship. Dr George  respectfully  addresses  this  issue  at
           paragraph 46-50 of his report of 5.11.08, confirming his earlier
           evidence  (that  there  was  no  real  sign  of  such  grant  of
           citizenship  on  the  horizon)  as  having  been  accurate.   He
           addresses the Syrian government's current position on this issue
           at paragraph 52-54 (no  progress).  Further,   the  progress  of
           these reforms has been repeatedly 'suspended'  or  'stopped'  by
           the government (see quotations from  speech  made  by  President
           Basher al-Assad on  17.7.07  at  paragraph  45  of  Dr  George's
           report).
      14    The Tribunal is therefore invited to conclude that Dr George  is
           an appropriately qualified expert,  and  to  give  his  evidence
           significant weight. It is further contended  that  weight  ought
           not be given to his  evidence  merely  on  the  basis  that  his
           evidence is consistent with  other  objective  evidence  -  this
           would miss the point of calling  expert  evidence  -  Dr  George
           clearly has sources available to him that are not  available  to
           others (eg his contacts within  the  Syrian  embassy  in  London
           itself).
      15    The Appellants refer in particular  to  the  following  passages
           within Dr George's report of 5.11.08:
           Paragraph:  Issue:
           20          One mukhabarat secret policeman for every 153  adult
                       Syrians
           23          Nature of secret police
           24-25       Human rights abuses and trends in 2007 - downwards -
                       (quoting from various sources)
           27          Numbers of political arrests  - 1500
           34 onwards  Position of Kurds
           36          Torture and ill-treatment is routinely inflicted  on
                       Syrian Kurdish political detainees  whilst  they  are
                       held incommunicado in Syrian  prisons  and  detention
                       centres.
           37          Oppression of Kurds escalated  sharply  since  March
                       2004
           38          Oppression of Kurds continues
           40          Fatal shootings of Kurds at Newroz  20.3.08
           42-54       No real progress on issue of  citizenship  (and  see
                       para 13 above)
           55          Syrian political leaders stated situation  on  Kurds
                       more difficult
           56          Effect of new law Decree 49, effective from 10.9.08;
                       restrictions   on   construction   disproportionately
                       discriminating against Kurds
           58          Demonstration against Decree 49 on  2.11.08  leading
                       to 200 arrests
           71          Authorities' view of  asylum  seekers:  critique  of
                       Amnesty International  report  of  January  2004.  Dr
                       George's firm view (middle of paragraph  71)  that  a
                       Syrian who has applied for asylum will  be  perceived
                       to be an oppositionist; the  authorities  are  highly
                       unlikely to make  a  consistent  distinction  between
                       'government opponents', and 'government opponents who
                       are politically active', and a claim for asylum would
                       be quite sufficient cause for him to be detained  and
                       maltreated on return to Syria, regardless of  whether
                       that  person  has  a   history   of   anti-government
                       political activity.
                       Reference to Canadian IRB report of  September  2003:
                       "If it becomes  known  that  they  have  applied  for
                       asylum, the consequences may be severe." This opinion
                       remains valid, according to Canadian  IRB  report  of
                       1.5.08 (as to which, see further below)
           72-73       Same issue
           74          Dr George's  anonymous  contact  within  the  Syrian
                       embassy, a senior  and  respected  official,  who  is
                       personally involved in matters concerning the  return
                       of Syrians to Syria from the UK said ..."however, the
                       Syrian security authorities often continued  to  view
                       such individuals (i.e. those  motivated  by  economic
                       considerations) with suspicion.  Old  attitudes  died
                       hard ..." (Emphasis added)
           75          Assessment of risk as a returned asylum  seeker.  NB
                       Dr George's oral evidence was  that  this  assessment
                       was purely on  the  basis  of  failed  asylum  seeker
                       status alone. It specifically did not  represent  his
                       assessment of risk for persons with  additional  risk
                       factors  such  as  Kurdish  ethnicity   and   illegal
                       departure from Syria.
            76         Monitoring of suspected dissidents
                       (insofar  as  relevant  to  SA  and  AK  -  but  more
                       specifically relevant for cases involving an  element
                       of UK political activity)
                       NB The document at page 195 of Bundle 9  (the  common
                       objective bundle) clearly shows in the colour  copies
                       handed up at the hearing that a tripod is being  used
                       (top photo) - the video  camera  was  not  hand-held.
                       This would clearly provide steady  images  even  when
                       the camera was  zoomed  in  close  to  the  subjects,
                       facilitating the process of identifying those filmed.


           77          Dr. George observes that the British police are able
                       to identify offenders  from  footage  of  individuals
                       attending  demonstrations  in  the   UK.   (And   the
                       Appellants  observe  that  this  is   achieved   with
                       substantially  fewer  (one  hopes)  than   1   secret
                       policeman for every 153 adult Britons.)
                       Further  NB.  The  removals  statistics  provided  by
                       present Counsel were for failed asylum  seekers  (not
                       other immigration categories), and for the last three
                       quarters reported, were 5 per quarter (not per month)
                       (to the nearest  5!). Dr. George suggests that it  is
                       reasonable to suppose  that  the  Syrian  authorities
                       might apply some of their  substantial  resources  to
                       compare 'their photographic and film records to those
                       relatively few individuals being returned.  It  would
                       therefore be a relatively easy  matter  for  them  to
                       establish whether a particular individual  had  taken
                       part  in  an  anti-regime  demonstration  whilst   in
                       London.' See also  Paragraph 18  of  YB  (Eritrea)  v
                       Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2008]
                       EWCA Civ 360.
           78          Obtaining travel documentation for return to Syria
                       An  application  for  a  travel  document  to  Syrian
                       embassy  in  London  not  only  requires   that   the
                       application be referred to the  Foreign  ministry  in
                       Damascus, but clearance  from  General  Intelligence,
                       one of Syria's key  intelligence  agencies.  'Even  a
                       Syrian without  a  past  political  profile  will  be
                       required,  on  return  to  Syria,   to   report   for
                       questioning to the intelligence agencies so that  the
                       latter can satisfy themselves that  the  returnee  is
                       not an opponent  of  the  regime.  I  obtained  these
                       details  of  the  procedure  from  the  same   Syrian
                       official that I  mentioned  in  Paragraph  74  of  my
                       Report.' (Emphasis added)
           80          Dr George provides his observations on  the  finding
                       within the case of  SY  (Kurd-No  Political  Profile)
                       Syria CG [2005] UKIAT 00039 that if  a  Kurd  applied
                       for documents at the Syrian embassy in  London  there
                       would be no real risk of  an  inference  being  drawn
                       that he or she had sought asylum in the UK.  This  is
                       refuted by Dr George's source at the Syrian  embassy;
                       Syrian authorities  'might  indeed'  suspect  such  a
                       person of  being  a  failed  asylum-claimant.  As  Mr
                       Stanage  argues  at  paragraph  15  of  his   written
                       submissions in IA,  the  use  of  the  word  'indeed'
                       strengthens the word 'may' (or  here,  'might')  such
                       that the phrase as a whole expresses a degree of risk
                       which would found a successful claim for  refugee  or
                       humanitarian protection.
           82-83       Further, and importantly (the Appellants  aver),  Dr
                       George refers to the  Canada  IRB  report  of  1.5.08
                       (full text at pages 39-41 Bundle 9 - common objective
                       bundle). This provides that,  in  the  context  of  a
                       person returning  to  Syria  as  a  person  who  left
                       illegally, that they  will  have  to  report  to  the
                       immigration department for  new  documentation;  this
                       comprises a visit to the Political Security branch by
                       which the person will be interrogated  regarding  the
                       earlier motives and reasons for the illegal departure
                       from Syria.  Should  this  arise,  it  will  be  very
                       difficult for the returnee to keep the information on
                       a potential asylum application  abroad  confidential.
                       (Emphasis added)
           84 onwards  Consequences for illegal exit from Syria
           88          " ... it is standard practice for a returnee  to  be
                       interrogated by the mukhabarat. Bearing in  mind  the
                       habitual brutality of Syria's  security  agencies,  I
                       would  assert  that  an   individual   subjected   to
                       mukhabarat interrogation would be  at  real  risk  of
                       maltreatment. Likewise, I would assert that a  person
                       sentenced to imprisonment for leaving Syria illegally
                       would also  face  a  real  risk  of  maltreatment  in
                       prison."
           89          Arrests of forcibly returned asylum seekers
                       Details provided.
           92           "The  Amnesty  report  noted:  'Scores  of   Syrian
                       returnees over the last few years, including  several
                       juveniles, have  been  arrested,  held  in  prolonged
                       incommunicado detention and unfairly tried. Many have
                       reportedly been tortured. In the past four years,  at
                       least 10 returnees appear to have  "disappeared"  and
                       several have died, apparently as a result of  torture
                       or ill-treatment."
           94          Details of persons arrested  on  arrival  in  Syria.
                       Whilst their ethnicity is by  and  large  not  known,
                       this  evidence   clearly   establishes   the   Syrian
                       authorities' practice of such detentions
           96          Personal record keeping in Syria
           98           "The  same  Danish  Refugee  Council  report  cites
                       diplomatic sources in Damascus as stating  'that  the
                       exit-entry procedure in Syria has  been  considerably
                       tightened in recent years."


      16    The Appellants also rely on the report  of  Sheri  Laizer  dated
           1.7.05 (bundle 7, page A11 -  A21  (please  excuse  markings  on
           copies provided to Tribunal).
      17    Ms. Laizer should also be accepted an expert entitled to comment
           on the risk of harm to returnees to Syria - see her cv  at  page
           A11-A12. She observes the deterioration in the position of Kurds
           in Syria at the time of writing (paras 4(i) -  (xi),  page  A13-
           A18) (and there is no evidence of any improvement in  their  lot
           since then; the reverse, in fact).
      18    She assesses the risk of harm to SA, as a Kurdish failed  asylum
           seeker who had left Syria illegally, at paragraph  5  (A18-A20).
           She provides specific evidence of  her  own  experience  of  the
           operation of the security  services  at  Damascus  airport.  See
           paragraph 5 generally, and in  particular,  paras  5(ii),  (iv),
           (v), (viii), and (ix). Her conclusion  at  A21  (iii)  that  the
           Appellant SA (and others in his position) would have a political
           opinion imputed in him is entirely sustainable.
      19    The Appellant also relies on the Amnesty  International  letters
           dated 4.10.06 (bundle 6 page   165-166,  document  26),  and  of
           25.1.08  (bundle  7,  page  160-163)  which  fully  support  the
           Appellants' cases. Amnesty's  assertions  are  on  the  base  of
           sourced material; they set out the nature of the sources at,  eg
           page 160 bundle 7. See specifically the paragraph at the top  of
           page 162; risk on return.
      20    The Appellants further refer to the list  of  essential  reading
           within their original skeleton argument dated 5.11.08.
           Conclusion
      21    Even in paragraph 21 of SY the Tribunal accepted that there  was
           a risk of a previous asylum claim becoming known  on  return  to
           Syria. On the basis of the current evidence -  not all available
           to earlier Tribunals - it is apparent that the risk is real. The
           Court of Appeal in MH (Iraq) v SSHD [2007] EWCA Civ 852 recently
           restated the principle that the burden of proof in  relation  to
           future events is discharged 'by showing that there is a real  as
           opposed to a fanciful risk that they will happen  (paragraph  22
           of that judgement). There is nothing fanciful in the Appellants'
           fears.
      22    The evidence available to the  Tribunal  also  establishes  that
           there is a real risk that where a previous claim for  asylum  in
           the UK becomes known to the Syrian authorities on return, a real
           risk of harm will result (and indeed this does not appear to  be
           disputed in any earlier reported case). In  the  alternative,  a
           real risk of serious harm  will  result  where  additional  risk
           factors of either Kurdish ethnicity or illegal exit  from  Syria
           are present, or in  the  further  alternative,  where  both  are
           present.
      23    The Appellant SA requests that his  appeal  be  allowed  on  the
           basis set out in paragraph 22 above....
 14. Mr Stanage's written submissions were as follows.

        "Introduction and summary


        1.  IA's  appeal  was  today  adjourned  part-heard   for   written
           submissions after the conclusion of his evidence as to sur place
           activities and live evidence from Dr Alan George.
        2.  The  Tribunal  invited  the  parties  to  exchange  submissions
           electronically and gave liberty to  the  Appellants  to  respond
           thereafter to any submissions drafted by the Respondent.
        3. IA's main submission is that the real  risk  of  persecution  or
           breach of Art 3 ECHR arising from the cumulative factors set out
           at paragraph 4 of his skeleton argument [bundle  8,  section  C,
           page 3] is proved all the  more  clearly  as  a  result  of  the
           evidence heard today.


        Submissions on law


        4. IA relies upon the submissions in  the  aforementioned  skeleton
           argument.


        5. IA further and gratefully adopts the  submissions  made  in  the
           skeleton argument submitted on behalf of his  fellow  Appellants
           [bundle 11]. The Tribunal's attention is particularly invited to
           paragraphs 23  and  25  in  which  principles  of  law  directly
           relevant to an assessment  of  risk  in  the  instant  case  are
           extracted from Court of Appeal decisions in Batayav v  SSHD  and
           YB(Eritrea) v SSHD .


        Submissions on objective evidence


        6. As  to  objective  evidence,  IA  again  gratefully  adopts  the
           extracts already set out in the skeleton argument for SA and  AK
           [bundle 11] at paragraph 30.


        7. Those extracts confirm the ever more marked  propensity  of  the
           Syrian   authorities   to   deploy    systematic/frequent/common
           arbitrary  detention,   torture,   malicious   prosecution   and
           imprisonment against oppositionists.


        8. To that summary  of  relevant  objective  evidence  [drawn  from
           bundle 9] IA would advance the following extracts from  his  own
           bundle 8, section C as corroboration for his  well-founded  fear
           of persecution:


           page 83: Freedom House, October 30, 2008: para 3,  line  3:  the
           State may charge opponents with "spreading false information";


           page 84: Human Rights Watch, October 30, 2008: para 3: the State
           convicted 12 political activists on vaguely defined  charges  of
           "weakening  national  sentiment"   and   "spreading   false   or
           exaggerated news which would affect the morale of  the  country"
           in an attempt (according to the headline) to 'silence critics';


           page 85: ibid, line 8: a further charge exists which,  says  IA,
           may  be  particularly  easy  to  level   against   him,   namely
           "communicating  with  a  foreign  country  and  inciting  it  to
           initiate aggression against Syria";


           page 113: Human rights Watch, February 5, 2008,  para  1:  eight
           out of the twelve opposition activists (NB: apparently not Kurds
           but rather Syrian nationals-see page 115- and  activists  within
           an umbrella group of pro-democracy groups) claim  to  have  been
           beaten in detention;


           page 123:  Human  Rights  Watch,  October  2007,  at  page  154,
           penultimate  paragraph:  'Syrian  security  agencies  frequently
           arrest activists following their  return  from  trips  overseas,
           apparently as a form of punishment for the activists' discussion
           of Syrian human rights issues abroad'.

        Submissions on expert evidence


        9. IA relies upon all reports submitted by Dr George in respect  of
           all three Appellants.


       10. It is further submitted that Dr George's oral evidence today has
           helpfully clarified, and fortified, his conclusion  that  IA  is
           reasonably likely to face risk of persecution on return.


       11. In particular, IA invites the Tribunal to recall  the  following
           elements of the oral evidence today:


                     a)  All  of  Dr  George's  sources  indicate  that  the
                        situation for Syrian Kurds  has  deteriorated  since
                        2006. None says that it has improved;
                     b) Dr George only days ago spoke to two  Kurdish  party
                        leaders who confirm that view;
                     c) It is probable that the authorities would  be  aware
                        of the YouTube video broadcast [reproduced in  print
                        at Bundle 8, section C, pages 58-59];
                     d) 'Certainly' they  are  hyper-sensitive  to  internet
                        activity. An  example  from  Dr  George's  book  was
                        given.  A  political  cartoon  critical  of   Syrian
                        involvement in Lebanon was emailed to the wife of  a
                        businessman. Within half  an  hour  of  transmission
                        security services arrived at her home;
                     e)  Email  communications  are  monitored.  A's   email
                        correspondence  with   the   SHRC   is   extensively
                        documented and covers a long period of time.  Please
                        see  bundle  8,  section  C,  pages  14-45  [It   is
                        submitted that although translations have  not  been
                        provided, there can be no doubt that the  sender  is
                        the SHRC and the recipient therefore in contact with
                        them];
                     f)  It  is  'extremely  probable'   that   filming   of
                        demonstrators is undertaken so as to have  a  record
                        as to who is an oppositionist so that they or  their
                        families may be targeted;
                     g) There is  a  hard  core  of  people  to  attend  all
                        demonstrations and there will be  at  demonstrations
                        faces that become known  to  the  Embassy  personnel
                        filming/photographing from within. It  is  submitted
                        that, notwithstanding a change of hairstyle,  IA  by
                        his  regular  attendance  at   a   total   of   nine
                        demonstrations is reasonably likely to have become a
                        'known face' easily capable of identification as  an
                        oppositionist;
                     h) For a stateless Kurd resident in Syria the only type
                        of exit available is an illegal one because a Syrian
                        Kurd will have no passport, therefore  cannot  apply
                        for an exit visa  and  is  in  effect  forbidden  to
                        travel. It is therefore submitted that the  fact  of
                        illegal exit, an accepted fact in IA's appeal, would
                        raise suspicion that he is a Kurd and  therefore  an
                        oppositionist;
                     i) The relatively low number of forced returnees  (less
                        than 5 per month in recent years) would  enable  the
                        authorities   to   search   for   and    root    out
                        oppositionists among them;


        Submissions on IA's own evidence


       12.  It is submitted that insofar as it is important to evaluate the
           genuine nature of IA's political commitment, he has:


           (i) travelled a significant distance from Newcastle upon Tyne to
           London on the nine occasions that he has  publicly  demonstrated
           his opposition to the government;


           (ii)  corresponded  by  email  with  the  Syrian  Human   Rights
           Committee (SHRC) over a prolonged period;


           (iii) been less politically active than he would like to  be  in
           the Kurdish cause because few Kurds live on Tyneside, many  more
           live   in   London   and   IA   is   therefore   prevented    by
           circumstance/NASS from the fuller political involvement which he
           would choose if resident in London.


       Submissions on Home Office evidence


      13. Although  there  was  no  need  to  consider  in  detail  the  COI
          information request [bundle  12]  at  the  hearing  today,  it  is
          significant that its final paragraph appears to  corroborate  IA's
          fear of persecution on return.


      14. Information from the Immigration and Refugee Board  of  Canada  in
          May 2008 notes that those who have participated in  demonstrations
          against the Syrian government outside Syrian Embassies 'may indeed
          have to face prosecution upon return'.


      15. It is submitted that the use of the word 'indeed' strengthens  the
          word 'may' such that the phrase as a whole expresses a  degree  of
          risk  which  would  found  a  successful  claim  for  refugee   or
          humanitarian protection. 'May indeed' means 'is reasonably  likely
          to' or 'runs a real risk of'.


      16. If a risk of 'prosecution upon return' is thus established then it
          is submitted that IA's appeal can only succeed because the risk of
          torture or beatings or disproportionate punishment on politically-
          motivated charges is plain from all on the  objective  and  expert
          evidence.


       Conclusion


      17. IA's appeal is supported by an abundance of:


                      1. well-sourced objective evidence;
                      2. well-documented photographic evidence;
                      3.  well-reasoned,  recent  and   researched   expert
                         evidence


           and should therefore be allowed.

 15. Ms Pettersen made the following written submissions


        Introduction:-





       1. The Secretary of State's representative submits that both appeals
          should be dismissed on the basis  that  neither  appellant  would
          face a real risk of persecution on return to Syria on  the  basis
          of being failed asylum seekers of Kurdish origin.
       2. In the case of SA, the original finding that he had  not  made  a
          credible claim about the events before he left Syria stands.  His
          case is therefore that of a failed asylum seeker with no accepted
          profile with the Syrian authorities.
       3. In the case of IA, his claims surrounding events  in  Syria  were
          not accepted, but he  claims  risk  on  return  as  a  result  of
          attending demonstrations in London  which  he  claims  have  been
          filmed  by  the  Syrian  authorities  -  a  refugee  'sur  place'
          argument.


        Submissions on credibility (IA)


       4. This appellant has produced photographic evidence  of  attendance
          at a number of demonstrations in London (bundle 8A pp  35-47  and
          8C 47-73). It is submitted that IA's evidence about  why  he  was
          attending the demonstrations to the effect that it was  his  duty
          as a Kurd to do this, does not  sit  with  his  earlier  evidence
          (bundle 8A p4 para 11) that he was not interested in politics. In
          addition, the appellant has not in fact been involved  in  Syrian
          or opposition groups in the United Kingdom. It is submitted  that
          it is therefore speculation that  the  Syrian  authorities  might
          have a record of his name even if they have filmed  demonstrators
          (bundle 8C pp 76-79). The fact that the appellant  may  be  on  a
          mailing list  of  the  Syrian  Human  Rights  Commission  is  not
          something that is reasonably likely to be  known  to  the  Syrian
          authorities, notwithstanding the comments made by Dr George about
          the case of e-mail monitoring which he says  takes  place  within
          Syria. The Tribunal's attention is also drawn to  the  fact  that
          the number of hits on the YouTube clip (bundle 8C  pp  57-59)  is
          210 on one printout (p 58)  and 297 on another (p 59). These  hit
          counts do not suggest the clip has been very widely viewed.
       5. It is  noted  that  the  medical  report  (bundle  8C  pp  81-82)
          submitted in support of IA's claim is undated, and refers to  him
          having flashbacks to torture that he experienced. It is submitted
          that little weight should be given to this report  on  the  basis
          that IA never claimed to have been  arrested  or  ill-treated  in
          Syria.


         Dr George's reports:-


       6. In relation to the updated report on IA (bundle 8C  pages  76-79)
          it is argued that IA's activities will have  been  monitored  and
          his photograph taken, or he has been filmed. It is submitted that
          not all those being filmed (if this is the case)  are  Syrian  or
          Kurdish,  and  Dr  George  acknowledged  that   some   of   those
          demonstrating are people resident in the United Kingdom for  many
          years.
       7. Dr George quotes from 'indymedia' (bundle 8C p  77  para  6)  who
          assert that the filming may be used to intimidate the families of
          demonstrators in Syria. In cross examination he acknowledged that
          he  had  not  been  told  of  any  occurrences  of  this  in  the
          individuals he had interviewed or done reports on.
       8. In relation to the updated report on AK whose case is being dealt
          with separately, Dr George deals with the  general  situation  of
          failed asylum seekers, and submissions are  being  made  on  this
          report in the context of the more general   information  for  the
          two appellants IA and SA (rather than the  sections  relating  to
          AK).  This report is at bundle 10 pp 8-38.
       9. Dr George's brief is set out at paragraph 17 (bundle 10 p 11). It
          is notable that the instances he cites of those  who  have  faced
          problems in paragraphs 89 to 93 (bundle 10 pp 32-34)  take  place
          between 2002 and the end of 2006. Many have connections with  the
          Muslim Brotherhood, and are clearly distinguishable  from  Syrian
          Kurds. The cases cited in paragraph 94 (bundle 10 p 34) are taken
          from a Syrian Human Rights Committee report and  are  not  broken
          down as to Kurds and  non  Kurds;  only  one  of  these  incident
          Patricia Dabbour is said to have taken place in 2007.
      10. In the penalties section (bundle 10 pp 30 - 32) Dr  George  cites
          the penalties for illegal exit, which could be a prison  sentence
          of 7 years hard labour if the seal of Syria  is  falsified  (para
          87), but it is clear that none of  the  appellants  have  claimed
          that  they  used  false  Syrian  documents  or  falsified   these
          themselves. Any penalty for these appellants therefore  would  be
          at the lower end of the scale.


          Comments on Country Guidance issue on risk on return:-
          11. It is submitted that the material put forward both  in  terms
          of Dr George's  opinion  and  the  objective  material  does  not
          demonstrate that the situation for Syrian Kurds on return  having
          left illegally has  become  any  worse.  See  above  comments  in
          relation to the cases cited. It is  submitted  that  the  Country
          Guidance on this issue should follow the same  principles  as  AR
          Syria CG [2006] UAKIT 00048.


      Objective material to which the Tribunal's attention  is  specifically
      drawn:-


          (Bundle 9 pp 68-91) Danish Refugee Council - report from  a  fact
          finding mission to Damascus 15-22 January 2007


           3.4.2.1, Mistreatment of Detainees:
          "An Embassy in Damascus (2) informed the  delegation  that  there
          were no  reports  of  slapping,  beating  or  torture  of  people
          detained because of illegal departure from Syria.  It was assumed
          that slapping, beating or torture was  not  used  against  people
          detained for minor crimes as for instance illegal departure."


          Section 5.3
          Deals in detail with penalties for illegal departure and quotes a
          number of sources, in only one of which is there a  reference  to
          the possibility of abuse:


           Embassy 2   Their source had  no  knowledge  of  cases  where  a
          Syrian cit returning from Sweden has been subject to  a  fine  or
          prison sentence  due  to  illegal  exit....Knew  of  cases  where
          returning cit interrogated about the reasons for loss of  PPT  by
          Immig Ser & detained 2/3 days by Security Services (SS)


           Embassy 1 persons who have exited S illegally will be detained &
          questioned on return.  Source had no knowledge of  the  penalties
          for illegal exit and knew of no cases where illegal exit lead  to
          a  penalty..........detained & questioned by SS, but  most  often
          released after a short period of detention"


           Embassy 3   "no knowledge of cases where  a  Syrian  cit  ...had
          been sentenced to a  fine  or  prison  due  to  illegal  exit..."
          ...indicated that  the  regulations  in  the  Syrian  Penal  Code
          regarding illegal exit may have been abolished, but not  poss  to
          confirm this information yet."


                       ...not normally a  problem  to  leave  for  economic
          reasons or to apply for asylum abroad.....(which) is not regarded
          by the  Syrian  authorities  ...as  an  expression  of  anti-govt
          activities.  The authorities have a certain understanding for the
          fact that Syrians may choose to go  abroad  due  to  unemployment
          etc."
                       ...2 cases of FAS Syrians "In one the  returnee  was
          detained  by SS and held for I month without trial.   The  reason
          for the detention was unknown.   In  another  case  the  returnee
          admitted  having   participated   in   anti-govt   demonstrations
          abroad...referred to the court but  eventually  released  with  a
          suspended sentence of 2 months imprisonment."


           Local Lawyer     "normally  illegal  exit  ...is  not  punished.
          Persons who have left illegally & re-enter ...holding a  laissez-
          passer will be interrogated  in  order  for  the  authorities  to
          establish the  identity  of  the  person."...person  interrogated
          first by Immigration authorities and after that referred  to  SS,
          who decide if a new PPT can be issued....most  cases  SS  decides
          can  be  issued  even  in  cases  where  person  originally  left
          illegally.  The official range of penalty for illegal exit  is  6
          months imprisonment."


           Embassy 4    Alternative  source  "generally  persons  who  left
          illegally and then return...will  be  kept  by  the  intelligence
          agency from a few days to 2-3  weeks  and  interrogated.   During
          this period of time     mistreatment may happen"


           Local Lawyer     "having applied for asylum abroad does  not  in
          itself  lead  to  detention  or  imprisonment  upon  return...re-
          entry...in general is not a problem."


           Local Lawyer     Military Service deserters  "will  be  arrested
          and sent to complete their military service."


           HR Org           "re-entry can lead to problems for HR activists
          and political activists,  including  Kurds  who  are  politically
          active, if the concerned persons are already known by the  Syrian
          authorities."


           Kurdish rep 4    returning Kurds "may face arrest due to illegal
          exit from Syria ...risk depends on how much the authorities  know
          about the activities of the returning  person."   Referred  to  a
          Syrian Kurd sentenced by Syrian court for separatist activity  on
          return from Germany...2 Kurds detained on ret from Iraq, one  for
          9mths without trial, the other being  tried  by  court.   Another
          case where Kurd & his son arrested on return from Norway."


           Attorney 1  ..."usual penalty for illegal exit ...is a fine".


          Commentary on the Amnesty International letter (of 26 Jan 2008)


          (Bundle 9 p 160 - 166).  It is submitted that the letter does not
          cite  instances  of  failed  asylum  seekers  being  arrested  or
          detained on their return (p162 final paragraph).  The  report  (p
          161 2nd para)) refers to systematic persecution of Syrian  Kurds,
          particularly those who are members of Kurdish  organisations.  By
          contrast the Amnesty International  report  for  Syria  for  2008
          published 28 May 2008 (bundle 10 page  1-4)  refers  to  identity
          based discrimination for Syrian Kurds and denial of equal  access
          to social and economic rights.


          US State Department Report (bundle 9 pp12-37).
          It is submitted that whilst the situation for  Kurds  (pp  34-35)
          may be discriminatory, the instances cited are not of  widespread
          persecution solely for being a Kurd. The  arrests  cited   mostly
          refer to leaders of opposition  parties  rather  than  widespread
          persecution of all Kurds.

          Closing summary
          It is submitted that for both IA and SA  the  risk  as  a  Syrian
          Kurdish failed asylum seeker would be at worst the possibility of
          a fine or a short term of imprisonment.   It  is  submitted  that
          this is not a real risk of persecution or a breach of Article  3.
          With regard to IA the risk needs to be assessed  in  relation  to
          whether or not it is accepted that his UK  activities  have  been
          monitored by the Syrian authorities and that he would as a result
          be identified on his return.


          It is respectfully submitted that the appeals should be dismissed
          on all grounds."

 16. Mr Stanage made further written submissions by way of reply  on  behalf
     of IA in the following terms.


        "Introduction


       18.  Counsel  has  within  the  last  hour  had  sight  of   written
           submissions on behalf of the Respondent in this matter.


       19. The Respondent, no  doubt  inadvertently,  therein  invites  the
           Tribunal to err in law. A brief rebuttal of certain  submissions
           is therefore necessary.


        Rebuttal


       20. As to the Respondent's paragraph 4:


           Counsel cannot find a bundle 8A but in any event recalls that it
           has been IA's case throughout that he has no desire to join  any
           Kurdish nationalist political party but to promote  the  Kurdish
           cause free from political party restrictions. Such was his  oral
           evidence before Mr Aitken at North Shields.


           IA's  oral  evidence  yesterday  made   abundantly   clear   his
           commitment to that cause:


           He explained that he attended demonstrations because


           'I am Kurdish; the world knows how much Syrian Kurds suffer;  We
           face  unbelievable  difficulties;  They  take  our   properties,
           belongings, not giving us our ID cards; If we don't go to defend
           Kurdish rights whatever the Syrian government does to Kurds  no-
           one would know about it. I am trying by going to  demonstrations
           to stop the injustices being done to the Kurdish people'.


      21. Further, as to the Respondent's paragraph  4,  it  is  potentially
          misleading to suggest that 'the appellant has  not  in  fact  been
          involved in Syrian or opposition groups in the United Kingdom'. It
          is right that he is not a member of any group but the Tribunal has
          seen  the  overtly  political  and  oppositionist  nature  of  the
          demonstrations and has heard from Dr George that they  are  mainly
          organised by the Western Kurdistan Association.


          It would therefore be misconceived to suggest that A, if  he  came
          to the attention of  the  authorities  at  all,  would  be  deemed
          apolitical by them.


       22. Further, as to the Respondent's paragraph 4, the number of  hits
           on the YouTube site  if  more  than,  say,  10  would,  in  IA's
           submission, lead to the conclusion that there  is  a  real  risk
           that someone from the Embassy was one of the ten viewers.


       23. As to the Respondent's paragraph 5, IA confirms that he does not
           rely on the contents of the medical report. Counsel has made  no
           reference to it and had  not  advised  that  it  be  before  the
           Tribunal on this occasion.


       24. As to the Respondent's paragraph 6, it  is  submitted  that  the
           fact that not all  demonstrators  are  Syrian  or  Kurdish  only
           increases the likelihood that the Embassy staff will focus their
           attention on those who are or appear to be Kurdish such as IA.


       25. As to the Respondent's paragraph 7, it is submitted that, in law
           as in logic, absence of evidence is not evidence of absence.


       26. As to the Respondent's paragraph 10, IA is unsure what is  meant
           by a penalty 'at  the  lower  end  of  the  scale'.  Torture  in
           detention is systematic/common i.e. reasonably likely to  attend
           even a 'short' custodial sentence where cumulative risk factors,
           as in IA's case, are present: see skeleton argument for IA, para
           4, factors (a)-(e).


       27. As to the Respondent's extracts from objective material, IA asks
           the Tribunal to note the information attributed to 'Kurdish  rep
           4': a Kurd returned from Iraq was detained for 9 months  without
           trial i.e. persecuted.


       28. As to the Respondent's 'closing summary' if imprisonment  is  an
           alternative to a fine it is a real risk, with the attendant risk
           of breaches of Art 3 ECHR.


        Conclusion


       29. IA's appeal should be allowed."

THE EVIDENCE OF DR GEORGE

 17. Dr George is a freelance consultant, writer and  academic  specialising
     in Middle Eastern political and economic affairs. He has  a  BA  degree
     from Oxford University and MA and PhD degrees from  Durham  University.
     In our view he is plainly well-informed  on  Syrian  affairs.  His  two
     reports of 20 July 2006 and 5 November 2008, which he  adopted  as  his
     evidence in chief, were prepared for the AK  appeal  but,  whilst  they
     contain elements  that  were  specific  to  it,  the  general  opinions
     expressed in them as to the situation in Syria are of wider  relevance.
     He also adopted his reports  dated  7  November  2006  on  IA  and  his
     supplemental report of 10 June 2008.

 18. The material thrust of these reports, as well as the differing views of
     the Representatives  about  them,  is  clear  from  the  above  written
     submissions by the Representatives and we do not therefore wish  to  be
     unnecessarily repetitious by  summarising  them  again  now.  We  shall
     however draw from these reports and submissions in more detail when  we
     come to our conclusions. We  must  however  record  at  this  stage  Dr
     George's oral evidence and supplementary written information,  made  in
     response to questions put to  him  from  the  Representatives  and  the
     Tribunal, which we found to be helpful and illuminating.

 19. Dr George was referred to the original  Tribunal  determination  in  AK
     where he was reported to have expressed the following opinion.

           "9.... Dr George said that whilst it is true that  in  the  past
           there was a greater likelihood of failed asylum seekers being at
           risk on return to Syria the conditions are not as bad  now,  but
           the improvement is "not by much", and  the  authorities  at  the
           airport may sometimes  not  assume  economic  motivation  having
           caused a person to leave...."

 20. He said he was baffled by this reporting. He referred to  paragraph  74
     of his 5 November 2008 report which stated that:

           "I would add that in 2006 a senior and respected Syrian official
           who is based at the Syrian Embassy in London and  is  personally
           involved in matters concerning the return of  Syrians  to  Syria
           from the UK told me that there was now some realisation  on  the
           part of the Syrian authorities that Syrians who  claimed  asylum
           might have done so for  purely  economic  reasons,  rather  than
           because they genuinely  opposed  the  regime.   He  also  stated
           however that the Syrian security authorities often continued  to
           view  such  individuals  (ie   those   motivated   by   economic
           considerations) with suspicion.  Old attitudes and died hard, he
           said."

 21. He concluded that the reporting in AK may have been intended to reflect
     this. However, whilst it is true that some Syrian officials  have  some
     understanding  of  reasons  for  claiming  asylum,  that  is  not  much
     improvement from a very repressive regime. In the 1980s  there  was  an
     uprising which resulted in severe repression. One  cannot  put  precise
     dates on changes in levels of repression but it was less in 1990s,  and
     less again under the new President post 2000. However recently  it  has
     become more  oppressive  again.  The  overall  position  for  Kurds  as
     compared to 2006 is now worse. The context matters.  After  March  2004
     there were violent confrontations and the  situation  has  deteriorated
     since then. In last couple of years it has become bad  for  non-Kurdish
     groups as well, for example for democracy activists.  He  had  recently
     telephoned Kurdish leaders (described in paragraphs 53/55 of  his  2008
     report) and they were clear that the position of Kurds has deteriorated
     since 2004. He had not found any Kurds who say other than that  it  has
     got worse in last couple of years.

 22. In paragraph 75 of his report of 5 November 2008 he had said:

           "The available information on the Syrian  authorities'  attitude
           towards asylum applicants is clearly somewhat contradictory.  In
           my opinion however it would be imprudent to assert categorically
           the claiming asylum abroad in and of itself  would  never  cause
           adverse attention from  the  Syrian  authorities.   I  say  this
           because several of the reports on this  question  cite  specific
           cases where individuals have been  targeted  solely  for  having
           applied for  asylum.   Evidently,  it  is  something  that  does
           happen, albeit that it does not happen routinely or even  often.
           In my view, especially bearing in mind the arbitrary  manner  in
           which  the  Syrian   security   services   conduct   themselves,
           unsuccessful asylum claimants do run  the  risk,  at  least,  of
           attracting adverse official attention on their return to Syria."

     Dr George added that this passage related specifically  to  people  who
     claimed asylum and not to those who left Syria illegally. That would be
     a cumulative risk factor.

 23. He was then asked about the photographs at demonstrations  outside  the
     Syrian Embassy in London  and  he  confirmed  that  two  of  them  (the
     enlargements) appeared to show a camera  being  used  from  inside  the
     Embassy to record the demonstration. He was told that IA claimed one of
     the demonstrations he had attended was videoed by  the  organisers  and
     published on the internet on YouTube and was asked if  the  authorities
     would be interested in this. He replied that  they  would,  if  it  was
     drawn to their attention. They  are  hypersensitive  to  criticism  and
     there are several examples of rapid  reaction  by  the  authorities  if
     information about criticism comes to their attention. He was shown  the
     photo which suggested that a videocam was being used from  the  Embassy
     and was asked why this was being done. He said that if it was a one off
     it may be due to the interest in an individual. But he  had  been  told
     that this was routine and in that case it was very probable that it  is
     being done to create a record with view to targeting the  demonstrators
     and their  families.  People  attending  demonstrations  say  they  see
     photography from the Embassy happening routinely.

 24. Paragraph 5 of his 10 June 2008 report described evidence by two  named
     witnesses, Dr J Mella, the head of the London-based  Western  Kurdistan
     Association, a lobby group for Syrian Kurds and Mr M Al-Abdeh, the head
     of the policy unit of the Movement for Justice and Development, a  non-
     Kurdish Syrian opposition group. Both confirmed that they had  attended
     demonstrations outside the Syrian Embassy and had personally  witnessed
     the filming of the demonstrations from within  the  Embassy.  Dr  Mella
     considered this to be routine. Dr George was later able to confirm that
     both of these witnesses had been in the UK for many years and were  now
     British citizens. Dr George thought that such  demonstrations  occurred
     every 3 or 4 months and about 50 or 100 attended at a time; or say  20-
     70 to be safe. It may be that the  demonstrations  took  place  only  a
     couple of times a year or a little more. He  later  confirmed  that  Dr
     Mella had told him that there were at least two per year and  could  be
     as many as four depending on specific events. Dr George said  it  would
     normally  be  the  same  hard  core  of   people   who   attended   the
     demonstrations,  though  there  will   be   others   who   may   attend
     intermittently.

 25. Dr George drew attention to paragraph 71 of his report  of  5  November
     2008 where he had highlighted what he considered to be an inconsistency
     in a report of the Canadian section of Amnesty International which  had
     stated that:

           "Syrians seeking political asylum abroad  are  perceived  to  be
           government opponents by the Syrian authorities.  The  very  fact
           of leaving the country to seek asylum abroad is imputed to be  a
           manifestation of opposition to the  Syrian  government.   If  in
           addition  the  asylum  seeker  has  been  affiliated   with   an
           unauthorised political party will group, he/she risks arrest and
           torture upon return to Syria.  This is done by  the  authorities
           to attempt to  extract  information  about  the  group  and  its
           members."

 26. He was asked how opponents in the UK of  the  Syrian  regime  would  be
     identified, when the evidence on identification related  to  attendance
     at demonstrations only. He said that  political  activity  in  eyes  of
     Syria would certainly include a demonstration outside the Embassy. Also
     a Kurd, who had fled from Syria to escape  allegations  of  anti-regime
     activities, would be regarded as a political oppositionist  whether  he
     attended demonstrations or not. Thus there is the  potential  of  risk.
     However there are not infinite resources  available  for  surveillance,
     and it will be targeted on those who are most of interest.  Also  if  a
     person left Syria illegally he would not have proper documentation.  So
     an application would  have  to  be  made  at  the  Embassy  for  travel
     documents. That would attract attention from the security services that
     may be adverse. If however the individual was an economic migrant only,
     it is a grey area. Security can be arbitrary. If he is a Kurd  and  the
     officer has had a bad experience of Kurds there  could  be  a  problem.
     There were a range of factors  that  could  be  significant  given  the
     arbitrary  nature  of  the  security   services.   There   is   greater
     understanding of the fact of economic  migration  but  also  there  are
     still hard-liners who do not accept this. Serious charges could be made
     against the most innocuous of democracy activists and possibly  against
     economic migrants. There is a risk but he said he  could  not  quantify
     it. He leaned to the view, if pushed, that there would be a  real  risk
     even  for  a  purely  economic  migrant  of  being  perceived   as   an
     oppositionist by some elements of the security services.  However  such
     risk would be much less than for someone who had a political history.

 27. As for economic migration from Syria, there were no statistics. However
     he thought it was significant, given the number  of  Syrians  who  work
     abroad in various countries and send remittances home.  There  were  no
     official unemployment figures either but he thought unemployment  could
     be running at about 25%. It was very significant.  Many  Syrians  leave
     legally. Getting permission is not that difficult. Many  also  come  to
     Europe to study. Syrians can travel to Lebanon on an ID  card,  without
     the need for a passport. They can then  travel  onwards  from  Lebanon.
     Syria does not unduly restrict the ability of its  citizens  to  travel
     abroad if they have a good reason. They can get an exit visa. However a
     stateless Kurd does not have a passport and  cannot  therefore  get  an
     exit visa. Thus a stateless Kurd can only  exit  illegally.  If  he  is
     abroad it would be very problematical whether he would be let back. The
     Home Office would be better placed to say.  He  did  not  know  of  any
     stateless Kurd seeking re-admission and being refused, but he could not
     see how he could get in. At paragraph 65 of his report  of  5  November
     2008 he had identified difficulties that exist for stateless Kurds even
     for travel within Syria. None of his reports had dealt with refusal  of
     documentation. That would be a follow-up issue which would not come  to
     him and was not within his knowledge.

 28. He was then asked about the  consequences/penalties  for  illegal  exit
     only. He referred to paragraph 86 of his 5 November 2008  report  which
     stated:

           "Under law 42 of 31 December 1975...  any  Syrian  national  who
           departs his country illegally faces judicial  consequences  that
           may in principle result in up to  three  months  imprisonment...
           the penalties for leaving Syria using false documents or a false
           identity are  much  stiffer:  ranging  from  one  month  to  two
           years..."

 29. He was asked if law 42, which he said applied to a  "Syrian  national",
     also applied to a stateless undocumented Kurd. He said that he did  not
     know. For a stateless Kurd the law was what a secret  policeman  wanted
     it to be. On a return on emergency documents, problems could  arise  in
     refusal to approve return, or on return at the airport, or  afterwards.
     He was asked if the Syrian authorities cared if  stateless  Kurds  left
     the country. Dr George replied that  the  position  was  contradictory.
     They  were  sensitive  to  issues  touching  national  unity,  as   the
     Government came from a minority group. It did not like  to  acknowledge
     problems. It tried to maintain the notion  of  a  unity  that  embraces
     Kurds even if it is a fiction in terms of reality. Thus they would  not
     wish to push Kurds out as this would go against the concept of unity.

 30. Syria operates on an "as if" system, based upon presumptions  that  are
     not true in fact. Thus if Kurds  behave  as  members  of  the  national
     family then what  happens  in  their  private  lives  is  not  of  real
     interest. Dr George later commented further in writing  about  the  "as
     if" culture, which is described in a  paper  entitled  "Ambiguities  of
     Domination: Politics, Rhetoric and Symbols  in  Contemporary  Syria  by
     Lisa Wedeen, from which he quoted as follows.

           "Asad's cult operates as a  disciplinary  device,  generating  a
           politics of public dissimulation in which  citizens  act  as  if
           they revere their leader.  A politics of "as if", while  it  may
           appear irrational or even  foolish  at  first  glance,  actually
           proves politically effective".

 31. Dr George was asked whether and if so which of the people identified in
     paragraphs 89-94 of his report of 5 November  2008  as  being  forcibly
     returned asylum seekers who had been arrested on return, were Kurds. He
     said he did not know. The names  in  the  reports  could  be  Druse  or
     others. Some of the names are neutral. Some are not Kurdish. One  them,
     Jihad Sha'ban Qabaqeebu could be a Kurdish name. The  sources  did  not
     identify whether the individuals named had been involved  in  political
     activity. He added that he did not know of any instance of any  arrests
     or intimidation of the Syrian families of demonstrators  in  UK.  There
     was no follow up mechanism  to  monitor  what  happened  after  return.
     Amnesty  International  gave  examples  of  what   happened   to   some
     individuals.

 32. He then referred to  paragraph  10  of  his  report  of  10  June  2008
     concerning  the   identification   by   the   Syrian   authorities   of
     demonstrators where he said;

           "I would add that I have no  information  as  to  precisely  how
           Syria's  security  services  identify   individual   anti-regime
           demonstrators who had been photographed or  filmed.   I  presume
           however that they would use a variety of techniques and  sources
           of information, including information from  informants.....  Far
           more pertinent would be the risk of identification attendant  on
           unavoidable encounters with the Syrian authorities in the course
           of his return.  To the best of my knowledge, meanwhile,  only  a
           small number of Syrian Kurds are returned forcibly to Syria from
           the UK each year.  I would  assert  that  it  is  reasonable  to
           suppose  that  the   Syrian   authorities   will   apply   their
           photographic  and  film  records   to   those   relatively   few
           individuals being returned.  It would therefore be a  relatively
           easy  matter  for  them  to  establish  whether   a   particular
           individual had taken part in an anti-regime demonstration whilst
           in London."

 33. He added that identifying 5-10 individuals in a few weeks would not  be
     hard. The names will be disclosed on applying for  documentation.  Some
     of the applicants might have files already. In the Middle East,  people
     do not live anonymously. People live in extended families.  They  would
     not be returned in a vacuum. It was pointed out to him  that  the  Home
     Office statistics were that there had been 70 recent returns  from  the
     UK  to Syria  over  a  period  of  15  months.  He  observed  that  not
     everything that happened in Syria was reported. Human rights violations
     were very random. There is no  free  press.  Also  as  there  were  few
     demonstrators they can readily be checked when applications for  travel
     documents  are  made.  Moreover  these  statistics  included  voluntary
     returns and were not broken down. There were many  Syrian  students  in
     the UK.

 34. That was the thrust of Dr George's oral evidence given, as supplemented
     by his subsequent written comments. IA  then  gave  his  oral  evidence
     concerning his political activities in the UK.

THE EVIDENCE OF IA

 35.  In  his  oral  evidence,  given  to  us  through  a  Kurdish  Kurmanji
     interpreter without any apparent  difficulty  or  complaint,  IA  first
     adopted his written statement of 4 November 2008.  In it, he said  that
     he had attended in total about nine demonstrations organised by various
     organisations outside the Syrian Embassy  in  London.   Some  had  been
     organised by Kurdish organisations and others by other  groups  opposed
     to the Syrian government.  He was on the mailing  list  of  the  Syrian
     Human Rights Committee (SHRC), which is banned in Syria  and  based  in
     London.  He attached a number of e-mails and photographs to corroborate
     his attendance at demonstrations and also in particular to  demonstrate
     the filming of the demonstrators from within the Embassy.  He  said  he
     did not belong to any particular party or group because his loyalty was
     to the Kurdish people. At demonstrations he often  carried  a  placard.
     He identified some of the dates on which  he  attended  demonstrations,
     the last being on 6 June 2008.  At each demonstration there was a  film
     crew recording the demonstration and the coverage  was  shown  on  Arab
     media throughout  the  Middle  East.   Additionally  at  three  of  the
     demonstrations which he attended, he  personally  saw  cameras  in  the
     Embassy filming the demonstrators.

 36. IA then responded to questions put to him. He confirmed that the  dates
     of the photographs were as in the index to the bundle  and  related  to
     demonstrations on 7/10/06, 12/03/07, 29/02/08, 4/03/08, 6/06/08.  There
     was also the YouTube film of the demonstration on 4/03/2008, which  was
     attended  by  about  40   people.   There   had   also   been   earlier
     demonstrations. He could not remember the date of the first but it  was
     about a year after coming here. The photographs were taken by a friend.
     The YouTube video came from the SHRC, who had e-mailed him about it.

 37. When it was pointed out to him that 29/2/06 (the date given by him  for
     one demonstration) did not exist as  2006  was  not  a  leap  year,  he
     accepted that he could have made a mistake about the precise  date.  In
     all he had attended 9 demonstrations. The attendance varied.  It  could
     be in the 100s, or 50s, or more or less. He confirmed that he  was  not
     an officer of any of the organising groups. He attended because he  was
     Kurdish and he wanted the world to know  how  they  have  suffered.  If
     Kurds did not go to demonstrations, they  would  not  be  fighting  for
     their rights. He did not do anything else politically besides attending
     demonstrations, because he had been housed in Newcastle by NASS. London
     is a long way to travel. The Kurdish activities were based  in  London.
     If he had been housed in London his activities would have increased.

OTHER OBJECTIVE EVIDENCE

 38. There was extensive further documentary evidence  as  itemised  in  the
     appendix hereto. We have taken it all into account in  our  conclusions
     even if we do not mention each item specifically  outside  the  annexe.
     Much of it deals with matters that are  not  disputed,  or  is  broadly
     repetitive of evidence given elsewhere,  or  is  not  the  most  recent
     evidence on the subject.

THE RELEVANT LAW

 39. The legal framework for  our  determination  is  now  provided  by  the
     Refugee or Person in Need of International  Protection  (Qualification)
     Regulations 2006 (the "Qualification Regulations"),  the  Statement  of
     Changes in Immigration Rules Cmnd 6918, and the AIT Practice  Direction
     of 9 October 2006.

 40. The burden of proof lies with the Appellant. The standard of  proof  in
     relation to both past  and  future  events  is  that  of  "real  risk",
     otherwise   expressed   as   "reasonable   likelihood"   or    "serious
     possibility". In assessing this we have adopted the approach  described
     by the Court of Appeal in the leading case of  Karanakaran  [2000]  IAR
     271 CA, where the task of the Tribunal was described as this.


           "It has to reach a well-rounded decision as to whether,  in  all
           the circumstances, there is a serious possibility of persecution
           for  a   Convention   reason...This   balancing   exercise   may
           necessarily involve giving greater weight to some considerations
           than to others, depending variously on the degree of  confidence
           the decision-maker may have about them, or  the  seriousness  of
           their effect on the asylum-seeker's welfare if they  should,  in
           the event occur.....


           What is relevant in the present context is the methodology  they
           adopted.  Unless  something  is  so  trivial  that  even  on   a
           cumulative assessment it would be bound to carry no  weight,  or
           the decision-maker has no real doubt  that  it  is  entitled  to
           discard some point from its consideration altogether,  it  would
           be wrong to eliminate that point completely. In my judgment, the
           tribunal's  technique  in  Sayandan  of  evaluating   both   the
           likelihood of a risk eventuating  and  the  seriousness  of  the
           consequences if it were  to  eventuate  demonstrates  a  correct
           approach. It was also correct for it to  assess  the  cumulative
           effect of the matters it was considering, particularly if  there
           was a likelihood that they would all affect the applicant at the
           same time. It will be seen that that  tribunal,  whose  decision
           predated Manohoran by three months, seems to have experienced no
           difficulty  in  deciding  whether  in  the  conditions  it   had
           evaluated it would be unduly harsh to expect  the  appellant  to
           live in Colombo. The tribunal in  the  present  case  adopted  a
           similar approach when it  said  that  a  common-sense  approach,
           rather than  a  legalistic  or  formulaic  approach,  should  be
           adopted (as opposed to considering whether it  was  more  likely
           than not, or only a  serious  possibility,  that  conditions  in
           Colombo would be unduly harsh).
           The fact-finder must be careful, however, to  evaluate  each  of
           the considerations suggested on behalf of the applicant.  In  my
           judgment it was completely wrong for the tribunal in the present
           case to dismiss considerations put forward  by  experts  of  the
           quality who wrote opinions on this case as  "pure  speculation".
           It was also quite wrong for it to say that certain matters  were
           "not considerations which we should take  into  account"  merely
           because in Robinson this court  said  that  such  considerations
           would not in themselves be enough to satisfy the requisite test.
           It was also wrong for it to consider each matter in isolation as
           opposed to considering their potential  cumulative  effect:  see
           now Gnanam [1999] INLR 219 per Tuckey LJ."


 41. Mr O'Ryan has suggested in his written submissions that  the  Court  of
     Appeal in paragraph 22 of   MH  (Iraq)  v  SSHD  [2007]  EWCA  Civ  852
     restated the principle that the  burden  of  proof  is  discharged  "by
     showing that there is a real as opposed to  a  fanciful  risk".  If  Mr
     O'Ryan intended to imply by this that the Court  intended  to  redefine
     what is meant by "real risk" or in some way to lower  the  standard  of
     proof, then we do not agree. Indeed the Court said in terms that it was
     restating the position that had existed since R. v. Secretary of  State
     for the Home Department ex parte Sivakumaran [1988] 1 A.C.  958  .  The
     reality is  that  the  Courts  have  over  the  years  used  equal  and
     interchangeable expressions to reflect what falls above  the  line  and
     what falls below. Thus "reasonable likelihood" is often used for  "real
     risk", and "mere possibility" as the converse. We do not consider  that
     "fanciful risk" is materially different from "mere possibility".

 42. A refugee is defined in the Qualification Regulations as a  person  who
     falls within Article 1(A) of the 1951 Geneva Convention and to whom the
     exclusion clauses in regulation 7 do not apply. Article 1(A)  describes
     a refugee as a person who

           "owing to a well-founded fear of being persecuted for reasons of
           race, religion, nationality, membership of a  particular  social
           group or political  opinion,  is  outside  the  country  of  his
           nationality and is unable or, owing to such fear,  is  unwilling
           to avail himself of the protection of that country; or who,  not
           having a nationality and being outside the country of his former
           habitual residence as a result of such  events,  is  unable  or,
           owing to such fear, is unwilling to return to it."

 43. Regulation 6(2) provides additionally that

           "In deciding whether a person has a well founded fear  of  being
           persecuted, it is immaterial whether he actually  possesses  the
           racial,  national,  social  or  political  characteristic  which
           attracts the persecution, provided that such a characteristic is
           attributed to him by the actor of persecution."

 44. Regulation 5 describes  what  is  required  to  amount  to  an  act  of
     persecution.


           "(1)  In deciding whether a  person  is  a  refugee  an  act  of
           persecution must be:
                 (a) sufficiently serious by its nature or repetition as  to
                 constitute a severe violation of a basic  human  right,  in
                 particular a right from which  derogation  cannot  be  made
                 under Article 15 of the Convention for  the  Protection  of
                 Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms; or
                 (b)  an  accumulation  of  various  measures,  including  a
                 violation of a human right which is sufficiently severe  as
                 to affect an individual in a similar manner as specified in
                 (a).
           (2) An act of persecution may, for example, take the form of:
                 (a) an act of physical or mental violence, including an act
                 of sexual violence;
                 (b) a legal, administrative, police,  or  judicial  measure
                 which in itself is discriminatory or which  is  implemented
                 in a discriminatory manner;
                 (c) prosecution or punishment, which is disproportionate or
                 discriminatory;
                 (d)   denial   of   judicial   redress   resulting   in   a
                 disproportionate or discriminatory punishment;
                 (e)  prosecution  or  punishment  for  refusal  to  perform
                 military service in a conflict, where  performing  military
                 service  would  include  crimes  or  acts   falling   under
                 regulation 7.
           (3) An act of persecution must be committed for at least one  of
           the reasons in Article 1(A) of the Geneva Convention."

OUR GENERAL CONCLUSIONS

The Issues

 45. We start with some matters arising from AR that have  not  been  argued
     specifically before us but need to be clarified for  the  avoidance  of
     doubt. There is no evidence of any  material  progress  concerning  the
     granting of Syrian citizenship  to  stateless  Kurds.  The  Appellants'
     Representatives have not specifically challenged the conclusion  in  AR
     that the discrimination and deprivations experienced  by  Syrian  Kurds
     are not such in themselves as to amount to  persecution  or  breach  of
     their human rights on return. Ms Pettersen has not sought to argue that
     a Syrian Kurd, who is  credibly  perceived  as  having  an  anti-regime
     political profile, would not be at real risk of persecution on return.

 46. We shall expand on some of these matters  later  but,  proceeding  from
     this basis, we have identified the  substantive  questions  in  dispute
     before us as being these:
           1. Is the conclusion in AR - that the likely penalty for illegal
           exit coupled with prison conditions in Syria would not in itself
           give rise to a real risk of  a  breach  of  protected  rights  -
           sustainable in the light of the current evidence?
           2. Would a stateless, undocumented Syrian Kurd, who had no  real
           or  perceived  political  profile  in  Syria,  who  left   Syria
           illegally and who is a failed asylum seeker, be at real risk  of
           persecution on return? We acknowledge Dr George's view that each
           of these components is a separate aggravating factor, and  shall
           take that into account.  Nevertheless  we  have  aggregated  the
           factors together in posing the question in this way  because  it
           appears that they cannot in practice  be  separated.  Dr  George
           maintained,   without   contradiction,   that    a    stateless,
           undocumented Kurd is not  entitled  to  a  passport  and  cannot
           therefore obtain a proper exit visa. Thus  if  he  is  a  failed
           asylum seeker he must by definition be outside  Syria  and  have
           left illegally.
           3. To what extent would anti-regime political activity by such a
           person only after his arrival in the UK, be likely  to  come  to
           the adverse attention of the Syrian authorities, and  with  what
           consequences in terms of risk on return?

The Objective Context

 47. These questions can only be answered properly when set in  the  overall
     Syrian context.  We would observe at this stage that we found Dr George
     to be well informed about Syrian affairs and his  evidence  to  us  was
     thoughtful, detailed and helpful. We were impressed by the way in which
     in his oral evidence he was careful to avoid exceeding his brief as  an
     expert witness; to indicate clearly when he did not know the answers to
     questions; and to indicate where there was in his view a grey area.  We
     also have the benefit of having several written  reports  from  him  as
     well as his oral evidence, which  taken  together  have  given  us  the
     opportunity to see the evolution of his thinking in the context of  the
     other  objective  evidence.  Of  course  we  have  to  reach  our   own
     conclusions on the evidence as a whole and in line with the law but  we
     have given serious weight to his evidence.

 48. We found helpful his description of the historic background up to  2006
     as set out in his report of 7 November 2006.

           "12. To set the context  requires  a  brief  exposition  of  the
           nature  of  the  Syrian  state.   In  1963   the   Arab   Ba'ath
           (Renaissance)  Socialist  Party  seized  power  in  Syria  in  a
           military coup.  One of the coup-makers was Hafez al  Assad,  who
           at the time was a captain in the air force.  A protracted series
           of intra-regime struggles culminated in November 1970  with  the
           seizure of power by Assad, who at the time was defence minister.
            Assad at once set about extending  his  personal  control  into
           every niche of public life.


           13.  Under Assad, the armed forces and a series of  intelligence
           agencies were expanded and became key agencies of  the  regime's
           survival... The multiple and overlapping  intelligence  agencies
           employ perhaps 100,000 people. As the country's total population
           is 16.7 million, there is one secret policeman per 257  Syrians.
           However 59.5% of Syrians are aged over  15  years  and  if  only
           these adults are counted the ratio is one secret  policeman  per
           153 Syrians.


           14.  Since the initial coup of March 1963, a state of  emergency
           has been in force which effectively gives  unlimited  powers  to
           the security agencies.  Although Syria has a constitution  which
           theoretically guarantees human and other rights, the reality  is
           that it is a police state in which citizens have  no  meaningful
           recourse to the law, and  no  protection  from  abuse  by  state
           agencies..


           17.  Syria's security services are notorious  for  their  casual
           disregard of human rights... The role of the  security  services
           extends far beyond strict  security  matters  and  they  operate
           independently and generally outside the  control  of  the  legal
           system. Abuses included arbitrary  or  unlawful  deprivation  of
           life; torture  in  prison;  poor  prison  conditions;  arbitrary
           arrests  and  detentions;  absence  of  rule  of  law;  severely
           restricted civil liberties; discrimination against  the  Kurdish
           minority...


           21. In the late 1970s Hafez al  Assad's  regime  faced  domestic
           opposition which escalated into a  widespread  armed  rebellion.
           Although they were not the only parties  involved,  the  Islamic
           fundamentalist Moslem Brotherhood played the central part in the
           rebellion. The regime countered with extreme violence...


           22. During and in the years after  the  Islamist-led  rebellion,
           repression  by  the  regime  was  especially  fierce,  involving
           arbitrary arrests, disappearance, torture and murder...


           23. To understand the significance  of  the  Moslem  Brotherhood
           involvement in the rebellion it is important to grasp that Syria
           is a patchwork  of  ethnic  communities  and  religious  groups.
           Approximately 74% of Syria's 16.7 million population  are  Sunni
           Muslims and about 15% are Shi'a (divided into several  sub-sects
           notably the Alawi, Druse and Ismaili).  Most  of  the  rest  are
           Christians  (mainly  Greek  Orthodox).  Although  the  country's
           various   religious   communities   generally   live    together
           harmoniously, there is a  marked  tendency  for  each  to  limit
           interaction with the others.  This  tendency  has  a  noticeable
           geographical expression...   The  Ba'athist  regimes  that  have
           ruled since  1963,  have  been  dominated  by  the  Alawis  -  a
           traditionally low status minority considered by many  Sunnis  to
           be heretics... Of the Muslim minorities,  the  biggest  are  the
           Alawis, accounting for some 12% of the population...


           26.  The Kurds, almost all Sunni Muslim  other  than  the  small
           number of Yazidis, are the largest  ethnic/linguistic  minority,
           accounting for about 9% of the population. As non-Arabs in  this
           explicitly Arab nationalist estate and as members  of  a  nation
           (divided  between  Turkey,  Syria,  Iraq  and  Iran)  which  has
           presently unworkable dreams of independent statehood, the  Kurds
           have been subject to  much  discrimination.   As  a  part  of  a
           program to Arabise the North-East it was decreed  in  1962  that
           Kurds who could not prove that they had lived in Syria at  least
           since 1945 would lose their citizenship.  A  special  census  in
           Hassakeh province (adjacent to the Turkish  and  Iraqi  borders)
           identified about 120,000 as "alien infiltrators"  who  allegedly
           had arrived illegally from Turkish Kurdistan.  At a stroke  they
           were rendered status, losing their civil and  political  rights,
           including the ability to hold a passport, to own land,  to  work
           for the government and to be admitted to public hospitals.  They
           and their descendants  now  number  at  least  200,000  although
           estimates ranged as high as 360,000...


           29. Oppression of Kurds has escalated sharply since  March  2004
           when violence at a football match in the north-eastern  town  of
           Qamishli   sparked   rioting   that   developed    into    large
           demonstrations against the Syrian  regime  by  Kurds.   Security
           forces opened fire on demonstrators, killing and wounding  many.
           Hundreds were arrested..  Those  detained  were  maltreated  and
           tortured in several died as a result..  All  but  about  200  is
           thought  to  have  been  released  by  December  2004.   Amnesty
           International has received many allegations of torture and  ill-
           treatment from those released...


           33. President Hafez Al Assad died in June 2000 and was succeeded
           as  president  by  his  son,  Bashar.   Although  the  political
           atmosphere has lightened in the period since Bashar's assumption
           of the Presidency, the apparatus of repression remains firmly in
           place."

 49. It was against this  context  that  the  Tribunal  in  AR  reached  its
     conclusions. Ms Pettersen maintained that there have been  no  material
     changes since AR, and all its conclusions should be upheld.  Mr  O'Ryan
     and Mr Stanage maintained that the position has deteriorated.

 50. Dr George maintains that Syria  has  a  very  repressive  regime  which
     always has been and remains ruthless in its  suppression  of  real  and
     perceived opposition. The position may  fluctuate  from  time  to  time
     dependant on events but the  fluctuation  is  from  a  high  base.  The
     lightening of the political atmosphere under the new President from his
     succession in 2000 has  been  overtaken  by  the  events  of  2004  and
     subsequently and the regime's response  to  it.  In  his  report  of  5
     November 2008 he identifies for example 1500 political  arrests;  fatal
     shootings of Kurds at Nevroz celebrations on  20  March  2008;  further
     demonstrations and arrests in November 2008 in the course  of  protests
     against new laws.

 51. His assessment is reinforced by Ms Sheri Laizer in her report of 1 July
     2005 (which has not been updated for us) and by material  from  Amnesty
     International and the SHRC. Freedom House on 30 October  2008  observed
     that the Syrian authorities may charge opponents with "spreading  false
     information". Human Rights Watch on the same date drew attention to the
     conviction of 12 political activists on vague charges, and  in  October
     2007 reported that the Syrian  security  services  frequently  arrested
     activists on  their  return  from  overseas  trips  in  punishment  for
     discussion of human rights issues when abroad.

 52. A consistent but broader overall perspective is revealed  elsewhere  in
     the objective evidence. We have found the Freedom House report of  2008
     on the world's most repressive regimes to be  particularly  informative
     in its analysis. It evaluates Syria as being on a downward trend due to
     its suppression of opposition activities. It explains that the toppling
     of the Ba'athist regime in Iraq in 2003 re-invigorated Syria's  secular
     and religious  dissidents  leading  to  co-operation  between  them  in
     seeking the release of political prisoners,  the  cancellation  of  the
     state of emergency and the legalisation of  political  parties.  Syrian
     Kurds were a part of this movement for  change.  They  were  especially
     encouraged by the empowerment of the  Iraqi  Kurds.  This  led  to  the
     Kurdish rioting in March 2004. The opposition was  also  encouraged  by
     international frustration over the failure  of  the  Syrian  regime  to
     prevent the infiltration of terrorists into Iraq, to end its occupation
     of Lebanon, and its claimed involvement in assassinations  in  Lebanon.
     Initially the Syrian regime made placatory moves. In 2005, it  released
     hundreds of prisoners and began to hint at sweeping political  reforms,
     but as time passed nothing of substance actually materialised and later
     in the year the President openly ruled  out  any  major  constitutional
     change or loosening of the power of the Ba'athist party.  In  response,
     in  October  2005,  representatives  of  the  three  main  strands   of
     opposition to the regime - the Islamists, the  Kurds  and  the  secular
     liberals - signed the Damascus Declaration for Democratic and  National
     Change. This called for the country's leaders to step down and endorsed
     a  broad  set  of  democratic  principles.  In  February  2006   exiled
     opposition leaders created the National Salvation Front to bring  about
     regime change. Also a number  of  Syrian  political  and  human  rights
     activists  signed   the   Beirut-Damascus   Declaration   calling   for
     recognition of Lebanese sovereignty. It is in  this  context  that  the
     regime has increased its suppression of real and  perceived  opposition
     activities.

 53. The US State Department report for 2007 offers a more focused  analysis
     of the nature of the repression itself. It cites examples of arrests of
     Kurds  but  identifies  that  they  relate  essentially  to   political
     activists  and  party  leaders,  rather  than  evidencing  the  general
     persecution of Kurds as such. This view also receives support from  the
     report of the Danish Refugee Council fact-finding mission to  Syria  of
     January 2007  which  noted  comments  from  various  sources  that  the
     authorities generally turn a blind eye to the political  activities  of
     some 13 popular and well supported Kurdish parties,  even  though  they
     are illegal. However sometimes the activists are arrested.

 54. There appear therefore to be, at least at face value, some  differences
     between the  various  sources  as  to  the  extent  and  focus  of  the
     repression of the political parties. In part this can be  explained  by
     the dates  of  the  various  sources  cited  in  the  reports  and  the
     escalation of repression in the face of increasing opposition. However,
     Dr George provided us with the separate analysis of the "as if" culture
     that prevails in Syria, which we have described in our summary  of  his
     oral evidence and which we found to be particularly illuminating in our
     assessment of risk. If people behave as if the President is revered and
     as if the Syrian nation is united, then they can in  the  main  get  on
     with their lives without difficulty, but those who do  not  conform  to
     this  culture  and  are  perceived  as  being  engaged  in  anti-regime
     activities, face persecution.

 55. We derive the following view of the overall context from  the  evidence
     as a whole. The Syrian  leadership  is  drawn  from  a  sub-sect  of  a
     minority community and believes that it can  maintain  its  pre-eminent
     position by the suppression of effective or threatening opposition.  It
     has put in place the security  apparatus  capable  of  achieving  this,
     irrespective of the  terms  of  the  Syrian  constitution,  which  acts
     outwith the rule of law. Having said that, common sense  suggests  that
     the maintenance of power would be  difficult  to  maintain  on  such  a
     narrow base as the Alawi alone (this being the minority group to  which
     the President and much of the ruling  class  belong),  even  given  the
     security apparatus in place, and must to some extent rely upon at least
     the passive acquiescence of a larger segment  of  the  population.  The
     growth of escalating opposition from a range of differing and divergent
     groups, triggered by aspirations of empowerment,  democracy  and  human
     rights arising from  the  2003  regime  change  in  Iraq,  triggered  a
     repressive response from the regime focused  upon  those  perceived  to
     have been involved in it. Kurdish political activists are caught up  in
     this, as are the other dissentient groups. Even so, it is  the  leaders
     and activists of those opposition groups  who  run  the  real  risk  of
     arrest and persecutory ill-treatment.   Those  who  behave  as  if  the
     President is revered and as if the Syrian nation is united are able  to
     live their lives without being at  real  risk  of  persecution  by  the
     regime.

Our Assessment

 56.  Against  this  overall  context,  we  reach  the  following   material
     conclusions, some of which have been disputed and others not. The first
     relates to paragraph 88 of AR, where the  Tribunal decided that:

           "The deprivations experienced by Syrian Kurds are not such as to
           amount to  persecution  or  breach  of  their  human  rights  if
           returned to Syria."


 57. This conclusion, as we have already observed, has not been specifically
     challenged before us on the basis of subsequent  evidence.  However  Mr
     O'Ryan referred, albeit in a different context, to the effect of Decree
     49 imposing restrictions on construction and  embodying  discriminatory
     provisions against Kurds. We have assessed this, but consider that this
     additional and aggregated  factor  does  not  in  the  overall  context
     materially affect the ability of Kurds to live a normal life and  enjoy
     the normal  benefits  of  living  in  a  society  and  we  confirm  the
     continuing validity of the conclusion in AR. For the avoidance of doubt
     we confirm that the  discrimination  and  deprivations  experienced  by
     Syrian Kurds are not such as to amount  to  persecution  or  breach  of
     their human rights if returned to Syria.


 58. No-one has argued before us that  a  person  perceived  by  the  Syrian
     regime as being  an  oppositionist  would  not  face  a  real  risk  of
     persecution by the Syrian authorities on  return.  Indeed  we  consider
     this is manifest from a wide range of objective evidence before us  and
     is implicit in the conclusions reached by the Tribunal in  AR.  To  put
     this into perspective,  whilst  human  rights,  democracy  and  Kurdish
     activists all fall within this risk category, there  is  evidence  from
     various sources quoted in the Danish Refugee Council report of  January
     2007 at 3.4.2 that the greatest risk  is  to  people  perceived  to  be
     Islamists and that an estimated 95% of the political prisoners at  that
     time were Islamists or  were  perceived  as  being  so.  Therefore,  we
     conclude that a person with an actual or  perceived  profile  of  being
     anti-regime would be at real risk of persecution by the authorities  on
     return to Syria. The greatest risk is to Islamists but  there  is  real
     risk for each category.

 59. The potential actor of persecution  in  these  appeals  is  the  Syrian
     State. Ms Pettersen has not sought to suggest that, should a person  be
     able to demonstrate a well-founded fear of persecution  by  the  Syrian
     authorities, he would nevertheless have a  viable  internal  relocation
     option. That must be right, given that the risk will initially arise at
     the point of return and the writ of the Syrian regime runs  across  the
     whole  country.  We  conclude  therefore  that  there  is  no  internal
     relocation  option  for  a  person  who  is  perceived  by  the  Syrian
     authorities to have an anti-regime political profile.

 60. Nor is there any logical reason why the Syrian authorities  would  make
     any distinction between anti-regime activities by Syrians on the  basis
     of whether they were undertaken at home or abroad. Indeed much  of  the
     opposition to the regime is now based abroad.  Thus  we  conclude  that
     anti-regime activities undertaken by Syrians abroad, which are held  to
     be credible and  of  which  the  Syrian  authorities  are  aware,  will
     contribute to their risk  profile  on  return  and  will  be  taken  as
     seriously as prior oppositionist activity in Syria.

 61. There are a variety of ways in which a Syrian can potentially undertake
     anti-regime activities in the UK. At the one end  of  the  spectrum  he
     could  become  a  committed,  highly  visible  officer  of  an  overtly
     political opposition organisation. At the other end of the spectrum  is
     the person who in reality is an economic migrant, holding no  political
     views, who cynically seeks to bolster  a  weak  asylum  claim  by  some
     claimed sur place activity with little or no perceptible visibility. As
     was made clear by the Court of Appeal in Danian v SSHD  [2000]  IAR  96
     CA, bad faith in undertaking sur place activities does not exclude  the
     protection of the 1951 Convention. What we have to balance, in order to
     decide if there is a real risk of those activities  becoming  known  to
     the  Syrian  authorities,  are  the  nature  and  visibility  of  those
     activities against the resources and expertise committed by the  Syrian
     authorities to monitoring its expatriate community.

 62. Dr George dealt with this in his written and  oral  evidence  to  which
     reference has already been made. It is not clear whether  "the  100,000
     people employed by the multiple and overlapping intelligence  agencies"
     who he describes, comprise full-time  intelligence  officers  only,  or
     includes a host of informers. Common sense might  suggest  the  latter.
     However be this as  it  may,  the  Syrian  Government  plainly  commits
     extensive resources to intelligence/security.  Overwhelmingly  this  is
     based in Syria where the immediate threat to the narrowly based  regime
     arises. Of relevance in assessing  the  extent  of  the  commitment  of
     resources to the UK is Dr  George's  oral  evidence  when,  talking  of
     overseas activities, he said that "there are not infinite resources for
     surveillance, and it will be targeted on those most of interest."

 63.  One  place  where  there  is  evidence  of  at  least  some  level  of
     surveillance is at  demonstrations  outside  the  Syrian  Embassy.  The
     enlargements of the photographs taken during the  demonstration  on  13
     March 2008 unambiguously show the demonstrators being filmed on a small
     video camera. In one photograph, the camera appears to be hand held and
     in another it appears to be on a tripod. This photographic evidence  is
     supported by Dr Mella and IA, who both claim that  this  is  a  regular
     occurrence at demonstrations. This incident  is  also  referred  to  in
     reports from SHRC and UK Indymedia. We see no good reason to disbelieve
     this.

 64. Mr O'Ryan and Mr  Stanage  have  sought  to  draw  parallels  with  the
     extensive camera surveillance of football crowds by British police with
     a view to identifying those responsible for violence. However there was
     no evidence before us as to the type of camera shown in the photographs
     and its capacity to produce clear images of individuals in a  crowd  on
     the far side of a street from the Embassy, as compared to the equipment
     used in surveillance at UK football grounds. We cannot speculate but we
     can apply common sense.

 65. Dr George opined that if the use of the camera was a one-off  it  could
     have been taken for individual purposes. However if it  was  a  regular
     event, then it suggested organised surveillance. His main  point  about
     this was that  the  Syrian  authorities  would  not  have  to  identify
     participants at large. They would only need  to  compare  a  photograph
     supplied by an applicant for emergency travel documents with the  films
     of those who had attended demonstrations. Given  the  small  number  of
     returnees that would not be onerous. Moreover  they  could  cross-check
     the photographs taken at demonstrations against reports from  informers
     within the UK based organisations opposed  to  the  Syrian  government.
     There might be a relevant file on  a  specific  individual  already  to
     which the photograph could be added. This  in  our  view  is  the  more
     relevant comparison with UK police surveillance of football  hooligans,
     where there is extensive material on file on known offenders frequently
     leading to travel and other restrictions being imposed.

 66. COI could not provide detailed information concerning  the  method  and
     level of surveillance by the Syrian authorities at home or  abroad.  It
     was able however to report a source identifying  the  existence  of  an
     "external security" branch of the General Security Directorate. It also
     reported that intelligence staff are  frequently  stationed  abroad  in
     Embassies  to  co-ordinate  terrorist  activities.  It  also  notes  an
     observation from  the  Research  Directorate  of  the  Immigration  and
     Refugee Board of Canada that:

           "Persons who have engaged abroad  in  political  activities  (eg
           demonstrations in front of Syrian Embassies against  the  Syrian
           Government) may indeed have to face prosecution upon return."

 67. Dr George had  acknowledged  in  his  oral  evidence  that  he  had  no
     knowledge of any specific reprisals by the Syrian  authorities  against
     the families of UK demonstrators.   Ms Pettersen asked us to note  that
     not all the demonstrators outside the Syrian  Embassy  were  Kurds  and
     many had been resident in the UK for years but Mr Stanage suggested  in
     his Reply that this would only make the task of identification easier.

 68. Assessing this evidence in the round, we conclude that we cannot in the
     abstract be prescriptive about the type or level of activity in the  UK
     that could come to the adverse attention  of  the  Syrian  authorities.
     Clearly the perception on the part of the  authorities  of  anti-regime
     activity by an individual would create for him a real risk  on  return.
     Whether in  any  particular  case  information  about  an  individual's
     activities would come to the attention of the Syrian authorities  is  a
     judgement that needs to be made after balancing the  established  facts
     in each case. There are between two and four demonstrations outside the
     Syrian Embassy each year, organised by various organisations, including
     non-Kurdish organisations. The  numbers  attending  vary  considerably,
     depending on the event that triggered the particular demonstration. The
     size of a crowd, the prominence of an individual in a crowd and what he
     does during the demonstration to attract attention may be  relevant  to
     assessing risk. The filming of the event from the Embassy could be  for
     propaganda purposes. It could also be for the purpose  of  surveillance
     of the participants, which is an activity that would fit the profile of
     the regime. There is clear evidence that, irrespective of  any  filming
     from the Embassy, the demonstration organisers  themselves,  for  their
     own political and propaganda purposes, film the events with a  view  to
     publicising them on news broadcasts and YouTube, and  that  people  who
     attend such demonstrations for whatever reasons will be  aware  of  it.
     SHRC for example produces frequent press releases and  uses  attendance
     at such demonstrations as evidence of opposition to the Syrian  regime.
     The possibility  of  there  being  an  existing  security  file  on  an
     individual would increase the risk  of  his  being  identified  by  the
     Syrian authorities at a demonstration.

 69. Our assessment is this. A rare attendance at  a  crowded  demonstration
     outside the  Syrian  Embassy  by  a  person  with  no  other  political
     involvement or activity from which he might be identified (for  example
     by a person who is simply seeking to bolster an otherwise  weak  asylum
     claim) would not in itself in our judgement constitute a real  risk  of
     coming to the adverse attention  of  the  Syrian  authorities.  However
     regular attendances at such demonstrations over  a  lengthy  period  of
     time will increase the risk profile, as would membership of and  active
     involvement in other overt political  activities  and/or  organisations
     which might be penetrated by informers. The greater and more varied the
     activity, the greater the risk. However, the extent of the risk is fact
     sensitive in each case and a single activity of significant  visibility
     could be sufficient.

 70. Next we consider the risk on return arising from illegal  exit  itself.
     We accept that it is in principle an offence under Syrian  law,  though
     it carries only a maximum sentence of three months in  the  absence  of
     aggravating factors. It is also clear from the objective evidence  that
     Syria has an effective computer system which records  legal  exits  and
     will make  this  information  available  at  border  control  when  any
     individual returns. We also accept that there is  an  effective  border
     control system in place for returnees, to which Ms Laizer has  referred
     in her  report  based  on  her  own  personal  experience.  It  follows
     therefore that on return there is a distinction between those who  left
     illegally, and  those  who  left  legally  but  return  without  travel
     documents, and the Syrian authorities will be able  to  tell  in  which
     category a person falls. Dr George said that  the  offence  of  illegal
     exit related to Syrian nationals and he did not know whether stateless,
     undocumented Kurds would come within  the  scope  of  this  definition.
     However for our purposes and in the absence of any better evidence,  we
     shall presume that if stateless undocumented Kurds are accepted by  the
     Syrian regime for return, they will be subject to this law.

 71. It has not been suggested by any of the Representatives before us  that
     there is in general any material difference  in  terms  of  the  issues
     which we are considering between  the  "Ajanib"  (some  120,000-150,000
     Kurds who were stripped of their Syrian citizenship in the 1962 census)
     and the "Maktoumeen" (those Kurds who failed to take part in  the  1962
     census or were born of unions  between  Ajanib  and  Syrian  citizens).
     However,  although  we  are  for  present   purposes   concerned   with
     undocumented Kurds, we must record for the sake  of  completeness  that
     there is evidence at 5.1 in the  January  2007  report  of  the  Danish
     Refugee Council that some Kurds who are  registered  as  foreigners  in
     Syria can under special circumstances obtain  a  travel  document,  but
     this would not apply to the Maktoumeen. We should also  record  that  a
     person returned from the  UK  would  have  at  least  emergency  travel
     documents.

 72. The same report at  5.3  quotes  Brigadier  Ahmed,  the  Chief  of  the
     Immigration and Passports Department as saying  that  those  who  leave
     illegally will be arrested on return  and  referred  to  the  competent
     authority, who will decide  what  to  do.  However  there  is  contrary
     evidence of how the system works in practice. Local lawyers are  quoted
     as saying that re-entry is in general not a problem and illegal exit is
     not normally punished. Those who left illegally  and  re-enter  with  a
     laisser-passer will be interrogated in  order  to  establish  identity.
     Such detention is generally brief in the absence of  adverse  interest.
     Another lawyer said that the usual penalty for illegal exit is a fine.

 73. We conclude on the evidence in the round that prison sentences are  not
     in practice imposed for  illegal  exit  unless  there  are  aggravating
     factors, generally in terms of known or perceived anti-regime  activity
     abroad, or in the context of trafficking. We would  add  that,  in  the
     unlikely event of  a  prison  sentence  being  imposed,  the  objective
     evidence does not suggest  that  prison  conditions  have  deteriorated
     since AR. We therefore conclude that there is no real risk that leaving
     Syria  illegally  would,  in  the  absence  of  additional  aggravating
     factors, result in ill-treatment on return amounting to persecution  or
     a breach of fundamental human rights.

 74. Having said that, illegal exit would normally mean that an  application
     would have to be made to the Syrian  Embassy  by  or  on  behalf  of  a
     returnee for  appropriate  travel  documents.  We  accept  Dr  George's
     evidence that enquiries will then be made  about  the  individual  that
     would include vetting by the Syrian security services. Indeed,  in  the
     Syrian context, it would be  surprising  if  this  were  not  so.  Such
     vetting would  be  likely  to  include  consideration  of  whether  the
     applicant has a political profile. Thus  the  applicant  would  not  be
     returning in a vacuum.

 75. We therefore move  on  to  the  next  issue  before  us  of  whether  a
     stateless, undocumented Kurd who is a  failed  asylum  seeker  (who  by
     definition must have left Syria illegally) would be  at  real  risk  of
     persecutory ill-treatment on return to Syria on that specific  profile.
     Obviously if the Syrian regime is not prepared to accept  him  back  he
     will not be returnable, but Dr  George  was  unaware  of  any  specific
     example of a refusal on this basis. We have proceeded therefore on  the
     basis that return will be permitted in these circumstances.  Dr  George
     identified the potential risk as  arising  from  a  perception  by  the
     Syrian authorities that the act of claiming asylum abroad is in  itself
     a criticism of the regime,  thus  identifying  an  opponent,  and  this
     perception being reinforced by the other components of the profile.

 76. Dr George provided both written and oral evidence on this  subject.  In
     paragraph 74 of his recent report of 5 November 2008, he described  his
     conversation with a senior official at the Syrian Embassy who said that
     there was now some realisation on the part of  the  Syrian  authorities
     that Syrians who claimed asylum might have done so for purely  economic
     reasons, rather than through genuine opposition to the regime. This  is
     a material development from what Dr George has  said  in  his  previous
     reports, even though Dr  George  has  expressed  personal  reservations
     about the extent to which this might be applied  in  practice.  However
     the comment by the official reflects the reality, accepted by Dr George
     in his oral evidence, that there is extensive economic  migration  from
     Syria where there is high unemployment. Many of those who work  outside
     Syria send remittances home, which  must  be  a  valuable  addition  to
     national income. Moreover Dr George acknowledged that  the  regime  did
     not seek to prevent citizens from leaving if they had a good reason  to
     do so.

 77.  The specific problem for undocumented Kurds is that as  they  are  not
     entitled to a passport, they cannot obtain the required exit visa. They
     would always therefore have to exit illegally. Dr  George  accepted  in
     his oral evidence that the extent of risk to a  pure  economic  migrant
     who left illegally was "a grey area". He said that if pushed, he  would
     maintain that there was still real risk on return as an  asylum  seeker
     per se, and this risk would be increased by  the  possibility  that  an
     individual security officer could be hostile to Kurds, or still held an
     adverse view of the motives of  asylum  seekers.  However  he  properly
     acknowledged that this was a judgement for us to make on  the  evidence
     as a whole.

 78. Dr George in his report of 5  November  2008  identified  a  number  of
     arrests of named asylum seekers on return to Syria. He  was  of  course
     questioned about this in his oral evidence and as  stated  above,  said
     that he did not know how many of the people he had  named  were  Kurds.
     Only one name was specifically identifiable as Kurdish.   Moreover  the
     sources upon which he  drew  had  not  indicated  whether  these  named
     individuals had been involved in political activity.

 79. The 2007 report of the Danish Refugee Council's fact finding mission to
     Damascus  was  concerned  with  "Kurds,  honour-killings  and   illegal
     departure". Some of  the  passages  summarised  above  in  relation  to
     illegal  exit  generally  are  relevant  here  also.  It   quotes   the
     observation of a local lawyer that "having applied  for  asylum  abroad
     does not in itself lead to  detention  or  imprisonment  on  return  to
     Syria."  An  Embassy  was  also  quoted  as  saying  that  "the  Syrian
     authorities do not regard applying for asylum abroad as  an  expression
     of  anti-government  activity.   The   authorities   have   a   certain
     understanding for the fact that Syrians may choose to go abroad due  to
     unemployment etc." The thrust of this evidence was that those  who  did
     not have an anti-regime profile would not face problems on  return  but
     those who did could.

 80. A report by the Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada of 1  May  2008
     cites an official from SHRC as stating that  "anyone  who  applies  for
     asylum and is known to the Syrian security services  will  be  arrested
     prosecuted and  detained,  for  distributing  false  information  about
     Syria." This reflects the view of SHRC which is set out in more  detail
     in its seventh report on human  rights  in  Syria  for  the  period  to
     December 2007.

 81. On the other hand, the Canadian report cites UNHCR  as  stating  on  14
     June 2008 as follows:

           "According to information available to the UNHCR  representation
           in Damascus, and confirmed by a number of European embassies  in
           Syria, the mere unsuccessful application for asylum abroad  will
           not lead per se to prosecution or other forms of persecution  in
           Syria.
           1. However, persons who left Syria may have to face  prosecution
           because of illegal departure and this  is  in  many  cases  most
           probable.
           The Syrian authorities have indicated to the different embassies
           that mere illegal departure  is  not  considered  as  a  serious
           crime.  This does not apply if there should be any person who is
           suspected on matters related to terrorism.  The same is the case
           if there is any indication  that  the  person  was  involved  in
           trafficking activities.
           2. Persons who have engaged abroad in political activities (e.g.
           demonstrations in front of Syrian embassies against  the  Syrian
           government) may indeed have to face prosecution upon return...
           4. The procedure upon return of the unsuccessful asylum  seekers
           as Syria is the following:
                 a. The person has to report to the  Immigration  Department
                 in order to apply for new documentation.
                 b. The procedure also comprises a visit  to  the  Political
                 Security Branch by which the person  will  be  interrogated
                 regarding their earlier motives and reasons for the illegal
                 departure from Syria.  Should this arise, it will  be  very
                 difficult for the returnee to keep  the  information  on  a
                 potential asylum  application  abroad  [sic]  confidential.
                 Inquiries on the reasons for an asylum  application  abroad
                 may follow.
                 c. Should there be no problem then the person  will  obtain
                 in about three months new identity documents.
                 d. Should the authorities come to the conclusion  that  the
                 person may be considered as an opponent against the regime,
                 the consequences may be very serious."


 82.  The letter from Amnesty International of 4 October 2006,  referred  to
     by the Court of Appeal when sending SA's appeal  back  to  us,  offered
     general comments  on  the  position  of  Kurds  in  Syria,  (which  are
     expressed in more detail and more recently by Dr George) and also   the
     following opinion on risk on return.

           "Syrians seeking political asylum abroad  are  perceived  to  be
           sympathetic to movements opposed to the Syrian authorities.  The
           act of leaving the country to seek asylum abroad is  imputed  to
           be a manifestation  of  opposition  to  the  Syrian  government.
           According  to  Amnesty   International's   information,   asylum
           applicants who have left Syria in an illegal manner are also  at
           risk of arrest, detention and torture upon  their  return.  This
           applies to the following three categories of returnee.
               a) Those who departed Syria without official  authorisation.
                  Government employees are required to obtain permission to
                  leave the country.  Men who are leaving the country  have
                  to show that they have completed military service  or  if
                  not, that they have permission to leave.
               b)  Those  who  have  used/are  using  false  documentation.
                  Article 428 of the Syrian  penal  code  defines  this  as
                  documentation "which carries  real  or  false  stamps  or
                  seals of  the  Syrian  or  foreign  country  for  illegal
                  purposes.
               c) Those who  are  not  in  possession  of  a  valid  Syrian
                  passport.


           In instances in which a request for asylum has been refused  and
           the asylum seeker is expelled, he/she may risk  imprisonment  in
           Syria ranging from one month to two years if he/she is found  to
           have used false  documents  or  a  false  identity  pursuant  to
           article 452 of  the  Syrian  penal  code.   In  accordance  with
           article 427, a person is punishable by seven years  imprisonment
           with hard labour (though Amnesty International has  never  heard
           of any case in which hard labour has been enforced if  the  seal
           of the Syrian authorities has been falsified.  Falsifying  seals
           of public authorities  is  punishable  by  one  to  three  years
           imprisonment according to article 428 of the Syrian penal code.


           Syrian Kurds returning to Syria in the  manner  described  above
           would face a heightened risk on return due to  institutionalised
           discrimination against Kurds in Syria together with the  routine
           practice of torture and cruel, inhuman and  degrading  treatment
           in Syrian detention centres.


           Amnesty International can confirm  that  asylum  applicants  who
           have applied for a new passport at the Syrian  Embassy  for  any
           reason will have been brought to the  attention  of  the  Syrian
           authorities.  The fact that they are  outside  Syria  would,  by
           itself, evoke the authorities' interest  in  them.   The  Syrian
           government is known to employ people to carry  out  surveillance
           on Syrians living abroad.


           I hope this information is understood to be a  strong  statement
           that Amnesty International opposes the enforced return of Syrian
           Kurds of the above profiles to Syria."

     Amnesty International also provided a further  letter  to  the  Greater
     Manchester Immigration Aid Unit on 25 January 2008 offering essentially
     the same opinions.


 83. The British Government's position is set out in the OGN on Syria  dated
     16 June 2007 in the following terms:

           "There is no evidence to suggest that individuals who have  been
           absent from Syria for any period of time or  who  are  returning
           failed asylum seekers are liable for adverse  treatment  by  the
           authorities solely for those  reasons.   Moreover  there  is  no
           evidence that an  application  for  asylum  abroad,  should  the
           authorities become aware that one has been made, will in  itself
           put a Syrian national at risk of  state-sponsored  ill-treatment
           amounting to persecution.  The grant of asylum  or  humanitarian
           protection  in  such  cases  is  therefore  not  likely  to   be
           appropriate."

 84. We have set out above the  main  objective  evidence  before  us  which
     describes the  range  of  opinions  offered.  There  is  more  that  is
     essentially  older  or  repetitive  of  opinions  expressed   elsewhere
     (including the 2005 report of Ms Laizer) and we have taken it all  into
     account. What then do we make of it?

 85. We would make some preliminary observations. First, we must make  clear
     that although we have identified evidence that the  greatest  focus  of
     suppression by the Syrian regime is targeted on Islamists,  we  do  not
     mean to imply by this  that  Kurdish,  or  human  rights  or  democracy
     activists would not also be at real  risk  on  return.  Second,  it  is
     important to  identify  carefully  what  each  source  is  specifically
     referring to. Some sources lump failed asylum seekers together to  draw
     broad general conclusions and do not differentiate  between  those  who
     have an anti-regime profile and those who do not. Third, we  must  bear
     in mind that there are not large numbers  of  forcible  returnees.  The
     Home Office statistics to Q1/2008 showed between  5  and  10  returnees
     from the UK in each  quarter  since  Q1/2007  but  removals,  voluntary
     departures and assisted returns have been lumped together  without  any
     means of distinction. Nevertheless there  appear  to  be  returns  from
     other countries also and the number  is  not  so  insignificant  as  to
     render unreliable the lack of clear  evidence  of  regular  or  routine
     targeting of failed asylum seekers as such. Fourth, the date of  source
     material may be significant in terms of the weight to  be  attached  to
     it. Events in Syria have in some respects moved on since 2005/6.

 86. Thus since  2006  some  sources  identify  recognition  by  the  Syrian
     authorities that failed asylums seekers can be economic migrants rather
     than opponents of the regime. This is not surprising in our  judgement,
     given the extent of economic migration  from  Syria  and  the  national
     significance  of  remittances  sent  home  by  economic   migrants   as
     identified by Dr George in his  oral  evidence.  In  his  report  of  5
     November 2008 he  confirmed  that  the  available  information  on  the
     attitude of the Syrian authorities towards asylum  seekers  is  clearly
     somewhat contradictory.  Indeed that is obvious from the evidence which
     we have cited above.  Dr George offered his judgement of  the  position
     at the time of  his  report  that  it  would  be  imprudent  to  assert
     categorically that the claiming of asylum abroad in and of itself would
     never cause adverse attention from the  Syrian  authorities.   This  is
     because there had been several specific cases where individuals  appear
     to have been targeted solely for having applied for asylum, albeit that
     it does not happen routinely or even often. In his report he summarised
     his conclusion in terms that "in my view, especially  bearing  in  mind
     the arbitrary manner in which  the  Syrian  security  services  conduct
     themselves, unsuccessful asylum claimant do run the risk, at least,  of
     attracting adverse official attention on their  return  to  Syria."  He
     then added that leaving illegally and being a Kurd would be  additional
     risks. In his oral evidence he explained it  slightly  differently.  He
     said that if the failed  asylum  seeker  was  in  reality  an  economic
     migrant only, the risk on return would be a  grey  area  as  there  was
     greater understanding of economic migrants on the part of the  security
     forces. Again he added that being a  Kurd  and  having  left  illegally
     would be additional risks.

 87. In broad terms the objective  evidence  reveals  disagreement  with  Dr
     George's opinion from two directions. First, there are sources, such as
     Amnesty International, SHRC and Ms  Laizer  (though  there  are  others
     also) who consider that all failed asylum seekers are at risk as  such.
     We do not accept this view. There is no doubt that there  are  examples
     of some returnees being severely  ill-treated  but  a  reading  of  the
     evidence as a whole suggests that overwhelmingly they are perceived  to
     be anti-regime activists with specific profiles as  such,  rather  than
     simply failed asylum seekers. We consider that the sources  maintaining
     the above viewpoint do  not  address  or  properly  factor  into  their
     assessment the evidence of a more complex and evolving situation.

 88. A contrary view is expressed by the various sources cited in the Danish
     Refugee Council report of January 2007.  A  local  lawyer  stated  that
     having applied for asylum abroad does not in itself lead  to  detention
     or imprisonment on return to  Syria.  An  Embassy  indicated  that  the
     Syrian authorities do not regard  applying  for  asylum  abroad  as  an
     expression of anti-government activity but have a certain understanding
     for the fact that Syrians may choose to go abroad due to  unemployment.
     Of particular weight is the statement from UNHCR of 14 June  2008  that
     according to information  available  to  the  UNHCR  representation  in
     Damascus and confirmed by a number of European embassies in Syria,  the
     mere unsuccessful application for asylum abroad will not lead per se to
     prosecution or other forms of persecution in Syria. This  is  also  the
     view expressed in the UK Operational Guidance Note.  There  is  a  fair
     degree of commonality between these views and  those  expressed  by  Dr
     George who now regards this as a grey area,  having  previously  shared
     the view expressed by Ms Laizer.

 89. We prefer the recent view expressed by UNCHR and  corroborated  by  the
     Danish report sources. We consider that the picture portrayed by  UNHCR
     is a logical reflection of the extent of economic migration from Syria,
     and the reality that an asylum claim may for many be a  way  into  work
     overseas. We do not believe that UNHCR  would  make  such  a  statement
     without there being adequate evidence on the ground for  doing  so.  We
     conclude therefore that a failed asylum seeker will not be perceived as
     being an opponent of the regime simply  by  reason  of  having  claimed
     asylum abroad and will not thereby be at real risk of persecutory  ill-
     treatment on return to Syria.

 90. We then have to consider whether in addition  to  being  failed  asylum
     seeker, a person who is also a stateless, undocumented  Kurd  who  left
     Syria illegally would be at real risk on return. We have set out  above
     the thrust of the objective evidence concerning illegal  exit  and  our
     conclusions on it. There are relatively  minor  penalties  in  law  for
     illegal exit which do not in practice appear  to  be  enforced,  beyond
     perhaps the possibility  of  a  fine.  Indeed  the  very  fact  that  a
     stateless, undocumented Kurd cannot legally get an exit visa  may  even
     diminish the seriousness of  the  offence.  The  real  significance  of
     illegal exit is that a failed asylum seeker will only  be  returned  by
     the Respondent if there are some travel documents  for  him,  and  this
     will, for a stateless undocumented Kurd, require an approach to be made
     to the Syrian Embassy at the least for emergency travel documents.  The
     objective evidence suggests that before issuing such papers in the UK a
     reference with be made to  the  security  service  and  on  return  the
     returnee will be questioned by them not least to confirm his  identity.
     This process of checking may take several days,  though  for  a  person
     with a perceived anti-regime profile it may extend considerably longer.
     We accept this evidence, which seems entirely  plausible  in  a  police
     state.

 91. It is at this stage that a Kurdish returnee's profile will be  examined
     and  if  there  is  a  perceived  anti-regime  profile,  this  will  be
     identified and then real risk will arise on return. Even if there is no
     perceived anti-regime profile, Dr George maintains that if a particular
     security officer has had a bad experience of Kurds there could still be
     a problem,  given  the  arbitrary  powers  which  they  have.  We  have
     considered this opinion very carefully but do  not  consider  that  the
     risk comprised in this amounts to more than a mere possibility. It does
     not in our judgement constitute real risk.  Thus  we  conclude  that  a
     stateless, undocumented, Kurd who left Syria illegally and is a  failed
     asylum seeker but is not perceived by the Syrian authorities as  having
     an anti-regime profile, will not be at real risk  of  persecutory  ill-
     treatment or a material breach of his human rights on return.

OUR CONCLUSIONS ON THE SPECIFIC APPEALS

 92. Having established our general  conclusions  on  the  country  guidance
     issues we can now deal with the specific appeals before us.

 93. SA was born on 3 December 1989 and came to the UK  on  22  March  2005,
     when he was 15. The credibility of his specific claim was rejected  and
     that rejection has  not  been  challenged  before  us.  His  appeal  is
     therefore based upon his being a stateless, undocumented Kurd who  left
     Syria illegally and is a failed  asylum  seeker.  He  has  no  real  or
     perceived anti-regime profile. In line with  our  general  findings  we
     concluded that he will not be at real risk on return to Syria  on  this
     basis and we dismiss his appeal on all grounds.

 94. IA was born on 1 November 1977 and came to the UK on 11 February  2004.
     His  claim  of  fleeing  from  Syria,  having  been  tortured  by   the
     authorities to make him spy on  the  activities  of  other  Kurds,  was
     rejected as lacking credibility. However he claims to be  at  risk  not
     just as a stateless, undocumented Kurd who left Syria illegally and  is
     a failed asylum seeker, but also as someone who  as  a  result  of  his
     activities in the UK will be perceived as anti-regime.  His  activities
     have been described in the course of his oral evidence. He  is  not  an
     officer or member of any specific organisation but has participated  in
     nine demonstrations between 2005 and 2008 in favour of  Kurdish  rights
     outside the Syrian Embassy. He was not an organiser but did on occasion
     carry a  Kurdish  flag  or  a  placard.  On  three  such  occasions  he
     personally saw the demonstrations being filmed from within the Embassy.
     There  are  clear  photographs  of  this  from  one  demonstration.  Ms
     Pettersen did not seek to challenge the credibility of his account  and
     indeed there is ample corroborative  evidence  of  it.  We  accept  his
     evidence of being committed to Kurdish causes but that  his  activities
     were constrained by his being housed in Newcastle by NASS and  that  if
     he were in London  he  would  do  more.  We  consider  that  the  views
     expressed by him in oral evidence and the consistency of his activities
     throughout his time in the UK, show a genuine commitment to the Kurdish
     cause and this would provide the 1951 Convention  reason  of  political
     opinion.

 95. The issue therefore is whether there is a real  risk  that  the  Syrian
     authorities would be aware of his activities in the UK. As he is not  a
     member of any organisation and does  not  attend  meetings  of  Kurdish
     groups we consider there is no real risk  that  the  authorities  would
     have identified him through informers in those  organisations.  However
     the question arises of whether his attendance  at  nine  demonstrations
     over 3 years outside the Syrian Embassy would create in themselves  the
     real risk of his identification as being anti-regime. We have looked at
     the evidence of his participation. Whilst he is identifiable  from  the
     angle of the photographs taken by his friend, most of these were  taken
     with IA's back to the  Embassy,  or  as  part  of  a  crowd.  There  is
     therefore some doubt as to whether the Embassy  would  have  any  clear
     pictures of him that could be used  to  identify  him  when  making  an
     application for emergency travel documents.  This  is  in  our  view  a
     marginal case.

 96. However we have come down in IA's favour because of the low standard of
     proof and the sheer number of demonstrations he  has  attended  over  a
     sustained period of time. Some of those demonstrations were quite small
     and we accept that  arising  from  them  there  is  a  real  risk  that
     identifiable photographs were taken that could be matched to  him  when
     making an application for emergency travel documents. Thus he could  be
     identified as participating in anti-regime activities.  Accordingly  we
     allow his appeal on asylum grounds.


                                  DECISION

 97. The Immigration Judge in each case made a material error  of  law.  The
     following decision is accordingly substituted:


           1. SA's appeal is dismissed on asylum, humanitarian protection
           and human rights grounds.
            2. IA's appeal is allowed on asylum grounds and under Article
3.


Signed                                                           Dated   8
December 2008

Senior Immigration Judge Batiste


      |APPENDIX                                                            |
|                                                                    |
|2008/11/05     Report of Dr George                                  |
|2008/10/30    HRW Report                                            |
|2008/10/30    Freedom House Release                                 |
|2008/10/17     Reporters Sans Frontieres Release                    |
|2008/10           Amnesty International Report                      |
|2008/08/08   HRW Release                                            |
|2008/06/19    USCRI Report                                          |
|2008/06/12    HRW Release                                           |
|2008/06/10    Supplemental Report of Dr George                      |
|2008/05/28    Amnesty International Report                          |
|2008/05/06    Freedom House Report                                  |
|2008/05/01     IRB of Canada Report                                 |
|2008/05           Indymedia Photographs                             |
|2008/03/25    UK FCO Report                                         |
|2008/03/13     Indymedia - 21 pages of photographs at demonstration |
|2008/03/11     US State Department Report for 2007                  |
|2008/03/02    SHRC Release                                          |
|2008/03           Indymedia Photographs                             |
|2008/02/05    HRW Release                                           |
|2008/01/31     HRW Report                                           |
|2008/01/25     Amnesty International Letter                         |
|2008                 UK Asylum Statistics Q1                        |
|2007/12            SHRC Report                                      |
|2007/10            HRW Report                                       |
|2007/06/16     UK Home Office OGN                                   |
|2007/05/23     Amnesty International Report                         |
|2007/05/09     Freedom House Report                                 |
|2007/01            Danish Refugee Council Report                    |
|2007                   Photographs of Demonstrations                |
|2006/11/24      SHRC Release                                        |
|2006/11/21      Amnesty International Further Information           |
|2006/11/15      Amnesty International Release                       |
|2006/11/07     Report by Dr George                                  |
|2006/10/17     Amnesty International Further Information            |
|2006/10/12     UK FCO Report                                        |
|2006/10/07     Letter from Dr Mella of Western Kurdistan Association|
|2006/10/04    Amnesty International Letter                          |
|2006/09/06    Freedom House Report                                  |
|2006/07/20    Report of Dr George                                   |
|2006/07/18    Society for Threatened People Release                 |
|2006/07/18    Amnesty International - Sentence of Moslem Brotherhood|
|returnee from US                                                    |
|2006/07/14    Amnesty International Update                          |
|2006/07/13    SHRC Release                                          |
|2006/06/26    Amnesty International - Sentence of Moslem Brotherhood|
|returnee from UK                                                    |
|2006/06/15    European Parliament Resolution                        |
|2006/06/14    USCRI Survey                                          |
|2006/06.07    SHRC Report                                           |
|2006/05/23    Amnesty International Report                          |
|2006/05/23    Amnesty International Report                          |
|2006/05/20    SHRC Release                                          |
|2006/04/24    IRIN Report                                           |
|2006/04/05    Society for Threatened People Press Release           |
|2006/04/04    Amnesty International Release                         |
|2006/03/10     Kurdish Community Statement in Britain               |
|2006/03/08    US State Department Report on Syria for 2005          |
|2006/03/07     UNHCR Statement                                      |
|2006/02/14     Refugees International (US) Report                   |
|2006/02/14     Amnesty International Update                         |
|2006                  SHRC Report                                   |
|2006                  Photographs of Demonstration                  |
|2006                  HRW Report                                    |
|2005/12/09     SHRC Press Release                                   |
|2005/11/28      Amnesty International Release                       |
|2005/11/20      IRIN Report                                         |
|2005/09/30    BIA Report                                            |
|2005/09/19     Amnesty International Report                         |
|2005/08/16     SHRC Release                                         |
|2005/08/05    SHRC Release                                          |
|2005/07/01    Report of Ms Laizer                                   |
|2005/05/13     Amnesty International Report                         |
|2005                  Foreign Dispatches Report                     |
|2005                  Amnesty International Report                  |
|2004                  Bakutoday Report                              |
|2004                  Amnesty International Report 2004             |
|2003/09/16     IRBC Update                                          |
|2003                   Kurdish Media Report                         |
|2000                  Kurdish Media Report                          |



Asylum and Immigration Tribunal




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Bradford
On 10-11 November 2008


                                   Before

                      Senior Immigration Judge Batiste
                       Senior Immigration Judge Taylor



                                   Between



                                     SA
                                     IA

                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


                            FUNDING DETERMINATION

The  Tribunal  orders  that  the  Appellants'  costs  in  respect   of   the
application for reconsideration, the  preparation  for  reconsideration  and
the reconsideration are to be paid out of the relevant fund, as  defined  in
Rule 33 of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005




Signed                                                             Dated 8
December 2008



Senior Immigration Judge Batiste


