
 SK (illegal entrant: leave to enter) Nigeria [2007] UKAIT 00003

                       ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at: Field House
Date of Hearing: 24 October 2006
                         Promulgated on: 22 December 2006

                                   Before:


 Mr C M G Ockelton, Deputy President of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
                      Senior Immigration Judge Chalkley

                                   Between


                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the Appellant:           Mr J Gillespie, Counsel instructed by D J Webb
& Co.
For the Respondent:          Mr M Blundell, Home Office Presenting Officer


A person who seeks leave to  enter  but  then  breaches  the  terms  of  his
temporary admission may be treated  as  an  illegal  entrant,  as  Akhtar  v
Governor of Pentonville Prison [1993] Imm AR 424 and Afunyah v  SSHD  [1998]
Imm AR 201 show.  He is not, however, entitled to  demand  treatment  as  an
illegal entrant.  He can still be  refused  or  given  leave  to  enter  (as
distinct from leave to remain), and cannot demand to  be  considered  as  an
illegal entrant for the purposes of deportation policies.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is the reconsideration of the appeal of the appellant,  a  citizen
    of Nigeria, against the decision of  the  respondent  on  19  May  2006
    refusing him leave to enter the United Kingdom.

 2.  The appellant came  to  the  United  Kingdom  on  27  June  1995.   He
    presented a passport which was not his own and sought to gain entry  by
    it.  He was granted temporary admission pending a decision.   A  couple
    of days later  he  claimed  asylum  through  his  solicitors.   He  was
    interviewed on 31 July 1995 and on 12 June 1996 he was  refused  asylum
    and refused leave to enter.   He  appealed  against  that  decision  by
    Notice of Appeal dated 13 June 1996.  The appeal came before a  Special
    Adjudicator  on  7  March  1997.   The  appellant  was   not   present.
    Investigation revealed that he had changed his representative and  that
    his new representative had not seen him since 19 July 1996.  The appeal
    therefore  proceeded  in  his  absence.   It   was   dismissed   by   a
    determination sent to the parties (including the appellant at his  last
    known address) on  23  April  1997.   It  is  common  ground  that  the
    appellant had  failed  to  comply  with  the  terms  of  his  temporary
    admission.   It  appears  that  subsequently  the  Secretary  of  State
    "treated him as an absconder", meaning in this case not  a  person  who
    has absconded from custody, but  a  person  who  has  disappeared  from
    sight.

 3. There was no appeal against the  Special  Adjudicator's  determination.
    The appellant was next heard of by the  respondent  in  2002,  when  he
    submitted a form FLR(M) "Application for an Extension of  Stay  in  the
    United Kingdom as the Spouse (Husband or Wife) or Unmarried Partner  of
    a Person Present and Settled in the UK".  In that  form  the  appellant
    asserted that he had in October  2002  married  a  person  present  and
    settled in the United Kingdom.  The form is signed by the appellant and
    his wife and is dated 24/11/2002.  It was accompanied by a letter dated
    12 December 2002 from his solicitors, which, so far as relevant,  reads
    as follows:

        "[The appellant] came to the United Kingdom  on  25  May  1995  and
        applied for asylum at Gatwick airport.  His application for  asylum
        was refused in 1997 and although he brought an appeal against  that
        decision, we are  advised  that  the  appeal  was  also  dismissed.
        Unfortunately, our client then [sic] absconded  from  reporting  to
        the Immigration Service.


        [The appellant] has continued to remain in the United  Kingdom  and
        is married to ... a British  citizen  woman  of  Nigerian  descent.
        They have been together since 1998 and  married  in  October  2002.
        Clearly our client has  an  existing  family  life  in  the  United
        Kingdom and on that  basis  we  request  that  you  regularise  his
        status.


        As you are no doubt  aware,  although  our  client  has  the  right
        respect for his family life under  Article  8(1)  of  the  European
        Convention on Human Rights, that right is  subject  to  limitations
        placed by Article 8(2).  It is our  submission  that  our  client's
        removal from the United Kingdom would be disproportionate  for  the
        purposes of Article 8(2), and therefore the only proper decision to
        arrive at with regard to this application is to grant him leave  to
        remain."

 4. The Secretary of State appears to  have  allowed  that  application  to
    mature.  The grounds for reconsideration refer to an application  on  5
    February 2005, also on form FLR(M): we have not seen  that  application
    and nothing was made of it at the hearing before us; it may be that the
    reference was a mistake but, in any event, it does  not  appear  to  us
    that a further application in the same terms would make any  difference
    to the appellant's case.  The respondent's response to the  application
    was the decision refusing leave to enter, dated 19 May 2006,  to  which
    we have already referred.  It was accompanied by a letter of  the  same
    date  setting  out  the  appellant's  immigration  history  and  making
    reference to paragraphs 281 and 283 of the Immigration Rules,  HC  395.
    The letter continues as follows:

        "Consideration has been given as to whether it would  be  right  to
        allow him to enter  exceptionally,  outside  of  the  Rules.   This
        consideration  has  taken  into  account   the   United   Kingdom's
        obligations under  the  European  Convention  on  Human  Right,  as
        enshrined in the Human Rights Act 1998,  with  specific  regard  to
        Article 8 of the Convention."

 5. The letter goes on to indicate consideration of various  matters  under
    that Article.  There is then the sentence:

        "Careful consideration has been given as  to  whether  your  client
        should qualify for discretionary leave in the United Kingdom but he
        does not qualify for such leave."

 6. The letter concludes by indicating the rights  of  appeal  against  the
    decision.

 7. The appellant's Grounds of Appeal may be summarised as follows.  First,
    the refusal of leave to enter is not appropriate in his case.   He  did
    not seek leave to enter on the basis of his marriage: he  sought  leave
    to remain.  He had already entered the  United  Kingdom  by  absconding
    from the terms of his temporary admission.  A refusal of leave to enter
    is therefore inappropriate in his case.

 8. Further, the power to refuse leave to enter is  vested  in  Immigration
    Officers and the present notice was issued on behalf of  the  Secretary
    of State, not an Immigration Officer.  Secondly, in making his decision
    the Secretary of State had failed to take into account  the  provisions
    of the deportation policy called DP3/96 which  set  out  a  process  by
    which  removals  would  be  considered  on  a  case-by-case  basis  and
    indicated that the matter was one of discretion to be exercised by  the
    Secretary of State.  In the absence of any reference to that policy  in
    the letter accompanying the decision, the decision itself  was  bad  on
    Abdi principles.

 9. The Immigration Judge rejected the arguments relating to  the  validity
    of the Notice.  He held that the mere fact that the application was  in
    form an application not for leave to enter but for leave to remain  was
    simply because no other application form was available,  and  the  form
    which was used was that which  most  closely  matched  the  appellant's
    position.  He also held that the Secretary of State "does have power to
    issue a  Notice  of  Refusal  of  leave  to  enter  under  s62  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002".  It is fair to say that,
    although Mr Blundell submitted that the notice was  good,  he  did  not
    seek to persuade us to endorse the  Immigration  Judge's  reasoning  on
    either point.  So far as concerns the  policy,  the  Immigration  Judge
    referred to its terms, and noted that the appellant sought to  rely  on
    the paragraphs headed "Marriages that pre-date enforcement action".  He
    said  that  "enforcement  action  against  the  appellant  would   have
    commenced when his claim for asylum was initially refused,  or  at  the
    very latest when his appeal was dismissed in March 1997.  His  marriage
    in October 2002 occurred after enforcement action commenced".  He  then
    found that the respondent did consider the  criteria  set  out  in  the
    policy, and did so on the basis of the correct facts.  He made findings
    of fact in respect of the appellant's wife, which we must set out:

        "The evidence is that [she] was born here  with  Nigerian  parents.
        She has lived in Nigeria for some time and went  to  school  there.
        She still has family there.  She has medical problems  ...  .   She
        says that these problems prevent her from conceiving the child that
        she and her husband badly want and that if he returns to Nigeria on
        his own they will have little chance of having a child.   There  is
        no evidence to indicate that  the  treatment  [she]  needs  is  not
        available in  Nigeria,  or  indeed  of  what  her  current  medical
        condition is.  No evidence was produced,  apart  from  the  medical
        evidence and the fact that she would not have a job in  Nigeria  to
        show that it would be unreasonable to expect [her] to  return  with
        her husband."

10. The Immigration Judge dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

11. The Grounds for Reconsideration reiterate  the  submissions  about  the
    validity of the Notice, and challenge the Immigration Judge's treatment
    of  DP3/96.   They  assert  that  there  was  no  basis  on  which  the
    Immigration Judge could find that the Secretary  of  State  had  indeed
    considered the policy; and complain that the determination taken  as  a
    whole amounts to the Immigration Judge's own consideration  of  factors
    under the policy: that, it is said, is a procedure not open to him as a
    discretion embodied in the policy is one for  the  Secretary  of  State
    alone.

12. Reconsideration was ordered in the following terms:

        "The  Grounds  contend  with  arguable  merit  that  the   decision
        complained of was in the wrong form and for that reason  alone  the
        decision was contrary to law.  In that regard, reconsideration  was
        ordered.

        I  see  no  merit  in  the  Immigration  Judge's  approach  to  the
        applicability of DP3/96.  He  decided  for  good  reason  that  the
        appellant could not possibly come within the scope  of  the  policy
        and was entitled to so conclude on the facts as he found them.

        For these reasons,  the  Grounds  that  challenge  the  Immigration
        Judge's Article ECHR findings are misconceived."

13. At the hearing before us Mr Gillespie again submitted that the decision
    refusing leave to enter was one which could not be made in  respect  of
    the appellant.  He referred us  to  the  statutory  provisions  and  to
    Akhtar v Governor of Pentonville Prison [1993] Imm AR 424,  CA.   After
    the hearing, by letter (with a copy to Mr Blundell) he  also  drew  our
    attention to Afunyah v SSHD [1998] Imm AR  201,  CA.   Dealing  briefly
    with DP3/96, he submitted that the policy created a presumption against
    removal in cases to which it applied, even if the case was  not  "truly
    exceptional" in the Huang sense.  Thus, in Mr  Gillespie's  submission,
    DP3/96 might benefit a person  who  could  succeed  neither  under  the
    Immigration Rules nor under Article 8.

14. Mr Blundell submitted that the Secretary of State remained entitled  to
    treat the appellant as a person seeking leave to enter and was entitled
    to refuse him leave.  On DP3/96, he submitted, in general  terms,  that
    the law had moved on since the issue of that policy.

15. Section 3 of the Immigration Act 1971 is headed "General Provisions for
    Regulation and Control".  It provides as follows:

            "3(1)      Except as otherwise provided by or  under  this  Act,
              where a person is not a British citizen:-
                 (a)   he shall not enter the United  Kingdom  unless  given
                  leave to do so in accordance with the provisions  of,  or
                  made under, this Act;
                 (b)   he may be given leave to  enter  the  United  Kingdom
                  (or, when already there, leave to remain  in  the  United
                  Kingdom) either for a limited period or for an indefinite
                  period;
                 ... ."

      Section 4 of the same Act is headed "Administration  of  Control"  and
    provides in s1 that "the power under this Act to give or  refuse  leave
    to  enter  the  United  Kingdom  should  be  exercised  by  Immigration
    Officers".  Section 3A of the same Act, headed "Further Provision as to
    Leave to Enter", provides, so far as relevant, as follows:

            "(1) The Secretary of State may by order make further  provision
              with respect to the giving, refusing or varying of  leave  to
              enter the United Kingdom

            ...

            (7)  The Secretary of State may, in such  circumstances  as  may
              be prescribed in an order made by him, give or  refuse  leave
              to enter the United Kingdom.

            ...

            (12) An order under this  Section  must  be  made  by  Statutory
              Instrument."

    The Immigration (Leave to Enter) Order 2001 (SI 2590/2001) provides  in
    part as follows:


      "2(1) Where this Article applies to a person, the Secretary of  State
              may give or refuse him leave to enter the United Kingdom.
      (2)   This Article applies to a person who seeks leave to  enter  the
              United Kingdom and who -
            (a)  has made a claim for asylum; or


            (b)  has made a claim that it would be contrary to  the  United
                  Kingdom's obligations under the Human  Rights  Convention
                  for him to be removed from, or  required  to  leave,  the
                  United Kingdom.


      (3)   This Article also applies to a person who seeks leave to  enter
              the  United  Kingdom  for  a  purpose  not  covered  by   the
              Immigration Rules or otherwise  on  the  grounds  that  those
              Rules should be departed from in his case.


      ... ."

16. In Akhtar's case,  the  appellant  was  interviewed  on  arrival  on  5
    September 1991 and was  granted  temporary  admission  pending  further
    examination, subject to conditions including a condition  of  residence
    at a particular address, a prohibition on employment and an  obligation
    to report back on  23  September.   On  9  September  he  breached  the
    conditions of his temporary admission by leaving the nominated address.
     He then applied for asylum.  He failed to report on  23  September  as
    required, and it then emerged that he might have engaged in  some  form
    of employment.

17. He was in due course interviewed in connection with his  asylum  claim.
    The person who dealt with him on that occasion took the  view  that  he
    was an illegal entrant for the purposes of s33 of  the  1971  Act  both
    because he had attempted to obtain  entry  to  the  United  Kingdom  by
    deceiving the Immigration Officer as to his  true  intentions  when  he
    first arrived, and because he had failed to comply with  the  terms  of
    his temporary admission.  He was given notice that he was  regarded  as
    an illegal entrant and was liable to detention; but was  given  further
    temporary admission.  The Secretary of  State  decided  to  refuse  his
    application for asylum and asked his solicitors  to  make  arrangements
    for him to attend in order to be notified of this  decision.   It  then
    emerged that he had again changed address, had  again  apparently  been
    engaged in employment; there was suspicion that he  had  been  claiming
    Social Security benefits and he had been convicted  of  an  offence  of
    theft, for which he had been fined.  He  was  eventually  located,  and
    said that he had married a person settled in the United  Kingdom.   The
    Immigration Officer dealing with him on that occasion concluded that he
    was an illegal entrant for both the earlier reasons and also because he
    had again broken the conditions of his second  temporary  admission  by
    changing address.  Authority was given to the  respondent  governor  of
    Pentonville Prison to detain him under the Immigration Acts.

18. The appellant  challenged  his  detention  by  way  of  habeas  corpus,
    asserting that he was not an illegal entrant.  His submission was  that
    the provisions of the 1971 Act relating to illegal entry were  directed
    to clandestine entry and did not apply to a person  who  had  presented
    himself to an Immigration Officer on arrival, or to a  person  who  had
    merely breached the terms of temporary admission.  Owen J  refused  his
    application.  He appealed to the Court of Appeal.

19. The Court noted,  amongst  other  things,  the  definition  of  illegal
    entrant in s33 of the 1971 Act as  "a  person  unlawfully  entering  or
    seeking to enter in  breach  of  ...  the  Immigration  Laws,  ...  and
    includes also a person who has entered",  and  s11(1),  which  provides
    that a person who "has not otherwise entered the United  Kingdom  shall
    be deemed not to do so so long as he is ... temporarily admitted".  The
    Court also reviewed existing authority.  All three members of the Court
    took the view that the appellant became an illegal entrant when he lied
    to the Immigration Officer on  or  soon  after  his  arrival.   On  the
    question whether he became an illegal entrant by breaching the terms of
    his temporary  admission,  Kennedy  LJ,  apparently  on  the  basis  of
    previous authority, held that the appellant's breach of  the  terms  of
    his temporary admission was also sufficient  to  make  him  an  illegal
    entrant.  Sir Thomas Bingham MR took the same view.  He said this:

        "The first point depends primarily on s11 of  the  Immigration  Act
        1971, and the curious position of a person who has been temporarily
        admitted to this country subject  to  conditions.   Such  a  person
        enters  the  country  physically  but  is  deemed  not  to  so  for
        immigration purposes.  So long as he obeys the conditions he is not
        an illegal entrant; indeed he is not an entrant at  all.   But  his
        right to be here is conditional, and a breach of conditions, in  my
        view, destroys the statutory presumption that such a person has not
        physically entered.  That in  turn  has  the  result  that  he  has
        entered at a time when he has not received leave to do so,  and  in
        those circumstances, as I understand the Act, he becomes an illegal
        entrant within the meaning of the Act and liable to be  treated  as
        such".

20. Evans LJ doubted whether that was right.  He said as to this ground:

        "I admit to some reservations and express no concluded opinion.  If
        it is correct that the detention is justified on  this  ground,  it
        follows that persons who are  granted  temporary  admission  become
        illegal immigrants on breach of any restriction and, by  virtue  of
        that failure to comply with the restrictions, liable  to  detention
        and even to removal from this country,  even  if  the  failure  was
        accidental or was temporary or even  due  to  circumstances  beyond
        their control."

21. Mr Gillespie's  submission  was  the  s3  of  the  Act  draws  a  clear
    distinction between those who seek leave to enter and  those  who  have
    entered.  Akhtar's case shows that a person who breaches the  terms  of
    temporary  admission  indeed  has  entered  illegally.   Therefore  the
    appellant in the present case is a person who has  entered  and,  under
    s3, he may be granted (or refused) leave to remain, but  he  cannot  be
    granted (or refused) leave to enter.

22. It appears to us that those submissions go beyond what is  required  in
    the judgments in Akhtar.  In that case the  question  was  whether  the
    appellant's detention was lawful, which was the same as asking  whether
    the Secretary of State was  entitled  to  treat  the  appellant  as  an
    illegal entrant.  The Court of Appeal held that  he  was  so  entitled.
    Despite Evans LJ's reservations, the effect of that decision is that  a
    person who breaches the terms of his temporary admission is  liable  to
    be detained as an illegal entrant.  Nothing in  Akhtar's  case,  as  we
    read it, suggests that in such  circumstances  that  the  Secretary  of
    State is bound to treat such a person as an illegal entrant.   Nor,  as
    we understand them, do the judgments in that case prevent the Secretary
    of State from regarding a person who is  in  breach  of  the  terms  of
    temporary admission as a person who still seeks leave to enter.  Indeed
    it appears to be inherent in the facts of  Akhtar's  case  itself  that
    such may indeed be the position.  In the view of all three  members  of
    the Court of Appeal the appellant became an illegal entrant  very  soon
    after his arrival; but there is no suggestion in the judgments that the
    Secretary of State was not entitled to continue  consideration  of  his
    application for leave to enter on the various bases on  which  he  made
    that application.

23. Mr Gillespie's submission can succeed only if he  is  right  in  saying
    that the word "or" in s3(1)(b) of the 1971 Act is disjunctive; that  is
    to say that it separates two circumstances which cannot  co-exist.   If
    he is right about that, then the effect of Akhtar's case is,  as  Evans
    LJ said, that a person who commits any  breach  of  the  terms  of  his
    temporary admission, however minor, automatically becomes a person  who
    has entered illegally, and, because he has entered, can  no  longer  be
    treated as a person who is seeking leave to enter.  It  appears  to  us
    that  that  is  wrong  in  principle  and  also  unrealistic.   It   is
    unrealistic for exactly the reasons indicated  by  Evans  LJ.   In  the
    context of Akhtar he was only concerned with  liability  to  detention,
    but if Mr Gillespie is right, the consequences are  much  more  severe.
    An  accidental  breach  of  the  terms  of  temporary  admission  would
    automatically have the effect we  have  indicated,  and  would  forever
    deprive the appellant of the possibility of  entering  legally  on  the
    present occasion.  What is even more alarming is that the breach  would
    have that effect even if the Secretary of State did not  notice  it  at
    the time.  This takes us on to  another  point.   If  Mr  Gillespie  is
    right, it follows that although in the present case the  appellant  was
    refused leave to enter, a grant of leave to enter would have been void.
     We think that that is an unrealistic position for Mr Gillespie to have
    to take; but, again, if he is right, any grant of leave to enter  would
    be void if it turned out to have been made to a person who had in  fact
    breached the terms of his temporary admission.  It is difficult to  see
    that the legislator could have so intended.

24. So far as concerns principle, the position in this appeal is  that  the
    appellant depends on his own wrong, that is to say  his  absconding  in
    breach of the terms of his  temporary  admission,  to  claim  that  the
    decision made  by  the  Secretary  of  State,  which  would  have  been
    appropriate in his case if he had not broken the law, is one  which  is
    invalid.  It does not appear to us  that  an  immigration  offender  is
    entitled to dictate to the Secretary  of  State  in  that  way,  or  is
    entitled to require that his offence be taken into account for what  in
    the present circumstances would be his own benefit.

25. For the foregoing reasons we reject Mr Gillespie's submission that  the
    word "or" in s3(1)(b) of the 1971 Act is to be read disjunctively.  The
    effect of that paragraph is to give a power in  respect  of  those  who
    have already entered the United Kingdom  which  is  additional  to  the
    power available in respect of all those who are not  British  citizens.
    Akhtar's case shows that a person who breaches the terms  of  temporary
    admission can properly be treated as an illegal entrant.   But  if  the
    breach is minor, or if there is some other  factor  to  be  taken  into
    account, there is no obligation to treat him as an illegal entrant.  He
    can properly continue to be treated as a person seeking leave to enter.
     In those circumstances the appropriate decision in this case  will  be
    one granting or refusing him leave  to  enter.   An  appellant  is  not
    entitled to succeed in an appeal by claiming that, as  he  had  already
    entered illegally, he cannot be granted leave to enter.

26. As we  have  indicated,  after  the  hearing,  Mr  Gillespie  drew  our
    attention to Afunyah v SSHD.  That was a case in  which  the  applicant
    arrived in the United  Kingdom  in  an  advanced  state  of  pregnancy,
    bearing in her passport a forged leave stamp.  She was refused leave to
    enter, but granted temporary admission so as to enable her not to  have
    to travel again when she  was  in  the  advanced  state  of  pregnancy.
    Following the birth of the child, it  appears  that  the  Secretary  of
    State proposed to remove the applicant in pursuance of the decision  to
    refuse her leave to enter; by that time she was in breach of the  terms
    of  her  temporary  admission.   The  present   proceedings   were   an
    application for leave to apply  for  Judicial  Review  of  the  removal
    directions, based on an assertion by the appellant that  the  Secretary
    of State had failed to take into account a policy called DP2/93.   That
    policy applied, on its face, to "deportation and illegal entry  cases".



27. In his covering letter, Mr Gillespie wrote as follows:

        "The Court of Appeal found that the  Secretary  of  State  was  not
        obliged to treat the appellant who  had  absconded  from  temporary
        admission as an illegal  entrant  where  she  had  previously  been
        refused entry.  I do not understand there to have  been  any  fresh
        refusal of entry in the Afunyah case (or at least none is  referred
        to); rather it appears to be a case  of  removal  directions  being
        given based on the original refusal of entry.  The case, therefore,
        sheds no light, in my submission, on  whether  an  illegal  entrant
        can, subsequent to entry, be refused entry.

        I have to accept, based on Afunyah, that in principle the Secretary
        of State has power to give removal directions based on a refusal of
        entry from some time past.  Whether it would be right to do  so  in
        the particular circumstances of any case, is  a  different  matter,
        and one that the Tribunal is not  concerned  with;  the  giving  of
        removal directions is not an appealable immigration decision.   The
        appellant maintains that he cannot be the subject of a  refusal  of
        entry once he has entered the UK"

28. It is clear therefore that counsel took the view  that  Afunyah's  case
    was sufficiently relevant that he ought to refer us to it, but that  it
    ought to have no impact on our decision.  We beg to differ.

29. The policy DP2/93 applied only to those threatened with deportation  or
    removal as illegal entrants.  The applicant in that case  claimed  that
    the policy applied to her.  She could do so only by claiming to  be  an
    illegal entrant.  Laws J, before whom the matter originally  came,  had
    said this:

        "It is entirely plain that if this applicant were in  the  position
        to insist the Secretary of State treated her as an illegal  entrant
        so that policy DP2/93 might be applied to her she would be building
        rights on an edifice consisting of nothing but her own  wrongdoing.
        I do not think that  is  the  law.   The  Secretary  of  State  was
        entitled to treat this  case  as  a  port  refusal  case  which  in
        substance it was."

30. Lord Woolf MR set that passage out in his judgment  and  expressed  his
    complete agreement with it.  Aldous LJ  and  Mummery  LJ  also  agreed,
    Aldous LJ adding this:

        "In this case the applicant was a person seeking leave to enter and
        was so treated by the Secretary of State.   That  being  so  policy
        DP2/93 does not apply.  The fact  that  also  in  law  she  was  an
        illegal entrant does not make the policy apply.   The  policy  only
        applies when action is taken  against  an  illegal  entrant  as  an
        illegal entrant."

31. It seems to us that the Court in Afunyah was  making  its  decision  on
    precisely the same grounds on those which we had  already  adopted  for
    the decision in this case.  The appellant is not entitled  to  rely  on
    her own wrong and to require the Secretary of State to treat her as  an
    illegal entrant; and the Secretary of State has the choice of  treating
    her as other than an illegal entrant, even  if  she  has  breached  the
    terms  of  temporary  admission.   Afunyah's  case   therefore   merely
    fortifies us in our views.

32. (For completeness, although the matter was not mentioned before us,  we
    should add that s11(5) of the 1971 Act provides that,  where  a  person
    enters the United Kingdom lawfully as a person exempt from  immigration
    control, and seeks to remain beyond the time during which he is exempt,
    he is to be treated for the purposes of the Act as seeking to enter the
    United Kingdom.  We read that section as excluding the possibility that
    such a person be treated as seeking to remain.  We do not  read  it  as
    excluding the possibility that a person who enters the  United  Kingdom
    unlawfully be treated as seeking leave to enter.)

33. Given, then, that a refusal of leave to enter was permissible  official
    action in the appellant's  case,  is  the  refusal  against  which  the
    appellant appeals bad for being signed on behalf of  the  Secretary  of
    State rather than on behalf of an Immigration  Officer?   In  our  view
    nothing turns on the fact that the  decision  was  in  response  to  an
    application for leave to remain.  What is important, however,  is  that
    the application was accompanied by the letter whose terms we  have  set
    out above, making it absolutely clear that the appellant  claimed  that
    his removal would breach rights protected by Article 8.  Given that the
    appellant has never had entry clearance or leave to enter as a  spouse,
    it is also clear that the appellant's application was for  leave  other
    than in accordance with the Immigration Rules.  There can in  our  view
    be no doubt that under the  Immigration  (Leave  to  Enter)  Order  the
    Secretary of State had power to give or refuse leave to enter.

34. We turn now to the grounds based on DP3/96, which was the successor  to
    the policy mentioned in Afunyah.   As  we  have  said,  Mr  Gillespie's
    submissions on this issue at  the  hearing  were  brief,  no  doubt  in
    deference to the terms in which reconsideration had been  ordered.   We
    suppose they would have been briefer still if he had then been aware of
    the decision in Afunyah.  DP3/96, like DP2/93, applies only  to  "those
    persons liable to be removed as illegal  entrants  or  deported".   For
    precisely the reasons indicated in Afunyah, the policy does  not  apply
    to the appellant, and he is not entitled to insist on being treated  as
    an illegal entrant so that it does.  Even if  he  could  overcome  that
    difficulty, however, he would  face  a  further  one.   Mr  Gillespie's
    submission was that the policy creates a presumption against removal in
    cases to which it  applies,  but,  as  the  policy  makes  clear,  that
    presumption applies only  where  "it  is  unreasonable  to  expect  the
    settled spouse to accompany his/her spouse on removal", on which  point
    "the onus rests with the  settled  spouse  to  make  out  a  case  with
    supporting evidence as to why it is unreasonable for  him/her  to  live
    outside the United Kingdom".  As the Immigration Judge's  determination
    shows,  that  case  has  never  been  satisfactorily  made.   In  those
    circumstances, even if this were a deportation or illegal  entry  case,
    the policy would not have been shown to apply to it.

35. The Immigration Judge erred in law.  He erred in  his  conclusion  that
    the Secretary of State's power  to  grant  or  refuse  leave  to  enter
    depended on s62 of the 2002 Act.  That error was not material,  because
    in the circumstances of this  case,  he  could  not  have  reached  any
    different conclusion if he had been pointed to the statutory provisions
    that were in fact applicable.  It does not appear that he was asked  to
    give any very lengthy  consideration  to  the  particular  question  of
    whether a refusal of leave to enter was in any event  apposite  in  the
    present case.  The Immigration Judge also erred in considering that the
    appellant's marriage post-dated enforcement action,  which  he  thought
    had begun on the dismissal of his asylum appeal.  It is clear from  the
    terms of the policy, (in particular note (iii) to  paragraph  5),  that
    this is not a case in which enforcement action  had  begun  before  the
    marriage.  In this respect we consider  that  the  Immigration  Judge's
    error was material, because it caused him to deal with the arguments on
    the policy in an entirely different way from  the  way  he  would  have
    dealt with them if he had appreciated that the marriage did  not  post-
    date enforcement action.

36. For the foregoing reasons we set aside the Immigration Judge's decision
    and we substitute a determination dismissing  the  appeal  on  all  the
    grounds advanced before us.








                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT
                                                             Date:
