
ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL

             TM (s94 certificate:  jurisdiction) Zimbabwe [2006] UKAIT 00005


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at: Bradford Hearing Centre       Date of Hearing:  2 December 2005


                                   Before:

                    Mr C M G Ockelton (Deputy President)
                 Mrs C E Roberts (Senior Immigration Judge)

                                   Between

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:           Mr Rhys-Davies instructed by Switalski's
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Peterson, Home Office Presenting Officer

It is for the Tribunal  to  decide  whether  an  appeal  has  in  fact  been
certified under s94.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

  1. The Appellant, who has claimed to be a citizen of Zimbabwe, arrived in
     the United Kingdom on 24 July 2004 and claimed asylum.  On 4  November
     2004, asylum having been refused, she was refused leave to  enter  the
     United Kingdom.  She appealed.  Her appeal was heard by an Immigration
     Judge, Mr S M Hildreth, and allowed.  Reconsideration was  ordered  at
     the instance of the Secretary of State.

  2. Although the Appellant has always claimed to be a citizen of Zimbabwe,
     it is apparently the Respondent's view that she is or may be a citizen
     of South  Africa.   The  reasons  for  refusal  letter  sets  out  the
     Respondent's challenges to the Appellant's claim in some  considerable
     detail.  The Immigration Judge concluded that the Appellant's claim of
     Zimbabwean nationality and  her  account  of  her  history  were  both
     established to the appropriate standard.  He  allowed  the  appeal  on
     asylum and human rights grounds.

  3. At the beginning of  the  reconsideration  hearing,  Ms  Peterson  who
     appeared for the Respondent submitted that the Immigration Judge erred
     in hearing the appeal at all because he had no jurisdiction to do  so.
     She reminded us that we ought to consider matters of jurisdiction even
     if they have not been previously raised.  She drew  our  attention  to
     the fact that,  at  the  beginning  of  the  letter  of  refusal,  the
     Respondent had written as follows:

           "You have claimed asylum in the United Kingdom  on  the  grounds
           that you have  a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution  in  South
           Africa,  the  country  which  is  listed  in   s94(4)   of   the
           Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002."

  4. The notice of decision has, at the end, these words:

           "You cannot appeal while you are in the United Kingdom because a
           certificate has  been  issued  under  s94  of  the  Nationality,
           Immigration and Asylum Act 2002."

  5. We considered the matter.  Section 94 reads, so far  as  relevant,  as
     follows:

           "(1)  This section applies to an appeal under s82(1)  where  the
                 appellant has made an asylum claim or a human rights  claim
                 (or both).
           ...
           (2)   A person may not bring an appeal  to  which  this  section
                 applies [in reliance on  s92(4)(a)]  if  the  Secretary  of
                 State certifies that  the  claim  or  claims  mentioned  in
                 subsection (1) is or are clearly unfounded.
           (3)   If the Secretary of State  is  satisfied  that  an  asylum
                 claimant or human rights claimant is entitled to reside  in
                 a state listed in subsection (4) he shall certify the claim
                 under subsection  (2)  unless  satisfied  that  it  is  not
                 clearly unfounded."

  6. There is no doubt that the effect of  such  a  certification  is  that
     there is no in-country right of appeal if the possibility of appealing
     from within the United Kingdom was one which depended upon s92(4),  as
     this one does.  South Africa is one of the states named in s92(4).

  7. We have no jurisdiction to  question  whether  a  claim  was  properly
     certified.  The question whether there has been certification  in  any
     particular case is, however, a matter for us.  The notice of  decision
     in this case clearly refers backward in time to  certification  having
     already taken place.  It follows that the certification, if any,  must
     be found within the reasons for refusal letter.  We  find  nothing  in
     that letter which indicates that the Secretary of State was  satisfied
     that the Appellant was entitled to reside in South Africa (as distinct
     from merely challenging her to prove that she was not), nor do we find
     any wording indicating certification under s92(2) as  is  required  by
     the statute.  We therefore ruled that this appeal  was  not  certified
     under s92 and that the Appellant has an in-country right of appeal.

  8. Ms Peterson told us that she did not seek to rely on the grounds  upon
     which reconsideration was ordered.

  9. In the circumstances, we find that there was no error of  law  in  the
     previous determination of the Tribunal, which shall stand.




                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT


                                                             Date:
