

Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
                 BA (military service - no risk) Sudan CG [2006] UKAIT 00006


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 12 December 2005                             |                           |
|                                                |...........................|
|                                                |............               |


                                   Before

                  DR H H STOREY (Senior Immigration Judge)
                 Mr H J E LATTER  (SENIOR IMMIGration Judge)
                               MrS l R SCHMITT


                                   Between

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Gill QC of Counsel instructed by  Blakemores
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss J Webb, Home Office Presenting Officer

Country guidance is given in this case on the  following issues and  in  the
following terms:

(i)  On the available evidence Sudanese draft evaders  and  draft  deserters
      do not face a real risk of imprisonment as a punishment.  Instead they
      are forced to perform military service under close supervision.

(ii) In view of the ending in January 2005 of  the  north-south  civil  war,
      there is no longer a real risk of conscripts or draft evaders or draft
      deserters being required to fight in the south.

(iii)     The  recent  conflict  in  Darfur   (still   ongoing)   has   been
      characterised by serious violations of international humanitarian  law
      amounting  to  crimes  under  international  law.   However,  on   the
      available evidence it is not  reasonably  likely  that  conscripts  or
      draft evaders or draft deserters are being or  would  be  required  to
      fight in Darfur.

(iv)     Accordingly, Sudanese who face  conscription,  or  who  are   draft
      evaders and draft deserters do not face  a  real  risk  on  return  of
      persecution or treatment contrary to Article 3.

(v)  The case of AM (Sudan Draft Evader) Sudan  [2004]  UKIAT  00335  is  no
      longer to  be  followed  and,  even  read  historically,  was  wrongly
      decided.

(vi) In view of the substantial political realignments in Sudan  during  the
      2002-2005 period, none of the  existing  Country  Guideline  cases  on
      Sudan (save for TM (Persecution- Christians -  Individual  -  General)
      Sudan CG [2002] UKIAT 04849 and AE (Relocation - Darfur - Khartoum  an
      option) Sudan CG [2005] UKAIT 00101) are to be considered  any  longer
      to furnish current country guidance and are accordingly to be  deleted
      from the AIT Country Guideline list.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   This is the reconsideration  of  an  appeal  against  the  respondent's
      decision made on 20 November 2004 to remove  the  appellant  from  the
      United Kingdom following a  decision  that  he  was  not  entitled  to
      asylum.  The appeal was originally heard  by  an  Adjudicator,  Mr  P.
      Telford, on 12 February 2004.   Permission was granted  to  appeal  to
      the Immigration Appeal Tribunal on 17 August 2004  and  by  virtue  of
      transitional provisions that appeal now proceeds as a reconsideration.

2.    At  a  hearing  on  7  September  2005  the  Tribunal  (Mr  T.  Davey,
      Immigration Judge and Mrs G. Greenwood) held that the Adjudicator  had
      made a material error of law as follows:

             'The Adjudicator gave inadequate reasons (in paragraph 46 D&R)
             concerning the risk on return of a person  to  Sudan  eligible
             for military service; and concerning the extent to  which  the
             appellant may be required to participate  in  or  be  involved
             with conduct contrary to  the  basic  laws  of  human  conduct
             and/or in brutal military conduct. Sepet and   Bulbul,  Krotov
             [in later context of AM AIT reported 2004 UKIAT 00335].


             The only issues to be addressed in  the  light  of  up-to-date
             objective material are (1) concerning whether the call  up  to
             do military service gives rise to risk of  being  required  to
             engage  in   acts   of   atrocity/brutality/abuse   of   human
             rights/contrary to basic human  conduct;  and  (2)  concerning
             whether there is  a  real  risk  of  proscribed  ill-treatment
             (contrary to the Refugee Convention Article 3 ECHR) as a draft
             evader.'

3.   When the appeal was listed  for  further  hearing,   the  parties  were
      notified that this appeal was  likely  to  be  treated  as  a  country
      guidance case. As the above indicates one of  the   purposes  of  this
      hearing was to consider to what extent reliance could still be  placed
      on the reported case, AM (Sudan  Draft  Evader)  Sudan   [2004]  UKIAT
      00335.

The appellant's claim
4.   The appellant is a citizen of Sudan born on 1  September  1975.    From
      1981 to 1987 he went to primary school in his home town of Labidia and
      then helped his father on the family farm.  His father  also  owned  a
      shop in Al-Abdia.  The basis of his claim for asylum  can  briefly  be
      described as follows. There were no problems  until 1 August 2003 when
      four members of the  military attended his father's shop  telling  him
      that the appellant had to attend the national  service  office  on  20
      October 2003.  His father told them this was impossible  as  according
      to Sudanese law when there is only one son in the family,  he was  not
      required to undertake military service. The military disregarded  this
      and repeated that the appellant would have to  attend.  The  appellant
      asserts that after this the authorities started to go to his  father's
      shop to harass him.   On  5  August  2003  the  appellant  went  to  a
      committee where they had to obtain a letter  to  buy  petrol  for  the
      tractor on the farm but this was  refused  with  no  explanation.  The
      appellant therefore had to leave the farm as he was unable  to  obtain
      either petrol or seeds.  He decided to help his uncle who was a member
      of the Communist Party. The appellant started taking down posters that
      the government put up at night. He said that he did this on 15, 16 and
      17 August 2003.  He was suspected of being a member of  the  Communist
      Party and was arrested on 17 August  2003  and  taken  to  a  security
      prison where he was  held for three days. During this  period  he  was
      beaten with sticks and hot metal  bars were placed on his back. On  20
      August 2003 his father paid a bribe to one of  the  officers  and  the
      appellant was released on  condition  that  he  had  to  report  on  5
      September 2003.  The appellant's father died on 23  August  2003.   He
      was a diabetic and his condition worsened because  of  stress  and  he
      died.

5.   On 24 August 2003 the appellant decided to sell the livestock with  the
      help of a friend. He believed that he had to escape to save  his  life
      due to the fact that he had to report back on 5 September 2003.  On 24
      August 2003 one of his father's friends took  him  to  Port  Sudan  by
      lorry. They arrived on 26 August 2003.   The  appellant  stayed  at  a
      house  and on 28 August 2003 he left Sudan by ship,  arriving  in  the
      United Kingdom on 23 December 2003.   He claimed asylum the same day.

The Secretary of State's decision
6.   His application was refused by the Secretary of State.  The latter  did
      not believe that the appellant had been  arrested,  detained  or  ill-
      treated or that he would be of any adverse interest  to  the  Sudanese
      authorities on the grounds of his imputed political opinion.   So  far
      as the issue of national service was concerned, the Secretary of State
      noted that national service was compulsory for males between  the  age
      of eighteen and thirty-three.  There were a number  of  categories  of
      people who could have their national call up postponed, including  the
      sole supporter of a family, but as the  appellant  was  not  the  sole
      supporter, the appellant did not appear to fall into this category. It
      was not considered that the requirement for the appellant  to  undergo
      military service was unduly harsh or that he was being singled out for
      other  reasons.  The  application  for  asylum  was  refused  and  the
      appellant appealed on both asylum and human rights grounds.


The hearing before the Adjudicator
7.   The appeal was heard by the Adjudicator  on  12   February  2004.   The
      Adjudicator said that  he  found  some  of  the  appellant's  evidence
      credible but most of his account incredible.  He  accepted   that  the
      appellant was born in Sudan and had worked on  a  farm  owned  by  his
      family and that his family also owned a farm  shop;   that  there  had
      been problems with local corruption; and that the appellant  had  been
      called up to do military service. However, he found that the appellant
      was not a member of the Communist Party nor suspected  of  being  one,
      although he had been arrested for damage to road signs.  He found  the
      rest of the account to be incredible. He  did  not  believe  that  the
      appellant was or had been sought as a Communist sympathiser.  He found
      that there was no court date and that his father had not died.  He did
      not believe the claim that everything on the farm had been sold.   The
      Adjudicator set out his reasons for these findings. They  are  not  in
      issue before us. The  Adjudicator  then  summarised  the  position  as
      follows:

             'The reality here is that he (the appellant) knew he was going
             to be called up to do military service  and  he  resented  it.
             There is no risk ironically on his own account  of  him  doing
             that military service now, nor was there when he left  because
             although he applied and was refused  exemption  on  the  basis
             that his father was alive, and therefore  the  appellant   did
             not qualify as the sole or main breadwinner,  because  he  has
             claimed his father was dead,  the  appellant  would  therefore
             become the main breadwinner.  When the appellant finished  his
             oral evidence by stating that the call up was in fact the main
             reason he did not want to live in Sudan and why he  wanted  to
             leave, he undermined his account  of  his  father  being  dead
             because he would have known that he would have been exempt  if
             his father really were dead.


             Taking all these factors into account this is not a well  made
             up claim and not one which can be accepted  even  on  the  low
             standard which applies.  There has to be a real risk and not a
             potential fanciful risk of persecution.


             These matters cause me to find that he is  not  at  real  risk
             under either the 1951 Convention or at real risk of breach  of
             his human rights.


             The objective evidence does not point to the  appellant  being
             incapable of being  returned to Sudan as there is no real risk
             to returnees and in his case no case against him other than as
             a draft dodger.  If there is punishment,  it does  not  follow
             on this evidence that it is  out  of  all  proportion  to  the
             crime.'

8.   When granting permission to appeal to the Immigration Appeal  Tribunal,
      the Vice President commented  firstly  that  it  was  clear  from  the
      determination that the appellant fled Sudan  to  avoid  being  drafted
      into the Sudanese army, and secondly  that  the  Adjudicator  had  not
      applied the principles in Sepet and Bulbul [2003] 1  WLR  856  in  his
      consideration of the evidence. Subsequently on 7  September  2005  the
      Tribunal accepted, and indeed it was agreed between the parties,  that
      the Adjudicator had  materially  erred  in  law  by  failing  to  give
      adequate reasons concerning the risk on return for a  person  who  had
      evaded military service.   We have already set out the terms in  which
      they set out that decision.

Documents produced at the hearing
9.   At this hearing the appellant produced two  bundles  of  documents,  1A
      and  2A,  together  with  a  skeleton  argument  which   annexed   the
      Operational Guidance Note (OGN),  June  2005  and  the  War  Resisters
      International (CONCODOC) report for  Sudan  dated  15  September  1998
      together with a  Save  The  Children  report  dated   May  2004.   The
      respondent produced the report of the Danish Fact Finding  Mission  to
      Cairo, Khartoum  and  Nairobi  prepared  by  the   Danish  Immigration
      Service in 2001 (DFFM).  The full list of background  evidence  before
      the Tribunal appears  in  the  Appendix  to  this  determination.  The
      Tribunal referred the parties  to  the  report  of  the  UN  Secretary
      General on Sudan dated 12 September 2005.

The submissions
10.  Mr Gill submitted that the appellant had deliberately evaded the  draft
      and was therefore at risk of imprisonment for that reason. The  appeal
      should be allowed on the same basis as in MA (Operational  Guidance  -
      Prison conditions - significance) Sudan [2005]  UKIAT  00149.   Prison
      conditions in Sudan were likely to  reach  the  Article  3  threshold.
      Further, at the time the appellant left Sudan and avoided his military
      service, the Sudanese military were involved in  actions  contrary  to
      the basic rules of human conduct.  If the appellant  were  now  to  be
      punished for that failure, his punishment would amount to persecution.
       He  submitted  that  the  risk  to  the  appellant  would  either  be
      imprisonment or being required to undertake military  service  with  a
      real risk of now being required to participate in  similar  activities
      in Darfur.  He referred to the CIPU  Report  for  April  2005  and  in
      particular paragraphs 5.82-5.86 and paragraph 6.204-207.

11.   Miss  Webb  submitted  that  the  appellant,  in  the  light  of   the
      Adjudicator's findings, could not  be regarded as having  a  political
      profile. He was simply an  Arab from northern Sudan. He was someone on
      his own account who was called up when he was twenty-eight,  not  when
      he was a teenager.  There was nothing to indicate that the authorities
      would have any adverse interest in him save to require  him  to  carry
      out his military service.

12.  In order to decide the issues raised  by this case it is  necessary  to
      set out relevant facts about the current situation in Sudan.

The North-South Conflict
13.  The civil war between the fundamentalist Muslim Government of Sudan  of
      the  National Islamic Front (NIF)  on  the  one  side  and  the  Sudan
      People's Liberation Movement (SPLM/A) on the  other,  which  began  in
      1983, has now ended. A  Comprehensive  Peace  Agreement  signed  on  9
      January   2005  has  been  implemented.   A   new   Interim   National
      Constitution was signed by  President  Bashir  on  9  July  2005.    A
      caretaker  government  was  installed  the  same  month,  pending  the
      establishment of a Government of National Unity.  Two chambers of  the
      national legislature, the   National  Assembly  and  the   Council  of
      State, were inaugurated on 31 August 2005.  The new  chairman  of  the
      Sudan  People's  Liberation  Movement,  Salva  Kiir  (replacing   Vice
      President John Garang following his death in a  plane  crash  in  July
      2005) was sworn in as Vice President on 11 August 2005.  In the  south
      itself, the Peace Agreement provided for the  SPLM/A  to  establish  a
      Government of  Southern Sudan within a larger federal entity.  A South
       Sudanese Assembly has been established. Tensions between the   SPLM/A
      and the  Southern Sudanese Defence Force remain, but  are  subject  to
      ongoing 'south-south' dialogue. Pursuant to  Resolution  1590  (2005),
      the UN has taken  a  range  of  measures  to  assist  in  disarmament,
      demobilisation and reintegration programmes. The UN  Secretary-General
      in his September 2005 Report stated that the ceasefire is holding  and
      that the peace process has been 'moving slowly but  steadily  forward'
      despite the setback caused by the death of First  Vice-President  John
      Garang.  He added that plans are well advanced to support  facilitated
      returns.

The situation in Darfur
14.  The International Commission of Inquiry on Darfur in its report  of  25
      June 2005 to the UN  Secretary-General found that:

             'The roots of the present conflict in Darfur are  complex.  In
             addition to the tribal feuds resulting  from  desertification,
             the availability of modern  weapons,  and  the  other  factors
             noted above, deep layers relating to identity, governance, and
             the emergence of armed rebel  movements  which  enjoy  popular
             support among certain tribes, are  playing  a  major  role  in
             shaping the current crisis.'


15.   It  appears  that  Darfurian  discontent  at   a  perceived  lack   of
      government protection and marginalisation of their region led in  2003
      to a campaign of attacks against government installations  and  police
      barracks by two rebel movements, the  Sudan  Liberation  Movement/Army
      SLM/A and the Justice and Equality Movement  (JEM).    The  government
      responded by calling upon the support of local Arab nomadic tribes, as
      well as tribes from  Libya, Chad and other states.  Collectively  they
      were known as the Janjaweed, a traditional  Darfurian term denoting an
      armed bandit or outlaw on  horseback  or  camel.   Land  grabbing  and
      looting of livestock became common: it is estimated  that  during  the
      2003-4  period  75%  of  livestock  in  the  region  was  looted  from
      civilians.  During 2004 and  early  2005  a  number  of  human  rights
      reports drew attention to a pattern of serious human rights abuses and
      atrocities carried out against the population of Darfur  by  Janjaweed
      militia, apparently acting systematically, with government support.

16.  Despite a number of ceasefires  wide-scale  fighting  continued  during
      2004 and early  mid-2005,  causing  the  destruction  of  hundreds  of
      villages  and  widespread  looting,  pillaging  and  rape.  Government
      complicity in these actions showed itself in particular  in  offensive
      operations described as 'road clearing', in fact a clearing of  ground
      up to 20 Km on each side of certain main roads by methods such as  the
      burning of villages  and looting, causing additional displacement.

17.  In January 2005 the  International  Commission  of  Inquiry  on   Sudan
      published its report to the UN Secretary  General.  What  this  report
      demonstrated was that  whilst  the  authorities  in  Darfur  were  not
      necessarily  involved  in  genocide  (one  of  the   most  serious  of
      international  crimes  under  international  law   and   international
      humanitarian law),  it  was  involved  in  wide-scale  crimes  against
      humanity.   As such, it was involved in widespread  acts  contrary  to
      the basic rules of human conduct.  The summary given at page 3 of  the
      report states, inter alia:

             'Based on a thorough analysis of the information  gathered  in
             the course of its investigations, the  Commission  established
             that the Government of Sudan and the Janjaweed are responsible
             for serious  violations  of  international  human  rights  and
             humanitarian law amounting to crimes under international  law.
              In particular, the  Commission found that  Government  forces
             and  militias  conducted  indiscriminate  attacks,   including
             killing  of  civilians,  torture,   enforced   disappearances,
             destruction of  villages,  rape  and  other  forms  of  sexual
             violence,  pillaging  and  forced   displacement,   throughout
             Darfur.  These  acts  were  conducted  on  a  widespread   and
             systematic basis, and therefore may amount to  crimes  against
             humanity. The extensive destruction and displacement  resulted
             in a loss of livelihood and means of  survival  for  countless
             women, men and children.   In  addition  to  the  large  scale
             attacks, many people have been arrested and detained, and many
             have  been  held  incommunicado  for  prolonged  periods   and
             tortured. The vast  majority  of  the  victims  of  all  these
             violations have been from the Fur, Zaghawa, Massaliet,  Jebel,
             Arnaga and other so-called "African" tribes.'

18.  On 28 February 2005 the UN published the  'Report  of  the  independent
      expert on the situation of human rights in the  Sudan, Emmanuel  Akwei
      Addo' which  spoke of a 'sharp deterioration'  in  the  situation  and
      highlighted  continuing  human   rights   abuses   committed   against
      internally  displaced  persons  (IDPs)  and  the  rape  of  women   in
      particular.

19.  Nevertheless, in tandem with peace negotiations  over  the  North-south
      conflict, the UN Secretary General in his  12  September  2005  report
      notes that the key players in the Darfur conflict - the Government  of
      Sudan, the Sudanese Liberation Movement/Army (SLM/A) and  the  Justice
      and  Equality  Movement   (JEM)  -  have  adopted  a  Declaration   of
      Principles at Abuja on 5 July  2005.    According  to  the  Secretary-
      General, the Declaration contains important provisions  regarding  the
      shape of future negotiations on  matters  such  as  unity,  power  and
      wealth-sharing, security arrangements and use and  ownership.  The  UN
      Mission in the Sudan  (UNMIS)  and  the  African  Union  (AU)  have  a
      presence in the  region, both pursuing efforts at  reconciliation  and
      peace-building.

20.  The conflict continues despite  the  passing  of  UN  Security  Council
      Resolutions 1556 of July 2004 and 1590 of March 2005, the  arrival  of
      African Union (AU) monitors and continued attempts at mediation. It is
      estimated to have affected in excess of 2 million people and  to  have
      caused the internal displacement of some 1.2  million.   There  are  a
      further  80,000 refugees living in   Chad's  eastern  border.  The  UN
      estimates  that  some  150,000  civilians  may   have   been   killed.
      Concerns have been expressed about a dangerous descent into warlordism
      and lawlessness.

The background evidence relating to military service
21.  The 1998 CONCODOC Report by War Resisters International states that  in
      1992  the  National  Islamic   Front   (NIF)   government   introduced
      conscription with the 1993  National  Service  Law.  All  men  between
      eighteen and thirty-three were liable.  The length of military service
      was twenty-four months albeit less  for  high  school  and  university
      graduates.  Postponement was possible for sole  breadwinners  and  for
      those working for the government.  Exemption  was  also  possible  for
      some  students  and  for  medical  reasons.   During  the  1990s,  the
      government had difficulty in recruiting conscripts and  so  sought  to
      complement numbers by forced  recruitment.   In  1997  the  government
      authorised a general mobilisation.

22.  Parallel to National  Service is service in the  Popular Defence  Force
      (PDF), created in 1990.  In addition there are so-called  'tribal  PDF
      militias' aligned  to  the  government.  The  right  to  conscientious
      objection is not legally recognised.

23.  Avoiding  military  service  is  punishable  by  two  to  three  years'
      imprisonment (National  Service Law, art.  28).    Draft  evasion  and
      desertion were seen to be widespread.

24.   The  issue  of  military  service  in  Sudan  is  also  considered  in
      paragraphs 5.72-80 of the CIPU Report April 2005.  Military service is
      stated as compulsory  for  all  males  aged  eighteen  and  over  with
      recruitment age being adjusted from time to time.    Those  called  up
      for military service are not allowed to follow an education or  get  a
      job and men of conscription age are forbidden to leave the country for
      any reason. The US State Department Report for 2004 records  that  the
      government officially required that young  men  between  the  ages  of
      seventeen and nineteen enter military or national service in order  to
      be  able  to  receive  a  certificate  on  leaving  secondary  school.
      According to the 2001 Danish Fact Finding Mission report, in the  year
      2000, virtually all students  at  Khartoum  University  had  completed
      their military service and many had been deployed at the front in  the
      south.

25.  The 1998 CONCODOC report also stated that draft evasion  and  desertion
      was widespread. Those who responded to a call up  received  a  booklet
      containing all the details about military service, the date of call-up
      and completion  of military  service  and  the  possible  reasons  for
      postponement or exemption. The  government  had  at  times  turned  to
      forced recruitment such as press ganging. Draft evaders and  deserters
      may also be tracked down  this way and sent into the armed forces. Not
      much  was  known  about  the  punishment  of  evaders  and  deserters.
      According to one source, deserters risked detention, ill-treatment and
      torture. Those  who had left the country and avoided military  service
      risked interrogation and detention on return.  Being sent to war areas
      in the south might also be a possible punishment for draft evaders and
      deserters.

26.  The specific issues of conscientious objection, desertion  and  evasion
      are considered  in paragraphs 5.82-92 of the same  CIPU  Report.  That
      refers to the Danish Fact Finding Report 2001  stating  that  a  well-
      informed source in Cairo said that deserters are not normally punished
      with imprisonment.  The  CIPU  Report   reports  that  in  2001  if  a
      deserter was caught,  he  was  sent  to  the  front  under  threat  of
      harassment and under close supervision.  Otherwise  the  sentence  for
      desertion was three years. But there had been  very  few  examples  of
      deserters being sentenced to three years in prison.  The  Foreign  and
      Commonwealth Office in a  letter  of  February  2005  had  said  that,
      although  they  were  not   aware   of   specific   cases   of   draft
      evaders/deserters facing inhuman, degrading or persecutory  treatment,
      they would not be surprised to find that this was the case.  The  1998
      CONCODOC report is described  as  reporting  that  draft  evasion  and
      desertion seemed to be widespread and it is  noted that  according  to
      the  Danish report a person's ability to  avoid  military  service  in
      Sudan in  2001  would  depend  very  much  on  his  and  his  family's
      connection to the regime and the social and economic position  of  his
      family in Sudan.

27.  Given the considerable  reliance  placed  by  CIPU  and  the  US  State
      Department Reports on the Danish FFM Report 2001  it is important that
      we note its findings in more detail. It deals at length with issues of
      conscription  and the risk of being sent into active service. There is
      a reference at page 38 of  that  report  to  an  announcement  in  the
      Sudanese press before the delegation's visit  to  Khartoum  in  August
      2001 that no one would be sent into battle against his will  any  more
      and that all recruits therefore  had  been  sent  home  from  training
      camps. It mentions that  one  source  explained  that  only  volunteer
      soldiers in the army and the People's Defence Force (PDF) were sent on
      active service to the front, adding that the  press  announcement  had
      been greeted with great relief by families in Khartoum and the rest of
      Sudan who had children of conscript age. As to the issue of conscripts
      being sent into active war service against their will, it records that
      one source could not dismiss the possibility of  this  happening,  but
      said that it was particularly southern Sudanese who  were  sent  south
      into war  zones (page 44).   Another source added that there were many
      examples of recruits being sent into war zones in  Sudan  without  the
      military authorities informing them where in  the  country  they  were
      being deployed. When dealing with the issue  of  desertion  and  draft
      evaders, the report notes that one source in Cairo, whom it  describes
      as well informed, said that deserters were not normally punished  with
      imprisonment.  This is the source referred  to  in  the  CIPU  Report.
      Deserters were not usually imprisoned and often sent directly  to  the
      front  under close supervision.  The  penalty  for  avoiding  military
      service was between two and three years imprisonment but  in  practice
      the authorities did not insist on such sentences and those who  wanted
      to evade military service had some opportunity of  doing  so.  It  was
      believed that only a few people were able to bribe their  way  out  of
      military service. Another source was not aware of cases  of  deserters
      or draft evaders being punished for their actions. If such people were
      caught the authorities would  simply  demand  that  they  returned  to
      service. The report mentions one Sudanese professor working  in  exile
      in a European country expressing the belief that almost  none  of  the
      Sudanese men who had sought asylum in Europe  and  who  had  cited  as
      grounds for seeking asylum their fear of having  to  perform  military
      service were actually at risk having to perform it against their will.



Our Conclusions

Risk of imprisonment for draft evaders and deserters
28.  Mr Gill has submitted that the appeal can readily  be  allowed  on  the
      same  basis  as  MA  (Operational  Guidance  -  prison  conditions   -
      significance)  Sudan  [2005]  UKIAT  00149,  since  the  appellant  is
      accepted as having evaded the draft and as such would be  at  risk  of
      imprisonment by way of punishment.

29.  We would accept that if there was a real risk of this appellant or  any
      draft evader or deserter facing imprisonment as punishment,  he  would
      be  entitled  to  succeed  on  Article  3   grounds.   The  background
      evidence relating to conditions in prison  in   Sudan  discloses  that
      there is a consistent pattern of gross, frequent and  mass  abuses  of
      the human rights of detainees:  see e.g. CIPU April 2004 at  paragraph
      5.78.

30.  We need not expand further on our reasons for taking this view,  since,
      as Miss Webb conceded, it is currently accepted by the Home Office  in
      its  June  2005  Operational  Guidance  Note  on  Sudan  that   prison
      conditions are generally contrary to Article 3:  see MA.

31.  We do not consider it appropriate to go  on  to  consider  the  further
      hypothetical question of whether, if draft evaders did generally  face
      imprisonment, that  punishment  would  be  on  account  of  a  Refugee
      Convention reason of political opinion - and so amount to  persecution
      as well as treatment contrary to Article 3.

32.  However, whilst accepting  that  prison  conditions  are   contrary  to
      Article 3 we  do  not  accept  Mr  Gill's  submission  that  there  is
      currently  a  real  risk  that  draft  evaders  generally  would  face
      imprisonment. We acknowledge that the evidence relating to this  issue
      is not all one-way. The  1998 CONCODOC report, although  stating  that
      '[n]ot much is  known  about  the  punishment  of  draft  evaders  and
      deserters', elsewhere states:

             "According  to  one  source,  deserters  and   those   helping
             deserters, risk detention, ill-treatment and  torture;   those
             who have left the country and avoided  military  service  risk
             interrogation and detention on return.  The FCO in  a February
             2005 letter has stated that, although they were not  aware  of
             specific cases  of  draft  evaders/deserters  facing  inhuman,
             degrading  or  persecutory  treatment,  they  would   not   be
             surprised to find that this was the case."

33.  But there is a clear preponderance of evidence to the effect  that  the
      general response of the Sudanese authorities  to  draft  evaders  when
      caught is not to imprison them, but to take steps  instead  to  ensure
      they are sent to serve in the  army,  under  supervision.    Thus  the
      2001 Danish FFM report (which is the most detailed  and  multi-sourced
      study on this issue) states that:

             'A well informed local source in  Cairo  said  that  deserters
             were not normally punished with imprisonment.  [In 2001] If  a
             deserter  was caught he would  be  sent  to  the  front  under
             genuine threat of  harassment  and  under  close  supervision.
             Otherwise the sentence for  desertion  was  three  years,  but
             there had been few  examples of deserters being  sentenced  to
             three years in  prison'.

34.  The same report noted further that:

             'The same well-informed [Cairo] source also explained  that  a
             persons' ability to avoid military service in  Sudan [in 2001]
             would depend very much on his and his family's  connection  to
             the regime, and the  social  and  economic  position  for  the
             family in  Sudan'.

35.  The report also  states  that  two  other  sources,  Barach  and  Ngot,
      confirmed that deserters were not usually imprisoned, but  were  often
      sent directly to the front under close supervision.   It  stated  that
      another source, Lehne, said that in practice the  military authorities
      did not insist on sentences [for avoiding military service] (52).   At
      p.53 it noted that a further source, El Mufti was not aware  of  cases
      of deserters or draft evaders being punished for  their  actions.   If
      the authorities caught such people they would simply demand that  they
      returned to service.

      Accordingly we conclude that the background  evidence  considered  in
      the round does not demonstrate that draft  evaders  and  deserters  in
      general face a real risk of imprisonment in Sudan.

Risk of conscripts/draft evaders or  deserters  being  required  to  perform
military service in  Darfur

36.  There  are  a  significant  number  of  references  in  the  background
      materials to conscripts being required, during the period of civil war
      between the national government and the SPLM(A) in the south, to serve
      in the south.  The 1998 CONCODAC  report notes that  military  service
      had become increasing unpopular:

             'due to  the  ongoing  civil  war,  the  brutality  of  forced
             recruitment and the risk of being sent to fight in  the  south
             of  the  country.   The  Ministry  of  Defence   denies   that
             conscripts are sent to serve in the south of the country,  but
             maintains they volunteer to do so. For instance, in  1995  the
             government stated that  1,850 conscripts volunteered to  serve
             in the war areas in the south'.

37.  In the context of treatment meted out to  deserters,  the  same  report
      adds:

             'Being sent to the war areas in the  south  might  also  be  a
             possible punishment for draft evaders and deserters.'


      As a source for this it cites Amnesty International   (Dutch  Section)
      1996: letter to Staatssecretaris van Justite,  Amsterdam, 20 September
      1996. This report notes that those joining the  PDF  were  urged,  for
      religious reasons, to 'volunteer' for combat duty in the  south.    It
      stated further that: 'In 1995  many  secondary  school  students  were
      recruited by the PDF to fight in the south.'

38.  According to the 2001 Danish Fact Finding Mission Report, in  the  year
      2000, virtually all students at Khartoum University had thus completed
      their military service and many had been deployed at the front in  the
      south.  It also records Waltman-Molier as stating that  any  conscript
      in Sudan was at risk of being sent to the front (2.2) and  Barach  and
      Ngot as confirming that deserters risked being  subjected  to  serious
      humiliation and could be at great risk of being pushed into the  front
      line.

39.   However,  there  is  a  comparative  silence  regarding  any  use   of
      conscripts being forced to fight in  Darfur. We have only been able to
      find two isolated references in the very extensive bundle of materials
      placed before us. There is firstly a reference to  Darfurian  children
      being conscripted to fight in Darfur. Save the  Children  in  its  May
      2004 report expressed  its  concerns  regarding  the  apparent  forced
      conscription of children  by  Government/Government-allied  forces  in
      Darfur.  This appears, however, to refer to children in Darfur.

40.  There is also a mention in section  3 of  the  Aegis  Trust  June  2005
      'Lives in Our Hands' report which describes a  'well  informed  Darfur
      African currently living in  Khartoum'  reporting  the  sentencing  in
      Khartoum of 47 Darfur Africans to 5-15 years imprisonment:

             'One of them, Mohamed Haroun, a Darfur African officer in  the
             Sudanese armed forces was ordered to go to Darfur to fight. He
             refused.  When he was forced to go to Darfur, he  went  absent
             without leave. He was caught and [faces sentence].'

      The fact that Mahomed Haroun was an example of a Darfurian refusing to
      fight in  Darfur limits its value as evidence of what  happens to non-
      Darfurian deserters, but even disregarding this limitation, it is  the
      only example in a large body of background material of  any   deserter
      or draft evader, Darfurian or non-Darfurian, being forced to fight  in
      Darfur.

41.  Given the frequent reference  to  draft  evaders  and  deserters  being
      required to fight in the south during the civil war, we find this lack
      of reference of considerable significance.  That  is  particularly  so
      for this reason. From  the  materials  before  us  it  is  clear  that
      internal and  external  human  rights  bodies  have   paid  particular
      attention to the  use made by the  Sudanese  authorities  of  military
      service over the past two decades. Furthermore, in  Darfur  itself  we
      note that the humanitarian community is said to consist of 12,500  aid
      workers, 13 UN agencies and  81  international  NGOs  on  the  ground.
      Additionally, there are 2,309 persons including 145 military observers
      and 86 UN police officers  who  comprise  the   UN  Mission  in  Sudan
      (UNMIS), plus 49 international  human  rights  officers  including  17
      international  UN  Volunteers  working  in  teams  on  monitoring  and
      protection  issues.   The Save The Children  Fund  also  has  monitors
      concerned with recruitment of child soldiers. We accept  that  Darfur,
      which is  in the west of Sudan, is a large region  roughly  equivalent
      in size to France, but we think that if  there  was  any  practice  of
      requiring draft evaders or deserters or even conscripts, to  fight  in
      that region, this would have been observed and chronicled  by  one  or
      more of the agencies and forces we have just described.  We are a body
      which  must  decide  cases  on  the  evidence.  If   in   the   future
      representatives are able to adduce evidence casting a different light,
      we shall then need to think again. But on the evidence  before  us  we
      consider the position we have reached is the right one.



The  AM (Sudan Draft Evader) case
42.  As noted earlier, one of the purposes  of  convening  this  case  as  a
      Country Guideline hearing was to  revisit  the  reported  case  of  AM
      (Sudan Draft Evader) Sudan [2004] UKIAT 00335.   It was promulgated on
      29 December 2004.   This case concerned an appellant  from  the   Nuba
      part of Sudan who had lived in the  north of  Sudan  since  childhood.
      Upon being called up he had evaded  the  draft.  He  claimed  that  he
      objected to military service on the  basis that the conduct of war  in
      Sudan is such as would bring it within the definition of a  war  which
      would be condemned by the international community.

43.  Before addressing AM's conclusion on this issue it  is  necessary  that
      we address what the case also found as regards risk  of  imprisonment.
      Mr  Gill did not seek to rely on this aspect of AM, but to our mind we
      need to consider its findings.  The case of  AM  had  previously  been
      before the Court of Appeal, who had remitted it primarily on the issue
      of risk on return.  Although the Court of Appeal did not  address  the
      issue of participation in a military conflict contrary  to  the  basic
      rules of human conduct, Schiemann LJ did address the submission raised
      by Counsel on that occasion  (Ms  Plimmer)  relating  to  the  earlier
      assessment of the IAT that  the  penalties  for  refusing  to  perform
      military service are not imposed.  At paragraph 15 the Tribunal in  AM
      quoted Lord Justice Schiemann as follows:

             'It may well be that circumstances can arise  when  a  law  is
             shown to be never enforced in which case  there  would  be  no
             real risk to a citizen that he would be imprisoned pursuant to
             it. but for my part I do not consider that it was open to  the
             IAT to conclude from the evidence before it that  the  present
             was such a case.'

44.  Having considered the evidence presented to it, the Tribunal who  dealt
      with the AM case on remittal back from the Court of Appeal concurred:-

           '25.   Turning to the question of whether or  not  he  would  be
                  imprisoned we accept that the  US State Department report
                  [for 2004] indicates that  there  is  no  record  of  any
                  imprisonment for failure to do military  service  in  the
                  year  2003  but,  bearing  in  mind  the  fact  that  the
                  appellant is a Nuban, bearing in mind the  fact  that  he
                  has been out of the country for some time, we would again
                  respectfully agree with the Court of Appeal at  paragraph
                  12 of its judgment in this case.'

45.  It is important that we bear in mind the observation of  Schiemann  LJ.
      It reflects the view, we think,  that  where  the  law  of  a  country
      creates an offence for draft evasion punishable by  imprisonment,  one
      should not lightly assume  that  in  fact  there  is  no  enforcement.
      Equally, however, we have to found our assessment of real risk on  the
      basis of evidence as to what is the actual practice  of  the  Sudanese
      authorities, not simply on the   basis  of  what  laws  are  on  their
      statute books. We do not know what the precise state of  the  evidence
      was before the Court of Appeal or was before the  subsequent  Tribunal
      who dealt with  AM on remittal from  that  court.  What  we  do  know,
      however, is that the AM determination does not refer to  any  evidence
      in support of  its above conclusion, apart from  the  appellant's  own
      assertions.   Mr Gill has been apprised of the issue in this case  for
      some time and has had ample opportunity to  adduce  evidence  to  show
      that draft evaders and  deserters  are  in  fact  imprisoned.   As  he
      himself conceded, the evidence he had  submitted  indicates  that  the
      authorities do not impose imprisonment, and that instead they impose a
      requirement to perform military service under supervision.

46.  Returning to the issue of the  nature  of  the  military  service,  the
      appellant would have to perform, the  Tribunal  in   AM  recorded  the
      respondent's submissions that there was no evidence of  conscripts  or
      draft evaders or deserters being sent to  Darfur.   At paragraph 29 it
      nevertheless concluded, with reference to  the  CIPU  Report  and  the
      Sudan Organisation Against Torture Annual Human Rights Report covering
      the period to March 2004, that:

             'We are satisfied that there is a reasonable  likelihood  that
             the appellant might be sent to the front and  that  the  front
             might well include Darfur, but could  also  include,  as  Miss
             Plimmer has indicated, other regions in the  Sudan  where  the
             Sudanese military authorities are currently involved [it  goes
             on to mention  seven  areas  where  the  government  has  been
             responsible for violence against the local population]'.

47.  The Tribunal went on to consider whether the nature   of  the  military
      conflicts in  Sudan in which  government  forces  were  involved  were
      contrary to the basic rules of human conduct.   Having  set   out  the
      principles identified by the Court of Appeal in Krotov [2004] EWCA Civ
      69, it concluded:

             '33. Having considered the objective material which is  before
                  us we take the view that the conduct of the  Sudanese army
                  in relation to the recent military activity in the  south,
                  in relation to  the current activities in Darfur,  and  in
                  relation to the activities in other parts of the  country,
                  are such as to come within the definition of acts contrary
                  to the basic rules of human conduct.


             34.  If  the  appellant  were  required  to  perform  military
                  service on his being apprehended, we are satisfied that he
                  might be required to  participate  in  the  commission  of
                  international crimes.'

48.  We note several things about  this  assessment.   Firstly,  written  in
      December 2004, it refers to ongoing military activity  in  the  south,
      whereas, as we  have  noted  elsewhere,  the  civil  war  between  the
      government and the SPLM/A has since ended.  Secondly,  to  the  extent
      that this Tribunal considered the acts of government forces  in  seven
      areas of  Sudan, other than  Darfur and the south, it did not point to
      any  evidence  that  those  conflicts  have  been   characterised   as
      contrary to the basic rules of human conduct. Thirdly,  it  failed  to
      identify any evidence to support its view  that  conscripts  or  draft
      evaders have or are being sent to Darfur.

49.  At this point it is necessary to bear in mind two very important  legal
      principles  identified  in  leading  cases  dealing   with   risk   of
      persecution arising from performance of military service  obligations.
      In the first place International law does not  seek to  pass  judgment
      on the performance of a  country's  military  generally.  It  concerns
      itself with specific armed conflicts.  Thus Common Article to the four
      Geneva Conventions of August 12 1949, to which 191 States  are  party,
      provides:

                 "In the case of armed  conflict  not  of  an  international
                 character occurring in a territory  of  one  of  the   High
                 Contracting Parties, each Party to the  conflict  shall  be
                 bound to apply as a minimum, the following provisions:


               1)  persons  taking  no  active  part  in  the   hostilities,
                  including members of armed forces who have laid down their
                  arms and those placed hors de combat by sickness,  wounds,
                  detention, or any other cause, should in all circumstances
                  be  treated  humanely,  without  any  adverse  distinction
                  founded on race, colour , religion or faith, sex, birth or
                  wealth, or any similar criteria.


             To  this  end,  the  following  acts  are  and  shall   remain
             prohibited at       any time  and in any place whatsoever with
             respect to the above-mentioned persons:


             (a)   violence to life and person, in particular murder of all
                  kinds, mutilation, cruel treatment and torture;


             (b)  taking of hostages;


             (c)    outrages   upon   personal   dignity,   in   particular
                  humiliating and degrading treatment;'


50.  In the second place, in order for a person  to  show  a  real  risk  of
      being required to serve in a military situation contrary to the  basic
      rules of human conduct, more is necessary that the  simple  occurrence
      of some incidents which amount to crimes under international  criminal
      law or crimes against humanity. The conflict must  be   one  in  which
      there is a consistent pattern of such incidents. The reason  for  this
      is that what has to be assessed is whether there is a real as  opposed
      to a remote risk, of  a  person  being  required  to  engage  in  acts
      contrary to the basic rules of human conduct.  As Potter LJ stated  in
      Krotov [2004] EWCA Civ 69 at paragraph 37:

             '37. In my view, the crimes listed above, if  committed  on  a
                  systematic basis as an aspect of deliberate policy, or  as
                  a  result  of  official  indifference  to  the  widespread
                  actions of a brutal military, qualify as acts contrary  to
                  the basic rules of  human  conduct  in  respect  of  which
                  punishment for a refusal to  participate  will  constitute
                  persecution within the  ambit  of  the   1951  Convention.
                  [emphasis added]'

51.  These principles are important in the instant case because, so  far  as
      we are aware, it is only in respect of Darfur that it has been  firmly
      established that the armed conflict taking place in  that  region  has
      been characterised by a consistent pattern of  acts  contrary  to  the
      basic rules of human conduct.

52.  We note further and in any event that, even if  it  were  thought  that
      the situation in the south during the civil war was also characterised
      by a consistent pattern of acts contrary to the basic rules  of  human
      conduct (consisting in crimes  under  international  criminal  law  or
      violations of international humanitarian law), that war has come to an
      end and we have to focus on the issue of current risk.

53.  The upshot of our analysis of AM is that it can no  longer  be  treated
      as affording guidance on the issue of draft evasion and desertion.  It
      is  out  of  date.  Even  considered  historically,  it  furnishes  no
      evidential basis for  its  general  conclusion  about  the  nature  of
      military  conflicts in the Sudan during the  relevant  period.  It  is
      only in respect of  Darfur, where the armed conflicts have involved  a
      consistent pattern of acts  contrary  to  the  basic  rules  of  human
      conduct, that its assessment  finds evidential  support.  However,  in
      respect of Darfur, we do not consider that it was  right  to  conclude
      that  conscripts or draft evaders or  deserters  would  be  forced  to
      fight in this region, since AM referred to no evidence to support that
      conclusion and it is not one which we have found to be  substantiated,
      even on the much fuller body of evidence we had presented to us.

Consideration of whether there are any  issues  personal  to  the  appellant
which put him at real risk of persecution or treatment contrary  to  Article
3

54.  The Adjudicator accepted that the appellant had been called  up  to  do
      military service and that his unwillingness to  do  so  was  the  main
      reason for leaving Sudan.  The issue was raised before the Adjudicator
      of whether the appellant would be able to seek exemption on the  basis
      that he supported his family. His argument is based on the  provisions
      of Article 12.1 of the Sudanese National Service Act 1992 (set out  at
      page 69 of the Danish report).  This provides that  service  shall  be
      postponed for the sole supporter of the family, or  the  husband,  the
      son or the brother until the family is provided  with  public  finance
      equivalent to that which the person concerned provided his family.  We
      accept that we must be cautious in  seeking  to  interpret  a  foreign
      statute. We note that in paragraph  9  of  the  Secretary  of  State's
      reasons for refusal letter dated 17 November 2003, he  took  the  view
      that the appellant could not bring  himself  within  the  category  of
      being the sole supporter of a family as on his  evidence   his  father
      was running the shop and the appellant the farm. There is  nothing  in
      the evidence or submissions  which satisfies us  that  the  respondent
      was wrong to take this  view and we are satisfied that  the  appellant
      would not be entitled to apply for a postponement of  his  service  on
      this basis. The  position  therefore  is  that  on  the  Adjudicator's
      findings the appellant would be liable for military service on return.



55.  We are not satisfied that there is  any  basis  for  an  argument  that
      there is anything in the appellant's own background  or  circumstances
      which would give him a profile that would make him of any interest  to
      the authorities save insofar as he has  attempted  to  evade  military
      service.  The Adjudicator rejected the evidence   that  the  appellant
      would  be  regarded  by  the  Sudanese  authorities  as  a   communist
      sympathiser. He rejected the  account  the  appellant  gave  of  being
      detained, arrested and ill-treated.  He did  not  believe  that  there
      were any pending court appearance or charges outstanding in Sudan.

56.  Accordingly there is nothing to  distinguish  the  appellant  from  any
      other Sudanese  citizen who had sought to evade military  service  and
      the question of whether he is at real risk of persecution or treatment
      contrary to Article 3 depends on whether draft evaders as a class  (or
      some subset of them) are at such risk on return to Sudan.

57.  Earlier we  have   concluded  that  neither  draft  evaders  nor  draft
      deserters as a class are at real  risk  of  persecution  or  treatment
      contrary to Article 3.  (Our full conclusions on the  issues  relating
      to country conditions on which guidance is given in this determination
      are set out in the summary at the beginning of this decision.)

58.  In the course of considering this appeal we have found it necessary  to
      have regard to not only the reported Tribunal case  of  AM  but  cases
      which are listed on the AIT website as current Country Guideline cases
      on  Sudan. It is clear to us that in  view  of  the  very  substantial
      changes in the political situation which have occurred in Sudan in the
      2002-2005 period, most of which we have covered in this case,  only TM
      (Persecution - Christians - Individual  -  General)  Sudan  CG  [2002]
      UKIAT 04849 and the latest case - AE (Relocation - Darfur  -  Khartoum
      an option) Sudan CG [2005]  UKAIT 00101 - remains  viable  as  country
      guidance.  TM remains because, although there has been a cessation  of
      civil war in the south, what is said in  paragraph  11   continues  to
      accurately reflect the Tribunal view that Christians per  se  are  not
      targeted as a group for treatment amounting to  persecution,  although
      in individual cases harassment and discrimination  against  individual
      Christians in  Sudan may amount to persecution.

59.  Accordingly, the following cases are no  longer  to  be  considered  as
      furnishing current country guidance and are to be removed from the AIT
      Country Guideline list:

         ME (Failed asylum seeker  -  Danian)  Sudan  CG  [2002]       UKIAT
      00997;

         MS (DUP Activities Abroad) Sudan CG [2002] UKIAT 02385;

         MH and Others (Article 3 - FGM) Sudan CG [2002] UKIAT 02691;

     GA (Umma - Reconciliation with   Government)  Sudan  CG  [2002]  UKIAT
         04605;

     AA (Failed asylum seeker) Sudan CG [2002] UKIAT 05894;

         AB (Return of  Southern Sudanese) Sudan CG [2004] UKIAT 00260

60.  For the above reasons:

       As already found, the Adjudicator materially erred in law.
      The decision we substitute for that of the Adjudicator is  to  dismiss
      the appeal on asylum and human rights grounds.



Signed                                  Date

Dr H.H. Storey
Senior Immigration Judge



                                  APPENDIX

                  Background Materials before the Tribunal


Sudan: War Resisters International CONCODAC 1998 Report

Danish Fact Finding Mission Report on findings and  conclusions  mission  to
Cairo 'Human Rights situation, military service and  entry  and  embarkation
procedure in  Sudan',  Khartoum and Nairobi, 8-19 August and 20-23  November
2001.

The Economist Intelligence Unit, Country Profile 2001, Sudan, London, 2001

US State Department report on Sudan ,February 2004

Child Protection in Darfur, Save the Children (SC UK), May 2004

Report of the International Commission of  Inquiry (ICI) on  Darfur  to  the
UN Secretary General, published in January 2005

US State Department Report on Sudan February 2005

CIPU Sudan Assessment April 2005

Amnesty International  Report on Sudan 25 May 2005

Human Rights Watch Report on Sudan 13 January 2005 Sudan

Freedom House, Freedom in the World 2005, Sudan,  31 March 2005

World Refugee Survey 2005, Sudan 15 June 2005

Aegis Trust (UK), Lives in Our Hands: Darfuri Asylum Seekers facing  removal
to Khartoum, 30 June 2005.

World Refugee Survey 2005, Sudan 15 June 2005

Report of the UN Secretary  General on Sudan, 12 September 2005
