
ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL


   TY (Student; "satisfactory progress"; course of study) Burma [2007] UKAIT
                                                                       00007

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at: Field House                      Date of Promulgation:  16
January 2007
Date of Hearing:  13 December 2006
                                   Before:

 Mr C M G Ockelton, Deputy President of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
                       Senior Immigration Judge Grubb

                                   Between


                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N K Sharma, N Sharma & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Home Office Presenting Officer

A person seeking an  extension  of  leave  as  a  student  must  show  under
paragraph 60(v) of HC 395 satisfactory progress in  the  "course  of  study"
for which he was last granted leave to enter or remain or,  if  appropriate,
to which a transfer was subsequently approved by  the  Secretary  of  State.
He is  not  entitled  to  show  satisfactory  progress  by  reference  to  a
different course of study which he has undertaken without the  Secretary  of
State's knowledge.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

  1. The appellant is a citizen of Burma who was born on 22 May 1975.   The
     appeal comes before  us  as  a  reconsideration  of  the  decision  of
     Immigration  Judge  Walters  who  dismissed  her  appeal  against  the
     respondent's decision taken on 26 June 2006 refusing her further leave
     to remain as a student under paragraph 62 with reference to  paragraph
     60(v) of Statement of Changes in Immigration Rules, HC 395.

  2. The appellant entered the United  Kingdom  on  1  October  2001  on  a
     student visa and was subsequently granted extensions of leave until 31
     May 2006.  Initially, the appellant studied and successfully completed
     a number of courses in General English at  the  West  London  Business
     College.  In  March  2005  she  enrolled  at  the  London  College  of
     Accountancy on a full-time course leading to completion of the Part  1
     examinations of  the  Charter  Association  of  Certified  Accountants
     (ACCA).  However, she sat the three required papers (1.1, 1.2 and 1.3)
     in June and December 2005 failing all three on  both  occasions.   Her
     evidence was that she found the course difficult and, in  relation  to
     the  December  examinations,  she  suffered  health   problems   which
     prevented her studying.   She  was  advised  to  undertake  a  simpler
     accountancy course which if she completed it successfully  would  make
     it easier to pursue the ACCA course.  Consequently, on  1  March  2006
     she enrolled on a course leading to a CAT  professional  qualification
     at the London College of Accountancy.  The course was  for  18  months
     duration and divided into three sections.   The  first  part  entailed
     taking CAT papers 1,  2  and  3.   The  second  part  commenced  on  1
     September 2006 and entailed taking CAT papers 4, 5 and 6.  We  do  not
     have information in respect of part 3 of the  course.   The  appellant
     took CAT paper 2 on 20 July 2006 shortly before  the  appeal  hearing.
     At the hearing she  produced  a  certificate  in  her  name  from  the
     internet headed "Provisional Results Notification  for  ACCA  Computer
     Based Examinations" which indicates a pass mark of 56% in part  "T2  -
     Information for  Management  Control".   She  also  produced  evidence
     before the immigration judge to indicate that she was taking the other
     two examinations for part 1 of  the  CAT  course,  one  of  which  was
     scheduled for 10 August 2006 which was  two  days  after  the  hearing
     before the immigration judge.  We interpolate here that we were  shown
     documentation suggesting that the appellant did, in  fact,  pass  that
     examination (T1) also with a mark of 56%.  We were told, however, that
     she has not taken the third examination (T3).

  3. On the basis  of  the  evidence  before  him,  the  immigration  judge
     concluded that  the  appellant  had  failed  to  provide  satisfactory
     progress as required by paragraph 60(v) of HC 395.  He referred to the
     Tribunal's decision in SW and  Others  (Paragraph  60(v):  meaning  of
     "including") Jamaica [2006] UKAIT 00054.  That case decided that where
     examinations were part of a course of study it had to  be  shown  that
     they had all been taken and passed.  Any failure would be fatal to the
     applicant's case under paragraph 60(v).  The immigration judge set out
     his conclusions  in  paragraphs  [22]-[24]  of  his  determination  as
     follows:

           "Conclusions


           22.   I have taken carefully into account the oral  and  written
                 submissions made by for or on behalf of the appellant;  and
                 I have also weighed  carefully  the  extent  to  which  the
                 appellant's representative had sought to distinguish SW and
                 others (2006) UKAIT 00054, by suggesting that  the  factual
                 matrix in the appeal before me was entirely  different,  in
                 that the appellant had successfully  completed  courses  of
                 study in General English before undertaking any accountancy
                 courses.


           23.   I have concluded that, following  the  Rules  and  SW  and
                 Others, where examinations have  been  taken,  satisfactory
                 progress under paragraph 60(v) of the Rules has to be shown
                 by evidence including evidence that the  examinations  have
                 been taken and  passed.   Upon  any  analysis,  whilst  the
                 appellant can demonstrate successful completion of  General
                 English courses of study between her arrival in the  United
                 Kingdom and 2005, she has failed to demonstrate evidence of
                 satisfactory progress in her course of study including  the
                 taking and passing of any relevant examinations thereafter.
                   The  appellant  failed  all  papers  in   Part   1   ACCA
                 examinations in June, 2005; and, giving credit for her  ill
                 health, nevertheless  failed  all  three  papers  again  in
                 December,  2005.   Had  the  appellant's  ill  health  been
                 critical to the likely outcome of any  examination  sat  in
                 December, 2005, I would have expected her to have sought  a
                 postponement of it, by  the  production  of  the  necessary
                 medical evidence, both to the educational  authorities  and
                 to the respondent;  there  is  no  evidence  the  appellant
                 sought any postponement of the examinations.  Indeed, it is
                 the evidence of the appellant that,  not  withstanding  ill
                 health, her attendance record stood at some 65%.  I do  not
                 consider it to be without significance that, following  her
                 failure to satisfactorily  complete  Part  1  of  the  ACCA
                 examinations,  in  December  2005,  and  at  a  time  when,
                 presumably, her ill health was  known,  the  appellant  was
                 advised to pursue a less demanding  course  of  study.   In
                 pursuing that less demanding course of study, the appellant
                 appears to be, according to the limited evidence  available
                 to me, attempting it paper by paper.


           24.   I have concluded that the  appellant  does  not  meet  the
                 requirements of paragraph 60(v) of the Rules."

  4. The appellant sought  reconsideration  which  was  ordered  by  Senior
     Immigration Judge McKee on the basis that the  immigration  judge  may
     have misdirected himself in taking into account the  appellant's  lack
     of success in the ACCA course.  It was arguable that  the  requirement
     to show satisfactory progress in  her  "course  of  study"  should  be
     understood as meaning her present course  of  study,  namely  the  CAT
     course in which she had successfully passed the  one  examination  she
     has undertaken on 20 July 2006.

The immigration rules

  5. Although the appeal raises the issue of the proper  interpretation  of
     the phrase "course of study" in paragraph 60(v) of HC 395 which  deals
     with an extension of existing leave, it may be helpful also to set out
     paragraph 57 which deals with the  requirements  for  leave  to  enter
     (emphasis has been added by us):

           "Requirements for leave to enter as a student


           57. The requirements to be met by  a  person  seeking  leave  to
           enter the United Kingdom as a student are that he:


           (i) has been accepted for a course  of  study  which  is  to  be
           provided by an organisation which is included on the  Department
           for Education and Skills' Register  of  Education  and  Training
           Providers, and is at either;


                 (a) a publicly funded  institution  of  further  or  higher
                 education; or
                 (b)  a  bona  fide  private  education  institution   which
                 maintains satisfactory records of enrolment and attendance;
                 or
                 (c) an independent fee paying school outside the maintained
                 sector; and


           (ii) is able and intends to follow either:
                 (a) a recognised full time  degree  course  at  a  publicly
                 funded institution of further or higher education; or
                  (b) a weekday full time course involving attendance at  a
                 single institution for a  minimum  of  15  hours  organised
                 daytime study per week of a  single  subject,  or  directly
                 related subjects; or
                 (c) a full time course  of  study  at  an  independent  fee
                 paying school; and


           (iii) if under the age of 16 years is enrolled at an independent
           fee paying school on a full time course of studies  which  meets
           the requirements of the Education Act 1944; and


           (iv) intends to leave the United  Kingdom  at  the  end  of  his
           studies; and


           (v) does not intend to engage in business or to take employment,
           except part time or vacation work undertaken with the consent of
           the Secretary of State for Employment; and


           (vi) is able to meet the costs of his course  and  accommodation
           and the maintenance of himself and any dependants without taking
           employment or engaging in business or having recourse to  public
           funds.


           ....


           Requirements for an extension of stay as a student


           60. The requirements for an extension of stay as a  student  are
           that the applicant:


           (i) was last admitted to the UK in possession of a  valid  entry
           clearance in accordance with  paragraphs  57-75M  or  82-87F  of
           these Rules, unless the applicant:


                 (a) was originally admitted to the UK with entry  clearance
                 in accordance with paragraphs 57-75M  or  82-87F  of  these
                 Rules which has since expired, but  has  subsequently  been
                 granted leave to remain in accordance with  paragraphs  57-
                 75M or 82-87F of these Rules; or
                  (b) is a non-visa national who has been  accepted  for  a
                 course of study at degree level or above, and  who  entered
                 the  UK  with  leave  as  a  visitor  in  accordance   with
                 paragraphs 40-46F of these Rules on or before 1 July  2006;
                 or
                  (c) is a non-visa national who has been  accepted  for  a
                 course of study at degree level or above, and  who  entered
                 the UK with leave in accordance with the provisions of  any
                 category of these Rules, other than paragraphs 40-56J,  82-
                 87, 104-121, and 135I-135N; or
                  (d) is a non-visa national who has been  accepted  for  a
                 course of study below degree level, and has valid leave  in
                 accordance with paragraphs 63-69,  69M-81,  Part  2  (other
                 than  paragraphs  47-56J),  or  Parts   4-8   (other   than
                 paragraphs 104-121 and 135I-135N) of these Rules, which was
                 granted on or before 22 July 2004; or
                  (e) is a non-visa national who has been  accepted  for  a
                 course of study below degree level, and has valid leave  as
                 a student to study below degree level  in  accordance  with
                 paragraphs 57-62 of these Rules,  or  has  valid  leave  in
                 accordance with  paragraphs  69A-69L  or  82-87F  of  these
                 Rules, which was granted on or before  30  September  2004;
                 and


           (ii) meets the requirements for admission as a student  set  out
           in paragraph 57 (i) - (vi); and


           (iii) has produced evidence of his enrolment on a  course  which
           meets the requirements of paragraph 57; and


           (iv) can produce satisfactory  evidence  of  regular  attendance
           during any course which he  has  already  begun;  or  any  other
           course for which he has been enrolled in the past; and


           (v) can show evidence of satisfactory progress in his course  of
           study  including  the  taking  and  passing  of   any   relevant
           examinations; and


           (vi) would not, as a result of an extension of stay, spend  more
           than 2 years on short courses below degree level (ie courses  of
           less than 1 years duration, or longer courses broken off  before
           completion); and


           (vii) has not come to the end  of  a  period  of  government  or
           international scholarship agency sponsorship, or has the written
           consent of his official sponsor for a further period of study in
           the United Kingdom and  satisfactory  evidence  that  sufficient
           sponsorship funding is available."


Issues in this appeal

  6. The immigration judge was  only  correct  to  take  into  account  the
     appellant's  lack  of  success  in  the  ACCA  examinations  if  those
     examinations formed part of "[her] course of study".  That raises  two
     issues concerning the interpretation of paragraph 60(v).  First,  what
     is the meaning of the phrase "his course  of  study"?   Second,  if  a
     student has undertaken more than one "course of study" since  entering
     the UK, does 'satisfactory progress' have to be shown in all (or  only
     some, perhaps the most recent) of them?  We begin with the meaning  of
     the phrase "course of study".

"Course of study"

  7. We were not referred to any authorities on the meaning of  the  phrase
     "course of study" in paragraphs 57 and 60  of  HC  395.   It  will  be
     immediately apparent from reading  paragraphs  57  and  60  that  they
     utilise a variety of vocabulary  when  referring  to  the  educational
     endeavour upon which a student  may  embark.   The  term  "course"  or
     "courses" is most frequently used.  However, admission and, because of
     paragraph 60(i) and (ii), extension of stay require the individual  to
     have  been  accepted  for  "a  course  of  study"  at  an  appropriate
     institution.    We also see the pluralized form in the phrase  "course
     of studies" used in paragraph 57(iii) in relation to children under 16
     studying at an independent fee paying school.   The variation in terms
     is perplexing since such differences that may exist in their  meaning,
     or indeed application in any particular case, is likely to be  subtle.



  8. A potentially significant  juxtaposition  for  the  purposes  of  this
     appeal is found in paragraphs 60(iv) and (v).  In an  extension  case,
     paragraph 60(iv) requires satisfactory evidence of regular  attendance
     during "any course" which has already begun or, presumably  where  the
     previous closure has been completed and  no  new  course  begun,  "any
     other course" on which the individual has been enrolled in  the  past.
     By contrast, paragraph 60(v) when requiring satisfactory  evidence  of
     progress looks not to  a  "course"  but  rather  to  the  individual's
     "course of study".

  9. Our starting point must be the words actually used  in  paragraphs  60
     and 57.  It is by no means clear that the  word  "course"  and  phrase
     "course of study"  are  always  used  there  to  convey  two  distinct
     meanings.  For example, when seeking leave to  enter  paragraph  57(i)
     requires an individual to have been accepted on a  "course  of  study"
     at, for example, a publicly funded institution  of  higher  education,
     i.e. a University.   Paragraph 57(ii)  requires  that  the  individual
     establish that he is able and intends to follow a recognised full-time
     degree "course" at such an institution.  Arguably, the terms are being
     used interchangeably in this situation: the  "degree  course"  is  the
     "course of study".

 10. Be that as it may, as a  matter  of  construction,  the  variation  in
     language used by the draftsman must indicate, at least  in  principle,
     that it is intended to convey something different when different words
     are used, for example, the word "course" and at other times the phrase
     "course of study".  This is all  too  apparent  when  the  immediately
     proximate requirements in respect  of  'satisfactory  attendance'  and
     'satisfactory progress' are anchored to the notion of a  "course"  and
     "course of study" respectively.

 11. The phrase "course of study" is capable of encompassing more than  one
     course, though it need not.   A "course of study" is the sum total  of
     the parts (courses) which coherently add  together  and  lead  to  the
     educational  outcome  sought,  such  as   a   certificate   or   other
     qualification.  Thus, a "course of study" may  comprise  a  foundation
     course followed by other more  advanced  courses  which  together,  if
     successfully completed,  lead  to  the  qualification.   The  contrast
     therefore is with the parts (the "courses"  which  themselves  may  be
     comprised of modules) and the whole or overall  educational  endeavour
     (the "course of study").   That is not to say that a "course of study"
     must always comprise more than a single  "course".   Whether  it  does
     will depend upon the structure of the "course of study" itself.

 12. This  interpretation  of  the  phrase  "course  of  study"  envisages,
     therefore, an educational enterprise where the  individual  progresses
     through  courses  coherently   connected   to   achieve   the   sought
     qualification.  That is precisely in  tune  with  the  requirement  in
     paragraph 60(v) which  is,  of  course,  concerned  with  establishing
     "satisfactory progress" before the individual's leave can be extended.
      It makes perfect sense, in our view, to  focus  on  the  individual's
     overall performance on his "course of  study"  before  granting  leave
     either to progress to another element (course) as part of  it  or,  if
     that course of study has been completed, to move on to another "course
     of study" which,  by  a  combination  of  paragraph  60(i)  read  with
     paragraph 57(i), it must be proved  he  has  been  accepted  on.    It
     follows that the phrase "course of study" does not necessarily  entail
     the student's entire educational experience in the UK.   One course of
     study may be followed by another.

 13. The present case has an obvious illustration of  the  distinctions  we
     have drawn.  Initially on arriving in the UK, the appellant  undertook
     a number of courses to improve  her  English  language  skills  before
     moving  on  to  study  accountancy.   They  are   described   in   her
     certificates as involving a progression of courses  beginning  with  a
     starter course and ending with  an  upper-intermediate  level  course.
     Taken together, they form  a  coherently  connected  set  of  language
     "courses"  which,  in  our  view,  constitute  a  "course  of  study".
     Likewise, when the appellant began to study accountancy  and  embarked
     on a set of courses  leading  to  an  ACCA  qualification,  she  began
     another, but distinct, "course of study".

 14. Applying this interpretation to the facts, we have concluded that  the
     CAT course was a new "course of study" which  the  appellant  embarked
     upon in March 2006.  It was distinct from the earlier ACCA  course  in
     its structure, content and the qualification that it led to.

Which "course of study"?

 15. That, then leads to the second issue: where more than  one  course  of
     study has been undertaken by the student whilst in the UK are all  (or
     only some) to be taken into account  when  applying  the  phrase  "his
     course of study" in paragraph 60(v)?

 16. On behalf of the appellant, Mr Sharma submitted that  the  appropriate
     "course of study"  was  the  CAT  course  begun  in  March  2006.  The
     immigration judge should have found on the evidence that the appellant
     had passed the only examination  she  had  sat  at  the  date  of  the
     hearing.  Mr Deller on behalf of the respondent did not rely upon  the
     failures in the ACCA examinations in June and December 2005.  Instead,
     he relied on the evidence before the immigration judge in  respect  of
     the CAT examination.  He submitted that the immigration judge had  not
     found that the appellant had failed that examination, but merely  that
     she had not  proved  that  she  had  passed  it.   As  a  result,  the
     immigration judge had not committed a material error of law in finding
     that 'satisfactory progress' had not been established under  paragraph
     60(v).

 17. In the light of the way Mr Deller put the case for the respondent,  it
     is not strictly necessary for us to decide whether the judge erred  in
     taking account of the ACCA examinations.    However,  we  will  do  so
     given that this was the basis of the order for reconsideration and, as
     will become clear, because we do not agree with Mr Deller's concession
     that the ACCA examinations were irrelevant.

 18. We have not found this to be an easy issue to resolve.  The  array  of
     terms used in paragraphs 57 and 60 make  the  search  for  a  coherent
     meaning problematic.  However, there is  a  rational  organisation  to
     paragraphs 57 and 60 which underlies the verbal chaos.  To be admitted
     to the UK as a student, an individual must be accepted for  a  "course
     of study" at an appropriate institution as set out in paragraph 57(i).
     The same requirement applies where an extension of stay is sought as a
     student because all the requirements of paragraph 57 must be satisfied
     under  paragraph  60.    Likewise,  the  transitional  provisions   in
     paragraph 60(i) also require that the applicant for  an  extension  be
     accepted on a "course of study".  The  decisions  to  grant  leave  to
     enter and then subsequent  extensions  of  that  leave  focus  on  the
     individual undertaking a "course of study".   As leave is  granted  or
     renewed, it relates to a particular "course of study" to be  completed
     or freshly embarked upon.

 19. It seems to us, taking that as an underlying feature  of  the  student
     rules read together, "his course of study"  in  paragraph  60(v)  also
     focusses on the "course of study" for which leave to enter  or  remain
     was last granted.   We see nothing unfair or surprising  in  requiring
     the applicant to show  'satisfactory  progress'  in  that  "course  of
     study" rather than any other.  Why should the individual's progress be
     assessed by reference to any other  "course  of  study"  when  further
     leave is requested?  It is the one for which leave was  most  recently
     granted or, if appropriate, for  which  a  transfer  was  subsequently
     approved by the Secretary of State.  Any previous course(s)  of  study
     will have been taken into account in earlier decision(s) to extend the
     individual's leave.   It is the course of study which  the  individual
     either wishes to continue or, at least in leave  terms,  is  the  most
     immediate, against which it is most appropriate  to  assess  progress.
     Indeed, we do not consider  there  to  be  any  justification  for  an
     individual to obtain leave for a course of study and then switch to  a
     less difficult one because it proves too difficult but  claim,  as  is
     proposed in this case, 'satisfactory progress' in the  lesser  course.
     Usually such an individual will have shown, in reality, that the leave
     granted to undertake the  more  difficult  course  was  in  retrospect
     mistaken.

Application to the facts

 20. In this case, the appellant was last given leave to undertake the ACCA
     course of study.  We are not aware that the Secretary  of  State  ever
     agreed to the 'switch' to the CAT course of study.   It  follows  that
     the relevant "course of study" under  paragraph  60(v)  was  the  ACCA
     examinations and  the  immigration  judge  was  correct  to  look  for
     'satisfactory progress' in respect of it.   We do not  agree  with  Mr
     Deller's submission that these examinations were irrelevant: they were
     in fact the only relevant ones.   Although,  the  immigration  judge's
     conclusion  in  relation  to  her  examination  record  in   the   CAT
     examinations was, in our view, entirely sustainable  on  the  evidence
     before him, he should not have taken that into account.  However, that
     could not possibly have affected the outcome of his  decision.   Given
     her poor examination record in the ACCA course,  the  only  conclusion
     open to him was the one he reached, namely that, applying SW, she  had
     failed to establish "satisfactory progress in [her] course  of  study"
     under paragraph 60(v).

Decision

 21. Consequently, we conclude that the immigration judge's  decision  does
     not disclose a material error of law and, as a result, his decision to
     dismiss the appeal stands.








                                                                     A GRUBB
                                                    SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE




