
AJ (Risk to Homosexuals) Afghanistan CG [2009] UKAIT 00001

Asylum and Immigration Tribunal

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Field House
On 28 October 2008

                                   Before

                      Senior Immigration Judge Batiste
                      Senior Immigration Judge Southern
                           Professor R. H. Taylor


                                   Between

                                     AJ

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:       Mr Z Nasim, instructed by Mayfair Solicitors
For the Respondent:  Mr S Kandola, instructed by Treasury Solicitors


   1. Though homosexuality remains illegal in Afghanistan, the  evidence  of
      its prevalence especially in the Pashtun culture, contrasted with  the
      absence of  criminal  convictions  after  the  fall  of  the  Taliban,
      demonstrates a lack of appetite by the Government to prosecute.
   2. Some conduct that would be seen in the  West  as  a  manifestation  of
      homosexuality is not necessarily interpreted in such a way  in  Afghan
      society.
   3. A homosexual returning to Afghanistan would normally seek to keep  his
      homosexuality private and to avoid  coming  to  public  attention.  He
      would normally be able to do so, and hence  avoid  any  real  risk  of
      persecution by the state, without the need to suppress  his  sexuality
      or sexual identity to an  extent  that  he  could  not  reasonably  be
      expected to tolerate.
   4. So far as non-state actors are concerned, a practising  homosexual  on
      return to Kabul who would not attract or seek to cause public  outrage
      would not face a real risk of persecution.
   5. If some individual, or some gay lobby, tried to make a political point
      in public or otherwise behaved in a way  such  as  to  attract  public
      outrage, then there might be a sharp response from the Government.
   6. A homosexual may be relatively safe in a big city  (especially  Kabul)
      and it would take cogent evidence in a particular case to  demonstrate
      otherwise. The position in smaller towns and in rural areas  could  be
      different and will depend on the evidence in a specific case.
   7. Relocation to Kabul is generally a viable option for  homosexuals  who
      have experienced problems elsewhere, though  individual  factors  will
      have to be taken into account.
   8. The evidence shows that a considerable proportion of  Afghan  men  may
      have had  some  homosexual  experience  without  having  a  homosexual
      preference. A careful assessment of the credibility of a claim to be a
      practising homosexual and the extent of it is particularly  important.
      The evaluation of an appellant's behaviour  in  the  UK  may  well  be
      significant.




                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

  1. The Appellant, a citizen of Afghanistan who was born on 1 January 1982,
     seeks reconsideration of the determination of Adjudicator  Harmston  of
     the IAT, dismissing his appeal against the Respondent's decision  on  6
     July 2004 to refuse him  leave  to  enter,  asylum/human  rights  claim
     refused, and to set removal directions to Pakistan.

     History of the Appeal

  2. The Appellant arrived in the UK on 2 April 2003 and made an application
     for asylum on arrival.  He was  granted  temporary  admission  until  3
     April 2003 when he was due to return to Heathrow for an  interview.  He
     failed to attend and the Respondent's decision was therefore reached on
     non-compliance grounds.  His appeal against this decision was heard  by
     an Adjudicator (Mr D.R.M. Harmston) on 29 October 2004. The Adjudicator
     accepted  the  Appellant's  explanation  for  non-attendance   at   the
     interview  and  allowed  his  appeal  to  this  limited   extent.   The
     Adjudicator also accepted the Appellant's submission that he  was  born
     in Afghanistan and was a citizen of that country although he had  spent
     many of his formative years in Pakistan.

  3. The Adjudicator then considered the substance of the Appellant's asylum
     claim which was based upon his professed  homosexuality.  His  material
     findings of fact are as follows:

           "18.  The  Appellant's  claim  is  based  upon  his   homosexual
           activities in Afghanistan.  This occurred in the period  between
           1998 when the family moved into Jalalabad and  April  2001  when
           the Appellant left Afghanistan.  His story is that a few  months
           after returning to Afghanistan he met Mr K, who was  about  nine
           years older than him, and  started  a  homosexual  relationship.
           This was disapproved by his parents but he continued it and then
           in 2001 it brought  trouble.   The  Taliban  were  in  power  in
           Afghanistan at that time and enforced Sharia law very  strictly.
           Homosexual activities were taboo.  Gay people could expect  very
           severe punishment from the Taliban if they were caught.


           19. In the early part of 2001 someone told the Taliban  about  a
           homosexual relationship between the Appellant  and  Mr  K.   The
           local Taliban  leaders  sent  a  messenger  and  called  in  the
           Appellant's  father  who  was  given  lectures  on   his   son's
           homosexual activities and was warned that he could possibly face
           a  death  sentence.   Despite  this  the  affair  continued  and
           eventually the Appellant's parents were asked to hand  him  over
           to the Taliban.  They refused  and  they  were  killed  and  his
           younger brother disappeared and was probably killed. It was as a
           result of that that the Appellant left Afghanistan on  15  April
           2001 and started his journeys to Mozambique and South Africa.  I
           find that the Appellant's claim is plausible.  He claims to have
           realised that he had homosexual  tendencies  whilst  he  was  in
           Pakistan.   He  also  claims  to  have  been  involved  in   gay
           relationships in  the  UK.   There  is  therefore  a  thread  of
           consistency running through his story and there is no reason  to
           disbelieve it."

  4.  However  notwithstanding  these  positive  credibility  findings,  the
     Adjudicator concluded that since the Appellant  had  left  Afghanistan,
     the Taliban had been ousted and  the  objective  evidence  showed  that
     under the current government he would not be at any  real  risk  on  or
     after return to Kabul of any material ill-treatment  entitling  him  to
     international protection as a consequence  of  his  homosexuality.  The
     Adjudicator also rejected the Appellant's evidence that he was involved
     with a UK national in a homosexual  relationship  amounting  to  family
     life under Article 8, principally because the alleged  current  partner
     did not attend  the  hearing,  offered  no  explanation  for  his  non-
     attendance, and had not signed the written statement  produced  at  the
     hearing.

  5. On 21 February 2005, the Appellant obtained permission to appeal from a
     Vice- President of the IAT. However, following reorganisation  and  the
     abolition  of  the  IAT,  the  appeal  was  heard  as  a  first   stage
     reconsideration by a panel of the AIT (Immigration Judge Macdonald,  Ms
     S. E. Singer and Mr A.J. Cragg CMG)  on  27  April  2006.   That  panel
     concluded that the Adjudicator did not make any material error  of  law
     and that the original determination of the appeal should stand.

  6. On 1 June 2006 a Senior Immigration Judge granted permission to  appeal
     to the Court of Appeal on the limited basis that it  was  arguable  the
     Tribunal had failed to properly consider  all  the  relevant  objective
     evidence  concerning  the  prevailing  attitude   to   homosexuals   in
     Afghanistan.

  7. On 26 July 2006, the Court of Appeal promulgated its judgement in  J  v
     SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1238. This case  also  related  to  a  homosexual,
     though from Iran rather than Afghanistan. In that  case,  the  Tribunal
     had concluded  that  appellant  would  not  be  at  any  real  risk  of
     persecution because he could continue to act with discretion on  return
     to Iran and would not therefore come to the adverse  attention  of  the
     authorities.  The Court of Appeal allowed that appeal on the basis that
     the Tribunal had erred in failing  to  consider  the  reasons  why  the
     Appellant  had  opted  for  discretion  and  whether  maintaining  that
     discretion was  something  which  the  Appellant  could  reasonably  be
     expected to tolerate.

  8.  On 17 January 2007 the Court of Appeal with the consent of the parties
     ordered second stage reconsideration in this appeal  on  the  following
     terms:

           "The appeal against the determination of the AIT  dated  9  June
           2006 be allowed to the extent that the appeal be remitted to the
           AIT for the latter to carry out a second  stage  reconsideration
           of the Appellant's appeal limited  to  determining  whether  the
           Appellant faces a real risk of  persecution  by  reason  of  his
           homosexuality and/or the restrictions on his ability to live  in
           Afghanistan as a practising homosexual."

  9. The material parts of the Court's statement of reasons are as follows.

           "9 Whilst it is not accepted by the Respondent  that  any  other
           matters expressly raised in the Appellant's grounds give rise to
           arguable errors of law, it is accepted that it is  arguable  the
           Adjudicator  appears  not  to  have   considered   whether   any
           obligation  on   the   Appellant   to   practise   homosexuality
           "discreetly" in order to avoid persecution, could itself  amount
           to persecution.


           10. Although the Appellant  never  appears  to  have  argued  or
           provided evidence, whether before the Adjudicator/AIT, that  the
           requirement to act "discreetly" would amount to persecution,  it
           is arguable that the Adjudicator should have made a  finding  as
           to whether  any  restrictions  on  his  ability  to  live  as  a
           homosexual amounted to persecution.


           11. On this basis the parties have agreed that  the  appropriate
           course is for  the  matter  to  be  remitted  to  a  differently
           constituted AIT, who can then consider whether, having regard to
           the objective evidence, the  Appellant  faces  a  real  risk  of
           persecution  by  reason  of   his   homosexuality   and/or   the
           restrictions on his ability to live as a practising homosexual."

 10. This case was then identified as offering  the  potential  for  country
     guidance and was prepared by the parties on that basis. By  this  route
     and on this limited scope the appeal came before us  for  second  stage
     reconsideration.


     The Hearing

 11. We were supplied by the parties with the objective evidence  listed  in
     the Appendix hereto. These documents included expert reports by Dr Niaz
     Shah, Dr Martin Lau and Dr Antonio Giustozzi. They were complemented by
     oral evidence from Dr Lau. We also heard  oral  submissions  from  both
     Representatives, which we shall deal with as needed in the  appropriate
     context. Essentially however the submissions were mainly concerned with
     directing us to the relevant case-law and to the  material  aspects  of
     the objective evidence to support their respective points of view.  All
     the oral evidence and submissions are fully set out in  our  record  of
     proceedings and we confirm that we have  taken  into  account  all  the
     evidence and submissions in reaching our conclusions, even if we do not
     consider  it  necessary,  in  order  to  explain  our  conclusions  and
     reasoning, to deal with every document and submission specifically.

 12. As can be seen from the passages quoted above  from  the  Adjudicator's
     determination, the information given in it concerning  the  Appellant's
     sexuality was rather brief and indeed  there  was  no  reason  for  the
     Adjudicator to have gone further given the issues  argued  before  him.
     However, given that he did not accept the existence of family life  for
     the purpose of Article 8 with his claimed partner in the UK, and  given
     the task we have been set by the consent order and the  nature  of  the
     objective evidence before us, we asked the Representatives to  identify
     the underlying evidence concerning the Appellant's sexuality to  enable
     us to understand more fully the extent of the Adjudicator's  acceptance
     at the end of paragraph 19 that there was "no reason to disbelieve" the
     Appellant's account of his homosexuality and experiences, and what this
     meant in terms of the Appellant's attitudes.

 13. Mr Nasim  referred  us  to  the  Appellant's  written  statements,  the
     material parts of which can be summarised as follows.  In 1988 due to a
     tribal dispute in Afghanistan in which the  Appellant's  elder  brother
     was killed, the Appellant's  remaining  family  moved  from  Jalalabad,
     where the Appellant was born, to a village in Pakistan near Lahore. The
     Appellant was then about five or six years  old.  He  went  to  primary
     school and it was there that he first became aware  of  his  attraction
     towards homosexual relations. In 1998, when the Appellant was about  16
     years old the family, under pressure from the authorities  in  Pakistan
     to repatriate, returned to  Afghanistan  and  Jalalabad.   Some  months
     after his arrival, he met Mr K, who was then about  25  years  old  and
     lived nearby.  Mr K had, in the Appellant's words, a  tendency  towards
     homosexual relations, and he  and  the  Appellant  maintained  a  close
     contact with each other, finally deciding to live together as partners.
       When  his  family  became  suspicious,  they  asked  him  about   his
     relationship with Mr K, which the Appellant  acknowledged.  His  father
     asked him to discontinue the relationship but,  given  the  Appellant's
     refusal to do so, remained silent.  Later, local people became aware of
     the relationship and reported this to  the  Taliban.   The  Appellant's
     father  was  called  in  by  the  Taliban  and  given  lectures   about
     homosexuality  and  that  it  was  punishable  with  death.   When  the
     relationship continued his father was asked to hand the Appellant  over
     to the Taliban, but he refused to  do  so  even  when  threatened  with
     severe consequences.  One night in April 2001, when the  Appellant  was
     absent from his house, his family was attacked  by  the  Taliban.   His
     father and mother were killed. His  brother  was  taken  away  and  the
     Appellant believes he was killed also.  The Taliban  also  attacked  Mr
     K's house and set it on fire after killing him.  Thus the whole of  the
     Appellant's immediate family had been killed.  With  the  help  of  his
     wider family and friends he escaped from Afghanistan, arriving  in  the
     UK some two years later in April 2003.

 14. In October 2003 the Appellant met a man at a gay club and they began  a
     brief  homosexual  relationship  which  ended  in  December  2003.   In
     February 2004 the Appellant met another man at a gay nightclub and they
     thereafter  lived  together.   It  is  this  relationship   which   the
     Adjudicator concluded did not constitute family life for the purpose of
     article 8, given that the claimed partner did not attend  the  hearing,
     explain his absence, or sign a written statement. Mr Nasim asked us  to
     note that given the limited nature of the original permission to appeal
     and of the consent order by the Court of Appeal this evidence  had  not
     been brought up to date. However the evidence  before  the  Adjudicator
     which was accepted as credible was that the Appellant first  identified
     his homosexual tendencies in  Pakistan;  had  a  long  relationship  in
     Afghanistan; and had had two relationships in the  UK.  This  justified
     the assessment  of  the  Appellant  as  a  "practising  homosexual"  as
     described in the consent order.

 15. Mr Kandola did not dissent from this and we have proceeded on the basis
     of this profile. Given that our  task  is  to  assess  the  Appellant's
     position in the context of the expert and other objective evidence,  it
     is therefore to this that we now turn.

     The Expert Evidence

 16. Dr Shah, who is a law  lecturer  at  Hull  University  has  provided  a
     written report which offers  an  insight  into  perceptions  of  sexual
     activity between men and its prevalence  in  Afghan  society,  and  the
     material  differences  between  this   and   Western   perceptions   of
     homosexuality. Given that Dr Shah was brought  up  in  Pashtun  culture
     with Pashto as his mother tongue, and  as  a  Moslem  in  the  Hanafite
     tradition, we consider that these insights are material  and  relevant,
     even though he came from Pakistan (where  he  obtained  a  law  degree)
     rather than Afghanistan. Dr Lau in his oral evidence, although  he  did
     not agree with the extent of Dr Shah's analysis, accepted that he would
     be well familiar with customs in  Afghanistan  given  that  the  border
     between the two countries was rather artificial and the tribes lived on
     both sides of the border. Dr Lau confirmed that  the  Pashtun  comprise
     38% of the population of Afghanistan.

 17.  Dr  Shah,  whose  observations  relate  mainly  to  Pashtun   culture,
     categorises male relationships in the following way:

           1. Catamite (Koni, Sesth) - Many young boys  are  sodomised  who
              may not agree to it out of love for the  active  partner  but
              can be persuaded for various reasons to consent, though  they
              are not professional male prostitutes. News of this  is  very
              often reported in Afghan society.
           2. Beloved (Mehboob, Meshooq, Ashna) -  Mature men (both married
              and  bachelors)  keep  younger  boys  as  friends.  In   this
              relationship it is not necessary that sex  takes  place.   If
              sex does take place it is usually with  consent.  The  mature
              male is the active partner and the kept boy  is  the  passive
              partner.
           3. Friend (Yari) - This is a relationship between the  two  boys
              of the same age  who  may  feel  affection  for  each  other.
              Essentially sex does not take place in the majority of  cases
              but there is a possibility that it will.  If it  does  it  is
              regarded as consensual. Yari is almost  as  popular  as  love
              affairs between male and female for example  in  universities
              and other places.  They are not regarded as homosexual in the
              sense that this is understood in the United Kingdom. They are
              heterosexuals and after attaining marriageable age they marry
              women.
           4. Eunuchs (Hijara) - There is a long tradition  of  eunuchs  in
              Afghanistan. In some cases they  are  sodomised  but  usually
              they dance and sing. In big cities they are  more  likely  to
              provide massages and sex.

 18. Dr Shah reports  that  Pashto  literature  is  full  of  references  to
     Mehboob, Yari and Koni. However he is not aware in  the  literature  of
     any tradition of gay relationships as understood in the West where  two
     males openly express love for each other and want to live as  a  couple
     to the exclusion of any sexual relationship with a female. Nevertheless
     the emergence of gay  relationships  cannot  be  ruled  out  after  the
     exposure of Afghan  society  to  the  Internet  and  other  sources  of
     information, and in 2005 a gay couple of Afghan origin got  married  in
     Pakistan.  He considers that it is important to note that  many  asylum
     seekers of Afghan origin tend to identify themselves as gay  which  may
     not genuinely be the case.

 19. He says that it is hard to assess whether these various forms of sexual
     relationship as practised in Afghanistan are socially  allowed  because
     of the prevailing social hypocrisy about male sexual roles in  society.
     However he strongly believes that if two males decide  to  have  sexual
     relationships and live together they will be prosecuted by  police  and
     persecuted by non-state actors. On the other hand mere  inclination  to
     love young boys with or without having sex with them is  practised  and
     tolerated.  He assesses the risk overall in the following way:

           "2.3.1 I feel, as indicated above, if someone  declares  himself
           as gay or wants a gay relationship, he will  be  persecuted.   A
           man can be a gay secretly but the minute it is known there  will
           be a serious risk of persecution by state and non-state  actors.
           In general, family members feel ashamed of a gay person  in  the
           family and his membership is regarded as a stigma on the family.
            If family feel the same about catamites but there is  a  subtle
           difference between gays and catamites. Gays want to live life as
           a gay person whereas catamites are usually young boys who can be
           persuaded for different reasons to have sex with  another  male.
           ....


           2.3.2 Geography and who rules the  country  are  also  important
           factors. If a gay person is living in a big city,  it  might  be
           relatively  safe  and  there  is  greater  possibility  the  gay
           relationships might be kept secret for longer periods.  If he is
           in town/village, it will be difficult to keep it secret and once
           it is discovered the reaction from non-state actors will be very
           strong.  The  question  of  who  is  ruling  the  country  or  a
           particular Providence is  very  relevant.   If  the  rulers  are
           Taliban or other religious parties,  persecution  and  death  is
           certain.   Taliban  killed  several  people  on  the  ground  of
           homosexuality.  If the government of Afghanistan is secular  and
           liberal the chances of official persecution is not  very  likely
           but they may be prosecuted under article 427 of the Afghan Penal
           Code if caught red-handed  or  if  the  matter  is  reported  to
           police.  Non-state actors will also be  a  real  threat  to  gay
           persons.


           2.4.1 Homosexuality was and is practised in Afghan society.  The
           attitude of society is hypocritical.  If homosexuality is secret
           or not discussed openly then it is tolerated.   Homosexuals  are
           generally not respected.  If two males are caught in the act  of
           sex and the fact is  made  public,  it  could  lead  to  serious
           consequences as it then  becomes  a  matter  of  family  honour.
           Serious consequences  include  death  by  non-state  agents.  As
           indicated above,  social  status  and  wealth  play  a  role  in
           determining the nature of the dispute between  the  families  of
           the two males involved.


           2.4.2 I do not think that Afghan society as a whole is  familiar
           with  the  concept  of  gays:  consenting   adults   to   sexual
           relationship living together Ram�n as understood in  the  United
           Kingdom... as indicated above both gays  and  lesbians  will  be
           seriously persecuted by non-state  actors  (as  it  is  regarded
           against Islam) and prosecuted by police under the  Afghan  Penal
           Code."

 20. Having said that Dr Shah also offers a subtle view of the  attitude  of
     Islamic law to homosexuality differentiating between different  Islamic
     schools of thought:

           2.2.2 The punishment mentioned in article  427  for  sodomy  and
           homosexuality is only a tazir punishment  (punishment  which  is
           not fixed by the Koran or Sunnah, the  two  primary  sources  of
           Islamic law, where the court has discretion).  Those  committing
           crimes of Had, Qisas and Diyat (cases where punishment is  fixed
           by the Koran and Sunnah where the court has no discretion) shall
           be punished according to the provisions of the Hanafi School  of
           Islamic law.....


           2.2.3 ..... The view of Imam Abdul Hanifa, the founder of Hanafi
           school, is noted in the authoritative book of Hanafi  law.  Imam
           Abu Hanifa says that there is no fixed penalty (Had) for sodomy,
           and therefore the accused should be corrected  by  tazir...  the
           view of Imam Abu Hanifa in general prevails over all other views
           in the Hanafi tradition. The penal code of Afghanistan  1976  is
           mainly based upon the views of Imam  Abu  Hanifa  which  is  why
           article 427 treats sodomy as tazir crime and is punishable  with
           "long imprisonment" instead of  the  death  penalty.   It  is  a
           matter for the discretion of the  court  having  regard  to  the
           circumstances of each case."

 21. Dr Lau is a barrister and a reader in Law at the School of Oriental and
     African Studies in the University of London.  He is the chief  examiner
     of Islamic law for the external LLB at the University of London and his
     current position involves intensive research on modern Afghan law.   He
     has made many visits to Afghanistan since the fall of the  Taliban  and
     is heading an EU Commission project on the reform of the justice sector
     in Afghanistan. He states in his written report that  despite  official
     and societal disapproval of  homosexuality  there  is  ample  anecdotal
     evidence  suggesting  that  in  reality  it  is  practised  with   some
     frequency.  However most of these men would not refer to themselves  as
     being homosexual because they had sex with men, but  would  argue  that
     the absence of  women  in  their  lives  forced  them  to  have  sexual
     encounters with  other  men.  He  summarised  his  conclusions  in  the
     following terms:

           "13. Given the legal position concerning homosexuality, any open
           display of someone's homosexuality would be extremely dangerous.
            In seven years of frequent visits to Afghanistan I  have  never
           met any Afghan who would admit to being homosexual.  The general
           opinion seems to be that homosexuality is a  western  phenomenon
           which does not exist in Afghanistan and that the few cases which
           do occur have to be punished harshly as a matter of Islamic law.
            In my opinion an openly gay man would be ostracised by  society
           and would sooner or later come in conflict  with  the  law.   If
           convicted,  the  punishment  would  involve  long  imprisonment,
           perhaps even death.


           14. In conclusion, in my opinion  homosexuality  is  an  offence
           under Afghan law. There is evidence showing that there have been
           convictions where homosexual conduct thus  confirming  that  the
           offence does not only exist on "paper". In my opinion  it  would
           be quite impossible to be openly gay in Afghanistan  because  of
           societal disapproval and official prosecution."

 22. In his oral evidence, Dr  Lau  adopted  his  report  and  responded  to
     questioning.  He identified a UN study concerning juvenile offenders in
     prisons in and around  Kabul.  He  acknowledged  that  this  should  be
     treated with some caution as it was not  precise  but  it  appeared  to
     suggest that 14% of those boys in the prisons checked had been  accused
     or convicted of homosexual behaviour. He was not sure what exactly  was
     said about the number of convictions, nor could he describe the precise
     circumstances of any specific case.  This was however the  only  report
     he had been able to find on statistics for homosexuality and he  agreed
     to provide a copy of it to the Tribunal as it  did  not  appear  to  be
     available on the internet.  He did not really know how  many  juveniles
     were covered in the report and would have to check.

 23. Following the hearing Dr Lau sent us the report in question,  which  is
     by the UN Office on Drugs and Crime and is entitled "Assessment  Report
     on the implementation of the Juvenile Code". It is dated May  2007.  It
     is convenient to summarise the  relevant  matters  at  this  point.  It
     states that in January  2007,  some  388  juveniles  were  in  juvenile
     rehabilitation centres across Afghanistan. In March 2006, 69  juveniles
     (58 boys and 11 girls) were held at the centre in Kabul. In March 2007,
     the number held in Kabul had increased to 130 (112 boys and 18  girls).
     Across the country as a whole, theft and robbery accounted for  33%  of
     the charges made, murder and assault for 30% and homosexuality for 12%.
     There was no geographical distribution of the  homosexuality  statistic
     between Kabul and elsewhere. Nor was there any  information  about  the
     number of convictions. However the following  general  observation  was
     made:

           "It seems uncontroversial  that  under  Islamic  law  homosexual
           behaviour is condemned and falls into the category  of  adultery
           (zina) as it is considered to be sex with  an  illicit  partner.
           In national statutory legislation consensual  sexual  activities
           with a person of the same sex  is  not  regulated  as  being  an
           offence. Some juveniles charged with homosexual  behaviour  were
           very young. One juvenile that is charged under this category  is
           11  years  old  and  therefore  under  the   age   of   criminal
           responsibility, one other juvenile is 13 and one 14  years  old.
           It  thus  seems  probable  that  some  juveniles  charged   with
           homosexual behaviour  are  rather  victims  of  rape  or  forced
           prostitution  than   having   engaged   in   consensual   sexual
           activities.  Since the lines between the two acts are  undefined
           in Afghanistan it is common that the victims of a moral  offence
           are arrested and  detained;  victims  of  rape  are  treated  as
           persons having committed the crime until proved innocent."

 24. Dr Lau went on in his oral evidence to say with regard to risk of being
     detected as homosexuals, that people who fall foul of the  system  have
     usually  been  detected  locally.   Communities  normally  look   after
     themselves  and  they  make  reports  leading  to  arrests.    Official
     statistics give only a small segment of what  happens  on  the  ground.
     The writ of the central  government  is  relatively  limited  and  most
     communities outside Kabul look after themselves.  The Afghan police are
     to a degree predatory and on occasion charge people with crimes with  a
     view to extracting a bribe.  Thus police can be proactive but  normally
     they would be reactive and an investigation would  be  triggered  by  a
     complaint.

 25. There were important distinctions between  perceptions  in  Afghanistan
     and the West as to public behaviour.  Thus although men might in public
     hold hands this was not regarded in  Afghanistan  as  having  a  sexual
     connotation.  However behaviour which falls outside the accepted norms,
     for example not  getting  married  or  having  relationships  beyond  a
     certain age, will begin to get people talking and  can  lead  to  risk.
     The Taliban certainly took this very seriously.

 26. With regard to legal consequences, Article 247 of the Afghan penal code
     was only one basis upon which a homosexual could  be  prosecuted.   The
     Afghan Penal Code was an addition to Islamic law and not an alternative
     to it.  Article 1 of  the  Penal  Code  made  clear  that  there  those
     committing crimes against  God  such  as  Hodod,  which  could  include
     homosexuality, could be punished in accordance with  Islamic  religious
     law.

 27. Dr Lau was asked about  Dr  Shah's  analysis  of  Afghan  attitudes  to
     homosexuality and did not agree with it to the  extent  described.   He
     considered that openness would be unacceptable.  There  was  a  lot  of
     folklore  about  Pashtun  practices  which  perhaps  reflected   ethnic
     tensions between the Pashtun and other tribes.  Dr Lau was  also  asked
     if he had any knowledge of any  individual  convicted  post-Taliban  of
     homosexual activity.  He said he did not, but he could surmise from the
     UN study to which he had referred that perhaps 10 to 15 boys in  prison
     had  been  charged  with  homosexuality.   This   limited   statistical
     information  reflected  the  fact  that  the  system  covered  by   the
     statistics was limited.  Only about 10,000 people  were  imprisoned  in
     Afghanistan but the number was rising quickly.   Not  too  much  weight
     should be given to the limited number of convictions.   His  impression
     of the system was that people who fall foul of their local  communities
     go to prison.

 28. The third expert report is by Dr Giustozzi is who is a research  fellow
     at LSE with a large number of publications  about  Afghanistan  to  his
     credit and who has carried out a number of research projects about  the
     country.  He agrees that  from  a  legal  standpoint  homosexuality  is
     banned and that  potential  prosecution  under  Islamic  law  or  under
     article 427 of the penal  code  is  possible.  He  also  confirmed  the
     existence of abuses by the security forces in similar terms to Dr  Lau.
     He also stated as follows:

           "4... The last known execution for  homosexual  practices  dates
           back to the Taliban period.  Prison sentences are  still  handed
           out to homosexuals. For example in 2002-2003 79 individuals have
           been arrested for homosexuality in Afghanistan according to  the
           figures of the Ministry of Interior.  In  2003-2004  the  number
           rose to 111 and in 2004-2005  to  124.  I  could  not  find  any
           figures for 2005-2006 but in 2006-2007 the number of  crimes  of
           homosexuality recorded by the Attorney General's office was 159.
            By no means were these cases concentrated in the provinces.  In
           2002-2003 there were 11 cases in Kabul, with another in 11 cases
           reported in 2003 -2004, 36 in 2004-2005 and 25 in 2006-2007.  In
           2004 even an American  adviser  to  the  Afghan  government  was
           reportedly arrested for having a homosexual relationship with an
           Afghan man.


           5. Since the reach of the government is very limited and  rarely
           extends beyond the cities and the main  administrative  centres,
           in the countryside Islamic law is most often is  still  applied,
           which means that their homosexuality  would  still  be  punished
           with death.  I do not know  of  any  case  of  homosexual  [sic]
           executed in the villages but I have heard of several  executions
           of adulterers in the villages on the basis of Sharia law.  Given
           the cultural context, outlined below, the possibility of summary
           executions of homosexuals seems to be very real....


           6. With regard to non-state  actors,  in  Afghanistan  attitudes
           towards homosexuality vary between the  religious  establishment
           and the  tribal  one.   The  attitude  of  the  clergy  is  very
           negative, as the practice of it is condemned by religious  laws.
           On the  other  hand  among  several  Pashtun  tribes  homosexual
           practices have long existed, especially among the warrior elite.
            In the tribal environments sex between  men  is  acceptable  as
           long as  those  indulging  in  it  are  also  married  and  have
           children.  They are also expected not to give publicity to their
           sexual conduct.  It is also considered shameful to serve in  the
           passive role.  This is why senior members of the tribe use young
           men and boys as lovers, who can then leave behind the  shame  of
           the passive  ("female") role by taking over  one  day  the  male
           role as they grow older. What is not acceptable even  in  tribal
           Afghanistan is homosexual couples, who refused  to  marry  women
           and indulge  exclusively  in  consensual  homosexual  relations.
           Generally it is not acceptable for a non-married man to start  a
           relationship with another man,  except as his junior partner."


           10. Kabul city itself  is  not  safe  from  the  abuses  of  the
           security forces.  Throughout 2003 and  2004,  the  situation  in
           terms of policing in Kabul has improved  somewhat,  due  to  the
           completion of the training of the first few batches of  recruits
           at the Police Academy and to a larger  plan  to  train  existing
           policeman.  However UN police advisers agree that on  the  whole
           the effectiveness  of  such  training  programs  has  been  very
           limited....


           11. From late 2004 a deterioration of security has been reported
           in the number of provinces including Kabul....


           12. Corruption is rife within the  police  force  as  the  staff
           tries to make up for low income by  asking  bribes  or  imposing
           arbitrary taxes on the population..


           13. In conclusion  [the  Appellant]  would  be  punishable  with
           imprisonment in Afghanistan if his homosexuality  was  known  to
           the authorities.  The  conditions  of  Afghanistan's  jails  are
           still well below international standards and given the record of
           abuses of the police and the cultural  attitudes  prevailing  in
           the country, it is likely that [he] would be subjected to a even
           worse treatment than the average prisoner."


 29. We should perhaps add at this point that, although it was not  included
     in Dr Giustozzi's report,  he  is  cited  in  the  latest  COIR  report
     offering the following view:

           "10. It is not difficult to track people  down  in  Afghanistan,
           although it might take some time.  Neighbours and landlords will
           check people's backgrounds, because everyone thinks in terms  of
           security, and  so  they  would  want  to  check  the  newcomer's
           background in their  home  area.   Further,  messages  are  sent
           across  the  country  via  chains  of  communications  based  on
           personal contacts, and it would be natural to investigate  where
           someone was from in order to see what role they  could  play  in
           such a  network.   The  Postal  Service's  unreliable  and  only
           delivers to the district centres,  not  the  villages,  so  that
           travellers are often used  to  deliver  messages  and  goods  to
           relatives and friends."

 30. That is the substance of the expert evidence from which it can be  seen
     that there are some differences in tone  and  degree  between  them  to
     which we  shall  return  later.  However  they  appear  offer  a  broad
     consensus that sexual activity between men is to some degree  prevalent
     in Afghan society possibly  due  to  a  lack  of  access  to  women  in
     particular circumstances, but  that  two  adult  unmarried  homosexuals
     living together openly as a couple to the exclusion of women  could  be
     at risk of prosecution by the state if it came to their attention, with
     the prospect of long imprisonment on conviction under  Article  247  of
     the Penal Code, or even death under Sharia  law,  although  there  very
     little specific evidence of this having actually occurred post Taliban.
     We turn now to the remaining objective evidence.

     The Other Objective Evidence

 31. We began by looking at the evidence  about  the  prevalence  of  sexual
     activity between men in Afghanistan. The CIPU report of  2005  reported
     at paragraph 6.277 a local mullah as saying that between 18% and 45% of
     men in the  Kandahar  area  engaged  in  homosexual  acts  and  that  a
     professor at Kandahar Medical College estimated that about 50%  of  the
     city's male residents had sex with men or boys at some point  in  their
     lives.  A psychiatry professor compared Afghan men  to  prison  inmates
     saying that they had sexual relations with men because  men  were  more
     available than women.

 32. A report from the Los Angeles Times of  3  April  2002,  which  is  the
     source  for  much  of  the  CIPU  comments  confirms  that  the  rarely
     acknowledged prevalence of sex between Afghan men is  an  open  secret,
     largely due to the segregation of women and this would appear to be the
     source of the reports in the 2005  CIPU  reports  about  Kandahar.  The
     report offers considerably more detail than is contained  in  the  CIPU
     report and confirms that  both  local  religious  authorities  and  the
     medical establishment consider male sexual  activity  to  be  prevalent
     with various sources suggesting that 50% of men could  be  involved  at
     some point in their lives, though they would not regard  themselves  as
     being homosexual. Public conduct such as  holding  hands,  kissing  and
     wearing make-up would not be regarded as sexual conduct.

 33. Paragraph 6.278 of the CIPU report of April 2005 goes on  to  state  as
     follows:

           "A  Danish  fact-finding  report  of  June  2004  reported  that
           according  to  the  UNHCR  and  the   Cooperation   Centre   for
           Afghanistan homosexuality is forbidden  in  Afghanistan.   UNHCR
           noted that it  is  difficult  to  say  anything  definite  about
           conditions for homosexuals  because  there  is  no  one  who  is
           prepared  to  declare  that  he  is  a   homosexual   or   whose
           homosexuality is publicly known. The CCA knew of  the  existence
           of homosexuals but  had  never  heard  about  homosexuals  being
           punished.  UNHCR  were  unaware  of  any  cases  under  the  new
           government in which homosexuals had been punished.   UNHCR  also
           noted however that behaviour  between  men  which  would  arouse
           curiosity in many  Western  countries  such  as  holding  hands,
           kissing  or  embracing  is  not  considered  explicitly   sexual
           behaviour  in  Afghanistan.   UNHCR  were  of  the   view   that
           homosexuality was common in Afghanistan due to the strong degree
           of separation between the  sexes.   Moreover  according  to  the
           source homosexuals do not have problems provided they  can  keep
           their sexual orientation secret and do not overstep other social
           norms within  their  family.   For  example  men  of  homosexual
           orientation can be forced into marriage and a possible  conflict
           with only arise if the man refused to marry.

 34. A report of the International Commission of Jurists of  2005  confirmed
     that there were credible reports of suspected homosexuals being  buried
     alive during the Taliban period following summary trials, but there was
     nothing in that report covering the post-Taliban period.

 35. Thus there is ample support for the view expressed by the experts  that
     sexual activity between men in Afghanistan is fairly highly  prevalent,
     probably due to the segregation of, and limited access to,  women,  but
     that many of  the  men  involved  do  not  regard  this  as  homosexual
     activity.

 36. However neither Islamic law  nor  the  Afghan  penal  code  makes  this
     distinction. The article in the LA Times cited a source a  saying  that
     during the period of the Taliban the number of men involved  in  sexual
     activities with other males in  Kandahar  fell  from  50%  to  10%  but
     following the fall of the Taliban was rising back to  previous  levels.
     In such circumstances  we  looked  for  evidence  of  prosecutions  and
     convictions for homosexuality in the post Taliban  period,  bearing  in
     mind that the population of Afghanistan was assessed  in  the  2004  US
     State Department report as being about 28.5 million.  In  doing  so  we
     accept Dr Lau's evidence that statistics in  Afghanistan  are  somewhat
     rudimentary and that the writ of central government is limited.

 37. In reality there is nothing beyond what was said by the experts. Dr Lau
     said that he was personally unaware of any convictions. The  statistics
     cited by Dr Giustozzi (though he said that prison sentences  are  still
     handed out to  homosexuals)  all  appear  to  be  of  arrests  and  not
     convictions/sentences, and even the arrests run at  the  rate  of  less
     that 150 per year. Of those, the numbers of arrests in Kabul were  very
     few indeed. The UN paper concerning the  juveniles  in  prison  in  and
     around Kabul, supplied by Dr Lau, was from a  very  small  sample;  was
     very unspecific about the individual cases; and also appeared to relate
     to arrests rather than convictions.

     The Relevant Law

 38. We turn next to the relevant law. A  refugee  is  a  person  who  falls
     within Article 1(A) of the 1951  Geneva  Convention  and  to  whom  the
     exclusion clauses in regulation 7 do not apply. Article 1(A)  describes
     a refugee as a person who

           "Owing to a well founded fear of being persecuted for reasons of
           race, religion, nationality, membership of a  particular  social
           group or political  opinion,  is  outside  the  country  of  his
           nationality and is unable or, owing to such fear,  is  unwilling
           to avail himself of the protection of that country; or who,  not
           having a nationality and being outside the country of his former
           habitual residence as a result of such  events,  is  unable  or,
           owing to such fear, is unwilling to return to it."

 39. The terms of the remittal to us  are  limited  to  considering  whether
     having regard to the objective evidence the Appellant faces a real risk
     of persecution by reason of his homosexuality and/or  the  restrictions
     on his ability to live as a practising homosexual. The Court of  Appeal
     in J, which is referred to in the consent  order,  held  following  the
     analysis of the House of Lords in R v Immigration Appeal Tribunal, Ex p
     Shah and Islam [1999] 2 AC 629 and with the agreement of  both  parties
     that "practising homosexuals in Iran" constituted a  particular  social
     group, given the legislative penalties imposed upon them under  Iranian
     law.

 40. Mr Kandola  suggested  that  in  the  context  of  Afghanistan  a  more
     appropriate particular social group would be "homosexuals  who  conduct
     relationships to the exclusion of women  and  who  do  not  conform  to
     social norms." As potentially serious penalties are imposed by  law  in
     Afghanistan on homosexuals generally, we do not  consider  that  it  is
     appropriate to distinguish between different categories.  We  therefore
     consider that "practising homosexuals in Afghanistan" also constitute a
     particular  social  group  and  this  provides  the  Convention  reason
     asserted in this appeal.

 41. We also remind ourselves that Maurice Kay LJ pointed out at para 11  of
     J:

           "If there is one  thing  upon  which  all  the  authorities  are
           agreed, it is that persecution is, in the words of Lord  Bingham
           of Cornhill in Sepet and Bulbul [2003] 1WLR 856 at paragraph  7,
           a 'strong word',  requiring  a  high  threshold.   It  has  been
           variously expressed, but the language of McHugh and Kirby JJ [in
           the High Court of Australia S395/002 [2003] HCA 71, [2004]  INLR
           233]... - 'it would constitute persecution only if by reason  of
           its  intensity  or  duration  the   person   persecuted   cannot
           reasonably be expected to tolerate it ' - has been adopted in  a
           number of recent authorities including Z [Z v  SSHD  2005  ImmAR
           75] (at paragraph 12) and Amare v  SSHD  [2005]  EWCA  Civ  1600
           paragraph 27, and RG  (Colombia)  v  SSHD  [2006]  EWCA  Civ  57
           paragraph 16."

 42. We also note that when the Tribunal reconsidered the appeal of J in  HJ
     (Homosexuality - reasonably tolerating living  discreetly)  Iran  UKAIT
     00044 it identified the task set for it by the Court of Appeal  in  the
     following terms:

           39. We take as our starting point that when assessing whether  a
           person who is a homosexual would face  risk  of  persecution  or
           serious harm on return  to  his  own  country  we  must  take  a
           factual, not a normative approach. That is to say we must  focus
           on the factual issue of how it is likely he  will  behave  given
           the evidence we have about how and why he has behaved up to now.
           It is wrong for a decision-maker to apply a  normative  approach
           which focuses on how it is thought an applicant  should  behave.
           However, we take from the way in which the Court of  Appeal  has
           formulated its questions that in examining  how  such  a  person
           will behave we have to examine whether that will entail for  him
           having to live a life which he cannot reasonably be expected  to
           tolerate because to do  so  would  entail  suppression  of  many
           aspects of his sexual identity.   We  are  confident  that  when
           referring to what an appellant can "reasonably  be  expected  to
           tolerate" the Court of Appeal had in mind an  objective,  not  a
           subjective test.

 43. The Court of Appeal, as Mr Kandola submitted, recently returned to  the
     issue of homosexuality in Iran  in  the  case  of  J  in  XY  (Iran)  v
     Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2008]  EWCA  Civ  911  and
     concluded as follows:
        1. It is on the basis of these findings that it is accepted  by  Mr
           Nicholson that not every active Iranian homosexual  is  entitled
           to asylum in this country. If homosexuals in Iran are  discreet,
           there is no real risk of their being apprehended  and  punished.
           If they have previously been  arrested  or  are  wanted  by  the
           authorities on account of their homosexual activities, different
           questions arise. In the present case, however, as has been seen,
           the Immigration Judge  rejected  the  Appellant's  claim  to  be
           wanted on account of his affair with A.
        1. However, discretion and clandestine  sexual  behaviour  are  not
           complete answers to the issues that may arise in cases  such  as
           the present. If the Appellant is returned to Iran, he will  have
           to carry out his sexual activities clandestinely. A  persecutory
           situation is capable of existing  by  reason  of  the  fear  and
           stress engendered by that risk. That was considered by the Court
           of Appeal in J  [2006]  EWCA  Civ  1238,  an  appeal  which  was
           confined to the application of  the  Asylum  Convention  to  the
           appellant's claim: his Convention  rights  were  not  addressed.
           Maurice Kay LJ, in a judgment with which the  other  members  of
           the Court of Appeal agreed, referred to the decision of the High
           Court of Australia in S395/2002 [2003] HCA 71 and said:
                 10. In our jurisdiction Lord Justice Buxton demonstrated in
                 Z v SSHD [2005] Imm  AR  75  that  the  approach  of  the
                 High Court of Australia had in turn  been  influenced  by
                 English authority, particularly Ahmed v SSHD [2000] INLR 1.
                 Having referred to the judgment of Simon Brown LJ in Ahmed,
                 he said at paragraph 16:
                 "It necessarily follows from that analysis  that  a  person
                 cannot be refused asylum on the basis that he  could  avoid
                 otherwise persecutory conduct by  modifying  the  behaviour
                 that he  would  otherwise  engage  in,  at  least  if  that
                 modification was  sufficiently  significant  in  itself  to
                 place him in a situation of persecution."
                 11. That brief extract is particularly helpful  because  it
                 brings together  the  principle  articulated  by  the  High
                 Court of Australia and the underlying need for an applicant
                 to establish that his case contains something "sufficiently
                 significant in itself  to  place  him  in  a  situation  of
                 persecution". If there is one  thing  upon  which  all  the
                 authorities are agreed it is that persecution  is,  in  the
                 words of Lord Bingham  of  Cornhill  in  Sepet and Bulbul
                 [2003] 1 WLR 856 at paragraph 7, "a strong word" requiring
                 a high threshold. It has been variously expressed  but  the
                 language of McHugh and Kirby JJ to which I have referred -
                 "it would constitute persecution only if, by reason of  its
                 intensity  or  duration,  the  person   persecuted   cannot
                 reasonably be expected to tolerate it" - has  been  adopted
                 in a number of recent authorities including Z (at paragraph
                 12) and Amare v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 1600, paragraph 27,
                 and RG (Columbia) v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 57, paragraph 16.
                 ....
                 16.   In   the   present   circumstances,    the    further
                 reconsideration should  be  by  a  differently  constituted
                 Tribunal. It will have to address questions that  were  not
                 considered on the last occasion, including the  reason  why
                 the appellant opted for "discretion" before  his  departure
                 from Iran and, by implication, would do so again on return.
                 It  will  have  to  ask  itself  whether  "discretion"   is
                 something that the appellant can reasonably be expected  to
                 tolerate, not only in the context of random sexual activity
                 but in relation to "matters following  from,  and  relevant
                 to, sexual identity" in the wider sense recognised  by  the
                 High Court of Australia (see the judgment of  Gummer  and
                 Hayne JJ at paragraph 83). This requires consideration  of
                 the fact that homosexuals living in a  stable  relationship
                 will wish, as this appellant says, to live openly with each
                 other and the "discretion" which they may feel  constrained
                 to exercise as the  price  to  pay  for  the  avoidance  of
                 condign punishment will require suppression in  respect  of
                 many aspects of life that "related to or informed by  their
                 sexuality"  (Ibid,  paragraph  81).  This  is  not   simply
                 generalisation;  it  is  dealt  with  in  the   appellant's
                 evidence.
        1. Buxton LJ said:
                 20. I would only venture to add  one  point.  The  question
                 that will be before the AIT on remission  will  be  whether
                 the applicant could  reasonably  be  expected  to  tolerate
                 whatever circumstances are  likely  to  arise  were  he  to
                 return to Iran. The applicant may have to abandon  part  of
                 his sexual identity, as referred  to  in  the  judgment  of
                 Gummow and Hayne JJ in S, in circumstances where failure to
                 do that exposes him to the extreme danger that is  set  out
                 in the country guidance case of RN and BB. The Tribunal may
                 wish to consider  whether  the  combination  of  those  two
                 circumstances has an effect on their decision as to whether
                 the applicant can be expected to tolerate the situation  he
                 may find himself in when he returns to Iran.
        1. Whether  the  issue  whether  an  applicant  can  reasonably  be
           expected to tolerate his personal or family circumstances if  he
           is returned to his country of nationality is more  appropriately
           considered under the Asylum Convention or under Articles 3,  and
           more particularly 8, of the European Convention on Human  Rights
           is something that it is unnecessary to decide.  So  far  as  the
           Asylum Convention is concerned, however, I would place  emphasis
           on paragraph 11 of Maurice Kay LJ's judgment and the requirement
           of persecution.
        1. The remitted appeal of J was heard by the AIT in  February  2008
           and  the  decision  of  the  President,  sitting   with   Senior
           Immigration  Judges  Storey  and  Mather,  is  reported  as   HJ
           (homosexuality: reasonably tolerating  living  discreetly)  Iran
           [2008] UKAIT 00044. The Tribunal's determination  is  summarised
           as follows:
                 It is a question of fact to be decided on the  evidence  of
                 the appellant's history and experiences  as  to  whether  a
                 homosexual  appellant  "can  reasonably  be   expected   to
                 tolerate" living discreetly in Iran. Enforcement of the law
                 against homosexuality in Iran is arbitrary but the evidence
                 does not show a real  risk  of  discovery  of,  or  adverse
                 action against,  homosexuals  in  Iran  who  conduct  their
                 homosexual activities  discreetly.  The  position  has  not
                 deteriorated since RM and BB.
        1. The Tribunal stated:
                 41. In his witness statement of 10 February 2007 and in his
                 evidence before us the appellant has  claimed  that  living
                 discreetly as a homosexual in Iran was for him a matter  of
                 living in extreme fear and of having to live  a  lie  every
                 day of his life. However, we prefer the evidence he gave in
                 his statement in 2001 immediately on or after his arrival -
                 and when his past in Iran was fresher in his mind - when he
                 said of his homosexuality in Iran:
                 "The penalties were not something I thought about.  It  was
                 more important for me to pursue my right to a private  life
                 and to think and act the  way  I  wanted  to.  Also  in  my
                 relationship with "A" it was more important for  me  to  be
                 with him than to think about what the police  might  do  to
                 me."
                 42. It was clearly possible for the appellant  to  live  in
                 Iran, from the age of fifteen to his leaving at the age  of
                 thirty one, as a  gay  man  without  discovery  or  adverse
                 consequences. In our judgment the  appellant  was  able  to
                 conduct his homosexual activities in Iran in the  way  that
                 he wanted to and without any serious detriment to  his  own
                 private and social life. The  evidence  does  not  indicate
                 that he experienced the constraints Iranian society  placed
                 on homosexual activity as oppressive or as constraints that
                 he could not reasonably be expected to tolerate.
                 ...
                 44. We acknowledge that the way in which he is able to live
                 as a gay man in the UK is preferable for  him  and  we  are
                 satisfied  that  this  informs  his   view   that   it   is
                 "impossible" for him to return to Iran. We acknowledge  too
                 that the appellant is now much  more  aware  of  the  legal
                 prohibitions on  homosexuals  in  Iran  and  the  potential
                 punishments  for  breach  of  those  prohibitions.  On  any
                 return, to avoid coming to the attention of the authorities
                 because of his homosexuality he would necessarily  have  to
                 act discreetly in relation to it. We are satisfied that  as
                 a matter  of  fact  he  would  behave  discreetly.  On  the
                 evidence he was able to conduct his  homosexual  activities
                 in Iran without serious detriment to his private  life  and
                 without that causing him to suppress many  aspects  of  his
                 sexual identity. Whilst he  has  conducted  his  homosexual
                 activities in the UK less discreetly, we are not  persuaded
                 that his adaptation back to life in Iran would be something
                 he  could  not  reasonably  be  expected  to  tolerate.  We
                 consider that as a  matter  of  fact  he  would  behave  in
                 similar fashion as he did before he left Iran and  that  in
                 doing  so  he  would,  as  before,  be  able  to  seek  out
                 homosexual relationships through work  or  friends  without
                 real risk  to  his  safety  or  serious  detriment  to  his
                 personal  identity  and  without  this  involving  for  him
                 suppression of many aspects of his sexual identity.
                 45.  The  evidence  of  suppression  of  aspects   of   the
                 appellant's life in Iran in comparison to his life  in  the
                 UK is limited. In Iran he could not go to gay clubs  as  he
                 can in the UK. Public displays of affection to a homosexual
                 partner may lead  to  a  risk  of  being  reported  to  the
                 authorities which is not so  in  the  UK.  The  appellant's
                 ability to be open about his sexuality as has been the case
                 in the UK was not possible for him throughout his  thirteen
                 adult years in Iran and three years as a minor. But he  did
                 have friends who knew of his  sexuality,  he  was  able  to
                 socialise with them and he was able to tell his family.  If
                 a wish to avoid persecution was ever a reason why he  acted
                 discreetly in Iran it was not, on the evidence, the sole or
                 main reason. It is difficult to see on the evidence that  a
                 return to that way of living can properly be  characterised
                 as likely to result in an abandonment  of  the  appellant's
                 sexual identity. To live as the appellant did for  thirteen
                 years did not expose him to danger. The appellant may  well
                 live in fear on return to Iran  now  he  is  aware  of  the
                 penalties which might be arbitrarily imposed were he to  be
                 discovered. The question as to whether such fear reaches so
                 substantial  a  level  of   seriousness   as   to   require
                 international protection has to be  considered  objectively
                 and in the light of the evidence as we have found it to be.
                 Homosexuals may wish to, but cannot, live openly in Iran as
                 is the case in many countries. The conclusions in RM and BB
                 as to risk remain the same. This appellant was able to live
                 in Iran during his adult life until he left in a way  which
                 meant he was able to express his sexuality albeit in a more
                 limited way than he can do elsewhere. In particular we have
                 regard to the fact that the evidence as  found  shows  that
                 the appellant's sexuality was not known to the  authorities
                 when he left Iran. Objectively we cannot see that the level
                 of seriousness required for international protection is  in
                 this case reached.
                 46. Buxton LJ describes the question before  this  Tribunal
                 as "whether the applicant can  reasonably  be  expected  to
                 tolerate whatever circumstances are likely to arise were he
                 to return to Iran"; and further " the applicant may have to
                 abandon part  of  his  sexual  identity...in  circumstances
                 where failure to do that exposes him  to  extreme  danger".
                 The circumstances to be tolerated are the inability to live
                 openly as a gay man as the appellant can  in  the  UK.  The
                 part of sexuality to be abandoned is on the  evidence  also
                 the ability to live openly as a gay man in the same way the
                 appellant  can  do  elsewhere.  To  live  a  private   life
                 discreetly will not  cause  significant  detriment  to  his
                 right to respect for private  life,  nor  will  it  involve
                 suppression  of  many  aspects  of  his  sexual   identity.
                 Enforcement of the law against  homosexuality  in  Iran  is
                 arbitrary but the evidence does not show  a  real  risk  of
                 discovery of, or adverse  action  against,  homosexuals  in
                 Iran who conduct their  homosexual  activities  discreetly.
                 The position has not deteriorated since RM and BB.  On  the
                 evidence we find the appellant can reasonably  be  expected
                 to tolerate the position on any return.
           Accordingly, the appeal was dismissed.
        1. In the present  case,  the  relevant  part  of  the  Immigration
           Judge's determination is in paragraphs 61 and 62:
                 "61. I do not accept that  the  Appellant,  simply  on  the
                 basis that  he  is  a  homosexual,  would  be  at  risk  of
                 treatment that amounts to persecution or breaches his human
                 rights, if he is returned to Iran. Although I accept he  is
                 a homosexual and does form  part  of  a  particular  social
                 group in Iran, he is not entitled for his appeal to succeed
                 simply  on  that  basis.  Mr  Nicholson  implies  that  the
                 Appellant's appeal should  succeed  because  the  Appellant
                 would have to abandon his sexual identity upon returning to
                 Iran. I do not accept that this is the case. The  Appellant
                 does not simply  abandon  his  sexual  identity  if  he  is
                 required to carry on his sexual activities with a  same-sex
                 partner with some  care  or  discretion.  All  persons,  of
                 whatever sex, involved in  intimate  relationships  conduct
                 themselves with such care and discretion. It is clear  from
                 the Appellant's own evidence  that  he  conducted  his  own
                 sexual  relationship  with  Mustafa  with  some  care   and
                 discretion as he was fully aware of the  likely  result  of
                 such activity  coming  to  the  attention  of  the  Iranian
                 authorities. It is therefore not reasonably likely that  he
                 would  be  careless  or  indiscreet  regarding  his  sexual
                 activities, if they resumed upon his return to Iran.
                 62. There is no evidence to suggest that the Appellant came
                 to the attention of  the  authorities  on  account  of  any
                 political or religious activity  and  as  such  he  has  no
                 profile which would bring  him  to  the  attention  of  the
                 Iranian authorities if he  is  returned  there.  I  do  not
                 accept that  the  Iranian  authorities  are  aware  of  his
                 homosexual  activity  and  therefore  they  would  have  no
                 interest in him if he is returned to Iran."
        1. It is correct that  the  Immigration  Judge  did  not  expressly
           consider the question posed in J. However, it is clear from  his
           findings that for a number of years the Appellant carried on  an
           active sexual relationship with A. The reason he left  Iran  was
           not  stated  by  him  to  be  his  intolerable  situation  as  a
           clandestine homosexual, but his fear of  arrest  and  punishment
           because of the detection of his relationship and the  arrest  of
           A. He was disbelieved on the basis for his alleged fear. It  was
           for him to establish that he could not reasonably be expected to
           tolerate his condition if he were returned to Iran. He  did  not
           establish, or even assert, facts on which such a  finding  could
           be based. Mr Nicholson stressed his situation  as  a  young  man
           living with his family, unable to carry on his  sexual  activity
           at home and having to resort to public baths. However, there  is
           no finding that on return he would resume his relationship  with
           A, and no finding that if he did they  could  not  resume  their
           sexual life  in  the  same  manner  as  before.  Mr  Nicholson's
           contentions involved speculation for which  the  groundwork  had
           not been established before the Immigration Judge.
 44. Of course this caselaw relates to Iran rather that Afghanistan but  the
     principles and approach described are of wider application. We consider
     that the guidance offered in XY itself and the approach followed in the
     reconsideration of J by the Tribunal in HJ,  are  appropriate  for  our
     assessment also. We should also mention that there is at this  time  no
     extant country guidance relating to Afghanistan specifically that is of
     direct relevance to the issues before us.

     Our General Conclusions

 45. The experience and qualifications of the three  country  experts  offer
     interesting contrasts. Dr Shah and Dr  Lau  are  academic  lawyers.  Dr
     Giustozzi  is  not.  He  is  a  research  fellow  with  a   degree   in
     international relations. Dr Shah was brought up in Pakistan but in  the
     Pashtun and Hanafite Moslem tradition. Dr  Lau  and  Dr  Giustozzi  are
     westerners, albeit with extensive  experience  in  Afghanistan  and  of
     involvement in Afghan affairs. We  have  found  their  evidence  to  be
     helpful in assessing the context of  homosexuality  in  Afghanistan  on
     which there appears to be relatively little other  objective  evidence.
     There are differences between the experts'  opinions  but  we  consider
     that these reflect their differing expertise and experience.

 46. In understanding the complex nuances of  life  in  Afghan  society,  we
     prefer, where there are  differences,  the  evidence  of  Dr  Shah  who
     himself comes from the Pashtun/Hanafite tradition to that of the  other
     experts  who  are  westerners  and  who,  however  well  informed,  are
     essentially outsiders looking in on that society. Additionally, much of
     what  Dr  Shah  has  said  is  supported  by  the  well-researched  and
     informative article in the LA Times. Moreover Dr  Lau's  suggestion  in
     oral evidence that the  folklore  of  Pashtun  homosexuality  may  have
     something to do with ethnic rivalry would not apply to Dr Shah, who  is
     himself a Pashtun and is better able to describe his own society.

 47. The most striking point of difference is in Dr Shah's strong  focus  on
     Afghan perceptions of relationships  between  men;  its  prevalence  in
     Afghanistan; and the need to contrast this with western perceptions  of
     homosexuality. This is touched upon by Dr Lau in  his  report,  but  in
     oral evidence he declined to subscribe  to  the  extent  of  Dr  Shah's
     analysis. Dr Giustozzi in his report does not pick  this  issue  up  at
     all.

 48. Our understanding of the main contrasts  highlighted  by  Dr  Shah  are
     these:

        1. Both Islamic  law  and  the  Afghan  penal  code  (Article  247)
           criminalise  pederasty/sodomy  without  distinction,  save  that
           under Article 247 if one of the parties is under  18  it  is  an
           aggravating factor. Dr Lau  suggested  that  although  the  term
           "pederasty" appears  in  the  official  English  translation  of
           Article 247 in context a better translation would be sodomy.  UK
           law  has  decriminalised  homosexual  acts  between   consenting
           adults, but regards paedophilia as a very serious offence.
        2. Article 247 prescribes "long imprisonment" for an offence, which
           leaves judicial discretion. Dr Shah  opines  that  the  Hanafite
           School, which is dominant in Afghanistan,  considers  the  death
           penalty would not be appropriate under Islamic  law  either  but
           would impose long imprisonment. Under UK law adults engaging  in
           sex with under age boys could face lengthy imprisonment.
        3. In Afghan society there is a tacit  acceptance  of  the  various
           types of homosexual behaviour described by  Dr  Shah,  including
           sex with under age boys provided it is not conducted openly  and
           particularly if it is consensual. Such acceptance,  particularly
           outside the big cities, would be unlikely for  adult  males  who
           chose to live together as adults to the exclusion of  women.  In
           the UK there is strong social condemnation of paedophilia.
        4. In  Afghan  society  men  and  boys  who  engage  in  homosexual
           behaviour due to the constraints of access to females, would not
           regard themselves as homosexual but heterosexual, even if  after
           marriage they continue to engage in homosexual activity. In  the
           UK, there is more open interaction between males and females and
           hence   a   clearer   distinction   between   homosexuals    and
           heterosexuals.


 49. What then does this mean in terms of the risk of persecution?

 50. We accept from what has been shown to us that Afghan law as such, be it
     under Article 247 of the penal code or under Islamic law, does not make
     a distinction between the different types of  homosexuality  identified
     by Dr Shah, save to identify aggravating circumstances. However  it  is
     clear from the objective  evidence  of  the  Taliban  period  that  the
     Taliban did not make such distinctions  in  their  brutal  approach  to
     homosexuality which is implicit in the evidence of executions  by  them
     and in the LA Times  article  identifying  the  dramatic  if  temporary
     decline in homosexuality in Kandahar, a Pashtun  centre,  during  their
     rule.

 51. We accept that sexual acts between  males,  often  including  boys,  is
     extensively practised, particularly among the Pashtun (at least so  far
     as the evidence before us is concerned) though, if this is  mainly  due
     to a lack of access to women outside marriage, we would expect that  it
     might be reflected to some degree among other  groups  subject  to  the
     same constraints and social environment. We accept also  that  many  of
     those males who have engaged in sexual acts with other  males  may  not
     regard themselves as homosexuals and, given the prevailing  culture  of
     hypocrisy around this subject, would be  unlikely  to  admit  to  being
     homosexuals. However, from Dr Shah's analysis it is clear  that  mature
     men, both married and unmarried, maintain sexual activity with  younger
     males. It follows, if homosexual  activity  is  so  prevalent  (perhaps
     extending according to some  reports  to  as  much  as  half  the  male
     population at some point in their lives) that this is reflected in more
     relaxed social attitudes  towards  such  acts.  It  also  explains  the
     relaxed approach to men holding hands, kissing in  public  and  wearing
     make-up.

 52. Nevertheless, as we have said, all  three  experts  maintain  that  two
     adult unmarried homosexuals living together openly as a couple  to  the
     exclusion of women could be at risk of prosecution by the state  if  it
     came to their attention. But what is the likelihood that it would  come
     to their attention and what is meant by "open"?

 53. Dr Lau said that  the  police  were  more  likely  to  be  reactive  to
     complaints by the community than proactive,  but  could  exploit  their
     position to extract bribes to supplement their income. This  was  taken
     up by Dr Giustozzi in his description of police corruption.  It  is  in
     this context we consider that the lack of evidence of  any  convictions
     for homosexuality in the post-Taliban period is very  significant.  The
     statistics cited by Dr Giustozzi  from  the  Attorney-General's  Office
     appear to relate to arrests only. He  is  not  a  lawyer  and  may  not
     appreciate the  important  distinction  between  arrests,  charges  and
     convictions. If even up to 150 people a year were being arrested as  he
     suggests,  one  would  expect  to  see  some  evidence  of  trials  and
     convictions. Yet Dr Lau said he knew of no such conviction.  Indeed  Mr
     Nasim was unable to identify anything in the objective evidence  before
     us about any trial or conviction for homosexuality in the post  Taliban
     period. Dr Lau said that not too much weight should  be  given  to  the
     lack of statistics because of the rudimentary systems in place and  the
     limited area over which the writ of central government runs.  But  even
     if we make full allowance for this and  restrict  our  enquiry  to  the
     Kabul area, there is still nothing. The UN report on juveniles to which
     Dr Lau referred to in his reports and subsequently sent on  to  us  did
     not identify any  convictions.  There  are  a  number  of  western  and
     international agencies  operating  in  Kabul  since  the  fall  of  the
     Taliban. Many (Dr Lau included) have been involved with the development
     of the justice system there. It  is  simply  not  plausible  given  the
     prevalence of sex between men and thus the potential  for  prosecution,
     and given the local rivalries that exist between different  communities
     and families with the potential for informing, that there would not  by
     now be clear evidence, if there was any appetite by the authorities  to
     pursue homosexual activity in the courts, of convictions  if  they  had
     occurred, irrespective of the adequacy  of  the  collected  statistical
     data. Thus we conclude that Dr Giustozzi's point in paragraph 4 of  his
     opinion that "prison sentences are still handed out to homosexuals"  is
     simply not born out either by his reference  to  a  limited  number  of
     arrests or by the objective evidence as a whole.

 54. Of course if some individual, or  some  gay  lobby,  tried  to  make  a
     political point in public or otherwise behaved in  a  way  such  as  to
     attract public outrage, then there may well be a  sharp  response  from
     the authorities. But there is no evidence that  this  has  happened  in
     practice, and we consider it is very unlikely that a person brought  up
     in an Islamic society such as Afghanistan would credibly consider  that
     it was an essential part of  his  sexual  identity  to  make  a  public
     political point about it to the extent of  attracting  public  outrage.
     This is reflected in Dr Shah's conclusions at the  end  of  his  report
     that:

           "3.2.1 Homosexuality is practised and tolerated as  long  as  it
           remains secret.  Usually, homosexuality is an  open  secret  but
           once it is  made  public,  it  could  lead  to  persecution  and
           prosecution by state and non-state agents.


           3.2.4 The society regards homosexuality as a shame and unIslamic
           but is tolerated in its  various  forms.   Homosexuals  are  not
           respected.  Open declaration  of  being  gay  and  lesbian  will
           outrage the society."

 55. We conclude that a homosexual returning to Afghanistan  would  normally
     seek to keep his homosexuality, be it with an adult male or  otherwise,
     private and to avoid coming to public attention. In the Afghan  context
     he would normally be able to do so without the  need  to  suppress  his
     sexuality or sexual identity to an extent that objectively he could not
     reasonably be expected to tolerate (per HJ). He would  be  assisted  in
     this by the fact that what we would see as manifestations of  affection
     such as holding hands and kissing in public  are  not  seen  in  Afghan
     society as controversial. Dr Shah suggests that a  gay  person  may  be
     relatively safe in a big city as opposed to a small community and there
     is obvious sense in that. It would, in our  assessment,  take  credible
     evidence in a particular case to demonstrate otherwise.

 56. There is a further point arising from the observation by Dr Shah that:

           "It is important to note that  many  asylum  seekers  of  Afghan
           origin tend  to  identify  themselves  as  gays  which  may  not
           genuinely be the case."

 57. This is an important point. In  a  society  in  which  sexual  activity
     between males is so prevalent, many asylum seekers from Afghanistan may
     in the past  have  had  some  homosexual  experience.   That  does  not
     necessarily mean that they are practising  homosexuals  and  would  not
     prefer heterosexual relationships if women were available. Nor does  it
     necessarily imply that they would on return engage in  open  homosexual
     activity and/or public campaigning for  gay  rights  that  could  cause
     public outrage and lead potentially to adverse attention by the  state.
     It is also a  very  proper  reminder  that  in  the  Afghan  context  a
     carefully reasoned assessment of the credibility of a  claim  to  be  a
     practising homosexual and the extent of it, is particularly  important.
     The  evaluation  of  an  appellant's  behaviour  in  the  UK,  and  the
     persuasiveness of the evidence about it,  may  well  be  a  significant
     factor in this assessment.

 58. Thus we conclude that, so far as the  Afghan  state  is  concerned  and
     notwithstanding  the  legal   criminalisation   of   homosexuality,   a
     practising homosexual on return to Kabul who  did  not  seek  or  cause
     public outrage would not face a real risk of persecution and would  not
     face restrictions on his ability to live as such that would  amount  to
     persecution.

 59. We then turn to the risk from non-state actors.  This has  been  raised
     by the experts and by highlighted by Mr Nasim. We accept that there  is
     a problem, identified by Dr  Shah  and  Dr  Giustozzi,  with  policemen
     seeking to make up  their  incomes  by  extorting  bribes.  It  is  not
     suggested in the reports that there  is  specific  evidence  that  this
     extortion by police is focused on homosexuals but is a general problem.
     Dr Giustozzi suggests in paragraph 12 of his  report  that  this  could
     even amount to imposing an arbitrary tax on the  population.  Mr  Nasim
     suggests that homosexuals may be in a somewhat weaker or worse position
     than others  given  the  lack  of  availability  of  a  sufficiency  of
     protection from the authorities for them and given  the  illegality  of
     homosexuality. However  we  do  not  consider,  having  regard  to  the
     prevalence of homosexuality in the population, there  is  any  adequate
     basis for maintaining that the risk of extortion as a homosexual by the
     police in this respect amounts to a real risk.

 60. It was also suggested by Mr Nasim, on the basis  of  Dr  Shah's  report
     that there is a risk to homosexuals from non-state actors if the  local
     community becomes aware of adult homosexuals  living  together  to  the
     exclusion of women. As we have  indicated  above,  Dr  Shah  states  in
     paragraph 2.3.2 of his report that:

           "If a gay person is living in a big city, it might be relatively
           safe and there is a greater possibility  the  gay  relationships
           might be kept secret for a  longer  period.  If  he  is  in  the
           towns/village it will be difficult to keep it secret and once it
           is discovered the reaction from non-state actors  will  be  very
           strong.  The  question  of  who  is  ruling  the  country  or  a
           particular province is very relevant."

 61. We conclude from this,  and  from  our  general  assessment  of  social
     attitudes described above, that a homosexual living in Kabul  who  does
     not invite public outrage would not be at any real risk from  non-state
     agents. We have seen  little  objective  evidence  about  the  position
     outside Kabul. Dr Shah's comments  suggest  that  there  is  a  similar
     position in the other big cities. Certainly there is no evidence before
     us of any post-Taliban convictions for homosexuality  (and  the  social
     attitudes they reflect) elsewhere in  Afghanistan  either.  However  in
     this context, Dr Lau's caution about  the  limited  nature  of  central
     government  statistics  and  the  limited  area  over   which   central
     government has sway, has greater weight and we consider that  there  is
     force in Dr Shah's concern about what  could  happen  if  a  homosexual
     comes from and returns to a small community,  or  a  province  or  area
     under the control of religious  parties.  An  assessment  of  this,  if
     required in any particular case, will have to depend  on  the  evidence
     available and the specific facts. However, as the venue for returns  to
     Afghanistan is Kabul, our conclusions about the situation there  should
     be sufficient to resolve most appeals.

 62.  Issues  may  arise  concerning  internal  relocation  for   homosexual
     returnees originating from other areas than Kabul. In the light of  our
     conclusions described above we consider that relocation to Kabul  is  a
     viable option  in  general  terms  for  homosexuals.  Obviously  though
     individual factors in any specific case will  have  to  be  taken  into
     account also.

 63. Thus we conclude, so far as non-state actors are concerned also, that a
     practising homosexual on return to Kabul who would not  seek  to  cause
     public outrage would not face a real risk of persecution  as  such  and
     would not face restrictions on his ability to live as such  that  would
     amount to persecution.

     Our Conclusions Concerning the Appellant

 64. Finally we  turn  to  out  assessment  of  the  Appellant's  individual
     position. It follows from our general conclusions  that  the  Appellant
     could not succeed in  his  appeal  simply  on  the  basis  of  being  a
     practising homosexual. However, Mr Nasim emphasised in his  submissions
     to us that the essential  basis  of  his  asylum  claim  was  his  past
     homosexual activities in Afghanistan, what it revealed about  him,  and
     its particular consequences.

 65. We start by recognising that the facts as we have described them  above
     were  accepted  by  the  Adjudicator  as  credible,  having   had   the
     opportunity to hear and assess the Appellant's oral  evidence  that  we
     have not. The sustainability of those findings of  fact  is  not  under
     challenge before us. On that basis, we agree with  Mr  Nasim  that  the
     Appellant's  established  profile  demonstrates   several   aggravating
     factors that have the effect of materially  raising the  risk  to  him,
     though we note that even under the Taliban he  was  able  to  live  for
     several years in a homosexual relationship in Jalalabad with  an  older
     man without difficulties. Be that as it may, in  early  2001,  he  fell
     foul of some people in his community who denounced him to the  Taliban.
     He did not flee but continued in this relationship even  after  he  was
     aware that it was known locally and was  the  subject  of  some  public
     outrage and had come  to  the  attention  of  the  Taliban.  Given  the
     reputation of the Taliban this was either exceptionally brave  or  very
     foolhardy but it is an established fact which  we  have  to  take  into
     account. It suggests a willingness to take risks with his life in order
     to maintain his homosexual lifestyle. Thereafter his father refused  to
     hand him over to the Taliban upon request and maintained  this  refusal
     even after threats were made against  him.  Thus  the  stakes  and  the
     consequent risks were raised again with the result that eventually  the
     Taliban raided the Appellant's family home killing his family and  then
     also killed his partner and burned his home. We  are  bound  to  factor
     this  willingness  to  take  risks  despite  the  prospect  of   severe
     consequences into our evaluation of how the Appellant would  behave  if
     returned, and whether it would cross the  threshold  of  real  risk  of
     persecution.

 66. In any community such a tragic incident as that in 2001, with  so  many
     deaths,  would  have  attracted  considerable  local   attention.   The
     Appellant as a participant in the homosexual relationship and the  sole
     survivor would have attracted considerable notoriety. As a  consequence
     we conclude he would still now be  readily  identifiable  in  his  home
     community. We do not consider that he could  in  reality  maintain  any
     real anonymity or a private life in those circumstances, and  would  be
     at real risk in his home area from non-state agents  who  know  of  his
     history and would watch and target him. Thus we conclude that he  would
     face the real risk of persecution in his home area.

 67. The question then arises of internal relocation to Kabul. As  simply  a
     practising homosexual who would wish to keep his life private, we would
     not consider, in light of our  general  findings,  that  he  could  not
     safely relocate. However we have to take into account the prospect that
     his  history  will  catch  up  with  him  and  that  his   demonstrated
     willingness to take risks could expose him to public outrage even in  a
     big city like Kabul. We have had regard to the quoted  passage  in  the
     COIR from a previous paper by Dr Giustozzi concerning the  practice  of
     neighbours and landlords checking out a newcomer's background. In  this
     case, on its very particular and exceptional facts  as  established  by
     the Adjudicator, we consider that that there is a real  risk  that  his
     past  notoriety  would  catch  up  with  him  in  Kabul,  with  similar
     consequences to those he would face were he to return to Jalalabad.  In
     those circumstances we find, albeit marginally, that he does not have a
     viable internal relocation option and is entitled to asylum.

                                  DECISION

 68. The Adjudicator made a material error of law. The following decision is
     accordingly substituted:

      "The Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's decision is allowed."






Signed
              Dated   3 December 2008



Senior Immigration Judge Batiste


      |APPENDIX OF OBJECTIVE EVIDENCE                    |
|                                                  |
|DATE              DOCUMENT                        |
|                                                  |
|2008/10/16      LA Times Article                  |
|2008/08/30     Lesbians, Gay, Bisexuals,          |
|Transgender Rights Report                         |
|2008/08/29      COIR Report                       |
|2008/05/15     Report by Dr Giustozzi             |
|2008/05         World Survey by International     |
|Lesbian and Gay Association                       |
|2008/03/15    Report by Dr Lau                    |
|2008/03/11    Excerpt from US State Department    |
|Report                                            |
|2008/03/10    Report by Dr Shah                   |
|2008/03/08     US State Department Report         |
|2007/05         UNODC Report                      |
|2007             UNHCR Eligibility Guidelines for |
|Refugees                                          |
|2007             Report by Afghan Independent     |
|Human Rights Commission                           |
|2005/04         UNHCR Report                      |
|2005/04         CIPU Report Extract               |
|2005             Sydney Morning Herald Article    |
|2004/09/06    Article by Rex Wockner              |
|2004/09/01    Pak Tribune report                  |
|2004/07/05    Reuters Report                      |
|2004/05/20    ECRE Statements                     |
|2004/05         ECRE Guidelines                   |
|2004/01/04    Afghan Constitution                 |
|2004             US State Department Report       |
|2003/03/01    Gay & Lesbian Review                |
|2003             Article by Martin Kuplens-Ewart  |
|2002/10         UNHCR Report                      |
|2002/05/24     Scotsman Article                   |
|2002/04/03     LA Times Article                   |
|2002/03/07     HRW report                         |
|2002/01/12    Times Article                       |
|2002              IJRL Guidelines                 |
|2001/12/21     Article by Lou Chibbaro            |
|2001/11/06     Article by Paul Varnell            |
|2001/10/02     Village Voice Article              |
|2001/09/28     Article by Sam Handlin             |
|2001/08/27     Life under the Taliban by Saira    |
|Shah                                              |
|2001              Article in ELR by Mark Bell     |
|1999/09          Amnesty International Document   |
|1998/06/12     ILGA Report                        |
|1976             Article 427 of Afghan Penal Code |
|1976             Article 1 of the Afghan Penal    |
|Code                                              |
|                                                  |





Asylum and Immigration Tribunal


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Field House
On 28 October 2008


                                   Before

                      Senior Immigration Judge Batiste
                      Senior Immigration Judge Southern
                           Professor R. H. Taylor


                                   Between

                                     AJ

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


                            FUNDING DETERMINATION

The Tribunal  is  satisfied  that,  at  the  time  the  Appellant  made  his
application for permission  to  appeal  to  the  IAT  and  for  the  reasons
indicated in the grant of permission, there was a significant prospect  that
the appeal would  be  allowed  upon  reconsideration.  It  orders  that  the
Appellant's costs are to be paid out of the relevant  fund,  as  defined  in
Rule 33 of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005


Signed
               Dated  3 December 2008




Senior Immigration Judge Batiste



