
LQ (Age: immutable characteristic) Afghanistan [2008] UKAIT 00005

                       ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at: Birmingham
Date of Hearing: 6 October 2006

                                   Before:


 Mr C M G Ockelton, Deputy President of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
                        Immigration Judge Sommerville

                                   Between

                                     LQ
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the Appellant:           Mr J-P Waite, instructed by Paragon Law
For the Respondent:          Mrs Maher, Home Office Presenting Officer

A  person's  age  is  an  immutable  characteristic.   Although  it  changes
constantly, one can  oneself  do  nothing  to  change  what  it  is  at  any
particular time.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan.  He was  born  on  1  August
    1991 and so is now aged 15.  This is the reconsideration of his  appeal
    against the decision of the respondent on 2 November 2005  refusing  to
    recognise him as a refugee.  He has limited leave until 30 October 2008
    and accordingly has a right of appeal against  the  refusal  of  asylum
    under s83 of the 2002 Act.

 2. The Immigration Judge took the view that "the 1951  Convention  is  not
    engaged", because the appellant is adequately protected by his leave to
    remain in the United Kingdom.  It was, we think, common  ground  before
    us, and it is certainly the case, that that was an error in  law.   The
    1951 Convention goes to status.  Section 83 of the 2002 Act entitles an
    appellant to assert his status as a refugee independently of  any  risk
    of removal.  It was the Immigration Judge's task to assess whether,  at
    the date of the hearing before him, the appellant had the status  of  a
    refugee.  His failure to do so amounts to a material error of law.

 3. The Immigration Judge summarised the appellant's case as follows:

       "10.   The  appellant's  evidence  is  that  he  is  a  Shia  Hazare
             originating from Nawabab in Ghazni Province,  Afghanistan,  the
             only child of a manual labourer, when he could find  work,  who
             died in 2003.  His mother disappeared in 1997.  To  escape  the
             fighting, the appellant and his father went to Iran, his mother
             disappearing around  this  time  possibly  a  casualty  of  the
             fighting although the appellant's father would not discuss  it.
             They set up home in the city of Hayrez  near  Shiraz  in  south
             Iran and the appellant's father worked when  he  could,  mostly
             factory work.  The appellant had some education in Farsi.   The
             appellant's  father  became  ill  and  died   in   2003.    The
             appellant's  father's  cousin,  [...],  helped  care  for   the
             appellant's father in his dying days.


      11.   The appellant remained in the room his father  had  rented  and
             received food from the factory where his father had worked  but
             he rapidly ran out of money and had to  leave.   The  appellant
             accepted an offer from [his father's cousin] to live with  him,
             his wife and two children.  [The cousin] proved  to  be  unkind
             and made the appellant earn his keep by working in the  kitchen
             of the factory where his father had worked.  [The  cousin]  was
             never satisfied and this led to  beatings  at  his  hands.   He
             bears a scar to the right side of his chest from this.  On that
             day the appellant had been to town and spent some of his  money
             thereby enraging [him].


      12.   At the beginning of August  2005,  [the  cousin]  required  the
             appellant to leave.  He took all the appellant's  money  except
             for a sufficient sum to pay an agent to take the appellant  out
             of the country.  For fear of further beatings from  [...],  the
             appellant complied.  He travelled for 25 days but is aware only
             of passing through Turkey and France where the agent  abandoned
             him leaving him to cling on to a small compartment of  a  lorry
             which 'would take me somewhere safe'.  This proved  to  be  the
             United Kingdom where he arrived on 7 September 2005 and claimed
             asylum directly he found a police station the next day."

 4. The Immigration Judge did not wholly accept the  appellant's  evidence.
    He did not believe very much of what he said about his own finances  or
    about [his father's cousin's] treatment of him; and he did  not  accept
    the view that the appellant faced a real risk from [the cousin]  if  he
    were returned to Afghanistan or Iran.  He stated that he did  not  find
    "the appellant's claim of having no more than a single uncaring, indeed
    hostile, relative to be persuasive", but he clearly did accept that the
    appellant's parents are dead.  Further, he  made  a  clear  finding  at
    paragraph 36 of his determination that:


        "I differ from the respondent in that, if the appellant  went  back
        now, I find that the appellant would be at risk  of  an  Article  3
        breach".


    The basis for that finding was the expert evidence  before  him,  which
    the Immigration Judge accepted, subject of course to his  own  findings
    about the personal credibility of the appellant.  He found  that  there
    would be no adequate reception facilities in Afghanistan and  that,  as
    an orphan, the appellant would be subject to the risks of  exploitation
    and ill treatment adumbrated in that evidence.

 5. The sole remaining question is, therefore, whether the appellant's ill-
    treatment would amount to persecution for one of the reasons  mentioned
    in Article 1A(2) of the Refugee Convention.  The only one  proposed  is
    "membership of a particular social group".  The Immigration Judge  took
    the view that, insofar as the appellant's claim to risk of  persecution
    for membership of a particular social group depended  on  his  being  a
    child,  it  could  not  succeed,  because  age  is  not  an   immutable
    characteristic.  As he wrote at paragraph 26 of his determination,


        "If there is anything that  is  not  immutable,  it  is  age.   The
        appellant gets older by the day.  He  is  not  immutably  a  child.
        Neither is the issue of immutability frozen in time to  the  moment
        of decision."

 6. We are persuaded by Mr Waite's submissions (to which Mrs Maher  offered
    no  very  spirited  objection)  that  the  Adjudicator  erred  in  this
    conclusion.  We think that for these purposes age is immutable.  It  is
    changing all the time, but one cannot do anything to change  one's  own
    age at any particular time.  At the date when  the  appellant's  status
    has to be assessed he is a child and although, assuming he survives, he
    will in due course cease to be a child, he is immutably a child at  the
    time of assessment.  (That is not, of course, to say that he  would  be
    entitled indefinitely to refugee status acquired while, and because of,
    his minority.  He would be a refugee only whilst the risk to him  as  a
    child remained.)

 7. Mrs Maher's submission was that if the appellant's age at any moment is
    immutable, the risk to him as a "street child" is not.  He might at any
    moment be adopted or receive some other form of care.  We  regard  that
    submission as pure speculation.   There  is  nothing  in  the  evidence
    before us or before the Immigration Judge to suggest that there is  any
    prospect that the appellant, if returned to Afghanistan, would be  able
    to achieve any change  in  his  circumstances.   We  note  Mrs  Maher's
    reminder that the Immigration Judge did not find the  appellant  wholly
    credible.  But his findings do  establish  that  the  appellant  is  an
    orphan and would be at risk.  In the light of the expert  evidence,  we
    conclude that the risk of severe harm to the appellant, as found by the
    Adjudicator, would be as a result of his membership of a group  sharing
    an immutable characteristic and constituting, for the purposes  of  the
    Refugee Convention, a particular social group.  We therefore substitute
    a determination allowing his appeal under s83.






                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT


