

Asylum and Immigration Tribunal

              RN (rule 23(5): respondent's duty) Zimbabwe [2008] UKAIT 00001




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |                             |
|On 11 October 2007                            |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                      SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE MOULDEN
                      SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE P R LANE


                                   Between

                                     RN
                                  Appellant


                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Muqit, Representative, of the Refugee Legal
Centre
For the Respondent:    Ms Cantrell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

The respondent complies with  rule  23(5)(a)(i)  if,  in  cases  other  than
personal service, she sends or delivers the  determination  not  later  than
the date on which the section 103A application is made. It is not  necessary
for the determination to have been served on the appellant for the  purposes
of rule 55(5) by that  date.  Where  the  appellant  adduces  evidence  that
suggests the respondent has not complied with rule 23(5)(a)(i),  it  is  for
the respondent to show otherwise.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant, a citizen of Zimbabwe born on 22 October  1974,  arrived
    in the United Kingdom on 17 February 2007  and  claimed  asylum  on  13
    March.  On 25 April the respondent decided to  refuse  the  appellant's
    application for asylum and consequently refused to vary  her  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom.

2.   The appellant appealed against that decision and on  7  June  2007  her
    appeal was heard at Hatton Cross by an Immigration Judge,  who  allowed
    the appellant's appeal on asylum grounds.

3.   The Immigration Judge's determination was served on the  respondent  in
    accordance with rule 23(4)  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal
    (Procedure) Rules 2005 on 19 June 2007.  On 26 June the respondent made
    an application under section 103A of the Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 for an order requiring the Tribunal to  reconsider  the
    Immigration Judge's decision.

4.   Rule 23(5) provides as follows:-

         "(5) The respondent must -


             (a)  serve the determination on the appellant -


                  (i)  if the respondent makes a section 103A application or
                      applies for permission to appeal under  section  103B
                      or 103E of the 2002 Act, by  sending,  delivering  or
                      personally serving the determination not  later  than
                      the date on which it makes that application; and


                  (ii) otherwise, not later than 28 days after receiving the
                      determination from the Tribunal; and


             (b)  as soon as practicable after serving  the  determination,
                  notify the Tribunal on what date and by what means it  was
                  served".


5.    In  pursuance  of  rule  23(5)(b),  at  the  end  of  Part  C  of  the
    respondent's application for reconsideration, it was  stated  that  the
    determination of the Immigration Judge "was served on the applicant  by
    post on 26 June 2007".  The respondent's application was considered  by
    a Senior Immigration Judge on 2 July 2007.  On the  information  before
    him, it would plainly have appeared to  the  Senior  Immigration  Judge
    that the requirement of rule 23(5)(a)(i)  had  been  met.   The  Senior
    Immigration Judge decided to order reconsideration on the  respondent's
    grounds, which he summarised as contending that  the  findings  of  the
    Immigration Judge in  relation  to  the  appellant's  credibility  were
    perverse and irrational and that the Immigration Judge  had  failed  to
    give adequate reasons for his findings and conclusions.

6.   On 10 July 2007 the appellant, her representatives and  the  respondent
    were sent a notice by the Tribunal to the effect that the  respondent's
    application for review had been granted.  Enclosed with the notice  was
    a copy of the decision of the Senior Immigration Judge.

7.   In HH (Rule 23: Meaning  and  extent)  Iraq  [2007]  UKAIT  00036,  the
    Tribunal held that compliance with rule 23(5)(a)(i) is a  pre-condition
    for a valid application by the  respondent  under  section  103A.   The
    Tribunal found as follows:-

         "6.  If r 23 applies to this appeal, the Home Office failed in  its
             duty to send the determination to the appellant on the day the
             application  for   reconsideration   was   made.    In   those
             circumstances the question arises whether the application  can
             be considered to be validly made.  This is not easy to answer;
             but two things are clear.  The first is that the terms of r 23
             are intended to give the respondent an advantage not  normally
             available to a  party  to  litigation.   The  second  is  that
             r23(5)(i) is intended to ameliorate the  appellant's  position
             in a case where the respondent seeks to challenge  a  decision
             in favour of the appellant, before the appellant even knows it
             has been made.  Strictly speaking, the appellant  is  unlikely
             to  be  prejudiced  by  knowing  about   the   reconsideration
             application only later, because the next possible act  by  him
             for which a time is fixed would be the service  of  a  'reply'
             under r 30, which does not have to be done until a week before
             the  hearing  of  the  reconsideration.    Nevertheless,   the
             possibility that the respondent will challenge a determination
             in favour of the appellant without notifying the appellant  of
             the determination or the challenge is not clearly envisaged by
             the Rules and could only add to the apparent unfairness  of  r
             23.  In these circumstances we incline to the  view  that  the
             requirements of r 23(5)(a)(i) are  mandatory,  and  compliance
             with them is  a  pre-condition  of  a  valid  application  for
             reconsideration of the instance of the respondent.  Mr  Walker
             [the Presenting Officer] did not dissent from that  view.   We
             should emphasise that we do not mean to indicate  any  similar
             view in respect of sub-paragraph (a)(ii) or sub-paragraph  (b)
             of  r  23(5),  where  the  unfairness  is  significantly  less
             apparent.


         7.   It follows from the foregoing that if r  23  applies  to  this
             appeal, our view is  that  the  respondent's  application  for
             reconsideration was not validly made."

8.   On 30 July 2007, the RLC wrote to the Tribunal to say that it  was  not
    until they received the order for reconsideration that they were  aware
    that the appellant's appeal had been allowed by the Immigration  Judge.
    According to the letter, that determination was not  received  until  4
    July 2007.  Relying on HH, the letter concluded  by  stating  that,  in
    view of the  respondent's  failure  to  comply  with  rule  23(5),  the
    application for reconsideration was invalid.  The Tribunal was  invited
    to dispose of that application accordingly.

9.   On 15 August 2007 the Tribunal wrote to  the  respondent,  enclosing  a
    copy of the RLC's letter of 30 July.  On the basis of  the  information
    contained in that letter, the Tribunal indicated that it was  satisfied
    that the reconsideration could be justly determined without a  hearing,
    pursuant to rule 15(2)(d), in the sense that no material error  of  law
    was disclosed in the original determination.  Any  submissions  to  the
    contrary were invited within fourteen days of the date of that letter.

10.  On 23 August the respondent's Border and Immigration Agency replied  to
    the Tribunal's letter  of  15  August.   The  Agency  stated  that  the
    Immigration Judge's determination allowing the appeal had been received
    by the Agency's Appeals Determination  Management  Unit  (ADMU)  on  21
    August 2007 and was forwarded to the Onward Right of Appeal Team (ORAT)
    in  order  for  them  to  make  a   decision   on   whether   to   seek
    reconsideration.   ORAT  made  an  initial  decision  not  to   request
    reconsideration and the Immigration Judge's determination was passed to
    the writer of the letter, Mr Ashworth, on the fourth working day  after
    its arrival at ADMU.  (At this point, it is necessary to interject that
    the reference to 21 August  is  plainly  a  mistake  and  should  be  a
    reference to 21 June 2007.)

11.  Mr Ashworth asked ORAT to reconsider their position  and  on  the  last
    day  on  which  reconsideration  could  be  sought,  a   "request   for
    reconsideration" was made to the Tribunal.  The letter  then  continued
    as follows:-

         "My understanding  at  this  point  was  that  the  allowed  appeal
         determination had already been served  on  the  appellant  and  her
         representative either by the Tribunal when  the  determination  was
         promulgated, and/or  by  ADMU.   On  04  July  2007  I  received  a
         telephone call from the appellant's  legal  representative  at  the
         Refugee Legal Centre, stating that she wanted a copy of the  appeal
         determination.  In the best of faith, I therefore faxed my copy  to
         her on 04 July 2007, assuming that either the representative's copy
         had not arrived or had been misplaced."


12.  The letter went on to state that, because the Senior Immigration  Judge
    had identified arguable errors of law in the determination, and in  the
    light of the writer's explanation as to why  there  was  "an  issue  of
    service of the allowed determination", the "reconsideration request  to
    proceed to  a  hearing  would  not  prejudice  the  appellant.   It  is
    submitted that the  interests  of  justice  would  be  best  served  by
    proceeding to a hearing at which the Tribunal can hear full submissions
    from both parties and consider any possible prejudice to the  appellant
    when deciding whether or not to make an order for reconsideration."

13.  At the hearing  on  11  October,  Ms  Cantrell  informed  us  that  the
    respondent had no means of demonstrating  that  the  determination  had
    been served on or before the time when reconsideration was sought.  All
    she could say was that it was the policy of the respondent  to  do  so.
    Ms Cantrell accepted that this did not take matters very far.

14.  We understood Ms Cantrell's  statement  to  encompass  service  on  the
    appellant, as well as  on  the  appellant's  representative.   In  this
    regard, it is relevant to observe that rule 55(3) requires that,  if  a
    document is served on the appellant, a copy must also at the same  time
    be sent to the appellant's representative.

15.  Because the consequence  of  the  decision  in  HH  is  potentially  so
    significant, it is necessary to consider precisely what the  obligation
    on the respondent imposed by rule 23(5) entails.  At  first  sight,  it
    appears that  the  respondent  must  serve  the  determination  on  the
    appellant not later than the date on  which  the  respondent  makes  an
    application under section 103A.  A possible  problem,  however,  arises
    when one considers rule 55 (filing and  service  of  documents).   Rule
    55(1) provides that any document which is required or permitted by  the
    Rules or a direction of the Tribunal to be filed with the Tribunal,  or
    served on any person, may be delivered or sent  by  post;  sent  via  a
    document exchange; sent by fax; sent by e-mail; or served personally by
    leaving it with the individual to be served.

16.  Rule 55(5) provides as follows:-

         "(5) Subject to paragraph (6), any document that  is  served  on  a
             person in accordance with this rule shall, unless the contrary
             is proved, be deemed to be served -


             (a)  where the document is sent by post or  document  exchange
                  from and to a place within  the  United  Kingdom,  on  the
                  second day after it was sent;


             (b)  where the document is sent by post or  document  exchange
                  from or to a place outside  the  United  Kingdom,  on  the
                  twenty-eighth day after it was sent; and


             (c)  in any other case, on the day on which the  document  was
                  sent or delivered to, or left with, that person."


17.  If the correct interpretation of rule 23(5)  is  that  service  of  the
    determination on the appellant must be effected  for  the  purposes  of
    rule 55(5) not later than the date on which the  respondent  makes  the
    section 103A application, considerable difficulties arise.  Despite the
    opening lines of rule 55(5), the only sensible interpretation  of  that
    paragraph is that, where, for example, service is sought to be effected
    by post but the intended recipient proves that the document in question
    was never received, that person has not been served with  the  document
    for the purposes of rule 55.  In such a case, the respondent would  not
    be in breach of rule 23(5), even  where  she  makes  the  section  103A
    application after the determination is sent by post to  the  appellant.
    On the other hand, if the determination is sent by post and  is  deemed
    to be received (without the contrary being proved) on  the  second  day
    after it was sent, the respondent would be in breach of rule  23(5)  if
    she purported to make a section 103A  application  before  that  second
    day.  Given  the  five  day  time  limit  for  making  a  section  103A
    application in respect of a person who is in the United  Kingdom,  such
    an interpretation would severely circumscribe the respondent's  ability
    to make such an application within the  statutory  time  limit  and  in
    accordance with rule 23(5).

18.  Even more problematically, where it is proved  that  the  determination
    was received later than the  second  day  after  it  was  sent  by  the
    respondent, the latter could in practice be  precluded  by  rule  23(5)
    from making  such  an  application  at  all;  for  example,  where  the
    determination is  received  more  than  five  working  days  after  the
    respondent received it from the Tribunal.

19.  Such a result cannot be correct and we have  concluded  that  rules  23
    and 55, properly construed, do not, in fact, lead to it. If rule  55(5)
    had been intended to have a bearing upon the requirement imposed on the
    respondent by rule 23(5), there would have been no need for  the  words
    "by sending, delivering or personally serving" to be included  in  rule
    55(5)(a)(i). The inclusion of those words  makes  it  clear  that  rule
    55(5) has no role to play in the interpretation of rule 23(5). In other
    words, there is no need for this purpose to determine when (or, indeed,
    whether)  service  was  effected  in  accordance   with   rule   55(5).
    Accordingly, we find that the requirement in rule 23(5)(a)(i)  must  be
    read as a requirement that the respondent (in cases other than personal
    service) must send or deliver the determination not later than the date
    on which the section 103A application is made, regardless of when  (or,
    indeed, whether) the determination is received. Thus, in a  case  where
    the respondent sends the determination by post, it must be put into the
    postal system not later than the day on which the respondent makes  the
    section 103A application.

20.  By the same token, the  obligation  in  rule  23(5)(b)  to  notify  the
    Tribunal on what date and by what means the  determination  was  served
    must refer not to the actual date when the appellant received it (which
    at this stage will often be unknown  to  the  respondent),  or  to  the
    deemed date of service under rule 55(5), but to the date on  which  the
    determination was despatched.

21.  In the  present  case,  the  respondent,  as  we  have  already  noted,
    purported to comply with rule 23(5)(b) by stating at the end of Part  C
    of the section 103A application that the determination  was  served  by
    post on 26 June 2007.  Although our interpretation  of  rule  23  means
    that there is no express provision (as there is in rule 55(5))  for  an
    appellant to challenge what would otherwise  be  the  presumption  that
    service (in the sense we have identified) took place on the date and by
    the means notified in accordance with rule 23(5)(b),  it  must  be  the
    case that an appellant should be able to adduce evidence to the  effect
    that the respondent did not, in fact, comply with rule 23(5)(a)(i).  In
    the present case, the appellant's representative  filed  evidence  that
    suggested the determination had not been received until  4  July  2007,
    when it had to be faxed to the RLC  at  their  request.  This  evidence
    placed an evidential burden on the respondent, which she has failed  to
    discharge. It  would  have  been  open  to  the  respondent  to  adduce
    evidence, for example, by means of recorded delivery slips or an  entry
    from a post log, to the effect that (whether or not  the  determination
    was ever received) it was posted not  later  than  the  date  when  the
    section 103A application  was  made.   As  we  have  already  recorded,
    however, Ms Cantrell was unable to adduce any such evidence.

22.  We therefore find that, in the circumstances of the present  case,  the
    respondent failed to comply with the duty imposed by  rule  23(5)(a)(i)
    and  that,  following  HH,  the  application  for  reconsideration  was
    invalid.

23.  That brings  us  to  the  issue  of  rule  15.   As  has  already  been
    described,  the  Tribunal,  following  receipt  of  evidence  regarding
    failure to comply with rule 23(5)(a)(i), wrote to  the  respondent  and
    the appellant's  representatives,  indicating  that  the  Tribunal  was
    minded to determine the appeal without a hearing, pursuant to rule  15.
    The Tribunal's letter of 15 August 2007 was inaccurate, to  the  extent
    that the point at issue was not whether there was or was not a material
    error of law in the Immigration Judge's determination but  whether  the
    purported application for reconsideration  of  that  determination  was
    invalid.  Nevertheless, given that the letter  of  15  August  referred
    expressly to HH, and that it was accompanied by a copy  of  the  letter
    from  the  appellant's  representatives,  the  point  being  made   was
    sufficiently clear.

24.  Mr Ashworth's letter  of  23  August  suggests  that  he  was  under  a
    misapprehension as to the purpose of the hearing.  The Tribunal has  no
    power to treat the invalid applicant as valid, even  were  it  to  find
    that the appellant had not been prejudiced, in the sense identified  by
    the Tribunal in paragraph 6 of HH.   As  a  creature  of  statute,  the
    Tribunal would need express statutory authority to breathe life into an
    otherwise lifeless application. There is none.

25.  We are aware that the issue of  non-compliance  with  rule  23(5)(a)(i)
    has been raised in a number of other appeals, where the respondent  has
    purported to apply for reconsideration under section 103A.  In any such
    case, where the respondent considers that she is  able  to  demonstrate
    compliance  with  that  provision,  notwithstanding  evidence  of  non-
    receipt, or late receipt, by the appellant of the determination, it  is
    likely to be the case that the Tribunal will arrange a hearing.  If, on
    the  other  hand,  the  respondent  is  lacking   such   evidence   but
    nevertheless is opposed to the Tribunal proceeding by way of  rule  15,
    the Tribunal will expect proper reasons to be adduced.  In  particular,
    it will not be sufficient merely to assert that the  underlying  merits
    of the respondent's  challenge  to  the  determination  are  strong  or
    otherwise merit specific consideration.

26.  In the present case, there is no reconsideration  before  the  Tribunal
    and the Immigration Judge's determination accordingly stands.






Signed                                  Date


Senior Immigration Judge P R Lane

