

Asylum and Immigration Tribunal

     RZ (Eurodac - fingerprint match -admissible) Eritrea [2008] UKAIT 00007


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |
|On 6 November 2007                   |
|                                     |


                                   Before

                       SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE LATTER
                          IMMIGRATION JUDGE BRUNNEN


                                   Between

                                     RZ

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:            Mr T Hussain, Counsel, instructed by White
Ryland, Solicitors
For the Respondent:       Mr J Hall, Counsel, instructed by Treasury
Solicitors


    1.   Evidence of a fingerprint match obtained from the  Eurodac  system
    is  admissible  not  only  when  considering  which  Member  State   is
    responsible for examining an  application  for  asylum  but  also  when
    examining the application itself.


    2. The safeguards within the Eurodac  system  are  such  that  in  the
    absence of cogent evidence to the contrary,


       (a) fingerprint images held in the system and data as to where, when
       and why      those fingerprints were taken  should  be  accepted  as
       accurate and reliable; and
       (b) evidence of a fingerprint match identified by   the  system  and
       confirmed by the Immigration Fingerprint Bureau should  be  regarded
       as determinative of that issue.


    3.   Where there is a dispute about  whether  there  is  a  fingerprint
    match, the burden of proof is on the respondent  and  the  standard  of
    proof is the balance of probabilities.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.      This is the reconsideration of an appeal  against  the  respondent's
    decision made on 18 September 2006 to remove  the  appellant  following
    the refusal of  his  claim  for  asylum.   His  appeal  was  originally
    dismissed following the  hearing  by  Immigration  Judge  Khawar  on  2
    January 2007.  Reconsideration was ordered on 27 February 2007  and  on
    25 May 2007 the Tribunal found that there was a material error  of  law
    in his determination and it was directed that the second stage  of  the
    reconsideration should be a full rehearing.

2.      This appeal has raised the issue identified in YI  (Previous  claims
    - fingerprint match - Eurodac) Eritrea  [2007]  UKAIT  00054  where  in
    paragraph 13 the Tribunal said:

        "13.    ... It is clear that a full assessment of Eurodac data is a
         matter of considerable general importance because a number of cases
         turn upon fingerprint evidence produced  by  this  system  of  past
         claims  in  order   to   expose   deception   in   current   asylum
         applications."


    We have heard evidence about the  Eurodac  system  and  submissions  on
    whether fingerprint evidence obtained as a result  of  that  system  is
    admissible and if so the burden and standard of proof to be applied and
    the weight to be given to such evidence.

Background

3.      The appellant is a citizen of Eritrea born on  24  April  1979.   He
    arrived in the United Kingdom on 19  July  2006  making  a  clandestine
    entry by lorry.  He applied  for  asylum  on  20  July  2006.   At  his
    screening interview the  appellant  said  that  he  was  a  Pentecostal
    Christian.  He said that he had left Eritrea on 4 June 2006 arriving in
    Sudan on 5 June 2006.  He had stayed in Kasala for two weeks  with  his
    uncle and then went to Port Sudan.  He then had a  23  day  journey  by
    ship arriving in an unknown country from where he travelled by lorry to
    the United Kingdom, arriving on 19 July 2006.  He said that he had  met
    someone from his own country who let him stay overnight with him.   The
    appellant was unable to identify where this was or who the person  was.
    He had travelled with his uncle by truck to Port Sudan  and  his  uncle
    had arranged with an agent for the appellant to travel by a cargo  ship
    from Sudan.  His uncle had paid  US$4,000.   The  appellant  was  asked
    where he had got the money from and he said he did  not  know  but  his
    uncle's son lived in the United States.  The appellant  said  that  his
    normal occupation was as a soldier.  He had been  in  national  service
    since November 1997 and had been detained from 10 October 2005 until he
    escaped on 4 June 2006.  When asked his reason for coming to the United
    Kingdom, he replied that he had come here to claim  asylum  because  of
    religious problems.  He had been detained on 10 October 2005 because he
    was a Pentecostal Christian.  He was  asked  whether  he  had  had  any
    problems prior to this and he replied that he had  not.   He  confirmed
    that he had never left Eritrea before June 2006.

4.      In accordance with normal  procedure  the  appellant's  fingerprints
    were taken on 20 July 2006 but they did not meet the quality threshold
    required for comparison by Eurodac and further fingerprints were  taken
    on  3  August  2006.   His  prints  were  then  automatically  compared
    electronically with other fingerprints on the Eurodac database and  the
    search results showed there was a  match  with  fingerprints  taken  in
    Lampedusa e Linosa, Italy on 8  July  2005.   Those  fingerprints  were
    taken following an illegal entry into Italy.  We will deal  more  fully
    later in this determination with the Eurodac system and the  procedures
    followed.

5.      The appellant was interviewed about his claim on 6  September  2006.
     He was asked whether he had ever left Eritrea before June 2006 when on
    his account he travelled to the United Kingdom. He replied that he  had
    not.  It was put to him that his fingerprints had been taken  in  Italy
    on 8 July 2005.  His response was that he had not been in Italy and  no
    fingerprints were taken.  It was put  to  him  that  fingerprints  were
    unique to each individual but he maintained his assertion that in  2005
    he was in Eritrea.  He repeated that he had come  directly  to  England
    and had never been to Italy.  The appellant said that  he  had  started
    his military service on 1 November 1997. It was supposed  to  last  for
    eighteen months but because of the situation in Eritrea he remained  in
    the army until June 2006.  He was asked if he  had  deserted  from  the
    military and he replied no.  He said that he could not return as he had
    escaped from prison and would be shot.

6.      The basis of the appellant's claim for asylum  as  it  emerged  from
    his interview was that he was in fear  of  the  government  in  Eritrea
    because of religious problems and because he had been  a  soldier.   He
    had converted to the  Pentecostal  faith  in  September  2003  and  was
    baptised on 2 May 2004.  He started to attend secret prayer meetings in
    other believers' homes.  He first encountered problems  on  5  February
    2005 when he was caught reading the bible by a squad leader.  His bible
    was taken from him and he was told he would not be allowed to  practise
    the faith and was given a warning.  On 10 October 2005 when  practising
    his faith with a group of five other believers he was arrested.  He was
    detained and taken to a prison in Asseb.  He was regularly  beaten  but
    he did not receive any injuries from the beatings.  On 4 June 2006  the
    appellant was travelling in a lorry with thirteen  prisoners  and  five
    guards when the lorry overturned.  The appellant was  able  to  escape:
    none of the guards tried to follow him.  He went on foot to  Sudan  and
    arrangements were made for him to leave and travel on to this country.

7.      The respondent was not satisfied that the appellant was entitled  to
    asylum.   He  took  into  account  the  fact   that   the   appellant's
    fingerprints had been taken in Italy on 8 July 2005.   Paragraph  9  of
    the Reasons for Refusal Letter of  12  September  2006  refers  to  the
    fingerprints being taken in Italy under the same name and date of birth
    as the appellant.  This is not fully accurate as  we  will  make  clear
    later as the information retrieved from Eurodac does not  identify  the
    appellant by name or date of birth.  The  respondent  did  not  believe
    that the appellant was a follower of the Pentecostal faith, that he was
    a deserter or that he would  be  considered  as  such  if  returned  to
    Eritrea.

8.      The appeal against this decision was heard by the Immigration  Judge
    on 2 January 2007.  The appeal was dismissed  on  asylum,  humanitarian
    protection and human rights grounds.  Following a  hearing  on  25  May
    2007 the Tribunal (Senior Immigration Judge Jarvis)  found  that  there
    was a  material  error  of  law  in  the  judge's  determination.   The
    Tribunal's reasons were as follows:

        "1.      The Appellant is a citizen of Eritrea whose date of  birth
        is given as 24 April 1979. He claims to be a refugee and to  be  at
        real risk of other serious harm, by reason of his Pentecostal faith
        and by reason of his being a deserter  from  the  military  service
        aspect of National Service.


        2.         On  18  September  2006  the  Respondent   refused   his
        application for leave to enter the UK on refugee and  human  rights
        grounds and decided to give directions for removal to Eritrea.  The
        Appellant appealed and by a determination issued on 30 January 2007
        to the Appellant,  Immigration Judge Khawar dismissed his appeal on
        asylum, humanitarian protection and human rights  grounds,  finding
        no article 3 ECHR rights would be breached on return.


        3.        The Appellant applied for an order  for  reconsideration,
        and Senior Immigration Judge King, made an  order  on  27  February
        2007 on the basis that the immigration judge had arguably erred  in
        law as contended for in grounds:


        '          The circumstances of this matter  are  somewhat  unusual
        because the  Respondent  relied  upon  a  Eurodac  computer  search
        carried out in relation to the Appellant's fingerprints such as  to
        find a match in relation to an asylum claimant in Italy.  What  was
        significant about the particular match was  that  the  claimant  in
        Italy bore the same name and date of birth as the Appellant.  This,
        of  course,  was  significant  and  fundamentally  undermined   the
        Appellant's account of his experiences in Eritrea at or around  the
        same time.


        It is contended in ground one of the  grounds  for  reconsideration
        that the evidential basis for such a report in its conclusions  was
        not established to the requirement set out in RP (Proof of forgery)
        [2006] UKAIT 86. Although it is not entirely clear that this is the
        appropriate Tribunal decision to quote it is clear  that  the  more
        serious the nature of the allegation that  has  been  made  by  the
        Respondent, the clearer the evidence in support  thereof  needs  to
        be. The matter merits further reconsideration.


        In addition the immigration  judge  has  failed  to  consider  with
        clarity the risk on return. There were  no  clear  findings  as  to
        whether or not the Appellant is now of the Pentecostal faith and if
        so,  whether  that  will  pose  a  risk  to  him  upon  return.  No
        consideration was given to the issue of being regarded as  a  draft
        evader upon return (query deserter? My emphasis) in accordance with
        country guidance decisions.


        The other matters raised in the  grounds  for  reconsideration  are
        essentially those going to the merits of the decision.'


        4.        Mr T  Hussain  of  Counsel  instructed  by  White  Ryland
        Solicitors appeared for the Appellant  and  Mr  W  Khan  Presenting
        Officer appeared for the Respondent.


        5.        Mr Hussain relied upon the grounds. He submitted that  of
        very real concern in relation to the information from Eurodac,  was
        that no evidence had been lodged to show  what  has  actually  been
        produced to show an allegation of the match of identity. There  was
        simply this print of a composite email, which appeared to  comprise
        at least three documents and was a 'cut and paste' job with nothing
        to show what lay behind it.


        6.        Further, it is the Appellant's position that it  was  not
        open to the Respondent to use the Eurodac system for the purpose of
        seeking to discredit an asylum applicant within appeal proceedings.
        It was an unlawful misuse  of  the  system.  The  Eurodac  275/2000
        regulations have direct in effect in the UK, see article 27.   They
        deal with its purpose and use, pursuant to the  Dublin  Convention,
        are very clear, and they  do  not  permit  the  use  to  which  the
        Respondent has put the information. There is nothing  to  show  any
        consultation with Italy (see article 13(3) and 4(b).  Further,  the
        Appellant had had no opportunity to deal with any  actual  evidence
        in relation to this allegation so that  all  he  could  do  was  to
        refute it in his oral evidence.


        7.        The photograph in  the  email  is  not  from  Eurodac  as
        Eurodac biometrics do not include photographs. It appears to be the
        photograph of the Appellant from his IND registration card.   There
        has been no opportunity to challenge any fingerprint evidence.  The
        Appellant has not seen any such evidence.  The  courts  have  given
        clear guidance on the approach to such  evidence  (see  Mr  Justice
        Collins in R v Robert John Buckley No.9802835/Y2 of 30 April 1999).


        8.        Mr Hussain submitted that at the case  management  review
        hearing he had requested that the immigration judge direct that  at
        least a statement be produced by Andrew Heseltine, who had sent the
        email in question. The Appellant's position is that he has not been
        to Italy. The immigration judge ought not  to  have  admitted  this
        evidence. Or in the alternative, he ought  not  to  have  given  it
        either the determinative or very heavy weight that he  clearly  did
        (see paragraph 23).


        9.        Mr Hussain relied upon  the  grounds  and  the  order  in
        relation to the additional errors of  failure  to  find  facts  and
        failure to assess risk on return in accordance with the law.


        10.      Mr Khan was not able to produce argument  or  evidence  to
        satisfactorily counter that of Mr  Hussain,  in  particular  I  was
        concerned as to the photocopy of the email in terms of its  cogency
        as evidence. It is, I find, an unexplained, compilation document. I
        find that whilst it may be that under the Dublin Convention  and/or
        the related regulations, information from  the  Eurodac  system  is
        properly available in law, to the Respondent, to  use  in  the  way
        that he has done in these proceedings, I am unable to find that  to
        be so on the basis of the unsatisfactory  evidence  that  has  been
        produced, which is in  a  form  that  is  very  difficult  for  the
        Appellant to respond to in a meaningful way. There  is  a  manifest
        lack of  continuity  in  the  evidence  that  is  purported  to  be
        presented in this copy email. Mr Khan agreed that a key  issue  was
        whether the Respondent was entitled to use the information from the
        Eurodac system as he had done.


        11.      Mr Khan further agreed  that  the  immigration  judge  had
        fallen into error of law in relation to the other aspects that  are
        highlighted in the grounds and the order.


        12.      I  concur  with  Mr  Hussain,  for  the  reasons  that  he
        advances, in finding that the immigration judge  erred  in  law  in
        treating the photocopy email and its purported content (apart  from
        the photograph, see 23 (d) as he did, and in giving it  the  heavy,
        if not determinative weight that the clearly did at  paragraph  23,
        in particular, where he states that it appears to  drive  a  'coach
        and horses' through the entirety of the Appellant's account. Whilst
        he may ultimately be right in that, he has erred in law  in  coming
        to the decision that he made on the basis of the nature and quality
        of the evidence that he had before him.


        13.      I am, in addition, satisfied that the   immigration  judge
        has fallen into material error in relation to the remaining matters
        contained in the grounds, in the ways and for the reasons  set  out
        in the grounds, in the order and in  Mr  Hussain's  submissions.  I
        find that the correct way forward is for there to be a further full
        hearing at which all issues will be at large. It is  directed  that
        the matter be transferred to the Manchester Hearing Centre,  to  be
        listed  for  a  further  full  reconsideration  hearing  before  an
        immigration judge panel of  judges  other  than  Immigration  Judge
        Khawar. The parties' time estimate is one day.


        14.      It is directed that the  Respondent  file  and  serve,  no
        later than 21 days before the  date  fixed  for  the  second  stage
        hearing,  a skeleton argument to include legal argument as  to  the
        object and purpose  of  the  Dublin  Convention  and  the  relevant
        regulations, to include EC2725/2000 and EC407/2002; together with a
        statement from Andrew Heseltine to deal with the continuity  issues
        in relation to the email of 3 August 2006, to include detail of its
        sources, including the photograph, and detail as to how  the  email
        was complied. That is to say, he needs to deal with everything that
        is in the main body of the email.


        15.      The Appellant is then  to  file  and  serve  all  evidence
        relied upon together with his skeleton argument, by no later than 7
        days before the date of hearing."


Evidence

9.      At the hearing before us we heard oral evidence from the  appellant,
    Ms E M, a member of the Agape Eritrean Church in  Chorlton,  Manchester
    and Mr J MacCloud,  a  Fingerprint  Consultant  with  Barclay  Security
    Bureau.  The respondent called three witnesses  Ms  K  Giles  a  Senior
    Executive Officer Policy Adviser  within  the  European  Asylum  Policy
    Unit, Mr Andrew Heseltine a Chief Immigration Officer and  Mr  Nicholas
    Jacques a Senior Scientific  Officer  in  the  Immigration  Fingerprint
    Bureau (IFB) at Lunar House in Croydon.  The relevant documents are set
    out in bundles produced by the appellant (A) with tabs A-C, 1-8 and  by
    the respondent (R) with  tabs  1-14.   Both  Mr  Hussain  and  Mr  Hall
    produced helpful and comprehensive skeleton arguments dealing with  the
    issues arising from the use of data from the Eurodac system.

The Evidence of the Appellant

10.    The appellant adopted his two witness statements of 8  December  2006
    (R10, B3) and 13 September 2007 (R8).   He  confirmed  that  he  was  a
    Pentecostal Christian and had attended the  Eritrean  Church  since  30
    July 2006.  Shortly after his arrival  in  this  country  he  had  been
    dispersed to Bury.  He met fellow countrymen there and they took him to
    the church.  He regularly attended  the  Agape  Church  on  Wednesdays,
    Fridays and Sundays.  He had attended meetings at the pastor's home  in
    Openshaw.  He explained that  Friday  was  a  special  worship  evening
    whereas Wednesday was a bible study.  When he was  in  Eritrea  he  had
    been imprisoned during his  military  service.   He  had  not  been  to
    Italy.  The first time his fingerprints had  been  taken  was  in  this
    country. When he left Eritrea he did not have permission to do so.   If
    he had to return he would not be able to stop practising his beliefs.

11.    In cross-examination the appellant confirmed that he had been  caught
    reading the bible in February 2005.   He  had  continued  in  his  unit
    without any further problems until October 2005 when he  was  arrested.
    He confirmed that he had been in Eritrea at all  times  up  until  June
    2006. If there was a match between his fingerprints and those taken  in
    Italy, he had no explanation.  He  was  asked  about  the  evidence  in
    Mr MacCloud's report that there appeared to be damage  to  the  prints
    taken in the United Kingdom: the  appellant  said  that  he  had  never
    interfered with his fingers or damaged them.  He had no explanation  as
    to how this could have happened.  He said that he  had  travelled  from
    Sudan in very harsh  conditions.   If  there  was  any  damage  to  his
    fingers, it would be due to the conditions of travel.  He had  not  had
    any accidents with his hands or other illnesses.  He repeated  that  he
    had never been to Italy.

12.    He said that his pastor,   Mr  M  D,  would  not  be  coming  to  the
    hearing.  The Pentecostal faith was banned in Eritrea.  He would not be
    able to worship or pray with  other  believers  there.   He  said  that
    pastors had been arrested and were still in prison.  He had  been  able
    to escape when the vehicle he was travelling in overturned.  He did not
    know what had happened to the others and could not say who  was  killed
    and who survived.  He had not run away but had walked.  He did not hear
    anyone shout 'stop' and there were no shots.  No one followed him.   He
    had not paid back his uncle the $4,000 and when  asked  how  his  uncle
    obtained this money, he said that it may have  come  from  his  son  in
    America.  He said that he had not left Eritrea legally.

13.    In re-examination he confirmed that members continued  to  arrive  at
    their church from Eritrea and others moved on  when  their  claims  had
    been resolved and they were relocated.  He had not damaged his fingers.
     He was a genuine believer.  He would not be able to worship  publicly
    in Eritrea.

The Evidence of Ms E M

14.    The witness confirmed that she had been  granted  refugee  status  by
    the respondent.  She had not had to appeal.   Her  status  papers  were
    produced in evidence.  She confirmed that she had known  the  appellant
    for over a year and that he had attended the  Agape  Church  where  the
    pastor was M D. She had been asked by the pastor to give  evidence  for
    the appellant and had been given permission to do so.  She attended the
    church four days a week: one day for choir practice, bible  studies  on
    Wednesdays, the prayer programme on Fridays and the main act of worship
    on Sundays.  The weekly bible  study  was  at  the  pastor's  house  in
    Openshaw.  The appellant had consistently attended for the past year.

15.    In cross-examination she confirmed  that  the  weekly  bible  studies
    were at  the  pastor's  house:  they  did  not  go  to  the  church  on
    Wednesdays.  There were different places where study groups  met.   She
    had not been  to  any  other  house  but  once  she  had  been  to  the
    appellant's home when she had been working on an outreach programme  in
    Bury.  On Fridays there was a prayer programme.  She confirmed that she
    had spoken the evening before this hearing to the pastor. He had had to
    attend a pastor's meeting in London.  She had talked  about  this  with
    him on Sunday.  She was asked about the letter written  by  the  pastor
    dated 30 October 2007 which had identified her as the person who  would
    be attending the hearing even though she had not been spoken  to  about
    this until Sunday 4 November.  She confirmed that she had been asked to
    attend on that Sunday and that was the first time she had known of  the
    matter.  She confirmed that the pastor could well have decided to  send
    her but tell her at a date after the  letter  had  been  written.   The
    witness was asked further questions about  the  two  letters  dated  16
    October 2006 and 30 October 2007 written by the  pastor.   She  assumed
    that the letter dated 30 October 2007 had been signed on  the  pastor's
    behalf.  She had been shown this letter.  Her pastor had told her  that
    her name had been put in the letter.  She confirmed that she could read
    a little bit of English.

The evidence of Mr John MacCloud

16.    Mr MacCloud  is  a  fingerprint  consultant  with  Barclays  Security
    Bureau and a registered Forensic Practitioner with the Council for  the
    Registration of Forensic Practitioners, a  Fellow  of  the  Fingerprint
    Society and a member of  the  Forensic  Science  Society.   During  his
    police career he was on the Register of  Fingerprint  Experts  and  has
    been engaged in the identification of persons by means  of  finger  and
    thumb prints for more than 40 years.  He confirmed that  he  has  never
    known impressions from different fingers, thumbs or palms to  agree  in
    the sequence of ridge characteristics.  He has produced a report  dated
    12 October 2007.

17.    He was instructed on behalf  of  the  appellant  to  take  a  set  of
    fingerprints from the appellant in the offices of his solicitors and to
    compare them with sets of fingerprints taken on 8 July 2005  in  Italy
    identified by the reference  IT2AG000EX1  and  another  taken  in  this
    country on 3 August 2006 identified by the reference  UK1IFB06052670J.
    Mr MacCloud compared these prints on 10 October 2007 at the Immigration
    Fingerprint Bureau (IFB) in Lunar House, Croydon.   He  commented  that
    the fingerprints taken in Italy were well taken and not  damaged.   All
    the finger impressions  on  the  form  were  capable  of  being  easily
    identified.  The ridges were clearly defined and  the  patterns  easily
    identified.  The fingerprints taken in this country on  3  August  2006
    were blotchy and very dark in places.  Mr MacCloud commented that  this
    could be caused by too much pressure or the printing machine  having  a
    tendency to print too darkly.  There were areas  of  slight  damage  to
    some areas in each finger impression.  He was not able to  say  whether
    this was as a result of deliberate or accidental action  or  a  medical
    condition.  The areas of slight damage were  confined  to  the  central
    area of the print and he therefore considered that it was unlikely that
    this resulted from a medical condition.  However the finger impressions
    on this form were capable of being clearly identified.   The  undamaged
    areas of the ridges were clearly  defined  and  the  patterns  of  each
    finger impression were capable of being identified.

18.    Mr MacCloud was satisfied that the finger impressions  taken  by  him
    and the impressions taken in Italy and this country had  been  made  by
    the same person.  He found sufficient ridge characteristics  to  be  in
    sequential agreement and had no doubt that they were made by  the  same
    person.  He then made the following general comments:

        "24.    In all the cases involving fingerprint identification  that
        I have been involved in during the past 42 years, there has  always
        been an unbroken chain  of  evidence  of  personal  identification.
         This evidence would start with obtaining any exhibits in the form
        of finger marks relating to a crime  scene  or  finger  impressions
        from a  known  person  or  exhibits  on  which  finger  marks  were
        developed.  This would be documented and the identity of the person
        introducing the exhibits should always  be  known.   That  person's
        evidence will be crucial to the case.  In this case the identity of
        the person taking the fingerprints in Italy is not known.


        25.      Council regulation (EC) No.2725/2000 of 11  December  2000
        concerns the establishment  of  'Eurodac'  for  the  comparison  of
        fingerprints.  Article 5 of the regulation deals with, among  other
        things the recording of data in respect of  applicants  for  asylum
        and clearly states that only the following data shall  be  recorded
        in the central data base:


        (a)      member state of origin, place and date of the  application
        for asylum;
        (b)      fingerprint data;
        (c)      sex;
        (d)      reference number used by the member state of origin;
        (e)      date on which the fingerprints were taken;
        (f)       date on which the data were transferred  to  the  central
        unit;
        (g)      date on  which  the  data  were  entered  on  the  central
        database; and
        (h)      details  in  respect  of  the  recipient(s)  of  the  data
        transmitted and the dates of transmissions.'


        26.      There is  no  provision  in  the  Council  regulation  for
        recording the name of the person taking the fingerprints."


19.    In his oral evidence Mr MacCloud confirmed  his  opinion  that  there
    was a match between the fingerprints he had studied.  It  was  possible
    that the damage to the core of the fingers had been done  deliberately.
    If there was a medical problem he would expect the damage  to  be  more
    widespread.  He had issues about  the  continuity  of  the  fingerprint
    evidence in  the  Eurodac  system.   It  was  important  to  avoid  any
    interference with the evidence before it arrived at  the  hearing.   He
    would expect to see evidence to identify who had taken the fingerprints
    and the details of the circumstances in which  those  prints  had  been
    taken.  There was nothing to indicate who had taken the fingerprints in
    Italy and nothing else to connect the appellant  with  the  fingerprint
    impressions save for the impressions themselves.

20.    In cross-examination he accepted that the prints in  Italy  had  been
    well taken and were not  damaged  whereas  the  prints  taken  in  this
    country in August  2006  did  show  areas  of  damage  on  each  finger
    impression.  Mr MacCloud could not think of any circumstances in  which
    an accident could cause the damage that he had seen.  On the  issue  of
    the continuity of evidence, he confirmed that he had given evidence  in
    many cases.  He accepted from his experience that if the person who had
    taken the fingerprints died before a hearing, that evidence could still
    be adduced if the records could properly be spoken to.

The Evidence called by the Respondent

21.    The evidence of Kerry Giles is set out in her witness statement of  3
    October 2007; of Andrew Heseltine, in the  statement  dated  2  October
    2007; and of Nicholas Jacques, in his statement of 2 October 2007.   Ms
    Giles sets out general information relating to the Eurodac  system  and
    Mr Heseltine gives an overview of the fingerprinting process during the
    screening of asylum seekers and the subsequent checking  of  prints  on
    the Eurodac system.   Mr  Jacques  gives  further  evidence  about  the
    Eurodac system and the comparison of the  data  held  and  the  records
    produced.

22.     In  her  evidence  Ms  Giles  describes  the  system  for   checking
    fingerprints before the  Eurodac  system  came  into  operation.   This
    involved each member state posting  fingerprint  records  for  separate
    checks by one or more member states to establish whether a match  could
    be found.  This was a time consuming "one to one" process with  limited
    coverage across the member states as a result.  The Eurodac system is a
    fully automated system with all fingerprint images  being  transmitted,
    stored and compared electronically.  There is no human intervention  at
    the Eurodac central unit in terms of storing or  checking  the  prints.
    Member states are able to establish quickly whether  an  individual  is
    already known in one or more of the participating states.

23.    In her evidence Ms Giles explained that transmissions to the  Eurodac
    central unit are highly  encoded  and  sent  via  a  secure  line  with
    backbone encryption.  To ensure that the  system  is  not  abused  each
    country has an authority responsible for monitoring on a domestic level
    how the information  is  collected,  stored  and  transmitted.  The  UK
    National  Supervisory  Authority  is  the  Office  of  the  Information
    Commissioner.  There is also a joint supervisory authority  to  oversee
    the system on a pan European level which is undertaken by the  European
    Data  Protection  Supervisor.   When  fingerprints   are   taken   each
    individual set is issued with a unique reference number.  She confirmed
    that the only data recorded in the Eurodac central unit  in  Luxembourg
    is the data specified in article 5  of  2000/2725/EC  (as  set  out  in
    paragraph 25 of Mr MacCloud's report referred to  in  paragraph  18  of
    this determination).

24.     Fingerprints  are  taken  in  three  different   circumstances   for
    transmission to Eurodac under 2000/2725/ EC. These  are  identified  by
    number:

         1 refers to data relating to asylum seekers, (article 4)
         2 refers to persons  within  article  8  (unlawful  crossing  of  a
             frontier); and
         3 refers to persons referred to in article 11 (people unlawfully in
         a particular country).


         The regulations provide that each member state shall promptly take
    the fingerprints of all those falling within  these  categories.   They
    are to be stored for a maximum of ten years and are then erased.   They
    are erased sooner if the individual is issued with a resident's  permit
    in the member state, has acquired citizenship or is known to have  left
    the EU.


25.    The process in this country is set out in the evidence of  Mr  Andrew
    Heseltine.  Prospective claimants  attend  the  Asylum  Screening  Unit
    (ASU) where details  are  taken  during  a  screening  interview.   The
    claimant is notified that his fingerprints will be taken  and  this  is
    done by a live scan machine which captures and encodes the fingerprints
    so that they can be automatically compared to other fingerprints on the
    Eurodac database.  A bar code quoting  a  unique  reference  number  is
    attached to the ASU core note.  The screen is opened to that unique bar
    code by passing an electric wand over the code.  The claimant's name is
    confirmed and checked.  The machine is also able to take  a  photograph
    of the claimant after the identity details have been confirmed and  the
    fingerprints are scanned.  The  photograph  is  taken  by  an  integral
    digital camera within the live  scan  machine.   The  fingerprints  are
    taken by an electric scan of all the fingers on the right hand followed
    by all the fingers on the left hand then the right thumb then the  left
    thumb.  Each finger  is  rolled  and  scanned.   When  taken  they  are
    automatically checked by the live scan machine to confirm they  are  of
    acceptable quality.   If  they  are  not  acceptable,  the  prints  are
    retaken.

26.    Fingerprints collected by ASU are automatically  sent  electronically
    to the Eurodac database where they are electronically compared with all
    other fingerprints on the database.  This takes  about  twenty  minutes
    and then a report of the findings identified as IFB2 and a confirmatory
    e-mail are returned and attached  to  the  application  file.   If  the
    results show an automatic match with prints already  on  the  database,
    the print matches are then visually examined by a fingerprint expert at
    IFB to confirm the match before ASU is notified of the match result.

27.    The appellant's fingerprints were taken on 20 July 2006 but they  did
    not meet the quality threshold required for comparison by  Eurodac  and
    the appellant was  asked  to  return  on  3  August  2006  for  further
    fingerprints to be taken.   He  was  re-fingerprinted  in  the  ASU  at
    Liverpool under the reference  IFB06/05267OJ.   His  fingerprints  were
    then automatically  compared  with  the  fingerprints  on  the  Eurodac
    database and an e-mail was received  showing  the  Eurodac  search  hit
    under case ID IT2AG000EXI   showing that the  appellant's  fingerprints
    were taken under this code on 8 July 2005  in  Lampedusa  e  Linosa  in
    Italy.  Italy is indicated by the letters IT and  the  fact  that  they
    were taken following the unlawful crossing of a frontier into Italy  by
    the numeral 2.

28.    In his  evidence  Mr  Jacques  dealt  with  fingerprint  evidence  in
    general.  There was no dispute between him  and  Mr  MacCloud  on  this
    issue.  Both confirmed that they have never known  the  friction  ridge
    detail of different persons to be the same.  In the United Kingdom  the
    fingerprint system operated by the IFB  is  technically  configured  so
    that those fingerprints identified as falling into the  categories  for
    transmission to the Eurodac central unit are automatically  transmitted
    in accordance with the regulations.  If a hit is identified  the  match
    is validated  by  a  fingerprint  expert.   In  the  present  case  the
    fingerprints taken in the UK from  the  appellant  and  transmitted  to
    Eurodac matched the fingerprint record that Eurodac showed as taken  in
    Italy and transmitted to Eurodac on 8 July 2005.

29.    In his oral evidence Mr Jacques commented  on  the  evidence  in  his
    witness statement there had been no evidence of false  hits  since  the
    Eurodac had been set up.  There had  now  been  one  such  false  match
    identified in this country where the visual inspection  disagreed  with
    the computer assessment.  He explained that the computer  compared  the
    prints by an algorithm programme.  If a hit was detected  it  was  then
    verified by a technician in the IFB and then looked at by a more senior
    officer.  Images on the computer screen could be enlarged or reduced to
    help with the examination.

Submissions

30.    Mr Hall submitted  firstly  that  the  evidence  obtained  under  the
    Eurodac system showing that the  appellant  had  had  his  fingerprints
    taken in Italy in July 2005 was  admissible  under  the  provisions  of
    article 21 of the Eurodac Regulations (2003/343/ EC). This provided for
    the exchange of personal data between member states for determining the
    state responsible for examining the application for  asylum,  examining
    the application for asylum  and  implementing  any  obligation  arising
    under this regulation.  Article 21(7)  provided  that  the  information
    could only be used for the purposes set out  in  article  21(1).   When
    used for such a purpose, the evidence was admissible and relevant.   It
    would then be a question of the weight to be placed on the  fingerprint
    match.  He submitted that the evidence showed that the  Eurodac  system
    was secure and operated to exacting standards.  This was  confirmed  in
    the present case by the appellant's own expert accepting that there was
    a fingerprint match.

31.    Dealing with the merits of the appeal, Mr  Hall  submitted  that  the
    appellant's credibility was seriously undermined by the  fact  that  he
    continued to deny that he had  previously  left  Eritrea  or  had  been
    fingerprinted before he arrived in this country.  There was no possible
    alternative explanation for how his fingerprints had been taken and put
    into the Eurodac database other than that his fingerprints were  indeed
    taken in Italy on 8 July  2005.   He  submitted  that  the  appellant's
    account was not credible.  The likelihood was that  the  appellant  had
    deliberately damaged his own fingerprints in an attempt to disguise the
    fact that he had been fingerprinted in Italy.  The appellant's  account
    of events in Eritrea and in particular his detention and escape was not
    credible.  He had been unable to explain how  his  uncle  had  obtained
    $4,000 to pay the agent.  There was no  adequate  basis  on  which  the
    Tribunal could find that the appellant had made an  illegal  exit  from
    Eritrea.

32.    Mr Hussain submitted that the evidence of the fingerprint match  from
    Eurodac was not admissible.   He  submitted  that  it  was  clear  from
    regulation 2000/2725/ EC that the purpose of the system was  to  assist
    in determining which member state was to be responsible pursuant to the
    Dublin Convention for examining an application for asylum lodged  in  a
    member state.  Unless there was an issue regarding the identity  of  an
    appellant or as to which member state would discharge the obligation of
    assessing the claim, Eurodac data was not admissible and could  not  be
    used simply as a piece of evidence seeking to undermine the appellant's
    credibility.

33.    He submitted that if the data  was  admissible,  it  was  clear  from
    article 5 of 2000/ 2725/EC that there were limits on the types of  data
    which could be stored and that confusion had arisen in the present case
    because the impression had been given that the data kept in  Italy  and
    transmitted through Eurodac had included the appellant's name and  date
    of birth.  The simple printout provided through the Eurodac system  was
    not sufficient to discharge the burden placed upon  the  respondent  to
    establish deception or fraud to the required standard.  He referred  us
    to the Tribunal determination in YI to support his contention that  the
    burden of proof rested on the respondent to support  an  allegation  of
    deception and as this was a serious allegation the standard would be to
    a high degree  of  probability.   The  evidence  in  the  Eurodac  data
    amounted to little more than  a  bare  assertion.   He  submitted  that
    fingerprint evidence was opinion evidence which was capable of rebuttal
    and was not conclusive.  In every case  the  quality  of  the  evidence
    would need to be assessed and the appropriate weight given to  it.   He
    submitted that as each member state was responsible for the  method  it
    employed in the taking of fingerprints, the respondent  was  unable  to
    show an unbroken line of continuity to establish that the prints  taken
    in Italy  or  any  other  member  state  would  be  from  a  particular
    appellant.

34.    He argued that if the evidence  was  admissible  the  respondent  had
    failed to discharge the onus placed upon him to show the appellant  had
    in fact had his fingerprints taken in Italy and in consequence was  not
    telling the truth about the facts in  support  of  his  present  claim.
    Even if the appellant's evidence was rejected about events in  Eritrea,
    the fact remained that it was unlikely that he would have been given an
    exit visa.  He referred to the country  guidance  determination  in  MA
    (draft evaders-illegal departures-risk) Eritrea CG [2007]  UKAIT  00059
    and in particular to paragraphs 340 and 357.  Even if  that  aspect  of
    the claim was rejected, the appellant's evidence was that he was now  a
    practising Pentecostal Christian.  He had converted to this faith  when
    in Eritrea and had continued to practise his faith  and  attend  church
    since arriving in this country.  This evidence was confirmed by letters
    from the pastor and from the oral evidence of Ms M.  On return he would
    be unable to practise his faith  and  would  not  be  able  to  worship
    freely.

The legal framework

35.    We remind ourselves that the appellant would be  entitled  to  asylum
    if owing to a well-founded fear of persecution for a Convention  reason
    he is outside his country of nationality and is  unable  or,  owing  to
    such fear, is unwilling to avail himself  of  the  protection  of  that
    country.  The burden is on him to  show  that  there  is  a  reasonable
    degree of likelihood of persecution for a convention reason if returned
    to Eritrea.  This standard can also be expressed as whether there is  a
    real risk of persecution.  The provisions of the Refugee or  Person  in
    Need of International Protection (Qualification) Regulations 2006  have
    brought into  effect  in  domestic  law  the  provisions  of  Directive
    2004/83/EC (the Qualification Directive). An issue has been  raised  in
    submissions on  the  burden  and  standard  of  proof  in  relation  to
    fingerprint evidence, if admissible, from the Eurodac system.  We  will
    return to this issue later in our determination.

Summary of Our Findings on Credibility

36.    Before we set out our findings and conclusions in detail, it  may  be
    helpful to summarise our findings on the  evidence  of  the  witnesses.
    There was no substantial challenge in cross examination to the evidence
    of  the  respondent's  witnesses   although   Mr   Hussain   did   seek
    clarification of a number of  aspects  of  their  evidence  and  raised
    issues as to the continuity of the evidence from  the  Eurodac  system.
    As we will make clear below, we accept the evidence  of  Ms  Giles,  Mr
    Heseltine and Mr Jacques about how the Eurodac system operates and  how
    fingerprints are taken and checked in this country.  We also accept the
    evidence of Mr MacLeod who clearly has considerable  expertise  in  the
    assessment and analysis of fingerprint evidence  but  for  the  reasons
    which we will set out, we do not share his  concerns  about  continuity
    issues or the evidential value of fingerprints taken  as  part  of  the
    Eurodac process.  We have not found the appellant to be a  credible  or
    reliable witness about events in Eritrea, his reasons  for  leaving  or
    his fears on return.  We accept that the evidence of Ms M was  honestly
    given to the extent that it confirms that the  appellant  has  attended
    the Agape Church in this country but it does not satisfy  us  that  the
    appellant is or has become a Pentecostal Christian.

Eurodac: the General Background

37.    We will deal firstly with the Eurodac system. This needs  to  be  set
    in the context of the movement towards a common  asylum  policy  within
    the EU.  An example of this policy in action has been the adoption into
    domestic law of the Qualification Directive referred to in paragraph 35
    above.  A more recent example  is  the  Procedures  Directive  (Council
    Directive 2005/85/EC) requiring that its provisions shall be transposed
    into national law by 1 December 2007.

38.    One of the priorities in seeking to have a common asylum  policy  has
    been to prevent multiple  or  successive  claims  in  different  member
    states and to  avoid  applications  being  transferred  between  member
    states without any single state taking responsibility for determining a
    particular claim.  To achieve these aims the  Dublin  Convention  which
    was agreed on 15 June 1990 and came into force on 1 September 1997 laid
    down a set of criteria for determining how member states would consider
    asylum applications.  A hierarchal approach was created  based  on  the
    principle that the member state most  responsible  for  an  applicant's
    presence in the territory of the EU should be responsible  for  dealing
    with that claim.  An important part of the Dublin  Convention  was  the
    exchange of specified personal information between member states as may
    be necessary for determining  which  member  state  would  examine  the
    application for asylum, for examining the application  for  asylum  and
    implementing any obligation under the  Convention.   This  exchange  of
    information was subject to provisions that it could only  be  used  for
    identified  purposes.   Similar  provisions  appear  in   the   current
    Regulation 2003/343/EC at article 21.  We will set those  out  in  full
    later.

39.    The Eurodac Regulation 2000/2725/EC was made under the provisions  of
    article 63(1a) of the treaty establishing  the  European  Union.   This
    regulation provides for the establishment of a Central Unit and for the
    collection, transmission  and  comparison  of  fingerprints  of  asylum
    applicants,  aliens  apprehended  in  connection  with  the   irregular
    crossing of an external border and aliens found illegally present in  a
    member state.

40.    Following the Treaty of Amsterdam, which  called  for  a  replacement
    mechanism for determining responsibility for the assessment  of  asylum
    claims within the  EU,  the  Dublin  Convention  was  replaced  by  the
    Regulation 2003/343/EC known colloquially as Dublin  2.   This  amended
    the  criteria  and  mechanisms  for  determining   the   member   state
    responsible for examining an asylum application lodged in  one  of  the
    member states by a third country national.  It came  into  force  on  1
    September 2003 for all European Union member states except Denmark.

41.    Paragraph 1 of Article 21 in Chapter  VI  of  2003/343/EC  under  the
    heading "Administrative Co-operation" reads as follows:

        "1.      Each member state shall communicate to  any  member  state
        that so requests such personal data concerning the asylum seeker as
        is appropriate, relevant or non excessive for:


        (a)      the determination of  the  Member  State  responsible  for
        examining the application for asylum;
        (b)      examining the application for asylum;
        (c)        implementing   any   obligation   arising   under   this
        Regulation."


        The information which may be  communicated  under  paragraph  1  is
        identified in paragraph 2 and includes


        (c)      other information necessary for establishing the  identity
        of the applicant, including fingerprints  processed  in  accordance
        with regulation EC No.2725/2000.


    It is provided by paragraph 7 that:


        7.        The information  exchanged  may  only  be  used  for  the
        purposes set out  in  paragraph  1.   In  each  member  state  such
        information may, depending on  its  type  and  the  powers  of  the
        recipient authority, only be communicated to  the  authorities  and
        courts and tribunals entrusted with:


        (a)      the determination of  the  member  state  responsible  for
        examining the application for asylum;
        (b)      examining the application for asylum;
        (c)        implementing   any   obligation   arising   under   this
        regulation."

The Admissibility of Eurodac Evidence

 42.   We are satisfied that fingerprint evidence from the  Eurodac  system
    is admissible in evidence not only when considering which member  state
    is responsible for  examining  the  application  for  asylum  but  also
    generally as part of the examination of the claim.   This  must  follow
    from the clear wording of article 21(1) of  2003/343/EC.   There  is  a
    safeguard built into article 21(1) that communication of data  must  be
    appropriate, relevant and non-excessive for these purposes but  it  has
    not been argued that fingerprint evidence either generally  or  in  the
    particular circumstances of this  case  contravenes  these  safeguards.
    The article also provides that the information held on the  system  may
    only be used for the purposes specified and can only be communicated to
    the authorities, courts and tribunals entrusted with the functions  set
    out in paragraph 7

43.    We accept Mr Hall's submission that article  21  does  not  draw  any
    distinction between the three purposes for which the information may be
    used.  Lawful use of the Eurodac data does not come to an end with  the
    identification of the  member  state  responsible  for  processing  the
    asylum claim.  In the present case because of the lapse  of  time,  the
    United Kingdom accepted responsibility for processing the claim.  There
    is no proper legal basis for holding  that  fingerprint  evidence  from
    Eurodac should  not  to  be  taken  into  account  when  examining  the
    application itself.  It is being used for a proper  purpose  identified
    in article 21(1). There is no other proper  basis  for  excluding  this
    evidence. No case can be  made  under  the  Data  Protecting  Act  1998
    referred to briefly in submissions as it is provided by  section  35(2)
    that personal data be exempt from the non-disclosure  provisions  where
    it is necessary for the purpose of or  in  connection  with  any  legal
    proceedings.

The reliability of Eurodac evidence and the system in practice

44.    As we  have  already  indicated  we  accept  the  evidence  from  the
    respondent's  witnesses  about  the  system   in   practice   and   how
    fingerprints are taken.  They are taken by an electronic  scan  of  the
    fingers recorded and sent electronically to the Eurodac database.  They
    are then compared electronically  and  automatically  against  all  the
    other fingerprints on the database.  If fingerprints are  submitted  by
    the  United  Kingdom  authorities  and  a  match  is  identified,   the
    fingerprints  are  then  visually  examined  at  IFB  initially  by   a
    technician and then by a more senior officer.  We  are  satisfied  that
    there  are  sufficient  safeguards  to  identify  when  and   why   the
    fingerprints have been taken and to ensure that the  data  recorded  in
    and retrieved from Eurodac is only used for the purposes set out in the
    regulations. We accept that each country has an  authority  responsible
    for monitoring how the information is collected, stored and transmitted
    and there is also a joint supervisory authority to oversee  the  system
    on  a  pan-European  level.   These  are  further  safeguards  of   the
    reliability of the system.  In the present case both Mr MacCloud and Mr
    Jacques  agree  that  the  evidence   of   matching   fingerprints   is
    compelling.  Both confirm that they have never known a case of matching
    prints not coming from the same individual.  In this appeal the experts
    are agreed that there is a true match between the fingerprints taken in
    this country and in Italy.

45.    If there is a dispute as to a match, that must be a question of  fact
    to be determined on  the  available  evidence.   We  do  not  have  any
    concerns about the continuity of evidence or the  need  to  record  who
    took the fingerprints within a  member  state.  The  factual  issue  is
    whether there is a match between sets of  fingerprints,  the  important
    and relevant data being when,  where  and  in  what  circumstances  the
    fingerprints were taken.  The identity of the person taking the  prints
    has no material bearing on those issues.  There  is  no  break  in  the
    continuity of evidence from the fingerprints being taken  and  recorded
    automatically on the Eurodac  system  and  any  subsequent  fingerprint
    check which would make this evidence unreliable.  In the light  of  the
    evidence we have heard about the Eurodac system  and  its  accompanying
    safeguards, in our judgment evidence of a match  produced  through  the
    Eurodac system and confirmed by IFB should be regarded as determinative
    of that issue in the absence of cogent evidence to the contrary.

Burden/Standard of Proof when assessing Eurodac Evidence

46.    Mr Hussain in his submissions raised a number of  issues  more  fully
    set out in his skeleton argument  about  the  principles  which  should
    govern the assessment of fingerprint evidence if admissible.  He argued
    that where fingerprint evidence was used by the respondent to challenge
    the truth of the account given by the appellant, this was equivalent to
    an assertion that the asylum claim was fraudulent and for this reason a
    high standard of proof was required.  He  supported  this  argument  by
    referring to YI and in particular to paragraph  12  were  the  tribunal
    said:

        "... Eurodac data is produced by the respondent in  cases  such  as
        this essentially to assert deception/fraud by  an  appellant.   The
        burden of proof rests with the person making the assertion and  the
        standard  of  proof  where  fraud  is  asserted   and   where   the
        consequences for the appellant are correspondingly serious  is  the
        higher standard of "proof to a high degree of probability".

47.    Mr Hussain seeks to  support  this  submission  by  referring  to  RP
    (Proof of Forgery) [2006] UKIAT 86 and to the guidance  given  in  that
    case that an allegation of forgery needs to be established  to  a  high
    degree of proof by the person  making  the  allegation.   The  Tribunal
    emphasised that the burden of proof lay on the  party  making  such  an
    allegation and that a bare assertion of forgery could not stand  as  if
    it were evidence.

48.    This submission needs to be set  in  context.   When  the  respondent
    seeks to rely on fingerprint  evidence  in  an  asylum  appeal,  he  is
    seeking to prove a number of facts: that fingerprints taken in a member
    state at a  specific  place,  date  and  time  are  a  match  with  the
    fingerprints of an  appellant  taken  in  the  course  of  his  current
    application.  These are issues of fact for the respondent to prove on a
    balance of probabilities.  In order to  do  this  the  respondent  will
    normally need to adduce evidence  to  establish  that  the  appellant's
    fingerprints were taken in the United Kingdom and submitted to Eurodac,
    that Eurodac responded with details relating to  matching  fingerprints
    and that the match has been visually confirmed  by  an  expert  at  the
    IFB.  Evidence of the visual comparison is important in view of article
    4(6) of 2000/2725/EC, which provides that "[f]inal identification shall
    be made by the Member  State  of  origin",  i.e.  by  the  state  which
    submitted the applicant's  details  and  received  the  result  of  the
    comparison.  The assertion that a particular appellant  has  previously
    given fingerprints in a member state is not in itself an allegation  of
    forgery or fraud bringing into play the higher civil standard of  proof
    identified in RP.  It is an allegation that there is  a  match  between
    fingerprints held in the Eurodac system.  If the match  is  proved  the
    respondent may well seek to argue that the appellant has not  told  the
    truth about material parts of his asylum claim and that his evidence is
    unreliable in whole or in part.  It will be for the Tribunal to  decide
    in the light of the evidence as a whole what  inferences  of  fact  can
    properly be drawn from any proved fingerprint match.

49.    In summary, the burden  of  proving  a  fingerprint  match  from  the
    Eurodac system lies on the respondent and the standard of proof is  the
    balance of probabilities.  In his  submissions  Mr  Hussain  relied  on
    paragraph 12 of YI to support  his  argument  that  a  higher  standard
    applies.  We agree that if fraud is being asserted by  the  respondent,
    it must be proved to a high degree of probability.   However,  in  most
    cases evidence of a fingerprint match will be adduced by the respondent
    to challenge or rebut evidence being put forward by  the  appellant  in
    support of his claim.  Whether it does so in any particular  case  will
    depend on the inferences to be drawn  from  the  evidence  as  a  whole
    including the appellant's explanation for any  such  match.   The  fact
    that the respondent seeks to rely  on  fingerprint  evidence  does  not
    without more amount to an assertion of fraud  or  deception  which  the
    respondent must then prove to a high standard. The  burden  remains  on
    the appellant to establish to the lower standard that he is entitled to
    asylum.

50.    Mr Hussain submitted that fingerprint evidence is not conclusive  and
    is capable of rebuttal.  We have no difficulties with that  submission:
    we accept as a matter of fairness and natural justice that an appellant
    should have the opportunity of obtaining and calling his  own  evidence
    to rebut evidence relied on by the respondent, as in this appeal  where
    the fingerprint evidence was made available to the appellant's  expert,
    who has confirmed that there is a match.  We  are  not  satisfied  that
    there is any requirement for corroboration in  respect  of  fingerprint
    evidence as Mr Hussain has sought to argue.  The judge was mistaken  to
    make the point that the evidence that there was a match  was  confirmed
    by the fact that the appellant's  name  and  date  of  birth  had  been
    recorded.  This information is not stored on the  Eurodac  system.   We
    accept Mr Hussain's general submission that any evidence in  an  asylum
    appeal including fingerprint evidence must be considered  with  anxious
    scrutiny but that must be within the context of the  general  rules  of
    evidence and procedure applicable to asylum appeals.

Background Evidence relating to Eritrea

51.    We have been provided with extensive background  evidence  about  the
    current position in Eritrea.  We also  have  the  most  recent  country
    information report.   The  situation  in  Eritrea  and  the  risks  for
    Pentecostal Christians, draft evaders, deserters  and  those  who  have
    made an illegal exit have been considered at  length  in  a  number  of
    country guidance determinations and we adopt and follow  that  guidance
    and in particular YT (minority  church  members  at  risk)  Eritrea  CG
    [2004] UKIAT 00218, KA  (draft  related  at  risk  categories  updated)
    Eritrea CG [ 2005] UK AIT 00165 and MA.

Assessment of the Appellant's Evidence

52.    We have not  found  the  appellant  to  be  a  credible  or  reliable
    witness.  We do not believe his evidence about events in  Eritrea,  his
    reasons for leaving or his fears on return.  The appellant's  claim  is
    based on his assertion that he was arrested on 10 October 2005 and kept
    in detention until 4 June 2006.  He denies  having  ever  left  Eritrea
    before then.  However, fingerprint evidence places him in  Italy  on  8
    July 2005.  In the face of the fingerprint evidence the  appellant  has
    maintained his claim that he did not leave Eritrea before June 2006 and
    has never  had  his  fingerprints  taken  before  he  arrived  in  this
    country.  We do not believe these assertions. There is  no  explanation
    for the confirmed fingerprint match.

53.    The appellant's evidence relating to his detention  is  not  credible
    when the evidence is looked at as a whole.   He  asserts  that  he  was
    regularly beaten but did not receive any injuries.  We do  not  believe
    his account of his escape from detention.   He  described  being  in  a
    lorry which overturned.  There were twelve  other  prisoners  and  five
    guards.  He was able to walk  away  from  the  accident.   On  his  own
    account he has no idea what  happened  to  the  other  passengers.   He
    described walking away but he did not see the guards and did  not  hear
    anyone shouting and no shots were fired.

54.    When assessing whether he is a Pentecostal Christian,  we  take  into
    account the knowledge he showed at interview and the fact that  he  has
    attended church services in this country.  However, the evidence of  Ms
    M only provided confirmation of his attendance and did not help us  any
    further in  our  assessment  of  the  genuineness  of  the  appellant's
    assertion of his faith.  We did not  hear  evidence  from  the  pastor.
    There was no satisfactory evidence for his failure to attend and  speak
    to the letters which have been written by him or  on  his  behalf.   We
    take into account the fact that the appellant did describe himself as a
    Pentecostal Christian on arrival but in the light of the  general  view
    we take as to his credibility, we are not satisfied  that  there  is  a
    reasonable degree of likelihood that his membership  of  a  Pentecostal
    church is anything other than a membership of convenience to support  a
    claim for asylum.  If he returns to Eritrea, we are not satisfied  that
    he would continue to practise this faith in a way which would bring him
    to the attention of the authorities and we are certainly not  satisfied
    that there would be any inhibition on the way  he  could  practise  his
    faith such as to amount to persecution.

55.    We have considered whether we can infer from the  evidence  that  the
    appellant made an  illegal  exit  from  Eritrea.   The  appellant  left
    Eritrea sometime before July 2005 and he was in Italy on 8  July  2005.
    We take into account the country guidance in MA  that  many  people  do
    leave Eritrea illegally but we also take into account  the  appellant's
    own evidence about the circumstances in which he  left  Eritrea  saying
    that his uncle had $4,000 available to pay the agent but he has no idea
    where that money came from.  We are unable to draw  an  inference  from
    the evidence before us that the appellant made  an  illegal  exit  from
    Eritrea.  He fails to satisfy us to the lower standard of proof that he
    would be at risk of persecution or serious harm on return.

Decision

56.    The original Tribunal made a material error of law.  We substitute  a
    decision dismissing the appeal on asylum, humanitarian  protection  and
    human rights grounds.





Signed:
       Date: 4 January 2008


Senior Immigration Judge Latter
