
ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at: Field House
Date of Hearing: 20 November 2008

                                   Before:


    Miss E Arfon-Jones DL, Deputy President of the Asylum and Immigration
                                  Tribunal


                                   Between

                                     FS
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the Appellant:           Ms N Brissett, Counsel, instructed by Aden
& Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:          Ms F Saunders, Home Office Presenting
Officer

Immigration Judges have a duty to consider all the evidence before them
when reaching a decision in an even handed and impartial manner.  In
assessing the evidence before them they must attach such weight as they
consider appropriate to that evidence.  It may on occasions be appropriate
to reject the conclusions reached by an expert.  What is crucial is that a
reasoned explanation is given for so doing.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, born on 12 December 1975, is a citizen of Somalia.   She
    appealed against the respondent's decision of 30 May 2008 which refused
    her application for leave to remain in  the  United  Kingdom  and  gave
    directions for her removal from the United  Kingdom.   The  appellant's
    claim for asylum was refused and furthermore  the  respondent  did  not
    consider that the appellant qualified for humanitarian protection.  The
    respondent further concluded that her removal from the  United  Kingdom
    would not breach her Article 8 rights under the European Convention  on
    Human Rights (ECHR) and also addressed the issues under paragraph  395C
    of the Immigration Rules.

 2. The appeal was heard by Immigration Judge Gerrey on 27 August 2008.  He
    allowed the appeal on both asylum grounds and on human  rights  grounds
    (Article 3).  In light of that decision, the appellant was not eligible
    for a grant of humanitarian protection.

 3. The respondent applied for reconsideration of the decision  and  in  an
    order dated 24 September 2008 Senior Immigration Judge Chalkley ordered
    reconsideration.

 4. Thus the matter came before me on 20 November  2008  when  Ms  Brissett
    represented the appellant and Ms Saunders the respondent.

 5. The appellant claimed  to  have  left  Somalia  on  12  December  2007,
    travelling to Kenya by lorry where she claims to  have  arrived  on  15
    December 2007.  She departed by air from Kenya arriving in  the  United
    Kingdom on 2 January 2008.  She claimed asylum on 3 January 2008.

 6. The appellant claims to have been born in Afgoye, and to be a member of
    the Ashraf clan, Hassan sub-clan, and Ashraf Sarmaan sub-sub-clan.  Her
    claim is that her family suffered after the outbreak of  civil  war  in
    1991 particularly at the hands of the Hawiye  majority  clan,  claiming
    that her parents and brother  were  killed  by  the  militia.   It  was
    following the death of her mother in 2007  that  she  and  her  husband
    escaped to Kenya, fearing for their lives.

 7. The essence of the appeal is that  the  respondent,  having  found  the
    appellant's claim to be  rehearsed  and  fabricated  on  the  basis  of
    linguistic analysis, rejected the appellant's claim to be  at  risk  of
    persecution if returned now to Somalia.  The substance of her claim was
    not addressed in detail nor was any background evidence  considered  as
    two expert reports were relied upon by the respondent in dismissing her
    claim to be from Afgoye and a member of the Ashraf clan.

 8. Before the Immigration Judge were two expert reports.   The  first  was
    prepared by Sprakab, a privately owned company located in Sweden  which
    conducts linguistic analyses.  They prepared a report which cast  doubt
    on the appellant's claim to originate from Afgoye.

 9. Acknowledging that the appellant displayed a familiarity with the  city
    of Afgoye the report nevertheless opined that "... her knowledge sounds
    rehearsed ...".  There was a later  reference  in  the  report  to  the
    appellant's evidence as "... could  be  rehearsed  ...".   Examples  of
    pronunciation of words and phrases as  well  as  sentence  construction
    were provided which Sprakab claimed disclosed a  linguistic  background
    with northern Somalia rather than the Afgoye area  as  claimed  by  the
    appellant.



10. Although the appellant enumerated several key buildings in  Afgoye  and
    identified the clans located in Afgoye, the report noted that she could
    not specify geographical locations.  The appellant  claimed  to  suffer
    from a headache which she  claimed  explained  her  failure  to  recall
    anything further during the interview.

11. Sprakab's final conclusion was that the appellant spoke  a  variety  of
    Somali "with certainty in: northern Somalia"  despite  her  familiarity
    with the Afgoye.

12. The conversation between Sprakab and  the  appellant  lasted  about  35
    minutes and was conducted over the  telephone.   The  appellant  claims
    that the conversation was interrupted by background noise and that  she
    had difficulty in understanding the interviewer who did not speak  with
    a southern dialect of Somali.

13. The second expert report was one prepared by Mr Haroon Abdi, a National
    Registered Public Service Interpreter in Somali and  also  a  qualified
    examiner of  the  Institute  of  Linguistic  Examiners.   He  had  been
    instructed by the appellant's solicitors to undertake an assessment  of
    the appellant with a view  to  giving  a  professional  opinion  as  to
    whether or not she spoke Somali in  the  Af-Reer  Hamar  dialect.   The
    assessment took place in a conference room at  the  solicitor's  office
    and the venue was described as "... sufficiently comfortable, quiet and
    spacious ...".  Following a  relaxed  and  informal  conversation,  the
    questions covering relevant topics for about an hour, Mr Abdi  set  out
    his conclusion at paragraph 13 of the  report  thus:   "...  it  is  my
    opinion that she is not a natural Af-Reer Hamar speaking Somali".

14. Mr Abdi's conclusion was based on  the  fluency  and  consistency  with
    which  the  appellant  engaged  in  conversation.   Albeit  she   could
    pronounce some "key words at times with some degree of fluency  in  Af-
    Reer Hamar in her intonation", Mr Abdi  nevertheless  formed  the  view
    that her sentences did not flow naturally in Af-Reer  Hamar.   Many  of
    the sentences and pronunciation of words did not  resemble  the  Somali
    "commonly" spoken by Reer Hamar speaking people from  southern  central
    Somalia where Afgoye is located.

15. Mr Abdi did not "instantly associate" the appellant's accent and speech
    as emanating from someone of  the  Af-Reer  Hamar  speaking  clan.   He
    stated "She did at times manage to rather surprisingly  pronounce  some
    words in the way they are expected to sound in Af-Reer Hamar  ..."  and
    he gave specific examples.  He considered that the  appellant's  Somali
    was interspersed with northern  intonation  and  concluded  "...  I  am
    therefore of the view that it is not likely that she emanates from  the
    Afgoye region which she claims."  The variations in her accent and  the
    phonetics  of  the  spoken  sentences  and  words  cast  doubt  on  the
    appellant's claim in his view.

16. The Immigration Judge engaged with the comments in both expert  reports
    and made clear findings of credibility with regard to  the  appellant's
    evidence and that of her witness, Deqo Ahmed Sharif.

17. At paragraph 7 of his determination the  Immigration  Judge  identified
    the  essential  issue  of  the  appeal  namely  the  appellant's   clan
    membership  and  area  of  origin.   The  respondent  had   found   the
    appellant's claim to be rehearsed and fabricated on the  basis  of  the
    linguistic analysis and had not gone on to consider  the  substance  of
    her claim and had not considered in any way the background evidence.

18. At paragraph 19 of his determination the Immigration Judge  noted  that
    the appellant's evidence was consistent with  the  background  evidence
    finding, "... events described by the Appellant to be totally plausible
    and credible ...".  The Immigration Judge addressed the comment  as  to
    the appellant's evidence sounding rehearsed  in  paragraph  20  of  his
    determination.  He noted that no credentials had  been  given  for  the
    expert's assessment of the appellant's demeanour  and  the  Immigration
    Judge  concluded  that  his  own  assessment  as  to  the   appellant's
    credibility was also to be put into the  analysis  of  the  appellant's
    claim.

19. "The author of the Respondent's analysis says  in  two  places  in  the
    analysis report that the Appellant "speaks a  variety  of  Somali  with
    certainty found in  northern  Somalia"".   The  Immigration  Judge,  in
    quoting that conclusion at paragraph 21 of this determination  went  on
    to note that the expert had not stated that that particular variety  of
    Somali was not found anywhere else in Somalia nor did he  suggest  that
    there was no one in southern Somalia  who  would  speak  that  variety,
    bearing in mind what he believed to  be  a  valid  point  made  by  the
    appellant in paragraph 6 of her witness statement namely that there had
    been a mass movement of internally  displaced  persons  within  Somalia
    since the outbreak of civil war in 1991.  He  further  noted  that  the
    author of that analysis did not appear to indicate anywhere  that  some
    at least of the appellant's spoken Somali  was  of  the  southern  Reer
    Hamar dialect.  In the light of what the Immigration Judge found to  be
    serious omissions from the respondent's analysis, he went on  to  state
    "I do not find it to be an impressive piece of evidence".

20. At paragraph 22 of the determination the Immigration Judge engaged with
    the expert report  prepared  pursuant  to  instructions  given  by  the
    appellant's solicitors.  He noted that the interview had lasted for  55
    minutes.  He also noted that nowhere in that report was there a comment
    about the appellant's knowledge relating to the city of Afgoye.

21. At paragraph 23 of the determination the Immigration Judge referred  to
    paragraph  14  of  Mr  Abdi's  report  in  which  he  stated  that  the
    appellant's accent and speech were consistent with someone who  he  did
    not "instantly associate as emanating from an  Af-Reer  Hamar  speaking
    clan".  He engaged with other findings made by Mr Abdi in his report.

22.  The  Immigration  Judge's  conclusion  at   paragraph   24   of   this
    determination that "On the basis of Mr. Abdi's assessment, I find  that
    he concluded that the Appellant was not speaking solely in  a  northern
    accent, but was speaking in a form of Somali  which  was  "interspersed
    with northern intonation"".  The judge also noted  "variations  in  her
    accent" and that her spoken Somali  did  not  resemble  that  "commonly
    spoken by the Reer Hamar speaking people".  He went on further to  find
    "... again, he [Mr Abdi] does not appear to suggest that no person  who
    had lived in the south of Somalia would speak as the Appellant did".

23. Notwithstanding the expert's evidence, the Immigration  Judge  analysed
    the appellant's evidence at paragraph 25 of the determination and  also
    commented on the evidence of  her  witness,  Deqo  Ahmed  Sharif.   The
    Immigration Judge found  the  witness  to  be  independent  and  indeed
    credible.  Internal and external consistency of evidence  were  factors
    taken into account by the Immigration Judge in the appellant's favour.

24. The Immigration Judge also noted at paragraph 26 of  his  determination
    that  the  appellant's  evidence  was  given  without  hesitation   and
    prevarication.

25. On that behalf he  allowed  the  asylum  appeal,  having  believed  the
    appellant's evidence that she belonged to the Ashraf clan and the  sub-
    sub-clan as claimed, had been born and lived in Afgoye and had suffered
    persecution at the hands of the Hawiye.

Submissions

26.   Ms Saunders, acknowledging that ethnicity  and  clan  membership  were
    crucial, urged me to find that failure  by  the  Immigration  Judge  to
    direct himself to  two  separate  expert  reports  led  to  a  perverse
    outcome.   Both  reports  had  stated  that  the  appellant's   dialect
    indicated  a  northern  origin,  inconsistent  with  her  claim.    The
    Immigration Judge focussed instead on the appellant  and  her  witness.
    Ms Saunders submitted that the Immigration  Judge  had  overlooked  the
    credentials of two experts and instead had "preferred" the  appellant's
    evidence, corroborated by her witness.  This in Ms Saunders' submission
    was inadequate.

27.   Notwithstanding that the Immigration Judge was  the  finder  of  fact,
    when there was powerful evidence from experts, it was insufficient  for
    him to reject the evidence of experts on the basis  that  he  preferred
    the appellant's  evidence.   There  was  no  cogent  reasoning  by  the
    Immigration Judge for his rejection of  the  expert  evidence  and  his
    failure to analyse fully those expert reports led to an unsafe outcome.

28.   Ms Brissett urged me to uphold the Immigration Judge's  determination.
     She invited me to find that his reasoning was not perverse  or  flawed
    as he had indeed engaged with the expert reports.  She  prayed  in  aid
    paragraph 19 and paragraph 20 of the determination.

29.   She  submitted  that  the  Immigration  Judge  had  given  a  detailed
    assessment of the reports but had preferred his own assessment  of  the
    appellant's credibility.

30.   His recording at paragraph 21 of his determination the failure on  the
    expert's behalf to establish credentials when assessing the appellant's
    demeanour and concluding that her conversation indicated a rehearsal of
    facts, was entirely valid and sustainable.

31.   It was to be noted that neither expert had  excluded  the  possibility
    that the appellant's dialect  could  be  found  elsewhere  in  Somalia.
    Neither report was therefore definitive or conclusive.  Such phrases as
    "commonly", "typically" were not conclusive.

32.   On the basis that the Immigration Judge had engaged with both  reports
    in some detail and given  cogent  reasons  for  his  rejection  of  the
    reports, his determination should not  be  regarded  as  irrational  or
    perverse.

33.   Ms Saunders reiterated that the failure by the  Immigration  Judge  to
    grapple meaningfully with  the  expert's  report  indicated  a  fatally
    flawed determination.  She did, however, acknowledge that there  was  a
    gap in the reports and that neither were conclusive as  to  whether  it
    was possible for someone to speak as the appellant did and nevertheless
    come from Afgoye.  She nevertheless submitted that the methodology  was
    sound and that the reports  were  balanced.   Particularly  the  report
    prepared for the appellant's  solicitors  had  been  conducted  over  a
    period of an hour with no noise interference.

34.   Ms Saunders urged me to find that the Immigration Judge's  failure  to
    grapple with the key findings from the professional experts had led  to
    an unsafe outcome.

Findings

35.   It is incumbent upon an Immigration Judge to consider the evidence  as
    a whole and not in a piecemeal fashion.  It must be remembered that  it
    is unlikely that an expert will be able to address  the  actual  events
    concerning an appellant himself or herself and that the  account  given
    by  an  appellant  is  to  be  considered  in  the  light  of  all  the
    circumstances, including material from the experts' reports.

36.   I find that in this  particular  appeal  the  Immigration  Judge  made
    clear findings of fact, giving cogent reasons for those findings.  They
    were findings that were open to him on the evidence before him.  A fact-
    finding Tribunal may give weight to an expert report favourable  to  an
    appellant and yet disbelieve an appellant's account.  The converse must
    also be possible.  Whilst no judicial fact-finder can reject an  expert
    report in a peremptory and  dismissive  manner,  where  cogent  reasons
    exist for such rejection, they must be considered in the light  of  all
    the evidence.

37.   I find that in this particular appeal the Immigration  Judge  gave  an
    explanation for preferring the appellant's  evidence  over  the  expert
    reports which he subjected to close analysis.  Neither report  excluded
    the possibility that the appellant might be from the Ashraf  clan  born
    and bred in  Afgoye,  albeit  in  their  expert  opinion  both  experts
    inclined to the view which cast doubt on the appellant's claim to  have
    been brought up in Afgoye as a member of Ashraf clan.  By not excluding
    such a possibility, the reports  were  not  absolutely  conclusive  and
    definitive.   Neither  report  addressed  the  issue  of  whether   the
    appellant's northern  intonation  might  have  been  a  consequence  of
    population displacement.

38.   It is for an Immigration Judge to make credibility findings  based  on
    the totality of the evidence and in some circumstances will  reject  an
    expert's evidence.  What is crucial is that a reasoned  explanation  is
    given for so doing.

39.   The expert evidence in  this  appeal  was  crucial.   The  Immigration
    Judge gave it the weight he regarded appropriate,  giving  reasons  for
    his conclusions.  His consideration of all the evidence was proper  and
    in no way perverse.

Decision

40.   Having been satisfied that the  determination  discloses  no  material
    error of law, the original decision stands.  The appeal is  allowed  on
    asylum grounds.  The appeal on human rights grounds is also allowed and
    accordingly the appellant is not in need of humanitarian protection.


                                                            E ARFON-JONES DL
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT



