
ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL

                            *STARRED*


      JM (Rule 62(7);  human rights unarguable) Liberia * [2006] UKAIT 00009

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at: Field House                        Date of Hearing:  16 August
2005
                                               Promulgated: 06 February 2006

                                   Before:

                    Mr C M G Ockelton (Deputy President)
                    Miss E Arfon-Jones (Deputy President)
                Professor A Grubb (Senior Immigration Judge)


                                   Between

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:           Mr R Symonds of Refugee Legal Centre
For the Respondent:    Ms R Brown, Home Office Presenting Officer

1.  Rule 62(7) has effect in restricting the grounds which may be argued  in
a reconsideration to which Rule 62 applies.  2.  If  the  appellant's  human
rights claim depends on  the  consequences  of  removal,  his  human  rights
grounds cannot avail him in an appeal  against  a  decision  that  does  not
entail removal.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

  1. The Appellant is a citizen of  Liberia.   He  arrived  in  the  United
     Kingdom on 3 July 2003 and was given six months leave to  enter  as  a
     visitor.  On 29 August 2003, he applied  for  refugee  status.   On  9
     February 2004, the Respondent gave notice of his refusal to  vary  the
     Appellant's leave.  The Appellant appealed under  section  82  of  the
     2002 Act on asylum and human rights grounds.  His appeal was heard  by
     an Adjudicator, Mr J R Devittie, who dismissed it on both grounds in a
     determination sent out on 21 May  2004.   The  Appellant  applied  for
     permission to  appeal  to  the  Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal  on  ten
     numbered grounds.  He was granted permission on two of them.  They are
     set out in the Vice President's reasons for her decision as follows:

           "It is asserted in the grounds of application that:


           (a)   the Adjudicator failed to deal with the submission made on
                 the Claimant's behalf that, as no  removal  directions  had
                 been set, the human rights claim could not be determined as
                 removal could not be said to be imminent.


           ...


           (b)   that the Adjudicator's determination does not  record  the
                 fact that the Claimant's daughter gave  oral  evidence  and
                 that, accordingly, her evidence has  not  been  taken  into
                 account when  the  Adjudicator  considered  the  Article  8
                 claim.  This is arguable.


           Permission to appeal is granted to raise the  above  two  points
           only.  Permission is otherwise refused."

  2. That decision is dated 29 September 2004.  Following the  commencement
     of the appeals provisions of the 2004 Act,  the  grant  of  permission
     operates as an order that this  Tribunal  reconsider  the  Appellant's
     appeal.

  3. On 10 June 2005, the Appellant was notified that the  hearing  of  the
     reconsideration would be on 16 August and he  thereupon,  through  his
     representatives, sought to amend the grounds for reconsideration.  The
     proposed amended grounds assert that the Adjudicator erred in  law  in
     his assessment of the personal and  the  country  evidence;   that  he
     erred in law in  failing  to  consider  the  activities  of  non-state
     agents;  that he erred in law in  failing  to  give  reasons  for  his
     conclusions, and that his dismissal of the  Appellant's  human  rights
     appeal was unsustainable on  the  evidence.   As  Mr  Symonds  of  the
     Refugee Legal Centre (who appeared for the Appellant)  recognised,  it
     was far from clear whether the Tribunal had  power  to  allow  him  to
     amend his grounds in this way.  We are very grateful to  him  for  the
     full  skeleton  argument  that  he  produced,  as  well  as  for   his
     submissions.

  4.  As  we  have  said,  this  matter  comes  before  the   Tribunal   on
     reconsideration, following the commencement of the appeals  provisions
     of the 2004 Act.  Those provisions came into effect on 4  April  2005.
     By then, the  Immigration  Appellate  Authority  and  the  Immigration
     Appeal Tribunal were both abolished and replaced by  a  single  Asylum
     and Immigration Tribunal.  The right of appeal from an Adjudicator  to
     the Immigration Appeal  Tribunal  was  abolished  and  replaced  by  a
     process under which, in appropriate cases, appeals  are  reconsidered.
     These changes are affected by the amendment of  the  2002  Act.   That
     Act, also as amended by the 2004 Act, contains power to make rules for
     the conduct of appeals in this  Tribunal,  and  the  2004  Act  itself
     contains power to make transitional provisions.

  5. The relevant transitional provisions are in the Asylum and Immigration
     (Treatment  of  Claimants,  etc)  Act  2004  (Commencement  No  5  and
     Transitional Provisions) Order 2005 (SI 2005/656).  Articles 4  and  5
     are, so far as relevant, in the following terms:

           4.    Subject to article 3 [which simply postpones the effect of
                 the following transition in cases where,  at  commencement,
                 an appeal had been heard but the determination had not  yet
                 been sent out] -
                 ...
                 (b)   any appeal to the Immigration Appeal  Tribunal  which
                       is  pending  immediately  before  commencement  shall
                       continue after  commencement  as  an  appeal  to  the
                       Asylum and Immigration Tribunal.


           5.-   (1)   This article  applies,  subject  to  article  3,  in
                 relation to any appeal which
                       immediately before commencement is -
                 ...
                    b) pending before an adjudicator.
                 (2)   The Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal  shall,  after
                       commencement, subject to rules under section  106  of
                       the 2002 Act deal with the appeal in the same  manner
                       as if it had originally decided the appeal and it was
                       reconsidering its decision.


  6. We do not need to set out the whole of the rule-making power.  We hope
     that we do Mr Symonds submissions no injustice if we confine ourselves
     to the following:

           106.  Rules
           (1)   The Lord Chancellor may make rules -
                 (a)   regulating the exercise of the right of appeal  under
                       section 82, or 83 or by virtue of section 109
                 (b)   prescribing procedure to be  followed  in  connection
                       with proceedings under section 82, or 83 or by virtue
                       of section 109
           (1A)  In making rules under subsection (1) the  Lord  Chancellor
           shall aim to ensure -
                    a)  that  the  rules  are  designed   to   ensure   that
                       proceedings  before  the  Tribunal  are  handled   as
                       fairly, quickly and efficiently as possible, and
                    b) that the rules where appropriate confer on members of
                       the  Tribunal  responsibility   for   ensuring   that
                       proceedings  before  the  Tribunal  are  handled   as
                       fairly, quickly and efficiently as possible.
              2) In particular, rules under subsection (1) -
           ...
                    v)  may  make  provision  about  reconsideration  of   a
                       decision pursuant to an order under  section  103A(1)
                       (which may, in particular,  include  provision  about
                       the action that may be taken on  reconsideration  and
                       about the matters and evidence to which the  Tribunal
                       may have regard);
           ... .


  7. The Rules are the Asylum and Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
     2005 (SI 2005/230).  Contrary to  Mr  Symonds'  submissions,  we  must
     start with Rule 62(6) and (7), which clearly apply to this appeal  and
     are in the following terms:

           (6)   Where, pursuant to a transitional  provisions  order,  the
                 Tribunal  reconsiders  an  appeal  which   was   originally
                 determined by an adjudicator, Section 2  of  Part  3  shall
                 apply to the reconsideration, subject to paragraph (7).
           (7)   Where -
                 (a)   a party has been granted permission to appeal to  the
                       Immigration Appeal Tribunal against an  adjudicator's
                       determination before 4 April 2005, but the appeal has
                       not been determined by that date;  and
                 (b)   by virtue of  a  transitional  provisions  order  the
                       grant of permission to appeal is treated as an  order
                       for the  Tribunal  to  reconsider  the  adjudicator's
                       determination, the reconsideration should be  limited
                       to the grounds  upon  which  the  Immigration  Appeal
                       Tribunal granted permission to appeal.

  8. In his efforts to show that that Rule means something other than  what
     it says, Mr Symonds made reference to a number of other provisions  of
     the 2005 Rules.

  9. Rule 4 is headed "Overriding Objective":

           4.    The overriding objective of these Rules is to secure  that
                 proceedings before the  Tribunal  are  handled  as  fairly,
                 quickly  and   efficiently   as   possible;    and,   where
                 appropriate,   that   members   of   the   Tribunal    have
                 responsibility for ensuring this, in the interests  of  the
                 parties to the proceedings and the wider public interest.

 10. Rule 14 provides that an Appellant may vary his grounds of appeal only
     with the permission of the Tribunal;  but Rule 29 makes it clear  that
     Rule 14 does not apply to reconsiderations.

 11. Rules 26 and 27 relate to the procedure to be adopted on  applications
     for review and orders for  reconsideration  made  after  commencement.
     Rule 26 provides, amongst other things, that the Immigration Judge (in
     fact a Senior Immigration Judge) deciding an application for review is
     to do so by reference only to the applicant's written submissions  and
     the documents filed with the application notice and is not required to
     consider any grounds for  ordering  the  Tribunal  to  reconsider  its
     decision other than those set out in the application notice.  Rule  27
     requires the decision to be in writing and to include  reasons.   Rule
     27(2) is as follows:

           27(2)  Where  an  immigration   judge   makes   an   order   for
           reconsideration -
                 (a)   his notice of decision  must  state  the  grounds  on
                       which the  Tribunal  is  ordered  to  reconsider  its
                       decision on the appeal;  and
                 (b)   he may give directions for the reconsideration of the
                       decision on the appeal which may -
                       (i)   provide for any of the matters set out in  rule
                            45(4) which he considers  appropriate  to  such
                            reconsideration;  and
                       (ii)  specify the number or class of members  of  the
                            Tribunal to whom the reconsideration  shall  be
                            allocated.

 12. Rule 31 is headed "Procedure for reconsideration of appeal" and is  as
     follows:

           31(1) Where an order for  reconsideration  has  been  made,  the
                 Tribunal must reconsider an appeal as  soon  as  reasonably
                 practicable after  that  order  has  been  served  on  both
                 parties to the appeal.
           (2)   Where the reconsideration is pursuant to  an  order  under
                 section 103A -
                 (a)   the Tribunal carrying out  the  reconsideration  must
                       first decide whether the  original  Tribunal  made  a
                       material error of law;  and
                 (b)   if it decides that the original Tribunal did not make
                       a material error of law, the Tribunal must order that
                       the original determination of the appeal shall stand.
           (3)   Subject to paragraph (2), the Tribunal must  substitute  a
                 fresh decision to allow or dismiss the appeal.
           (4)   In carrying out the reconsideration, the Tribunal -
                 (a)   may limit submissions or evidence  to  one  or  more
           specified issues;  and
                 (b)   must have regard  to  any  directions  given  by  the
                       immigration  judge  or  court   which   ordered   the
                       reconsideration.
           (5)   In this rule, a 'material error of law' means an error  of
                 law which affected the Tribunal's decision upon the appeal.

 13. Rule 31 is in Section 2 of Part 3 of the Rules, and so applies to this
     appeal by virtue of Rule 62(6), subject only to Rule 62(7).

 14. Rule 43 empowers the Tribunal to decide the procedure to  be  followed
     in relation to any appeal or  application,  that  power  is  expressly
     "subject to these  rules".   Rule  45  is  a  general  power  to  give
     directions, again specifically "subject to any specific provisions  of
     these rules".

 15. Mr Symonds directed his submissions to showing first, that, in a  case
     proceeding entirely under the new appeals provisions, there  would  be
     power at the time of any reconsideration  to  amend  the  grounds  for
     review which had originally been submitted, and secondly,  that  cases
     covered by transitional provisions, such as  the  present,  should  be
     treated in broadly the same way.  We find, however,  that  we  do  not
     accept the second part of that argument:   and  it  follows  that  the
     first part is redundant in this case.

 16. In our judgment, there  are  very  good  reasons  for  treating  cases
     covered by transitional provisions in a different  manner  from  those
     governed entirely by the new  appeals  provisions.   The  new  appeals
     provisions are intended to create a different appellate  system.   The
     transitional cases are those left over from a system  in  which  there
     was  a  true  appeal  from  the  Adjudicator's  determination.   Cases
     governed entirely by the new provisions have no  such  appeal  rights.
     In any event, there is clearly nothing in the remainder of  the  Rules
     that is equivalent to Rule 62(7):  that fact of itself  is  sufficient
     to  dispose  of  any  argument  that  cases  covered  by  transitional
     provisions are to be treated for these purposes in the same manner  as
     cases arising entirely under the new appeals provisions.

 17. It is true that, under the 2003 Procedure Rules applying to appeals to
     the Immigration Appeal Tribunal, the appellant could have  applied  to
     amend his grounds of  appeal  and  even  to  argue  grounds  on  which
     permission to appeal had  been  refused.   The  matter  was,  however,
     within the discretion of the  IAT.   In  his  submissions  to  us,  Mr
     Symonds appears to argue that the IAT had no jurisdiction to refuse to
     hear a good ground of appeal.  That was not, however, the case.  If it
     were, there would never be any  reason  to  raise  a  good  ground  in
     advance.  The true position is that if some reason for late submission
     of grounds, or for the need to amend, is given, then the merits of the
     proposed new grounds will play a part in deciding whether  the  reason
     is good enough to allow the amendment or to allow time to be extended.
      Further, it cannot  be  said  that  the  regime  that  was  in  force
     immediately before the commencement of the present  appeal  provisions
     encouraged tardiness on the part of claimants.  If a  claimant  wished
     to amend his grounds of appeal to the IAT, we can see nothing in those
     Rules that would have discouraged him from  doing  so  immediately  he
     received the grant of permission to appeal.

 18. Further, before the commencement of the present appeal provisions, the
     parties had the option of seeking to reverse or  amend  the  grant  of
     permission by application for Statutory Review.  Statutory Review  was
     not Judicial Review, and so the fact that an amendment to the  grounds
     could be  allowed  by  the  IAT  did  not  preclude  applications  for
     Statutory Review on the basis that permission to  appeal  should  have
     been granted on more grounds than it was granted.  It  is  within  our
     own experience that such applications for Statutory Review were  made,
     and were sometimes successful.

 19. There is a clear contrast with appeals governed entirely  by  the  new
     appeals provisions.  The application for  review  of  the  Immigration
     Judge's decision, although nominally an application to the High Court,
     is made to the Tribunal under arrangements governed by paragraph 30 of
     Schedule 2 to the 2004 Act.  The member of the Tribunal  dealing  with
     the application does not "grant" or "refuse"  it:   he  either  orders
     reconsideration or makes no order.  The application may be renewed  to
     the High Court if the Tribunal makes no order.  If the Tribunal orders
     reconsideration, that  is  the  end  of  the  matter  so  far  as  the
     application is concerned.  There is simply no power to  ask  the  High
     Court to add further grounds.

 20.  The  extent  to  which  further  grounds  can   be   added   at   the
     reconsideration stage in a case governed entirely by the  new  appeals
     provisions is not, we think, a matter which we should decide  on  this
     reconsideration.   This  is  a  case  governed  by  the   transitional
     provisions and, as we have shown, transitional  cases  are  different.
     They are governed by their own Rule - Rule 62:  and if  a  reason  for
     the different treatment of them in the 2005 Rules is required, it  may
     perhaps be found in the fact that, having been subject to a  different
     regime before 4 April  2005,  claimants  have  had  ample  opportunity
     already to ensure that they have  permission  to  argue  all  relevant
     grounds.  Mr Symonds' argument is to the effect that, if an  appellant
     has not taken the opportunity to put  things  right  promptly,  it  is
     unfair for Parliament to deprive him of the opportunity to do the same
     thing after a period of delay.  We do not agree.

 21. It is true that, as Mr Symonds pointed out, there is an infelicity  in
     the wording of Rule 62(7) in a case where there has been a  successful
     application for Statutory Review.  It looks as though even  where  the
     application for Statutory Review has been successful, the grounds  for
     reconsideration should be those  ordered  by  the  Immigration  Appeal
     Tribunal, not those added by the judge.  That, of  course,  cannot  be
     right:  but it does not show that the Rule is to be interpreted in the
     way Mr Symonds suggests.  It is apparent that for the purposes of Rule
     62(7) the order of the judge on Statutory Review is taken to be, or at
     least to be part of, the grant of permission by the Immigration Appeal
     Tribunal.  That is indeed what in effect it is.  By reading  the  Rule
     in that way, it is given an interpretation which is  in  our  judgment
     appropriate in context and sensible.  The effect of reading it in  the
     way proposed by Mr Symonds would be that it had the opposite effect to
     that expressed:  his principal submission is that, despite Rule 62(7),
     the reconsideration should not be limited to the  grounds  upon  which
     the Immigration Appeal Tribunal granted permission  to  appeal.   That
     interpretation of a clear rule  is  unacceptable.   It  is  abundantly
     clear from the structure of Rule 62, in particular paragraphs (6)  and
     (7), that in a case subject to the transitional provisions order there
     is a limitation on the scope of the reconsideration.

 22. We referred above to the rule-making power in the statute, not because
     Mr Symonds made any claim that the Rules were ultra vires but  because
     it is clearly appropriate to look at  the  terms  of  the  rule-making
     power in order to assess any submissions made on the  meaning  of  the
     Rules themselves.  As we noted, the statute expressly envisages  rules
     restricting  matters  to  which  the  Tribunal  may  have  regard   on
     reconsideration.  Mr Symonds placed great emphasis on the requirement,
     both in section 106 and in Rule  4,  for  the  Rules  to  secure  that
     proceedings are determined "fairly".  Mr Symonds submitted that it was
     unfair not to allow a claimant in particular (though  the  same  would
     have to apply to the Secretary of State) to suffer for  his  delay  in
     asserting the rights he now claims.  We do not agree.  Those who  make
     asylum and human rights claims in particular assert matters which,  if
     established, are of the highest importance  to  them.   As  succeeding
     legislation has made clear, an attempt will be made to deal with those
     claims as swiftly as possible.  It cannot properly be said  that  some
     unfairness arises if a claimant finds that having not made  his  claim
     (or part of his claim) promptly, he is not able to  make  it  at  all.
     Similar considerations apply to the delay by the Secretary of State in
     the appellate process.  To put it in more general terms, a concept  of
     fairness in the overriding objective simply does not  imply  that  the
     party at whose instance the litigation takes place  should  suffer  no
     penalty for tardiness or indolence.

 23. We should refer briefly to an alternative interpretation of Rule 62(7)
     proposed by Mr Symonds.   In  his  written  skeleton,  it  appears  as
     follows:

           "These words mean only that the AIT is to limit the  hearing  to
           submissions (and evidence) to the issue  of  material  error  of
           law:  see the President's Practice Direction, 4 April  2005  ...
           at paragraphs 14.7 to 14.9."

 24. As it stands, that suggestion is incoherent.  Mr Symonds  expanded  it
     in his oral submissions by reference to Rule 31.  Self-evidently  Rule
     31 envisages a two-stage procedure in  reconsiderations.   The  second
     stage, however, will only be reached if the result  of  the  first  is
     that the Tribunal takes the view that there was a  material  error  of
     law in the previous determination.  The Practice  Direction  envisages
     and  regulates  the  circumstances  in  which  the  two  stages  of  a
     reconsideration will take place on two separate  occasions:   but  the
     duality of the process  derives  from  the  Rules,  not  the  Practice
     Direction.  Mr Symonds suggested that any restriction on  the  grounds
     imposed by Rule 62(7) has effect  only  at  the  first  stage  of  any
     reconsideration and not at the second  stage  if  there  is  a  second
     stage.  Thus, the  limitation  on  the  grounds  would  apply  to  the
     ascertainment of any material error of law;  but if a  material  error
     of law was found, there would then be no restriction on the  basis  of
     the reconsideration.

 25. We are unable to accept that interpretation of Rule 62(7).   There  is
     no doubt that Rule 31 treats the whole of the two-stage process as the
     reconsideration;  and it is the "reconsideration" that has  the  limit
     imposed upon it by Rule 62(7).  The words of Rule 62(7) simply  cannot
     apply to one part but not the other part of  a  process  described  by
     Rule 31.

 26. For the foregoing reasons, we hold that, with three reservations, Rule
     62(7) means what it says.  We are not  persuaded  that  there  is  any
     reason it should not mean what is says;  and in our judgment it is not
     unfair to have required those, who sought to  take  advantage  of  the
     existence of an appellate process to enlarge their grounds, to  do  so
     before the appellate process ceased  to  exist.   Their  situation  is
     different from that of those who come after;  they  are  not  unfairly
     treated;  and there is in any event nothing in the Rules or  the  2002
     Act which would enable us to give a meaning to Rule 62(7)  other  than
     that which it appears on its face to bear in restricting the ambit  of
     a reconsideration in cases to which transitional provisions apply.

 27. The three reservations are as follows.  First, in our view Rule  62(7)
     is to be read in the light of any  order  made  on  Statutory  Review:
     such order is to be treated as though  it  were  incorporated  in  the
     Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal's  grant  of   permission   to   appeal.
     Secondly, Rule 62(7) cannot prevent a challenge to jurisdiction and so
     enlarge the jurisdiction of the Tribunal:   see  SS  (Somalia)  [2005]
     UKAIT 00167.  Thirdly, there is also a  need  to  make  allowance  for
     obvious points of Refugee Convention law in the Robinson [1997] Imm AR
     568 sense.

 28.  In  the  present  reconsideration,  the  Appellant   is   accordingly
     restricted  to  the  grounds  upon  which  leave  to  appeal  to   the
     Immigration Appeal Tribunal was given.  The Appellant cannot therefore
     challenge before us the dismissal of his  appeal  on  asylum  grounds:
     the grant of permission to appeal related purely to his  dismissal  of
     the appeal on human rights grounds.

 29. The first of those grounds is of some interest, because of the way  in
     which the issue has  subsequently  been  treated  by  the  Appellant's
     present representatives.  It is clear from the ground and the grant of
     leave that, before the Adjudicator, the Appellant's position was that,
     as there was no intention to remove him,  the  Adjudicator  could  not
     deal with any breach of his human rights on removal.  Grounds were put
     in to protect the  Appellant's  position,  but  the  argument  in  the
     grounds is clearly that the Adjudicator should not have dealt  with  a
     human rights appeal depending solely on removal.  The amended grounds,
     however, and Mr Symonds' brief submissions before us,  make  it  clear
     that the Appellant's present position is  entirely  to  the  contrary.
     What he now seeks to argue is the reverse of what was  argued  in  the
     grounds:  he seeks to establish that in an appeal against  a  decision
     which does not give the Secretary of State any entitlement  to  remove
     an  individual  without  making  a  further  appealable  decision,  an
     appellant has a right to raise human  rights  grounds  as  though  the
     second decision had already been made.

 30. For the  reasons  we  have  given  at  some  length  earlier  in  this
     determination, it is not open to the Appellant to change  his  grounds
     of challenge in that way.  We consider the issue on the basis on which
     it was put in the grounds.

 31. It is sufficient for present purposes to say that we have considerable
     sympathy with the view that an Adjudicator  should  not  consider  the
     human rights implications of any decision which has not yet been made.
      The refusal to vary leave to remain is, if the effect of the  refusal
     is that the claimant has no leave to enter or  remain  in  the  United
     Kingdom, an immigration decision appealable under s82.  The asylum and
     human rights grounds of appeal are both in similar terms  and  are  in
     s84(1)(g).  They are the grounds:

           "that removal of  the  appellant  from  the  United  Kingdom  in
           consequence of the immigration decision would breach the  United
           Kingdom's obligations under the Refugee Convention or  would  be
           unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998  as  being
           incompatible with the appellant's Convention rights."

 32. Although Refugee Convention and Human  Rights  Convention  rights  are
     there treated together, there is a difference between them:  a  person
     who is in law a refugee has a status.  A  person  who  is  merely  one
     whose human rights inhibit his removal has no international status  as
     such.  As a result, in Saad, Diriye and Osorio v SSHD [2001] EWCA  Civ
     2008, [2002] INLR 34, the Court  of  Appeal,  interpreting  provisions
     similar to those in s84(1)(g) in respect of asylum grounds, held  that
     the appellate authorities had a duty to ascertain the  status  of  the
     appellants as refugees or not even if their removal was not  imminent.
     It is true that the precise situation of those appellants is  probably
     now covered by s83 of the 2002 Act, but Saad, Diriye and  Osorio  must
     still be authority for the correct interpretation of s84(1)(g)  as  it
     applies to asylum appeals.

 33. The human rights position is different.  The Appellant does not  claim
     to have a status:  he simply claims that he should not be removed.  It
     is important to appreciate that, in  any  case  in  which  this  issue
     arises and to which the  transitional  appeal  provisions  apply,  the
     Appellant is a person who, by asserting human rights  grounds  in  his
     notice of appeal or one-stop notice to the  Secretary  of  State,  has
     made a "human rights claim" within the meaning of  s113(1)  and  hence
     also s92(4) of the 2002 Act.  He  thus  has  an  in-country  right  of
     appeal against the decision to issue removal  directions  against  him
     under s10 of the 1999 Act as an overstayer if such a removal  decision
     is ever made.  He cannot be removed  without  the  making  of  such  a
     decision.  If he is removed, it will not be "in  consequence  of"  the
     decision to refuse to vary his leave,  but  "in  consequence  of"  the
     decision to remove him.  We are aware that it has sometimes been  said
     that, in dealing with a refusal to vary leave to enter or remain,  the
     appellate authorities should deal also with human rights on removal on
     the basis that removal is imminent:  but it is  not  imminent  in  any
     legal sense because of the need for a further decision.   So  much  is
     clear from the European Court of Human Rights decision in Vijayanathan
     and Pushparajah v France  (1992)  15  EHRR  62.   Our  own  experience
     suggests that this argument in fact ignores the realities as  well  as
     the law.  A very small proportion of those who  lose  immigration  and
     asylum appeals are ever subject to involuntary removal;  when  removal
     does take place it is often a very considerable time after the  appeal
     decision.  The argument would also require the Tribunal to assume that
     any officer charged with making a removal  decision  will  ignore  the
     claimant's human rights.  There  can  be  no  proper  basis  for  that
     assumption.  For all these reasons, if there are human  rights  issues
     to be raised, they should be raised at  the  moment  when  removal  is
     threatened, not simply at the moment  when  it  becomes  theoretically
     possible.

 34. For those reasons, we agree with the Appellant's grounds on this issue
     as they were originally proposed.  Miss Brown did not dissent from the
     Appellant's  original  view  that  the  Adjudicator  should  not  have
     considered human rights on removal;  she also undertook in the present
     case that the Secretary of  State  would  not  use  the  certification
     process to remove any  rights  of  appeal  that  the  Appellant  might
     otherwise have if a removal decision is eventually made  against  him.
     We would also observe that since the Appellant's  human  rights  could
     not be raised in this appeal, we see no scope for the  application  of
     the certification procedure in s96 in respect of his human  rights  in
     any subsequent appeal.

 35. The second ground upon which permission to appeal to  the  Immigration
     Appeal Tribunal was given relates to the  Adjudicator's  treatment  of
     the evidence going to  the  human  rights  appeal.   In  view  of  our
     decision on the first ground, this ground falls away.

 36. As we noted at the beginning of this  determination,  the  Adjudicator
     dismissed  the  appeal  on  asylum  and  human  rights  grounds.   His
     dismissal of the appeal on asylum grounds is not validly challenged in
     this reconsideration.  He erred in law in considering the human rights
     grounds in substance, but his error was not material  because  insofar
     as the appeal against refusal to vary  leave  depended  on  the  human
     rights consequences of a different decision, he was bound  to  dismiss
     the appeal on human rights grounds.

 37. There was no material error of law in the Adjudicator's determination,
     which we accordingly order shall stand.
C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT


