
ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL

AA and Others (Highly skilled migrants: legitimate expectation) Pakistan
[2008] UKAIT 00003

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at: Field House                             Date of Hearing:  22
October 2007

                                   Before

    Miss E Arfon-Jones DL, Deputy President of the Asylum and Immigration
                                  Tribunal
                       Senior Immigration Judge Grubb

                                   Between

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellants:  Mr J Gillespie instructed by Turpin & Miller
                       Solicitors (for AA, RM and MF)
                 Ms M Phelan instructed by Solicitors Active (for MC) and
                 Christine Lee Solicitors (for KS)
For the Respondent:  Mr S Kovats instructed by Treasury Solicitors

(1) The Tribunal has jurisdiction to consider a challenge to an  immigration
decision on the basis of the public law concept  of  legitimate  expectation
which falls within the ground of appeal that the decision is "otherwise  not
in accordance with the law" in s.84(1)(e) of the 2002 Act and, if made  out,
the appeal must be allowed under s.86(3)(a); (2) the changes to the HSMP  in
effect from 7 November 2006 apply to all decisions in respect of  extensions
of leave made on or after that date; (3) in  such  cases,  the  Home  Office
Guidance on the HSMP of  31  October  2003  does  not  create  a  legitimate
expectation that those who entered the UK prior  to  7  November  2006  will
have their  extensions  of  stay  decided  on  the  basis  of  any  previous
Immigration Rules and criteria relating to the HSMP.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

  1. These appeals were listed together because they raise a  common  issue
     concerning the effect of changes  introduced  to  the  Highly  Skilled
     Migrant Programme ("HSMP")  from  7  November  2006  as  a  result  of
     amendments made to the Immigration Rules (HC 1702  amending  Statement
     of Changes in Immigration Rules, HC 395).  HC 1702 introduced  changes
     which, in particular, impose potentially more onerous criteria for  an
     individual already in the UK who seeks an extension of leave under the
     HSMP.

The appeals

      AA

  2. The first appellant (AA) is  a  citizen  of  Pakistan  who  worked  in
     Pakistan in the banking and investment sector prior to coming  to  the
     UK.  In March 2005 he made an application under  the  HSMP  which  was
     approved by Work Permits UK on 1 September 2005.  In November 2005, AA
     applied for entry clearance which, on  1  January  2006,  was  granted
     valid for 12 months.   AA gave up his job in Pakistan, sold his assets
     in Pakistan and travelled to the UK.  On 8 April 2006, AA  arrived  in
     the UK and was granted leave to enter until 1  January  2007.   On  19
     June 2006 AA's son, the third appellant (MF) arrived in the UK and was
     granted leave to enter in line with his father.  On  9  October  2006,
     AA's wife, the second appellant (RM) arrived in the UK and was granted
     leave to enter in line  with  her  husband.   Whilst  in  the  UK,  AA
     undertook work in a bank between April and October before  leaving  to
     set himself up in self-employment.  On 15 December  2006,  AA  applied
     for an extension of his leave  under  the  HSMP.   His  wife  and  son
     applied for an extension of their leave in line with his  application.
     AA's application, together with  those  of  his  wife  and  son,  were
     refused on 13 February 2007 as AA had failed to satisfy the new points
     requirement of the revised scheme introduced from 7 November 2006,  in
     particular because he had not earned sufficient income in the previous
     year in the UK.  Also, the respondent decided that AA could  not  take
     advantage of some transitional arrangements for the  self-employed  as
     he had failed to provide satisfactory evidence  of  trading  4  months
     prior to the application.

  3. Immigration Judge Kelly in a determination  promulgated  on  16  April
     2007 dismissed AA's appeal (and that of his wife and son which fell to
     be decided in line with his).    The  judge  doubted  whether  he  had
     jurisdiction  to  entertain  an  appeal  based   upon   a   legitimate
     expectation  argument.   Nevertheless,  he  went  on  to  reject  AA's
     argument that he had a legitimate  expectation  that  his  application
     would be decided under the HSMP scheme in force prior to  the  changes
     effected from 7 November 2006.  He concluded that the only expectation
     was that AA's application  would  be  decided  on  the  basis  of  the
     Immigration Rules in force at the date of decision:  on  that  it  was
     accepted he failed.  In any event, AA had failed to show that  he  was
     "lawfully economically active" - a requirement under  the  version  of
     para 135D of HC 395 in force prior to 7 November 2006.  The judge also
     decided that AA's removal would not breach his right  to  respect  for
     his private and family life under Art 8 of the ECHR.

      MC

  4. The fourth appellant (MC) is a citizen of Pakistan who worked for  the
     Pakistan government prior to coming to the UK  most  recently  in  the
     Ministry of Women Development, Social Welfare  and  Special  Education
     with responsibility for the Convention on  the  Rights  of  the  Child
     Agenda in Pakistan.  He has a Masters Degree  in  Sociology  from  the
     University of the Punjab.  On 30 November 2004 he made an  application
     under the HSMP which was approved by Work Permits UK on  16  September
     2005.  In  December  2005,  he  applied  for  and  was  granted  entry
     clearance under the HSMP scheme valid for 12 months.  MC resigned  his
     job in Pakistan and travelled to the UK.  On 10 April 2006, MC arrived
     in the UK and was granted leave to enter until 14 December 2006.    He
     left his wife and 4 children in Pakistan  with  the  expectation  that
     they would join him later.  Whilst in the  UK,  he  worked  from  June
     2006.  On 17 November 2006, MC applied for an extension of  his  leave
     under the HSMP.  On 15 March 2007, the respondent  refused  to  extend
     MC's leave because he had failed to establish a  total  of  75  points
     under the new HSMP requirements, in  particular  because  he  had  not
     earned sufficient income the previous year.  Also, the respondent  did
     not accept that MC's Masters degree  satisfied  the  English  language
     requirement in para 135D(iii) of HC 395 in force from 7 November 2006.

  5. Immigration Judge P D Birkby in a determination promulgated on 11 June
     2007 dismissed MC's appeal  against  the  respondent's  decision.   He
     rejected MC's argument that he had a legitimate expectation to  remain
     in the UK or to have his application for an extension of leave  to  be
     dealt with other than under the current Immigration  Rules.   He  also
     concluded that MC's return to Pakistan would not breach his  right  to
     respect for his private life under Art 8 of the ECHR.

      KS

  6. The fifth appellant (KS), who is a  citizen  of  India,  worked  as  a
     principal lecturer in information  technology  at  Gujarat  University
     prior to coming to the UK.   He  has  a  Masters  Degree  in  Computer
     Applications  obtained  in  India.    In  August  2004,  KS  made   an
     application under the HSMP which was approved by Work Permits UK on 14
     September 2005.  In December 2005 he applied for and was granted entry
     clearance under the HSMP valid for 12 months.   However,  due  to  the
     illness of his mother whom he looked after with his wife  he  did  not
     travel immediately.  KS resigned his job and sold the family  farm  in
     India and eventually travelled to  the  UK.   On  4  August  2006,  he
     arrived in the UK and was granted leave to  enter  until  19  December
     2006.  On arrival, he took up work with a bank.  On 24 November  2006,
     KS applied for an extension of his leave under  the  HSMP.   This  was
     refused by the respondent on 19 December 2006 because, due  the  short
     period of his employment in the UK, he was unable to meet the 75 point
     criteria in para 135D in force from 7 November 2006.  He  was  advised
     to make an application as a work permit holder but  his  employer  was
     unwilling to consider his employment on that basis.

  7. Immigration Judge McMahon in a determination  promulgated  on  5  June
     2007 allowed KS's appeal.  The judge accepted the argument that on the
     basis of what was said in Home Office guidance  the  appellant  had  a
     substantive legitimate  expectation  that  his  application  would  be
     considered under the HSMP criteria prior to HC 1702 coming into effect
     on 7 November 2006.  The respondent's decision was, as a  result,  not
     in accordance with the law and the respondent  should  again  consider
     KS's application accordingly.   The  judge  also  concluded  that  the
     refusal of leave was a disproportionate interference with  KS's  right
     to respect for his private life and hence breached Art 8 of the ECHR.

  8. Following  orders  for  reconsideration  on  the  application  of  the
     appellants (in the appeals of AA and MC) and of the Secretary of State
     (in the appeal of KS), the appeals now come before us.

The Highly Skilled Migrant Programme (HSMP)

      Introduction

  9. The HSMP was first introduced on 28 January 2002 but has been  subject
     to change on a number of occasions.   The  essential  feature  of  the
     HSMP is described in the Home Office guidance, Highly Skilled  Migrant
     Programme: Guidance for Applicants, 7 November 2006 (at p. 2):


           "to allow individuals with exceptional skills to seek  entry  or
           stay to  work  in  the  UK  without  having  a  prior  offer  of
           employment, or to take up self-employment opportunities."

 10. Initially the HSMP operated outside  the  Immigration  Rules  and  its
     terms were wholly contained within the Home Office guidance  documents
     (see Highly Skilled Migrant Programme (HSMP), January 2002 and  Highly
     Skilled Migrant Programme (HSMP) - Revised  Programme  effective  from
     28th January 2003).  On 1 April 2003, the HSMP was  incorporated  into
     the Rules as paras 135A-135H of HC 395 (HC 395 as amended by HC  538),
     although the points system and  criteria  operated  under  the  Scheme
     remained  in  the  published  guidance.   A  revised   programme   was
     introduced on 31 October 2003 together with a separate (but similar in
     effect) scheme for applicants  under  28  years  of  age  (see  Highly
     Skilled Migrant Programme (HSMP) - Revised Programme effective from 31
     October  2003  (hereafter  "the  October  2003  Guidance")).   Further
     changes were made to the rules governing the Scheme  in  October  2004
     (Cm 6333 and Cm 1112), March 2005 (HC 346) and April  2006  (HC  1016)
     before the final changes, and ones affecting  these  appellants,  were
     made in November/December 2006 by HC 1702.

 11. The HSMP operates on a "points system" awarding individuals points  on
     the basis of a number of factors currently  falling  within  the  four
     general "scoring  areas"  of  qualifications,  previous  earnings,  UK
     experience and age and one further specific one where  the  individual
     holds a qualifying MBA degree.  Since 7 November 2006, there has  also
     been an English  language  requirement  (see  Highly  Skilled  Migrant
     Programme: Guidance for Applicants, 7  November  2006).   The  precise
     criteria and points valuations have varied over time.   In essence, to
     be successful, the individual must, inter alia,  achieve  a  specified
     total number of points.  That too  has  varied  over  time,  initially
     being set at a minimum of 75 points, reducing to 65  from  31  October
     2003 but returning to 75 with effect from 7 November 2006.

 12. Applicants are required to follow  a  two-stage  process.   First  the
     applicant must obtain approval under the scheme from Work  Permits  UK
     and secondly, if successful must  apply  for  entry  clearance  or  an
     extension of leave if already  in  the  UK.   As  we  shall  see,  the
     Immigration Rules set out the requirements  for  the  grant  of  leave
     (para 135A-135HA of HC 395).  Successful  applicants  are  granted  an
     initial period of leave to enter which can be extended for  a  further
     period before the  individual  may  be  granted  indefinite  leave  to
     remain.  When first introduced, initial leave to enter under the  HSMP
     was granted for 1 year with possible extension for a further  3  years
     before indefinite leave could be sought after a total of  4  years  in
     the UK.  From 1 April 2006 those periods were changed so that  initial
     leave to enter is now granted for 2 years with a possible extension of
     leave for a further 3 years before  indefinite  leave  can  be  sought
     (now) after a total of 5 years in the UK (HC 1016 amending HC 395).

 13. Home Office guidance  notes  provided  potential  applicants  with  an
     explanation of the HSMP and the application process and also contained
     the  criteria  for  the  award  of  points  until  the   latter   were
     incorporated into Appendices 4 and 5 of the Immigration Rules  from  5
     December 2006 by virtue of HC 1702.  Mr Kovats, who appeared  for  the
     respondent, helpfully provided us with a binder containing the various
     guidance documents issued by the Home Office in particular, as may  be
     relevant to these appeals, dated 31 October 2003, April 2005,  October
     2005, April 2006 and November 2006.  The appellants rely in particular
     on the October 2003 Guidance as the foundation  for  their  claims  of
     legitimate expectation.

 14. On 7 November 2006, the Home Office suspended the  HSMP  deleting  the
     relevant  Immigration  Rules  and  substituting  with  effect  from  5
     December 2006 the current Rules  applicable  to  HSMP  applicants  (HC
     1702).   It is the effect of the changes  introduced  by  HC  1702  in
     November/December 2006 which is at the heart of these appeals.

      Prior to 7 November 2006

 15. Prior to HC 1702, the relevant Rules  in  HC  395  for  an  individual
     seeking entry to the UK under the HSMP provided as follows:

           "Requirements for leave to enter the United Kingdom as a  highly
           skilled migrant


           135A  The requirements to be met by a person  seeking  leave  to
           enter as a highly skilled migrant are that the applicant:


                    i) must produce a valid  document  issued  by  the  Home
                       Office confirming that he meets, at the time  of  the
                       issue of that document, the criteria specified by the
                       Secretary of State for entry to  the  United  Kingdom
                       under the Highly Skilled Migrant Programme; and
                   ii) intends to make the United Kingdom his main home; and
                  iii) is able to maintain and accommodate himself  and  any
                       dependants  adequately  without  recourse  to  public
                       funds; and
                   iv) holds a valid  United  Kingdom  entry  clearance  for
                       entry in this capacity.


           Leave to enter as a Highly Skilled Migrant


           135B  A person seeking leave to enter the United  Kingdom  as  a
           highly  skilled  migrant  may  be  admitted  for  a  period  not
           exceeding 2 years, provided the Immigration Officer is satisfied
           that each of the requirements of paragraph 135A is met.


           Refusal of leave to enter as a highly skilled migrant


           135C  Leave to enter as  a  highly  skilled  migrant  is  to  be
           refused if the Immigration Officer is not satisfied that each of
           the requirements of paragraph 135A is met."

 16. The provisions relating to an extension of stay for an individual  who
     had entered the UK under the HSMP were as follows:

           "Requirements for an extension  of  stay  as  a  highly  skilled
           migrant


           135D  The requirements of an  extension  of  stay  as  a  highly
           skilled migrant, in the case of a person who was  granted  leave
           to enter under paragraph 135A, are that the applicant:


                    i) entered  the  United  Kingdom  with  a  valid  United
                       Kingdom entry clearance as a highly skilled  migrant;
                       and
                   ii) has already taken during  his  period  of  leave  all
                       reasonable  steps  to  become  lawfully  economically
                       active in the United  Kingdom  in  employment,  self-
                       employment or a combination of both; and
                  iii) meets the requirements of paragraph 135A(i)-(iii).


           Extension of stay as a highly skilled migrant


           135E  An extension of stay as a  highly  skilled  migrant  maybe
           granted for a period not exceeding 3 years,  provided  that  the
           Secretary of State is satisfied that each of the requirements of
           paragraph 135D, 135DA, 135DB,  135DC,  135DD,  135DE,  135DF  or
           135DG is met.


           Refusal of extension of stay as a highly skilled migrant


           135F  An extension of stay as a highly skilled migrant is to  be
           refused if the Secretary of State is not satisfied that each  of
           the requirements of paragraph 135D, 135DA, 135DB, 135DC,  135DD,
           135DE, 135DF or 135DG is met."

 17. And, finally, in relation to the grant of indefinite leave  to  remain
     under the HSMP the relevant provisions were as follows:

           "Indefinite leave to remain as a highly skilled migrant


           135G  Indefinite leave to remain may be granted, on application,
           to a person currently with leave as a  highly  skilled  migrant,
           provided that he:


                    i) has had a continuous period  of  at  least  5  years'
                       leave to enter or remain in  the  United  Kingdom  in
                       this capacity or has had a continuous  period  of  at
                       least 5 years' leave to enter or remain in the United
                       Kingdom which includes periods of leave to  enter  or
                       remain granted under paragraphs 128 to 319  of  these
                       Rules; and
                   ii) for the period of leave as a highly skilled  migrant,
                       has met the requirements of paragraph 135A (i)-(iii);
                       and
                  iii) for any period of leave not in this capacity, has not
                       had recourse to public funds; and
                   iv) is lawfully economically active in the United Kingdom
                       in employment, self-employment or  a  combination  of
                       both.


           Refusal of indefinite  leave  to  remain  as  a  highly  skilled
           migrant


           135H  Indefinite leave to remain in  the  United  Kingdom  to  a
           person currently with leave as a highly skilled migrant is to be
           refused if the Secretary of State is not satisfied that each  of
           the requirements of paragraph 135G is met."

 18. In addition, the Rules allowed  for  'switching'  from,  for  example,
     being a student, work permit holder and working holidaymaker into  the
     HSMP category (paras 135DA-135DG).  It is unnecessary for  us  to  set
     these out as they are not relevant to these appeals.

 19. The relevant criteria for the awarding of points in order  to  qualify
     under the HSMP were not (then) in the Rules but were set  out  in  the
     relevant Home Office guidance and documentation (see HSMP Guidance for
     Applicants Under 28 Years of Age, April 2006  and  HSMP  Guidance  for
     Applicants 28 Years of Age and Over, April 2006).

      From 7 November 2006: HC 1702

 20. On 7 November 2006, the Government suspended the  HSMP.   With  effect
     from 6 December 2006, HC 1702 put in place amending Immigration  Rules
     for the HSMP.  The Government indicated that any applications received
     after 6 November 2006 would be considered  under  the  new  Rules  and
     criteria for the HSMP.  The requirements for entry clearance and leave
     to enter under the HSMP remained the same in para 135A apart from  the
     fact that a total of 75 rather than 65 points were now required.   For
     our  purposes  the  important  change  was  in  para  135D   and   the
     requirements for an extension of stay under the HSMP.  The substituted
     para 135D provides as follows:

           "135D. The requirements for an extension of  stay  as  a  highly
           skilled migrant for a person who  has  previously  been  granted
           entry  clearance  or  leave  in  this  capacity,  are  that  the
           applicant:


                 (i) entered the United Kingdom with a valid United  Kingdom
                 entry  clearance  as  a  highly  skilled  migrant,  or  has
                 previously been granted leave in accordance with paragraphs
                 135DA-135DH of these Rules; and


                 (ii) has achieved at least 75 points in accordance with the
                 criteria specified in Appendix 4  of  these  Rules,  having
                 provided all the documents which are set out in Appendix  5
                 (Part I) of these Rules  which  correspond  to  the  points
                 which he is claiming; and


                 (iii)        (a)  has  produced  an  International  English
                       Language Testing System certificate issued to him  to
                       certify  that  he  has  achieved  at  least  band   6
                       competence in English; or
                       (b) has demonstrated that he  holds  a  qualification
                       which was taught  in  English  and  which  is  of  an
                       equivalent  level  to  a  UK  Bachelors   degree   by
                       providing  both  documents  which  are  set  out   in
                       Appendix 5 (Part II) of these Rules; and


                 (iv) meets the requirements of paragraph 135A(ii)-(iii)."

 21. There are also a number of other amendments to the Rules governing the
     HSMP including the 'switching' provisions  in  paras  135DA-135DG  and
     that for the grant of indefinite leave to remain in para  135G.   None
     are important in these appeals.

 22. It will be immediately apparent that the new para 135D has a number of
     effects.  First, it imposes a new English  language  requirement.   We
     need say nothing more about that in these appeals other than  to  note
     that it was one of the bases for  the  refusal  in  the  case  of  MC.
     Secondly, it removes the requirement, previously in para 135D(ii) that
     the applicant show that he has "taken during his period of  leave  all
     reasonable steps to become lawfully economically active in the  United
     Kingdom in employment, self-employment  or  a  combination  of  both".
     Thirdly, this requirement is replaced by a  new  para  135D(ii)  which
     stipulates that the applicant must show that he "has achieved at least
     75 points in accordance with the criteria in Appendix 4" of the  Rules
     and  provided  the  necessary  supporting  documentation  required  by
     Appendix 5 of the Rules. (The detail of Appendices  4  and  5  is  not
     important to the legal issues in these appeals and we do not set  them
     out here.)

 23. It is clear that the shift  from  an  applicant  proving  that  he  is
     "lawfully economically active" to establishing that he has achieved 75
     points under the  criteria  in  Appendix  4  is  to  a  more  specific
     requirement which is likely to impose a more onerous requirement  than
     before.  What was previously  required  is  set  out  in  the  various
     versions of the Home Office guidance issued prior  to  November  2006.
     The relevant terms of the guidance has  not  changed  between  the  31
     October 2003 guidance which is relied upon by the appellants and  that
     immediately preceding the rule changes which was issued in April 2006.
      Point 18.1 of the October 2003 Guidance is in identical terms, so far
     as is relevant, to paras 55 and 57 respectively of the two April  2006
     guidance notes and is as follows:

           "....You will be asked to  provide  evidence  of  your  economic
           activity during your period of stay in the UK  and  evidence  of
           your personal earnings during the period, if you  are  employed.
           If you are self-employed a business plan and evidence  that  you
           have established a business bank account, which has been active,
           will suffice.  If you have been active in employment  and  self-
           employment then you should submit evidence of both. ..."

The Issues

 24. In these appeals, it is accepted that the  principal  appellants  were
     unable to satisfy the requirement in para 135D(ii)  in  force  from  7
     November 2006, namely that they had achieved the required threshold of
     75 points under the HSMP.  They had simply not been able to work  long
     enough in the UK prior to seeking an  extension  of  their  respective
     leaves to qualify for the necessary points in accordance with Appendix
     4 of HC 395.  (MC also failed  on  the  English  language  requirement
     introduced from 7 November 2006.)  But, it is strongly  maintained  on
     their behalf, that they each had taken "all reasonable steps to become
     lawfully economically active" and so would have  succeeded  under  the
     previous version of para 135D(ii).  (Although the  judge  specifically
     found against AA on that issue also.)

 25. The appellants argue that they are entitled to have their applications
     for extensions of leave considered under the  earlier  HSMP  rules  in
     force when they applied for and were granted entry clearance and  came
     to the UK acting in reliance on  that  guidance.      The  appellants'
     claims are based  upon  the  argument  that  they  have  a  legitimate
     expectation that their applications  will  be  decided  on  the  pre-7
     November 2006 rules which, they say, is derived  from  representations
     amounting to a promise contained in the  Home  Office's  October  2003
     Guidance upon which each appellant relied to his detriment  in  coming
     to the UK.  It is submitted on behalf of  the  appellants  that  their
     appeals should be allowed to the extent that the  Secretary  of  State
     should re-consider their applications in  accordance  with  the  pre-7
     November 2006 rules.  In addition, the appellants argue  that  refusal
     of leave in these circumstances  breaches  Art  8  and  the  right  to
     respect for private and, to the extent it  is  engaged,  their  family
     life.

The starting point

 26. In any appeal before the Tribunal in which the appellant  relies  upon
     the immigration rules, the applicable rules to the  appeal  are  those
     that were in force at the time the  immigration  decision  was  taken.
     That is the effect of the decision of the Divisional Court in R v  IAT
     ex parte Nathwani [1979-80] Imm  AR  9.    The  court  held  that  the
     Secretary of State and the appellate body were correct  to  apply  the
     rules in force at the date of the Secretary of State's decision rather
     than those in force at  the  date  of  the  individual's  application.
     Stephen Brown J considered this  to  be  "abundantly  clear"  and  the
     contrary unarguable (at p.13).  Eveleigh LJ was no less certain (at p.
     14):

           "... there is no right  in  the  applicant  to  dictate  to  the
           Secretary of State which set of rules shall be  applied  at  the
           time of the decision in the case.   The  rules  are  essentially
           rules which have to be regarded at the time of a decision."

 27. Lord Widgery CJ agreed with both  judgments  (at  p.  15).   We  would
     venture to say that this position represents  settled  and  undisputed
     law.  Nevertheless, it was challenged in the recent case of  MO  (Date
     of decision:  applicable  rules)  Nigeria  [2007]  UKAIT  00057.   The
     Tribunal approved and applied the reasoning in Nathwani.  At para [14]
     the Tribunal set out the underlying basis for the 'starting point'  in
     appeals before the Tribunal:

           "14. The Immigration Rules are not  a  statute  or  a  statutory
           instrument.  Although they are to be laid before Parliament, and
           although they are subject to a  negative  resolution  by  either
           House, they remain the Secretary of State's "Rules laid down  by
           him as to the practice to be followed".  Although they can  have
           no  effect  if  the  legislature  disapproves   of   them,   the
           Immigration Rules are essentially  executive,  not  legislative.
           Section 3(2) of the 1971 Act sets down the procedure for  making
           what are essentially statements of policy; it  does  not  change
           those statements from policy  into  legislation.   As  executive
           rules  or  policy  they  are  in  our  view  not   amenable   to
           interpretation  as  though  they  were  statutes  or   statutory
           instruments.  The Secretary of State is entitled  and  bound  to
           make and operate the United Kingdom's immigration policy and  he
           is  entitled  to  make  decisions  about  particular  cases   by
           reference to the policy in operation at the time the decision is
           made."


 28. We have no doubt that  the  Tribunal's  reasoning  in  MO  is  equally
     applicable in  determining  the  appropriate  policy  that  should  be
     applied by the Secretary of State outside the immigration  rules.   It
     must be the policy current at the time she takes the relevant decision
     under challenge (see R v North and  East  Devon  Health  Authority  ex
     parte Coughlan [2001] QB 213 per Lord Woolf  MR  at  [75]).   Although
     here, there may be an argument (at  least  before  the  Administrative
     Court) that a failure to apply at an  earlier  date  a  policy  in  an
     individual's favour is so "conspicuously unfair amounting to an  abuse
     of power" as to render a later decision unlawful even if  it  complies
     with the current (new) policy (see R(S) v SSHD  [2007]  EWCA  Civ  546
     (explaining R(Rashid) v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 744) and DS (Afghanistan)
     v SSHD [2007] EWCA Civ 774).

 29. Turning to these appeals, the only basis for the appellants' claims to
     an extension of leave under the Immigration Rules is on the  basis  of
     para 135D as introduced by HC 1702.  There is no doubt  that  HC  1702
     applies to the Secretary of State's decisions in these  appeals  which
     were all made after 5 December 2006 when  HC  1702  came  into  force.
     There are no transitional provisions displacing application of the new
     rules to applications outstanding at the date those  rules  came  into
     force.   Indeed, the Home Office expressly acknowledges they apply  to
     earlier applications if made on or after  7  November  2006  when  the
     previous rules were deleted.   They would also apply  to  applications
     for an extension of leave made before 7 November 2006 but  which  were
     decided after 5 December 2006.

 30. It is accepted that these appellants cannot succeed  under  the  Rules
     introduced by HC 1702.  What is said, of  course,  on  behalf  of  the
     appellants is that the terms of the Home Office  guidance  in  October
     2003 taken together with the wording of para 135A when they sought and
     were originally granted entry clearance that they must "intend[  ]  to
     make the United  Kingdom  [their]  main  home"  creates  a  legitimate
     expectation that the applications for extension of leave will be dealt
     with on the basis of the substance of the earlier  immigration  rules.
     At the dates the Respondent's decisions in these appeals, those  rules
     were no longer in force.  The content of this argument must  therefore
     be  that  the  Secretary  of  State  is  required  to  consider   (and
     consequently exercise) her discretion outside the rules in  accordance
     with the terms of the previous rules.

Legitimate expectation

 31. Mr Kovats on behalf of the Secretary of  State  made  three  principal
     submissions:

           (1) the Tribunal has no jurisdiction to entertain an  appeal  on
           public law grounds such as legitimate expectation;
           (2) in any event,  the  only  legitimate  expectation  that  the
           appellants had was that  their  applications  would  be  decided
           under the rules and  criteria  in  force  at  the  date  of  any
           decision on their applications for  extensions of stay; and
           (3) even if the appellants'  argument  was  accepted,  any  such
           legitimate expectation was overridden in the public interest.


      The Tribunal's jurisdiction


 32.  Before  we  consider  the  substantive  arguments  about   legitimate
     expectation we must confront Mr Kovats' first submission.  It goes  to
     the Tribunal's jurisdiction to deal  with  the  substantive  arguments
     apart from the Art 8 issues.   Although it was not raised  earlier  in
     the reconsideration process, it was specifically relied  upon  by  the
     immigration judge in  the  appeal  of  AA  to  reject  the  legitimate
     expectation ground.  In truth, counsel for  the  appellants  were  not
     taken by surprise and both Mr Gillespie and Ms Phelan fully  addressed
     the jurisdictional issue in their submissions before us.   Given  that
     Mr Kovats submission raises a jurisdiction issue, we consider that  it
     is right that we should deal with it.

 33. The relevant statutory provisions are found in ss. 84 and  86  of  the
     Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act").  So far
     as necessary for these appeals, s.84(1) provides as follows:

           "84.  Grounds of appeal


           (1)  An  appeal  under  section  82(1)  against  an  immigration
           decision must be brought on one or more of the following grounds-


                 (a)   that  the  decision  is  not   in   accordance   with
                 immigration rules;
                 (b) that the decision is unlawful by virtue of section  19B
                 of the Race Relations Act 1976  (c.  74)(discrimination  by
                 public authorities);
                 (c) that the decision is unlawful under section  6  of  the
                 Human Rights Act 1998 (c. 42)(public authority not  to  act
                 contrary to Human Rights Convention) as being  incompatible
                 with the appellant's Convention rights;
                 (d) that the appellant is an EEA national or  a  member  of
                 the family of an EEA national and the decision breaches the
                 appellant's rights under the Community Treaties in  respect
                 of entry to or residence in the United Kingdom;
                 (e) that the decision is otherwise not in  accordance  with
                 the law;
                 (f)  that  the  person  taking  the  decision  should  have
                 exercised differently a discretion conferred by immigration
                 rules;
                 (g) that removal of the appellant from the  United  Kingdom
                 in consequence of the immigration decision would breach the
                 United Kingdom's obligations under the  Refugee  Convention
                 or would be unlawful under section 6 of  the  Human  Rights
                 Act  1998  as  being  incompatible  with  the   appellant's
                 Convention rights. ..."

 34. Section 86 of the 2002 Act deals with the  "determination  of  appeal"
     and, as relevant to these appeals, provides as follows:

           "86. Determination of appeal


           (1) This section applies on an appeal under section 82(1)  ,  83
           or 83A.
           (2) ....
           (3) The Tribunal must allow the appeal in so far  as  he  thinks
           that-
                 (a) a decision against which the appeal is  brought  or  is
                 treated as being brought was not in accordance with the law
                 (including immigration rules), or
                 (b) a discretion exercised in  making  a  decision  against
                 which the appeal is brought or is treated as being  brought
                 should have been exercised differently.
           (4).....
           (5) In so far as subsection (3) does  not  apply,  the  Tribunal
           shall dismiss the appeal.
           (6) Refusal to  depart  from  or  to  authorise  departure  from
           immigration rules is not the exercise of a  discretion  for  the
           purposes of subsection (3)(b)."

 35. Mr Kovats' primary submission was that the  Tribunal  cannot  consider
     grounds of appeal which rely entirely upon public law principles  such
     as legitimate expectation or fairness.  Those  matters  were  for  the
     Administrative Court in judicial review proceedings under Part  54  of
     the  CPR.   He  submitted  that  challenges  based  upon  public   law
     principles did not fall within the ground of appeal in  s.84(1)(e)  of
     the 2002 Act that the decision was "otherwise not in  accordance  with
     the law".  He submitted that there was no binding authority that  they
     did  although  it  had  been  assumed  in  some  earlier  cases,  most
     prominently by the Court of Appeal in (DS) Abdi v SSHD [1996]  Imm  AR
     148.  Mr Kovats submitted  that  s.84(1)(e)  should  be  construed  as
     limited to  challenges  that,  in  effect,  a  decision  was  not  "in
     accordance with statute"  in  particular  the  Immigration  Acts.   Mr
     Kovats' subsidiary submission was that only the Abdi-type  public  law
     challenge of failure to consider (or properly consider) a policy could
     be brought within the ground of appeal in s.84(1)(e).

 36. In the experience of the current panel of  the  Tribunal,  Mr  Kovats'
     submissions on behalf of the Secretary of State are unprecedented.  It
     has certainly been accepted since the decision of the Court of  Appeal
     in Abdi that at least some  public  law  challenges  fell  within  the
     Tribunal's jurisdiction founded on the words "not in  accordance  with
     the law".   Those words have existed in the governing statute  dealing
     with immigration appeals since s.19(1) of the  Immigration  Act  1971.
     Those words were subsequently repeated in Sched 4, para 21(1)  to  the
     Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 before becoming, with the addition  of
     the word "otherwise" the ground of appeal now found in s.84(1)(e)  and
     repeated in s.86(3) of the 2002 Act.

 37. The case law begins with the House of Lords' decision in R  v  IAT  ex
     parte Bakhtaur Singh [1986] 1 WLR 910.   The case concerned an  Indian
     citizen whom it had been decided should be deported on the ground that
     it was conducive to the public good under s.3(5)  of  the  Immigration
     Act 1971.  In  the  appeal  against  that  decision,  the  adjudicator
     refused to  take  account  of  the  positive  contribution  which  the
     appellant had made (and could continue to  make)  as  a  musician  and
     priest in the local Sikh community.  The impact  upon  that  community
     was not one of the "compassionate circumstances of the case" under the
     equivalent of what is now para 364 of the Immigration Rules.  The  IAT
     refused permission to appeal and the appellant sought judicial  review
     of its refusal.  Counsel for the Secretary  of  State  submitted  that
     there were some matters which were only relevant for the Secretary  of
     State and were not relevant in a statutory appeal.  A failure to  take
     them into account might result in the Secretary  of  State's  decision
     being quashed on Wednesbury  grounds  but  did  not  fall  within  the
     appellate tribunal's jurisdiction.  The House of Lords held  that  the
     adjudicator had been wrong in excluding the effect of the  deportation
     upon the Sikh community.  In so doing,  Lord  Bridge  (with  whom  the
     other Law Lords agreed) rejected counsel's argument (at p. 919):


           "[Counsel for the Secretary of State's] argument encounters  its
           final and, to my mind, insurmountable hurdle, in a consideration
           derived from the general law.  On classic Wednesbury  principles
           (Associated  Provincial  Picture  Houses  Ltd.   v.   Wednesbury
           Corporation [1948] 1 K.B. 223),  in  exercising  his  discretion
           whether to implement a court recommendation for  deportation  or
           whether to  decide  to  make  a  deportation  order  against  an
           overstayer, the Secretary of State is bound to take  account  of
           all relevant considerations.  If, therefore,  some  interest  of
           third parties which is known to the Secretary of State and which
           would be adversely affected by deportation is in truth  relevant
           to the proper  exercise  of  the  discretion,  a  decision  made
           without taking it into account would in any  event  be  open  to
           challenge by judicial review and consequently would be open,  in
           the case of an overstayer, to  appeal  under  section  19(1)  as
           being "not in accordance with the  law"  quite  apart  from  the
           immigration rules.  It follows that to construe the rules in the
           sense for which the appeal  tribunal  contends  would  not  only
           conflict with the general law but would also be  ineffective  to
           restrict the relevant matters which  the  appellate  authorities
           may, and indeed must, take into consideration."

 38. Mr Kovats submitted that these comments are obiter and should  not  be
     followed.  He relied instead upon a passage in the judgment of Watkins
     LJ in the decision of the Divisional Court in R v IAT  ex  parte  Home
     Secretary [1992] Imm AR 555.  There, the appellant contended that  the
     Secretary of State in refusing leave outside the immigration rules had
     acted unfairly.   It was argued on the  appellant's  behalf  that  the
     general principles of administrative law (including the  duty  to  act
     fairly) fell within the appeal tribunal's jurisdiction because of  the
     requirement to  allow  an  appeal  where  the  decision  was  "not  in
     accordance with the law" by virtue s.19(1) of the 1971 Act.  The court
     dismissed the application because there  had  not  in  fact  been  any
     unfairness.   Nevertheless,   Watkins   LJ   said   this   about   the
     jurisdictional issue (at pp. 563-4):


           "...having  regard  to  the  firm  view  I  have  taken  of  the
           Tribunal's finding on fairness, it  is  unnecessary  to  resolve
           this issue.  It is far better that it should wait to be resolved
           in a case where it  is  crucial  to  the  determination  of  the
           application.  Be that as  it  may,  I  feel  it  right  to  say,
           without, of course, deciding the matter, that I should  find  it
           very surprising that within the appellate structure of the  1971
           Act, adjudicators and tribunals are  empowered  to  embark  upon
           often complex  and  far-reaching  issues  involving  public  law
           considerations, such  as  procedural  impropriety,  and  so  on,
           albeit that a Tribunal has a legal chairman and that  an  appeal
           lies  to  this  court  from  the  Tribunal.   In   the   present
           uncertainty of the public  law  issues,  I  think  it  would  be
           prudent of chairmen of tribunals to leave such matters  to  this
           court which is accustomed to dealing with them."

 39. It is important to notice that Watkins LJ's views were obiter and,  as
     he explicitly acknowledged, were clearly tentative.  By contrast, Lord
     Bridge's  views,  even  if  also  technically  obiter,  were   clearly
     considered and the other four Law Lords sitting in  Singh  who  agreed
     with Lord Bridge's speech did not demur from them.    Lord Bridge,  of
     course, had extensive experience of public law cases.  Whilst  at  the
     Bar he represented  the  Government  in  public  law  cases  as  First
     Treasury Counsel (Common Law).  To the  extent  that  we  must  choose
     between these views, Watkins LJ's  comments  pre-date  those  of  Lord
     Bridge and, with all due respect to Watkins LJ, we prefer the approach
     in Singh.

 40. The next case we should consider is the well-known  decision  of  (DS)
     Abdi v SSHD.  The case concerned  the  (then)  Somali  Reunion  Policy
     whereby members of the household of a Somali  national  who  had  been
     granted refugee status in the UK would, in certain  circumstances,  be
     allowed to join  that  individual  in  this  country.   In  Abdi,  the
     Secretary of State refused a number of applications under  the  policy
     concluding that the applicants did not qualify  as  the  part  of  the
     refugee's household.  On appeal,  an  adjudicator  found  that  was  a
     mistaken view of the facts and so the policy did apply.  He went on to
     allow the appeal on the basis that the decision was "not in accordance
     with the law".  Following an  unsuccessful  appeal  to  the  IAT,  the
     Secretary of State appealed to the Court  of  Appeal.   The  Court  of
     Appeal upheld the adjudicator's decision.  In the course of doing  so,
     the court dealt with  the  argument  that  the  Secretary  of  State's
     failure to apply his policy did not lead to the decision being "not in
     accordance with the law" under s.19(1) of the 1971 Act.  Having  cited
     the passage from Lord Bridge's speech in Singh which we set out above,
     Peter Gibson LJ continued as follows (at p. 157):

           "These remarks are only obiter dicta and it is not obvious  that
           Parliament by section 19(1)(a)(i) intended adjudicators to  have
           the power to  examine  the  validity  of  the  Home  Secretary's
           decision by reference to all the matters that would be  relevant
           for a judicial review of the decision.  But  Mr  Singh  did  not
           suggest that Lord Bridge's  remarks  were  wrong  and  they  are
           supported by similar comments by Mustill LJ in Malhi v Secretary
           of State for the Home Department [1990] Imm AR 275 at p 283.   I
           shall therefore proceed on the footing that if it can  be  shown
           that the  Home  Secretary  failed  to  act  in  accordance  with
           established principles of  administrative  or  common  law,  for
           example if he did not take account of or give effect to his  own
           published policy, that was not "in accordance with the law"."

 41. Mr Kovats placed great store upon this passage and submitted that  the
     Court of  Appeal  simply  assumed  the  existence  of  the  Tribunal's
     jurisdiction for the purposes of  that  appeal.   It  is  not  binding
     authority on the scope of what is  now  s.84(1)(e)  of  the  2002  Act
     despite having been followed, seemingly without disagreement,  by  the
     Court of Appeal in the similar case of Hershi v  SSHD  [1996]  Imm  AR
     569.

 42. We accept that Abdi is not an authoritative ruling on the scope of the
     Tribunal's jurisdiction because the Court of  Appeal  merely  accepted
     that it existed given  the  concession  by  the  Secretary  of  State.
     Nevertheless, the Court of Appeal did act upon that concession and did
     find against the Secretary of State on the substantive issue and  held
     that the Secretary of State's decision was "not in accordance with the
     law".   That approach, so far as we are aware, has never  subsequently
     been challenged in the 12 years since Abdi was decided.  It  has  been
     applied numerous times by the Tribunal (and  its  predecessors)  where
     the  decision-maker  has  failed  to  take  account  of  (or  properly
     consider) a relevant policy.  The same can be said  of  the  Court  of
     Appeal as is illustrated by the following passage from the judgment of
     Keene LJ in AA (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2007] EWCA Civ 12 at  [16]  which
     concerned the misapplication by the Secretary of State of  his  policy
     dealing with unaccompanied children:

           "16. The position is that the AIT should have found an error  of
           law by the adjudicator. He for his part should have  found  that
           the Secretary of State's decision was not in accordance with the
           law and  allowed  the  appeal  under  section  86(3)(a)  of  the
           Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act, 2002 ("the 2002  Act").
           This court has held more than once that  for  the  Secretary  of
           State to fail to take account of  or  give  effect  to  his  own
           published policy renders his decision not  "in  accordance  with
           the law": see, for example, Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
           Department v. Abdi [1996] Imm. AR 148 at 157. Likewise  the  AIT
           should have concluded that the adjudicator had made an error  of
           law."

 43. Mr Kovats properly drew our attention to two decisions of the IAT both
     chaired by the President (Ouseley J) in which  it  had  been  accepted
     that legitimate expectation could be relied upon in  an  appeal  under
     s.84(1)(e).

 44. The first, RM (Special Vouchers - representation) India  [2005]  UKIAT
     00067, concerned a number of East  African  Asians  who  sought  entry
     clearance to join their parents in the UK after  the  Special  Voucher
     Scheme (which would have  applied  to  them)  ended.   The  appellants
     relied  upon  a  number  of  Government  statements  which  they  said
     established a legitimate expectation that they would, nevertheless, be
     granted entry to the UK.  On the facts,  the  IAT  found  against  the
     appellants.  However, Ouseley J accepted that  s.84(1)(e)  encompassed
     both the Abdi-type  challenge  and  also  one  based  upon  legitimate
     expectation.  As to the former, he said this (at [40]):

           "40. The Tribunal has jurisdiction to say that a decision is not
           in accordance with the law where  the  Secretary  of  State  has
           ignored or misinterpreted his policy. Abdi shows as much...."

 45. As to legitimate expectation, Ouseley J said this (at [43]):

           "43. It might be that the facts of a  particular  case  were  so
           strong that a failure to give effect to a substantive legitimate
           expectation was an abuse of power and hence the  decision  would
           be not in accordance with law.   That  would  not  be  enforcing
           policy but law.  But the facts here are nowhere near that. Where
           the facts show that a decision breached the requirement for  the
           procedural protection of a legitimate expectation, the  decision
           would not be in accordance with law, but could be  reconsidered.
           ..."

 46. In the second case, EG (Abuse of  process  -  legitimate  expectation)
     Serbia and Montenegro  [2005]  UKIAT  00074,  the  appellant  appealed
     against the decision refusing him asylum.  One of the  bases  for  his
     appeal was that, as a result of a telephone conversation with  a  Home
     Office official in which (the appellant claimed) he had been  told  he
     would be issued with "papers", he had a legitimate expectation that he
     would be granted leave.   In this respect, he relied  upon  s.84(1)(e)
     and argued that the decision was "otherwise not in accordance with the
     law".   On the facts, the IAT concluded that  no  such  representation
     had been made.  The IAT cast no doubt, however, on the  view  that  it
     could in principle  consider  a  challenge  based  upon  a  legitimate
     expectation (see [16]-[31]).  In addition, Ouseley  J  saw  legitimate
     expectation as encompassing both  cases  where  a  decision-maker  had
     failed to follow a promulgated  policy  and  where  it  arose  from  a
     practice or promise (at [21]).  The importance of the latter for these
     appeals is its implications for Mr Kovats' subsidiary position, namely
     that s.84(1)(e) allows only challenges on an Abdi basis.   Ouseley J's
     view was that Abdi is merely a specific instance where a person has  a
     legitimate expectation that a decision-maker will  act  in  a  certain
     way, namely apply his published policy.   Thus, to accept  that  Abdi-
     type  challenges  fall  within  s.84(1)(e)  is  also  to  accept  that
     challenges based upon legitimate expectation fall within s.84(1)(e).

 47. Mr Gillespie and Ms Phelan also referred us to the  cases  of  Baig  v
     SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 1246 especially a  passage  in  the  judgment  of
     Buxton LJ at [28] and HC v SSHD  [2005]  EWCA  Civ  893.   It  is  not
     necessary for us to dwell on these cases at any length.  They  are  in
     truth not directly relevant to the issue we must decide.  In Baig,  it
     is  clear  that  Buxton  LJ  was  concerned  with   the   scope   (and
     identification) of an error of law within the appellate structure.  It
     was a misunderstanding by the adjudicator of the correct  approach  to
     determining proportionality under Art  8.2  of  the  ECHR.   In  other
     words, Buxton LJ was concerned exclusively with what had to  be  shown
     by a losing party to allow an appeal from an adjudicator to the (then)
     IAT and onward to the Court of  Appeal.   (Under  the  current  appeal
     structure, such an error would be relevant in seeking  reconsideration
     or,  subsequently,  onward  appeal  to  the  Court  of  Appeal.)   His
     reference to "an error of public law" must be read  in  that  context.
     Buxton LJ was not dealing with the jurisdiction  of  (and  grounds  of
     appeal to) the adjudicator (now Tribunal) under the 2002 Act.  To  the
     extent that there is any ambiguity in Buxton LJ's  words  -  which  we
     doubt - his reference to HC makes the point  unequivocally  where  the
     Court of Appeal at paras [3]-[8] is dealing with the  jurisdiction  of
     the IAT to hear an appeal from an adjudicator on a point of law  under
     s.101(1) of the 2002 Act.  At best, these  cases  illustrate  a  broad
     view of what constitutes an  "error  of  law"  but  they  say  nothing
     directly about the interpretation of the statutory  phrase  "otherwise
     not in accordance with the law" in s.84(1)(e) of the 2002 Act.

 48. In our view, there is nothing in the case law, apart from Watkins LJ's
     tentative view in R v IAT ex parte Secretary  of  State,  which  tells
     against s.84(1)(e) encompassing at  least  some  public  law  grounds.
     Indeed, the case law provides positive support for that view.

 49. Further, the structure of s.84(1) itself  strongly  suggests  that  Mr
     Kovats' submission that  s.84(1)(e)  must  be  construed  narrowly  is
     untenable.  It cannot be restricted to, in effect, decisions  contrary
     to the Immigration Acts.   The grounds of appeal in  s.84(1)(b),  (c),
     (d) and (g) identify a broad range of other legal provisions which, if
     breached, will led to a successful appeal: s.19B, Race  Relations  Act
     1976; s.6, Human  Rights  Act  1998;  EU  Treaties;  and  the  Refugee
     Convention.   Ground  '(e)'  requires  proof  that  the  decision   is
     "otherwise" not in accordance with the law.  As a matter of  language,
     therefore, a decision which breaches one of these  other  statutes  is
     one which is "not in accordance with the law"  and  that,  of  course,
     would be the basis for allowing  any  appeal  in  such  a  case  under
     s.86(3)(a).   Given the breadth (and particularity) of what  surrounds
     ground '(e)' it seems unlikely that Parliament intended that ground to
     be limited to 'the Immigration Acts'.  Had it  wished  to  do  so,  we
     would have expected that to be spelt out  in  s.84(1)(e)  rather  than
     expressed in the general way it actually is.   In  our  judgment,  the
     narrow interpretation that Mr Kovats pressed upon us - whether in  the
     form of his primary or subsidiary argument - sits  uncomfortably  with
     the statutory context.

 50. Mr Kovats also submitted that the narrow  interpretation  was  correct
     otherwise there would be an undesirable overlap with the  jurisdiction
     and functions of the Administrative Court.  We do not accept this.  To
     the extent that it is echoing Watkins LJ's words in R v IAT  ex  parte
     Secretary of State that the Administrative Court  should  be  left  to
     deal with legal issues with which it is more familiar, that  is,  with
     respect, a somewhat dated  view.   The  Tribunal's  jurisdiction  lies
     within the heart of public  law  adjudication.   On  an  almost  daily
     basis, Immigration Judges are required  to  interpret  and  apply  the
     Human Rights Act and ECHR to individual appeals before  them.    Also,
     as the case law amply demonstrates, since Abdi  the  Tribunal  has  in
     fact exercised a jurisdiction applying public law principles.

 51. To the extent that Mr Kovats' submission is that there  should  be  no
     overlap between the Tribunal and the Administrative Court, it is  with
     respect misplaced.  There is an inevitable  overlap  between  the  two
     jurisdictions dealing with "immigration  decisions"  as  indeed  there
     always is when a statutory appeal system to challenge  certain  public
     law decisions exists.  The Administrative  Court  always  retains  its
     jurisdiction but any attempt to invoke it in preference to the  appeal
     process will usually be met by  a  refusal  to  grant  leave  to  seek
     judicial review because there is  an  alternative  remedy  by  way  of
     appeal (see R v SSHD ex parte Swati [1986] 1 WLR 477; SSHD v  R  (Lim)
     [2007] EWCA Civ 773,  especially  at  [13]).   Of  course,  there  are
     differences between the jurisdictions.  The Tribunal may  be  able  to
     enquire into the merits of immigrations decisions, for example in  the
     exercise of discretion under  the  Rules,  whilst  the  Administrative
     Court is restricted to determining the legality of  the  discretionary
     decision.  Determining whether a  decision  breaches  an  individual's
     human rights may in practice  blur  the  merits/legality  distinction.
     Likewise, the Administrative Court may have a  jurisdiction  that  the
     Tribunal lacks, for example to determine the vires of  an  immigration
     rule (see e.g. Koprinov (01 TH 00091) (5 February  2001);  AI  v  SSHD
     [2007] EWCA Civ 386 at [58] per Dyson LJ) and has  remedies  that  the
     Tribunal lacks such as quashing orders  and  declarations.   The  fact
     remains that there is overlap but, in reality, the appeals process  is
     the procedure of first choice in such cases.  Mr  Kovats'  submissions
     would, if  correct,  tend  to  produce  a  duplication  of  procedures
     requiring an individual to raise public law  based  challenges  to  an
     immigration decision, which would otherwise come within the s.84(1)(e)
     ground, before the Administrative Court.  We see no  good  reason  for
     this obviously inefficient use of court and judicial resources.

 52. Mr Kovats' final submission on this aspect of the appeals was that the
     appellants were seeking to avoid the effect of s.86(6) which prohibits
     a challenge to the Secretary of State's decisions not to exercise  his
     discretion outside the Rules.  With respect, this argument  is  simply
     wrong.  Section 86(6) has no application to these appeals.  We set out
     above the relevant parts of s.86.  It provides  the  circumstances  in
     which the Tribunal must allow an appeal (s.86(3))  and  when  it  must
     dismiss  an  appeal  (s.86(5)).    By  relying  upon  the  ground   in
     s.84(1)(e), if made out, the appellants rely upon s.86(3(a)  that  the
     "decision  against  which  the  appeal  is  brought  ...  was  not  in
     accordance with the law (including immigration rules)".  As it happens
     the wording of ground '(g)' and s.86(3)(a) coincide but the latter  is
     equally applicable to an appeal where the individual succeeds on,  for
     example, asylum, human rights or EU  grounds.    By  contrast,  if  an
     appellant is arguing that a discretion  under  the  Immigration  Rules
     should have been exercised differently, he will rely on the ground  in
     s.84(1)(f) and, if made out the appeal will be allowed  by  virtue  of
     s.86(3)(b), namely that a "discretion exercised in making  a  decision
     against which the appeal is brought ...  should  have  been  exercised
     differently".  There is no question of the appellant succeeding  on  a
     challenge based upon  the  illegality  of  the  decision  (covered  by
     s.86(3(a)) where the challenge is to the merits of the exercise  of  a
     discretion.  Hence the need for the specific wording in s.86(3)(b)  if
     the appeal is to be  allowed.   Section  86(6)  exists  to  create  an
     exception to s.86(3)(b) where the merits based  challenge  is  to  the
     Secretary of State's refusal to exercise his  discretion  outside  the
     rules.  It has no application where, as here, the challenge is to  the
     legality of the  decision  and  which,  if  successful,  falls  within
     s.86(3)(b).

 53. We see no proper basis  for  adopting  the  narrow  interpretation  of
     s.84(1)(e) proposed by Mr Kovats.  In reality, his one  example  of  a
     "law" which could engage this ground of appeal  was  "the  Immigration
     Acts".  That example, however, merely illustrates that at  least  some
     public law challenges do fall within  s.84(1)(e).   The  most  obvious
     examples would be in a deportation case  where  the  power  to  deport
     under s.3(5) of the 1971 Act does not exist because the appellant is a
     British citizen or in a removal case where the power  to  remove  does
     not exist because the appellant is not an immigration offender  within
     s.10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999  nor  an  illegal  entrant
     (see SSHD v R(Lim)).  But in truth, these 'precedent fact'  cases  are
     challenges based upon a public law principle - that the decisions  are
     ultra vires: see R  v  SSHD  ex  parte  Khawaja  [1984]  AC  74.   The
     inclusion of these challenges, in our view, places a significant  dent
     in Mr Kovats' otherwise pristine primary submission in respect of  the
     Tribunal's jurisdiction.

 54. As Mr Gillespie pointed  out,  the  phrase  "immigration  laws"  is  a
     statutory term of art defined in s.33(1) of the Immigration  Act  1971
     as, indeed, is the phrase "Immigration Acts" which is now  defined  in
     s.61(2) of the UK Borders Act 2007.  We agree with Mr  Gillespie  that
     had Parliament wished to narrow the  Tribunal's  jurisdiction  to  the
     degree submitted by Mr Kovats, it would have done so expressly and  in
     the clear words which were readily available to it.   The  wording  of
     s.84(1)(e)  has  been  the  operative  statutory   phrase   conferring
     jurisdiction in immigration appeals since the  Immigration  Act  1971.
     Parliament has re-enacted those words without  relevant  amendment  on
     two subsequent occasions in the 1999 and  2002  Acts;  both  occasions
     were subsequent to the  Court  of  Appeal's  decision  in  Abdi  which
     clearly, in our view, raised the availability of public law challenges
     within the immigration appeals structure.  The  statutory  words  have
     nevertheless remained  despite  the  major  overhaul  of  the  appeals
     provisions in the 2002 Act.

 55. For these reasons, we do not accept Mr Kovats' primary  or  subsidiary
     submissions  in  respect  of   the   Tribunal's   jurisdiction   under
     s.84(1)(e).   The  words  themselves   are   broadly   expressed   and
     unqualified in their scope.   They  should  be  given  their  ordinary
     meaning.   The words  "otherwise  not  in  accordance  with  the  law"
     encompass challenges to immigration decisions on public  law  grounds.
     Such grounds will include for  example  procedural  fairness  (see  BO
     (ECO's Duties per D S Abdi) Nigeria  [2004]  UKIAT  00026  -  decision
     taken by ECO prior to date fixed for interview) and,  importantly  for
     these appeals, legitimate expectation.

 56.  As  presently  advised,  we  also  consider  that  the  Tribunal  has
     jurisdiction to deal with a challenge to  a  discretion  exercised  in
     making an immigration decision on a Wednesbury basis, namely that  the
     discretion was exercised irrationally.  That, after all, was the  very
     ground considered by Lord Bridge in Singh to fall within the statutory
     wording.  This will have no impact where the discretion is part of the
     Immigration Rules themselves  because  any  such  challenge  would  be
     subsumed by the Tribunal's role in deciding on the merits whether  the
     discretion "should have [been] exercised differently" (s.84(1)(f)  and
     s.86(3((b)).  It might, however, have an impact if the discretion  was
     one existing outside the rules.  Section 86(6) prohibits the  Tribunal
     from considering the merits of a refusal  to  depart  from  the  rules
     under s. 86(3)(b) but, as we have seen, does not affect a challenge to
     the legality of such a decision  where  s.86(3)(a)  is  the  operative
     provision.   As a 'rationality'  challenge  forms  no  part  of  these
     appeals, we say no more than that.

 57. In relation to the appeals before us, it follows that the  immigration
     judges in the appeals of MC  and  KS  were  correct  to  consider  the
     legitimate expectation argument  but  the  immigration  judge  in  the
     appeals of AA, RM and MF erred in law (though not, as  we  shall  see,
     necessarily materially) when he concluded that he had no  jurisdiction
     to do so.

 58. The crucial issue in these appeals now becomes whether the  appellants
     can establish the substantive legitimate expectation they claim.

      The scope of legitimate expectation

 59. The courts have developed and  refined  the  public  law  doctrine  of
     legitimate expectation significantly since Lord Denning first used the
     term almost 40 years ago in Schmidt v SSHD ([1969]  2  Ch  149  at  p.
     171).  Its precise scope and content remains part of the  evolutionary
     process within modern public law (see, R v North and East Devon HA  ex
     parte Coughlan [2001] QB 213 per  Lord  Woolf  MR  at  [71]).  In  its
     original usage the courts conceived legitimate expectation as  a  type
     of public law "property" interest lying somewhere between a right  and
     a  mere  spes  which  might  entitle  the  individual  to   procedural
     protection before he was deprived of it or denied its continuance (see
     O'Reilly v Mackman [1983] 2 AC 237 per Lord  Diplock  at  p.  275  and
     McInnes v  Onslow-Fane  [1978]  1  WLR  1520).   In  time,  legitimate
     expectation came to describe the procedural "right" conferred  by  the
     law (the outcome) rather than the underlying interest (the basis) that
     was a sine qua non to protection from arbitrary or unfair action by  a
     public body.

 60. Consequently, over time  the  courts  have  utilised  the  concept  to
     provide procedural protection to an individual where the  public  body
     has either acted in a way  inconsistent  with  its  previous  practice
     (see, e.g. Council of Civil Service Unions v Minister  for  the  Civil
     Service [1985] AC 374) or in violation of a promise or  representation
     made that a certain process would be followed (see,  e.g.  Att-Gen  of
     Hong Kong v Ng Yuen Shiu [1983] 2 AC 629).   In  both  instances,  the
     root of the public law principle is fairness.  In Nadarajah and Abdi v
     SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 1363, Laws LJ expressed the underlying  principle
     as follows (at [68]):

           "68 ...Where a public authority has issued a promise or  adopted
           a practice which represents how it proposes to act  in  a  given
           area, the law  will  require  the  promise  or  practice  to  be
           honoured unless there is good reason not to do so. What  is  the
           principle behind this proposition? It is not far to seek. It  is
           said to be grounded in fairness, and no doubt in  general  terms
           that is so. I would prefer to express it rather more broadly  as
           a requirement of good administration,  by  which  public  bodies
           ought  to  deal  straightforwardly  and  consistently  with  the
           public. ..."

 61. There are four further general points that we would make.

 62. First, any practice or promise must be  established  evidentially  and
     must be "clear, unambiguous, and  devoid  of  relevant  qualification"
     particularly where it is said to give rise to a substantive benefit (R
     v IRC ex parte MFK Underwriting Agencies Ltd [1990]  1  WLR  1545  per
     Bingham LJ at p. 1570).    Secondly,  detrimental  reliance  upon  the
     representation will usually be  present  in  order  to  establish  the
     unfairness (or abuse of power) arising form the public  body  reneging
     upon its previous practice or promise; although not always  necessary,
     the absence of detrimental reliance where the claim is successful will
     be "very much the exception" (see R v SSHD ex parte  Begbie  [2000]  1
     WLR 1115,  per  Peter  Gibson  LJ  at  p.  1124).   Such  reliance  is
     particularly important in cases where the expectation is said to arise
     from a specific promise or representation made to the individual.   It
     is less important where the public body seeks to depart from  what  it
     has stated to the public at  large  it  will  do,  for  example  in  a
     published policy (see Bibi v Newham LBC [2002] 1 WLR 237 per Schiemann
     LJ at [30]; Begbie per Sedley LJ at p. 1133).  In truth, (detrimental)
     reliance by  an  individual  is  a  factor  relevant  to  the  overall
     assessment of the  binding  nature  of  the  claimed  expectation  and
     whether the public body's decision to act in accordance with  its  new
     (lawful) policy is 'unfair' and an abuse of power.  Thirdly, not every
     legitimate expectation must be honoured.  Such an expectation  may  be
     overridden in the public interest (Coughlan per Lord Woolf MR at [57];
     and Nadarajah and Abdi per Laws LJ at [68]-[69] - suggesting that  the
     public body must satisfy a test of  'proportionality').   Fourthly,  a
     promise cannot operate to create a legitimate expectation  where  that
     would require the public  body  to  act  contrary  to  its  powers  or
     otherwise unlawfully (see, e.g. Begbie; Ng Yuen Shiu per  Lord  Fraser
     at p. 638).

 63. As these authorities show, the benefit that the individual  may  claim
     by operation of a legitimate expectation is exclusively  a  procedural
     one, for example to be consulted or to make representations  prior  to
     the decision being taken.  That cannot assist the appellants in  these
     appeals.  They do not  claim  a  right  to  be  consulted  before  the
     Immigration Rules can be changed: an argument which would have  little
     or no prospect of success given the statutory framework  for  amending
     Immigration Rules (see R (Bapio Action Ltd) v  SSHD  [2007]  EWCA  Civ
     1139).  Instead, they argue that they are entitled  to  a  substantive
     benefit, namely the application of the pre-7 November 2006 Immigration
     Rules applicable to HSMP applications.  For that the  appellants  rely
     heavily upon the Court of Appeal's decision in Coughlan's case.

 64. In Coughlan, the applicant was a seriously disabled woman who lived in
     a purpose built  NHS  facility.   She  had  moved  there  having  been
     promised that it would be her "home for life" by the health authority.
       Following a public consultation, the  health  authority  decided  to
     close the facility and the applicant sought judicial review  to  quash
     the decision.  She claimed, inter  alia,  that  the  decision  was  in
     breach of an enforceable legitimate expectation based upon the promise
     of a "home for life".   Hidden J agreed and his decision was upheld by
     the Court of Appeal.

 65. At [57] Lord Woolf MR identified the three possible  outcomes  when  a
     legitimate expectation is claimed:

           "57. There are at least three possible outcomes. (a)  The  court
           may decide that the public authority is only required to bear in
           mind its previous policy or other representation, giving it  the
           weight it thinks right, but no more, before deciding whether  to
           change course. Here the  court  is  confined  to  reviewing  the
           decision on Wednesbury grounds. This has been  held  to  be  the
           effect of changes of policy in cases involving the early release
           of prisoners (see Re Findlay [1985] AC 318; R v  Home  Secretary
           ex parte Hargreaves [1997] 1 WLR 906). (b) On the other hand the
           court  may  decide  that  the  promise  or  practice  induces  a
           legitimate expectation of, for example, being consulted before a
           particular decision is taken. Here it is uncontentious that  the
           court itself will require the opportunity for consultation to be
           given unless there is an overriding reason  to  resile  from  it
           (see A-G for Hong Kong v Ng Yuen Shiu [1983] 2 AC 629) in  which
           case the court will itself judge  the  adequacy  of  the  reason
           advanced for the change of  policy,  taking  into  account  what
           fairness requires. (c) Where the court considers that  a  lawful
           promise or practice has induced a legitimate  expectation  of  a
           benefit which is substantive , not simply procedural,  authority
           now establishes that here too the court will in  a  proper  case
           decide whether to frustrate the expectation is so unfair that to
           take a new and different course  will  amount  to  an  abuse  of
           power.  Here,  once  the  legitimacy  of  the   expectation   is
           established, the court  will  have  the  task  of  weighing  the
           requirements of fairness against any overriding interest  relied
           upon for the change of policy."

 66. At [58] he explained the court's role in respect of each category:

           "58. The  court  having  decided  which  of  the  categories  is
           appropriate, the court's role in the  case  of  the  second  and
           third categories is different from that in  the  first.  In  the
           case of the first, the court  is  restricted  to  reviewing  the
           decision on conventional grounds. The test will  be  rationality
           and whether the public body  has  given  proper  weight  to  the
           implications of not fulfilling the promise. In the case  of  the
           second category the court's task  is  the  conventional  one  of
           determining whether the decision was procedurally fair.  In  the
           case of the third, the court has  when  necessary  to  determine
           whether there is a sufficient overriding interest to  justify  a
           departure from what has been previously promised."


 67. As will be clear, it is the third category of  legitimate  expectation
     that confers a substantive, rather than a purely  procedural,  benefit
     and which is claimed in these  appeals.   In  effect,  the  Respondent
     argues that the appeals fall within the first category.

 68. In relation to when a substantive expectation may arise, Lord Woolf MR
     (at [59]) identified a narrow category of case:

           "...most cases of an enforceable expectation  of  a  substantive
           benefit (the third category) are likely in the nature of  things
           to be cases where the expectation is confined to one person or a
           few people, giving the promise or representation  the  character
           of a contract...."

 69. And at [71], Lord Woolf MR added:

           "...when a promise is made to a category of individuals who have
           the same interest it is more likely to  be  considered  to  have
           binding effect than a promise which is made generally  or  to  a
           diverse class, when the interests of those to whom  the  promise
           is made may differ or, indeed, may be in conflict..."

 70. On the facts, the Court of Appeal held that the 'promise' gave rise to
     a  substantive  legitimate  expectation.   At  [60]  Lord   Woolf   MR
     identified the significant features of the case:

           "...First, the importance of what was promised to Miss Coughlan,
           (as we will explain later, this is a matter  underlined  by  the
           Human Rights Act  1998);  second,  the  fact  that  promise  was
           limited to a few individuals, and the fact that the consequences
           to the Health Authority of requiring it to  honour  its  promise
           are likely to be financial only."

 71. Having established the legitimate expectation,  the  Court  of  Appeal
     went on to consider whether it would be an abuse of power to frustrate
     the expectation and concluded that  it  would  be  and  there  was  no
     overriding public interest which justified it (see [89] per Lord Woolf
     MR).

 72. In Coughlan, Lord Woolf MR commented that the category  of  legitimate
     expectation where an individual could claim a substantive benefit  was
     "controversial"  (at  [59]).   The  existence  of  this  category   of
     legitimate expectation is now settled.   It  has,  for  example,  been
     accepted by the Court of Appeal in Begbie; Bibi and Nadarajah and Abdi
     albeit unsuccessfully on the facts of those cases.  Thus, there is  no
     doubt that the authorities now recognise that  a  substantive  benefit
     may be derived from a legitimate expectation.  In these appeals, it is
     not an extension of leave which would be the substantive benefit  akin
     to that claimed in Coughlan's case.  If it were, we are  in  no  doubt
     that this would be a proposition with no hope  of  success  given  the
     structure of the Immigration Rules and  of  the  HSMP  in  particular.
     Rather, the appellants claim the  substantive  benefit  of  the  pre-7
     November 2006 HSMP rules.

 73. To establish the legitimate expectation claimed, the  appellants  must
     show that:

           i. a promise or representation  was  made  in  the  Home  Office
              guidance that an applicant seeking an extension of  leave  in
              the future would be judged on the (then) rules  and  criteria
              rather than any changed provisions;
          ii. if so, that it would be unfair and unlawful as  an  abuse  of
              power to renege on that promise.

      Promise or representation?

 74. Before turning to consider the submissions  in  detail,  there  is  an
     initial point that we should mention.

 75. There has been a number of guidance documents issued  before  HC  1702
     took effect.  Mr Kovats provided us with a ring-binder containing  the
     guidance.  A number pre-date the appellants' initial  applications  or
     at least the decisions under the HSMP or  to  grant  entry  clearance.
     Nevertheless, Mr Gillespie and Ms Phelan relied as a  matter  of  fact
     exclusively upon the guidance of 31 October 2003 when a  revised  HSMP
     was introduced.   The passages they rely upon, which we set out below,
     do not appear in the  later  guidance,  for  example  of  April  2005,
     October 2005 and October 2006.

 76. Both counsel asked us to accept that it was the October 2003  Guidance
     which was in fact relied upon by each appellant.   That  indeed  would
     seem to have been accepted by the immigration judges  in  each  appeal
     and it is probably improper for us to go behind  that.   Nevertheless,
     the appellants' claimed position seemed somewhat unlikely to  us.   We
     enquired how this could be when later guidance had been issued by  the
     Home Office and, we presumed, would have  replaced  the  October  2003
     Guidance on the Home Office web-site.  The matter was left unresolved.
      Equally, when we enquired of the respondent when precisely particular
     guidance had been replaced on  the  web-site,  again  no  satisfactory
     answer was forthcoming despite enquiries being made.  In  his  written
     submissions, Mr Kovats asked us to assume, unless  the  contrary  were
     shown, that at the time the appellants were  granted  entry  clearance
     the April or October 2005 guidance would have been on the Home  Office
     web-site.  The appellants' subsequent reliance  on  the  October  2003
     Guidance was, therefore, wholly inappropriate.

 77. This is a most unsatisfactory situation.  Reliance is central  to  the
     appellants' submissions in these appeals.  It appears plain to us that
     a legitimate expectation can  only  be  established,  if  at  all,  in
     circumstances such as arise in these appeals  from  guidance  that  is
     current at the time that an individual changes  his  position  to  his
     detriment on the strength of the representation  made  which  probably
     equates to the time when each appellant resigned  his  work  and  sold
     assets in his own country and came to the UK.  It is  far  from  clear
     precisely what the dates for these events would be in  each  of  these
     appeals.   In an orderly world of immigration  control,  it  would  be
     reasonable to assume that at  all  relevant  times  the  October  2003
     Guidance would have been replaced on the Home Office web-site  by  the
     April or October 2005, or even April 2006, guidance.   That,  however,
     may not  always  be  the  reality  (see  e.g.  OS  (10  years'  lawful
     residence)  Hong  Kong  [2006]  UKAIT  00031  -   dealing   with   the
     relationship  between  the  'long  residence'  rule  and  concession).
     Reliance could then only properly be placed  on  that  later  guidance
     which the appellants' counsel accept could not help them to  establish
     the legitimate expectation claimed.  In these appeals, given the  view
     we take below on the effect of  the  October  2003  Guidance,  we  are
     content,  albeit  reluctantly,  to  proceed  on  the  basis  that  the
     appellants may put their cases at their highest in reliance upon  that
     guidance.

 78. Ms Phelan and Mr Gillespie relied upon  four  sets  of  questions  and
     answers in the October 2003 Guidance which are as follows:

           "24. 9      Q:   What if the scheme changes?
                 A:    As with any immigration scheme we reserve  the  right
                 to  adapt  some  of        the  criteria  or  documentation
                 associated with the scheme and will inform    you  via  our
                 websites of any such  changes.  All  applications  will  be
                 treated     on the basis of the HSMP provisions at the time
                 that they were submitted.


             24.10     Q:    I have already applied successfully under HSMP.
                  How does the    revised HSMP affect me?
                 A:    Not at all.  It is important to note that  once  you
                 have  entered  under  the        programme  you  are  in  a
                 category that has an avenue to settlement.  Those  who have
                 already entered under HSMP will  be  allowed  to  stay  and
                 apply       for  settlement  after  four  years  qualifying
                 residence regardless of these     revisions to HSMP.


             26.5 Q:   How long can I stay in the  UK  if  I  entered  as  a
                 skilled migrant?
                 A:    You will initially be given 12 months stay.  If  you
                 want to remain in the  UK under the HSMP, you should  apply
                 for an extension of your stay in  the last month before the
                 expiry of your permission to  stay  in  the  UK.        For
                 further information, please see "Extension of stay  in  the
                 United       Kingdom"  section.  You  will   be   able   to
                 amalgamate  leave  in  other     categories  that  lead  to
                 settlement for example, please see "Extension of   stay  in
                 the United Kingdom section." towards the end of that period
                 you   can apply to  remain  in  the  same  capacity  for  a
                 further period of up to      three years.


                       After four years  in  the  UK  as  a  highly  skilled
                 migrant you can apply for    settlement. The main  criteria
                 for  settlement   will   be   that   you   have   spent   a
                 continuous period of four years in the UK (except for trips
                 abroad of   three months or less, totalling less  than  six
                 months in the four year      period) in a category  leading
                 to settlement and that you continue to  be     economically
                 active in the UK as a highly skilled migrant.


           26.6  Q:    What will I need to do to qualify to stay after  the
                 first 12 months?
                 A:     You  will  need  to  show  that  you  are   lawfully
                 economically active or, if   you are  not,  that  you  have
                 taken   all   reasonable   steps   to    become    lawfully
                 economically  active  (e.g.   evidence   of   several   job
                 application forms or a       business plan).   Applications
                 are made directly to the HSMP Team  of    Work  Permits  UK
                 using a form FLR (HSM)  together  with  supporting     HSMP
                 evidence.  The  evidence  that  you  will  be  required  to
                 provide is  covered in the section "Extension  of  stay  in
                 the United Kingdom" in  this   guidance.   Details  of  the
                 application  process  for  an  extension  of   stay   after
                 one  year  in  the  programme  will  also  be  provided  to
                 successful HSMP  applicants with their approval papers. "

 79. They also relied upon paras 18.1 and 18.2 which are headed  "Extension
     of stay in the United Kingdom":

           "18.1       If your application is successful you will be  given
                 permission to enter the United Kingdom for a period  of  12
                 months.  In the last month before the end  of  that  period
                 you will be able to apply for further permission to stay as
                 a Highly Skilled Migrant.  You should apply directly to the
                 HSMP team in Work Permits (UK) using  the  form  FLR  (HSM)
                 available from the IND  website.   You  will  be  asked  to
                 provide evidence of  your  economic  activity  during  your
                 period of stay in the UK  and  evidence  of  your  personal
                 earnings during the period, if you are  employed.   If  you
                 are self-employed a business plan  and  evidence  that  you
                 have established a business bank account,  which  has  been
                 active,  will  suffice.   If  you  have  been   active   in
                 employment  and  self-employment  then  you  should  submit
                 evidence of both.  You will also need to declare  that  you
                 and your family have not had access  to  public  funds  and
                 have  not  received  a  criminal   conviction.    If   your
                 application  is  approved  you  will  normally   be   given
                 permission to remain  for  a  further  three  year  period.
                 Further details on the application process for an extension
                 of stay after one  year  will  be  provided  to  successful
                 applicants.


           18.2        If you have been granted permission to stay  in  the
                 United Kingdom as a Highly Skilled Migrant for  four  years
                 and wish to remain in the United  Kingdom  on  a  permanent
                 basis you can apply at the end of the four-year period  for
                 permanent residence.  This is otherwise known as indefinite
                 leave or settlement.  In addition those applicants who have
                 been approved under HSMP and  are  applying  for  permanent
                 residence as a Highly  Skilled  Migrant  will  be  able  to
                 amalgamate leave to remain under HSMP with  previous  leave
                 from other categories that lead to settlement.  For example
                 if you had previously stayed in the UK with two years leave
                 for work permit employment and then switched  to  the  HSMP
                 you would be eligible  to  apply  for  settlement  after  a
                 further two years in the UK as a  Highly  Skilled  Migrant.
                 Further information on whether an immigration  route  leads
                 to  settlement  can  be  found  on  the  IND   website   at
                 www.ind.homeoffice.gov.uk.  If you  meet  the  requirements
                 for  settlement  your  spouse  or  unmarried  partner   and
                 children under the age of 18 will also be  able  to  obtain
                 permanent residence with you."


 80. Reliance was also placed upon the requirement for the grant  of  leave
     to enter found in para 135A(ii) of the Immigration Rules in  force  at
     all materials times which states that the person seeking leave:

           "intends to make the United Kingdom his main home".

 81. This in turn, it is said, is amplified in para 9.1(c) of the  guidance
     in the following terms:

           "9.1  In addition to scoring at least 65 points  you  will  also
           need to demonstrate:
                 ...
                 c)    That you are willing and  able  to  make  the  United
                 Kingdom your main home.  We  will  ask  you  to  provide  a
                 written undertaking to that effect.  You will  be  expected
                 to  make  the  UK  your  country  of  habitual   residence.
                 Secondments abroad that are an integral part of a job based
                 in the UK are permitted  by  HSMP,  however  they  will  be
                 considered  as  time  outside  of  the  UK  for  settlement
                 eligibility purposes.  To qualify for settlement in the  UK
                 you must have spent a continuous period of  four  years  in
                 the UK except for short holidays or  business  trips.   Any
                 secondment that requires you to be outside the  UK  for  an
                 unbroken  period  of  over  three  months  will  make  your
                 previous stay in the UK ineligible as a  continuous  period
                 in the UK."

 82. Counsel for the appellants submitted that these  words  read  together
     amounted to a promise that the appellants' applications for  extension
     of leave will be judged on the basis of  the  rules  and  criteria  in
     force when the appellants  moved  to  the  UK.    An  ordinary  person
     reading the guidance would understand it as saying that there  was  no
     need to worry about any changes to the scheme in the future.

 83.  Mr  Kovats,  on  behalf  of  the  respondent,  submitted   that   any
     representation must be clear and unequivocal if it is to give rise  to
     a legitimate  expectation.   The  guidance  was  far  from  that.   In
     context, the appellants must have been aware that they would  have  to
     make further applications to remain and that the criteria for  success
     would be those applicable at the time.  It was important  to  look  at
     the matter objectively and to see what the Government was  seeking  to
     achieve.   Mr Kovats sought to distinguish Coughlan on the basis  that
     the representation, if any, had been  made  to  the  public  at  large
     rather than to a small group through specific dialogue.  He  submitted
     that the appellants' only legitimate expectation was that the rules at
     the date of decision would be applied.

 84. The starting point, and for Mr Kovats the finishing point,  is  stated
     by the Tribunal in MO (at [16]):

           "16. The appellant can gain nothing by putting his claim in  the
           language  of  legitimate  expectation.   His   only   legitimate
           expectation is to have his  application  decided  in  accordance
           with the Rules at the time the decision is made.  Any other view
           would entail the conclusion that the Secretary of State's  power
           to make policy by changing  the  Rules  from  time  to  time  is
           hampered or fettered (see In re Findlay [1985] AC 318)....  "

 85. However, as the Tribunal in  MO  itself  acknowledged,  this  will  be
     displaced if a substantive legitimate expectation is established based
     upon a promise or representation (at [18]).   In deciding what, if any
     promise or representation is made, it seems to  us  that  the  correct
     approach is not a subjective one.  It is neither correct to ask  'what
     do the appellants understand the guidance to mean?' or 'what does  the
     Secretary of State intend to convey  in  the  guidance?'   Neither  of
     those approaches focuses upon the legitimacy of  any  expectation  and
     therefore on its legal enforceability.  There is a need for  objective
     verification to justify that result.  The correct approach is  to  ask
     'what would a reasonable reader of the guidance understand  was  being
     said?'  That reader will not approach  the  guidance  in  a  pedantic,
     overly analytical way  but  will  read  it  sensibly  and  not  in  an
     excessively  self-serving  way  necessarily  ignoring   or   resolving
     ambiguities in their own favour.   In addition, the reasonable  reader
     will bear in mind the context in which the  guidance  is  issued.   It
     should be readily apparent to anyone that immigration policy  reflects
     the Government and Parliament's current view of the  public  interest.
     Immigration policy is not static and the consequence is  change.   The
     Immigration Rules, for example, are amended with a sometimes  alarming
     frequency.  Objectively, applicants under the HSMP  could  expect,  in
     general, no future certainty as to the content of the rules.

 86. The appellants seek to establish a  legitimate  expectation  that  the
     accepted basis  upon  which  immigration  decisions  are  made  -  the
     'starting point' as we called it  earlier  -  must  give  way  in  the
     interests of fairness.   They are, no doubt,  part  of  a  substantial
     group of individuals.   We  do  not  know  how  many.   The  House  of
     Lords/House of Commons Joint Committee on Human Rights in its  report,
     Highly Skilled Migrants: Changes to the Immigration Rules published on
     9 August 2007 (HL Paper 173; HC 993), quotes the HSMP  Forum  estimate
     that "as many as 90% of the 49,000  migrants  who  have  already  been
     admitted onto the programme" may not be eligible to stay under the new
     Rules (at para 26).  Mr Kovats prays this in aid and, pointing to what
     was said in Coughlan, argues that this makes the appellants'  argument
     less potent.  We see the potential force in that submission if we were
     concerned with the unfairness to the appellants or the ability of  the
     Secretary of State to renege on a promise that has  been  established.
     The smaller the group the more likely it would be unfair to renege  on
     the promise because of the lesser impact upon the public  interest  in
     maintaining 'old' policy for a few.  It is more difficult to  see  its
     force when the issue is what would a reasonable  reader  consider  the
     guidance to be saying? However, we  acknowledge  that  the  reasonable
     reader's interpretation might be affected by the breadth of  potential
     recipients of the guidance.

 87. Turning to the specific parts of  the  guidance  relied  upon  by  the
     appellants, we do not consider the requirement in  the  Rules  or  the
     statement in the guidance at para 9.1(c) that the individual  must  be
     willing and able to make the  UK  his  "main  home"  substantially  to
     assist the appellants.  The requirement is not that they make  the  UK
     their only home and, in any event, the scheme (as was and is now) is a
     scheme leading to settlement if the Rules and criteria are  satisfied.
     That is simply what the HSMP  is  about  -  it  does  not  amount  (or
     contribute) to a promise as to the basis  upon  which  the  individual
     will be judged when seeking an extension of leave.

 88. Likewise, paras 18.1 and 18.2 (which are reflected  in  questions  and
     answers 26.5 and 26.6) describe the (then) current requirements of the
     HSMP for an individual who has entered the UK under  the  scheme.   In
     our view, it cannot reasonably be construed  as  a  promise  that  the
     rules and criteria will remain ossified for ever.   They must, in  any
     event, be read in the context of the October 2003 Guidance as a  whole
     and in particular pars 24.9 and 24.10.

 89. We consider these to be the crucial parts of the October 2003 Guidance
     for the appellants.   Paragraph 24.9 could not be clearer.  In  answer
     to the question "What if the scheme changes?",  the  answer  is  given
     that the criteria and documentation under scheme may change which will
     be notified via the Home Office web and

           "All applications will be treated  on  the  basis  of  the  HSMP
           provisions at the time that they were submitted."


 90. In fact, this is also reflected in para 16.1 where it is stated:

           "HSMP has been extended indefinitely, although the  Home  Office
           may decide it is appropriate to make further changes to HSMP  in
           the future."

 91. If the October 2003 Guidance said  no  more,  the  appellants'  claims
     would be utterly hopeless in law.  These paragraphs make it  clear  to
     any reader - let alone the reasonable reader -  that  the  scheme  may
     change and future applications would be dealt with under the  criteria
     in force at that time.

 92. However, the October 2003 Guidance does say more in para  24.10  which
     we set out again for ease of reference:

           "24.10      Q:   I have already applied successfully under HSMP.
                  How does the    revised HSMP affect me?
                 A:    Not at all.  It is important to note that  once  you
                 have  entered  under  the        programme  you  are  in  a
                 category that has an avenue to settlement.  Those  who have
                 already entered under HSMP will  be  allowed  to  stay  and
                 apply       for  settlement  after  four  years  qualifying
                 residence regardless of these     revisions to HSMP."


 93. Paragraph 24.10 is more promising from the appellants' perspective  at
     least at first blush.  Its scope is, however, clear: it  is  concerned
     with  how  the  "revised  scheme"  affects  someone  who  has  already
     successfully applied under the HSMP.   The  "revised  scheme"  is,  of
     course, a reference to the revisions introduced  on  31  October  2003
     which led to the particular Guidance.  The Guidance is headed  "Highly
     Skilled Migrant Programme (HSMP) - Revised Programme effective from 31
     October 2003".   The changes are summarised at para  3.1  involving  a
     reduction in the points threshold to 65, the  introduction  of  a  new
     scheme for under 28 year olds and the introduction of a new  10  point
     allowance for a person with a skilled partner.   The effect  of  these
     changes on someone who has already  "applied  successfully  under  the
     HSMP" is stated to be "Not at all".   In  fact,  paragraph  24.10  has
     nothing to do with the situation of these  appellants.   They  applied
     after the "revised scheme" came into effect and they do not claim  not
     to be covered by its terms.  Their claim is that its  terms  do  cover
     them.  However, what is said is that para 24.10 is said  to  give  the
     impression that a person who has already entered the UK under the HSMP
     will not be affected by any revisions to the scheme.

 94. As Bingham LJ stated in the MFK Ltd case, to give rise to a legitimate
     expectation the representation must be "clear, unambiguous and  devoid
     of relevant qualification" (at p. 1570).  Whilst para 24.10 is  not  a
     model of clarity, it cannot reasonably bear the meaning and create the
     expectation claimed.  To read it  as  such  would  be  to  ignore  the
     immediately preceding para 24.9 which  states  that  is  not  how  the
     scheme will be applied if any changes to it occur in the future.  This
     is not merely a pedantic or overly  analytical  construction  of  para
     24.10.  It is to read it in context and in the light of what  is  said
     in immediate proximity to it in the  Guidance.   A  reasonable  reader
     would  not  read  the  (potentially)  beneficial  provisions   without
     reference to such clear and unequivocal  provisions  that  negate  any
     beneficial meaning that might be gleaned from para 24.10.   The effect
     is that any ambiguity  is  resolved  against  the  claimed  legitimate
     expectation that the (then) current rules and criteria under the  HSMP
     will always be applied to the appellants.

 95. For these reasons,  the  appellants  cannot  factually  establish  the
     legitimate expectation they claim.  Their only legitimate  expectation
     is that their applications will be judged on the basis  of  the  rules
     and criteria under the HSMP in force at the relevant time, namely  the
     date of any decision.

      Unfairness/public interest

 96. That conclusion is sufficient to  dispose  of  these  appeals  to  the
     extent that they are based on  the  legitimate  expectation  argument.
     However, we cannot leave the legitimate interest  argument  raised  in
     these appeals without dealing with the public interest issue that  was
     fully argued before us.   Mr  Kovats  submitted  that  the  change  in
     immigration policy effected by HC 1702 was justified and overrode  any
     legitimate expectation that might otherwise arise.   We agree  to  the
     extent that it seems to us that even if a  promise  or  representation
     had been made we are not satisfied that it would be  unfair  to  these
     appellants (or those in a similar  situation)  for  the  Secretary  of
     State to renege on that promise.  Our reasons for that conclusion  are
     as follows.

 97. We accept that these appellants - and no doubt  others  in  a  similar
     position - have given up their jobs and, perhaps, also their homes and
     re-located to the UK.  Despite our reservations, we also have accepted
     that they did so in reliance upon the October  2003  Guidance.   There
     is, therefore, a genuine  sense  of  grievance  that  they  have  been
     treated unfairly in, to use Ms  Phelan's  words  during  the  hearing,
     'having the  rug  pulled  out  from  under  them'.   That  unfairness,
     however,  has  to  be  balanced  against  any  countervailing   public
     interest.  It is also axiomatic that the  Government  is  entitled  to
     change immigration policy by the procedures laid down in s.3(2) of the
     Immigration Act 1971 through Parliament.  In these appeals, it is  not
     suggested that she has done so unlawfully.  Therefore,  we  are  faced
     with a situation where, it is said, a  lawful  change  of  immigration
     policy cannot be invoked against these appellants (or others similarly
     placed).  There is no doubt that the public interest may outweigh  any
     promise (and hence legitimate expectation) that  an  individual  might
     claim.   As Laws LJ said in Nadarajah and Abdi at [69]:

           "The  balance  between  an  individual's   fair   treatment   in
           particular circumstances, and  the  vindication  of  other  ends
           having a proper claim on  the  public  interest  (which  is  the
           essential dilemma posed by the law of legitimate expectation) is
           not precisely calculable, its measurement not exact."

 98. In the earlier case of Begbie, Laws LJ said this (at pp.1130-31):

           "80. .... In some cases a change of tack by a public  authority,
           though unfair from the applicant's stance, may involve questions
           of general policy affecting the public at large or a significant
           section of it (including interests not  represented  before  the
           court); here the judges may well be in no position to adjudicate
           save at most on a  bare  Wednesbury  basis,  without  themselves
           donning the garb of policy-maker, which they  cannot  wear.  The
           local government finance cases, such as R v Secretary  of  State
           ex parte Hammersmith [1991] 1 AC 521, exemplify  this.  As  Wade
           and Forsyth observe (Administrative Law , 7th edn p.404):


                 "Ministers' decisions on important matters  of  policy  are
                 not on that account sacrosanct against the unreasonableness
                 doctrine, though the court  must  take  special  care,  for
                 constitutional reasons, not  to  pass  judgment  on  action
                 which is essentially political."


           81. In other cases the act or omission complained  of  may  take
           place on a much smaller stage, with  far  fewer  players.  Here,
           with respect, lies the importance of the fact in  Coughlan  that
           few individuals were affected by the promise  in  question.  The
           case's facts may be discrete and limited, having no implications
           for an innominate class of persons. There may be no wide-ranging
           issues of general policy, or none  with  multi-layered  effects,
           upon whose merits the court is asked to embark. The court may be
           able to envisage clearly and with sufficient certainty what  the
           full consequences will be of any order it makes. In such a  case
           the court's condemnation of what is done as an abuse  of  power,
           justifiable (or rather, falling to be relieved of its  character
           as abusive) only if an overriding public interest  is  shown  of
           which the court is the judge, offers no offence to the claims of
           democratic power.


           82. There will of course be a multitude of cases falling  within
           these extremes, or sharing the characteristics of one or  other.
           The more the decision challenged lies in what may inelegantly be
           called the macro-political field, the less intrusive will be the
           court's supervision. More than this: in that field,  true  abuse
           of power is less likely to be found, since within it changes  of
           policy, fuelled by broad conceptions of the public interest, may
           more readily be accepted as taking precedence over the interests
           of groups which enjoyed expectations  generated  by  an  earlier
           policy. "

 99. There  are  powerful  arguments  in  favour  of  the  public  interest
     outweighing the interests of those who came to the UK under  the  HSMP
     prior to the changes brought in by HC 1702.  First,  unlike  Coughlan,
     we are concerned not  with  a  small  group  of  individuals  to  whom
     (assuming contrary to  the  view  taken  above)  a  representation  or
     promise has been made -  this  is  not  a  "discrete"  but  rather  an
     "innominate" class likely to be of  some  substantial  size  (see  the
     comments of Laws LJ in Begbie at p. 1131 taking a restrictive view  of
     the reach of Coughlin).

100. Secondly, the context of  immigration  policy  is  a  "macro-political
     field" to borrow Laws LJ's words in Begbie.  In striking  the  correct
     balance,  the  Tribunal  (like  the  courts)  should  be  cautious  of
     intruding so as to frustrate a change of immigration policy  that,  in
     itself, is lawful.   (It has not been suggested in these appeals  that
     the change in the Rules was  unlawful  on  Wednesbury  grounds.)   The
     changes  to  the  HSMP  introduced  in  November/December  2006   were
     motivated by a recognition that Government  policy  needed  better  to
     capture those who would contribute more to the labour  market  in  the
     UK.  The Explanatory Memorandum to HC 1702 stated that the  new  rules
     and criteria:

           "will be more effective in ensuring that the HSMP  helps  us  to
           select those  migrants  who  will  make  the  greatest  economic
           contribution to the UK."

101. The point is made at greater length by Liam Byrne MP, the Minister  of
     State for Nationality, Citizenship and Immigration in a  letter  dated
     18 May 2007 and addressed to the House of Lords/House of Commons Joint
     Committee on Human Rights (at Appendix 3 of their Report):

           "We made the changes in order to:


            . Ensure that the programme continues to attract those migrants
              who are of the greatest benefit to the UK economy.


            . Make it clearer and more objective, inline with our aims  for
              the forth-coming Points-Based System for  managed  migration;
              and


            . Tackle previous instances of abuse under the system.


           The previous extension test was not a sufficient robust  measure
           of whether the migrant had been making an economic  contribution
           to the UK.  This meant that the scheme was  not  always  meeting
           its policy objective of bringing talented people to the  UK  who
           can make a strong contribution  to  our  economy.   Analysis  of
           labour market outcomes at the extension test stage  showed  that
           whilst the majority of HSMP migrants are earning  good  salaries
           in the UK, around one in ten earn equivalent to the  bottom  25%
           of UK earners, and around 2 in 10 earn below the  average  wage.
           Further, we found that some were employed  in  low-skilled  jobs
           such as food production operatives and taxi drivers.


           The new rules have been designed to  overcome  this  problem  by
           using  criteria  that  more  accurately  predict  labour  market
           success at the initial application stage  and  by  testing  HSMP
           participant's success in the UK labour market more rigorously at
           the extension  stage.    We  believe  that  these  measures  are
           therefore necessary in the interests of the economic  well-being
           of the country."

102. The Minister's letter does not seem to have been made public until the
     Parliamentary Joint Committee on Human Rights published its report  on
     9 August 2007 and so was not relied upon  by  the  Respondent  at  the
     hearings in these appeals.   It cannot, therefore, directly assist the
     Respondent in these appeals although the public interest it highlights
     is merely a 'fleshing out' of what is readily apparent in the  earlier
     Explanatory Memorandum to HC 1702 which was certainly available at the
     time of the hearings.

103. Thirdly, it is important to notice, in our view, that as part  of  the
     policy changes effected by HC 1702 consideration was given in  general
     terms to those who had been granted entry under the earlier  criteria.
      As part of a package of changes,  some transitional  provisions  were
     introduced in order to provide alternative routes for seeking leave to
     remain on another basis when an individual could not succeed under the
     new  criteria,  for  example  to  permit  switching  to  work   permit
     employment and concessions were made specific to HSMP  cases;  and  to
     assist the self-employed.  We do not set out the detail (for which see
     letter from Liam Byrne MP, the  Minister  of  State  for  Nationality,
     Citizenship and Immigration in  a  letter  dated  30  March  2007  and
     addressed to the House of Lords/House of Commons  Joint  Committee  on
     Human Rights, at Appendix 2 of their Report).  It is accepted that for
     a variety of reasons these appellants could not take advantage of  the
     transitional arrangements.

104. In our view, the Tribunal is not in a position, nor is it entitled, to
     embark upon an evaluation of the policy  changes  that  motivated  and
     which resulted in the specific changes made to the HSMP  by  HC  1702.
     It seems to us that commensurate with the injunction in cases such  as
     Begbie and Nadarajah and  Abdi,  the  Tribunal  must  stay  its  hand.
     Whilst each case must, in this respect, turn upon an assessment of the
     unfairness to the individual appellant balanced against  the  dictates
     of the public interest, for these appellants (and any others similarly
     placed) their  only  legitimate  expectation  can  be  to  have  their
     applications determined under the current HSMP rules and criteria.

      Conclusion

105. In the appeals of AA (together with RM and MF) and MC, the immigration
     judges did not materially err in law in dismissing the appeals on  the
     basis that the appellants  had  failed  to  establish  an  enforceable
     substantive legitimate expectation and so those decisions must  stand.
     In the appeal of KS, the immigration judge did materially err  in  law
     in allowing the appellant's appeal on this basis and we  substitute  a
     decision dismissing the appeal.

Article 8

106. We turn now to consider Art 8 of the ECHR in respect of  each  of  the
     appeals before us.  In these appeals, the appellants  argue  that  the
     decisions to refuse to extend their leave disproportionately interfere
     with their right to respect for their "private and family life".   The
     implicit effect of the Respondent's decisions is that the  appellants'
     human rights are engaged because they will be required to leave the UK
     and return to the countries of which they are nationals and where they
     lived prior to coming to the UK under the HSMP (see JM v  SSHD  [2006]
     EWCA Civ 1402).

107. Art 8 provides as follows.

           "Article 8 - Right to respect for private and family life


           1. Everyone has the right to respect for his private and  family
           life, his home and his correspondence.


           2. There shall be no interference by a public authority with the
           exercise of this right except such as is in accordance with  the
           law and is necessary in a democratic society in the interests of
           national security, public safety or the economic  well-being  of
           the country, for the prevention of disorder or  crime,  for  the
           protection of health or morals, or for  the  protection  of  the
           rights and freedoms of others."

108. The jurisprudence setting out the framework for the application of Art
     8 is too well-known to require repetition here: in particular, the  5-
     stage approach in the speech of  Lord  Bingham  in  R(Razgar)  v  SSHD
     [2004]  UKHL  27  at  [17]  and  the  approach  to  the  question   of
     'proportionality' in the single opinion of the House in SSHD  v  Huang
     [2007] UKHL 11, especially at [19]-[20].

      AA

109. The immigration judge's reasons for dismissing AA's claim under Art  8
     are set out at paras [21] - [23] of his determination:


          21. I  deal  next  with  the  claim  that  the  decision  of  the
              Respondent is unlawful because it is in breach of  the  terms
              of Article 8.  In my view the Appellants have failed to  show
              that Article 8 is engaged at  all,  whether  in  relation  to
              their right to respect for their private  lives  on  the  one
              hand or their family life on the other.  So far as the former
              is concerned, Mr  Hussain  submitted  that  private  life  in
              effect extended to any activity undertaken in the life  of  a
              private individual.   Mr  Hussain  cited  no  authorities  in
              support  of  this  proposition  and  in  my   judgement   his
              submission is far too widely framed.  It would, were it to be
              adopted, mean that Article 8 would be engaged in the case  of
              every field of human activity  with  the  exception  of  that
              conducted  in  a  public  capacity.   I  therefore  turn   to
              authority for guidance.  In Pretty v United Kingdom (2002) 35
              EHRR 1, paragraph 61, the Court held the expression to  cover
              "the physical and psychological integrity of  a  person"  and
              went on to observe that


                    "Article  8  also   protects   a   right   to   personal
                    development, and the  right  to  establish  and  develop
                    relationships with other human  beings  in  the  outside
                    world".
              In Regina v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department,  ex
              parte Razgar [2004] UKHL 27, Lord Bingham said


                    "Elusive  though  the  concept  is,  I  think  one  must
                    understand "private life" in Article 8 as  extending  to
                    those features which are integral to a person's identity
                    or ability to function socially as a person.  Understood
                    in this sense, I am quite satisfied that the decision of
                    the Respondent to extend the Appellant's leave to remain
                    in the  United  Kingdom  does  not  interfere  with  the
                    exercise by them of their right  to  respect  for  their
                    private lives".


              Applying these dicta, I find that the refusal  to  allow  the
              appellant to settle and work in the United Kingdom  does  not
              impinge at all upon his right  to  respect  for  his  private
              life.  It merely restricts the location in which he  is  able
              to conduct his economic activities.  It  has  nothing  to  do
              with "...those features which  are  integral  to  a  person's
              identity or ability to function socially as a person".


          22. I turn to the issue of the family life of the Appellants.   I
              find that there is nothing in the decision of the  Respondent
              which interferes at all with the exercise by  the  Appellants
              of their right to respect for their family  life.  Article  8
              imposes a positive obligation upon the state to  respect  the
              family life of the Appellants: it does not guarantee a  right
              to family life in the United Kingdom.   The  decisions  which
              are impugned have been applied consistently in  the  case  of
              all  three  Appellants  (in  the   sense   that   all   their
              applications  have  been  rejected):   they   do   not   even
              potentially (as is sometimes the case) result in  the  family
              being divided.


          23. If I am wrong to find that Article 8 is not engaged,  and  in
              deference to the able submissions put forward by Mr  Hussain,
              I consider briefly the remaining  four  questions  raised  by
              Lord Bingham at paragraph 17 of his speech in Ex parte Razgar
              (above).   I  do  not  consider  the  consequences   of   the
              Appellants' relocation to Pakistan where, with the  exception
              of the last twelve months, they have lived all their lives to
              be of such gravity as potentially to engage the operation  of
              Article 8.  In other words, even if technically the right  is
              impinged upon, it does  not  meet  the  minimum  required  to
              qualify as a breach of the human rights  of  the  Appellants.
              If it does, such interference is in accordance with the  law,
              as represented for these purposes by paragraph 135D of HC 395
              as amended.  The interference is necessary  in  a  democratic
              society in the interests of the economic  well-being  of  the
              country.  Indeed, the very basis upon  which  highly  skilled
              migrants are admitted to the  United  Kingdom  in  the  first
              place is intended, not primarily to be for the benefit of the
              migrant  (although   it   may   well,   and   usually   will,
              coincidentally benefit him),  but  for  the  benefit  of  the
              economy of the United Kingdom.  The corollary of this is that
              at the point that the state judges the net  economic  benefit
              to the United  Kingdom  of  the  continued  presence  of  the
              migrant in the United  Kingdom  to  be  outweighed  by  other
              factors (the pressure on housing, the cost to public services
              and so forth) interference with the Article 8  right  of  the
              migrant becomes necessary in a democratic society.   This  is
              the answer to Mr Hussain's rhetorical question: what  purpose
              would be served by returning the Appellants  to  Pakistan  at
              this stage?  The answer  is  (however  dispassionate  it  may
              seem) is  that  the  economic  benefits  of  their  continued
              presence are now outweighed  by  the  economic  disadvantages
              arising from it.  As to the emphasis by Mr Hussain  upon  the
              need for the law  that  regulates  such  interference  to  be
              foreseeable, this in my view  should  be  understood  in  the
              context of the clarity of the  language  employed.   The  law
              must be sufficiently clearly stated so that a person who  may
              be affected by it can foresee the likely consequences of  its
              application.  It is not intended  to  suggest  that  the  law
              cannot be  changed.   Were  such  a  requirement  imposed  by
              Article 8(2), it would mean  that  the  law  could  never  be
              changed,  contrary   to   the   doctrine   of   parliamentary
              sovereignty.  That the  law  can  be  changed  is  implicitly
              recognised in Article 7, which prohibits  the  imposition  of
              retrospective penalties, but  does  not  prevent  them  being
              changed at all.   In  answering  the  final  question  (which
              relates to the proportionality of  the  interference  to  the
              legitimate public end sought  to  be  achieved)  once  it  is
              recognised that it is  legitimate  to  control  the  flow  of
              economic migrants at all, it is difficult to see  what  other
              measure the Respondent could have taken  in  pursuit  of  his
              objective.  The return of a family  to  their  home  country,
              from which they have been estranged  for  only  a  matter  of
              months, appears on its face to be a proportionate response to
              the overall economic well-being of the United Kingdom.  In so
              holding, I have not overlooked the other factors urged by  Mr
              Hussain.  However it is entirely a matter of  speculation  as
              to whether the liquidation by  the  first  Appellant  of  his
              assets in Pakistan and investment of them in  assets  in  the
              United Kingdom will have led to an overall financial loss  to
              him.  It is further  a  matter  of  pure  speculation  as  to
              whether the subsequent  liquidation  of  his  assets  in  the
              United Kingdom in order to reinvest  them  in  Pakistan  will
              result in a gain or loss to him.  As the investments in  both
              countries were essentially in real property, this will depend
              entirely upon the relative property price  inflation  in  the
              respective countries at the time  of  sale  and  acquisition.
              Undoubtedly disbursements incurred by the first Appellant  as
              a result of the process of acquisition will have been wasted.
               The extent to which these  wasted  expenses,  which  may  be
              viewed as losses in isolation, affect the  overall  financial
              situation of the first Appellant as a result of his period in
              the United Kingdom, is again a matter  of  pure  speculation.
              On the evidence before me I  can  therefore  only  judge  the
              issue  of  proportionality  by  reference  to  the   personal
              inconvenience to the Appellants arising from the decision  of
              the Respondent.  Arguably this will be felt most  acutely  by
              the third Appellant, whose education has been disrupted  once
              by moving from Pakistan to the United  Kingdom,  only  to  be
              disrupted  once  again  by  his  removal  back  to  Pakistan.
              However, when looking at the issue of proportionality in  his
              case, the most that can be said is that he  may  have  fallen
              behind a single year in his overall educational progress."

110. Mr Gillespie submitted that the immigration judge had  erred  in  law.
     First, he submitted that Art  8.1  was  engaged.   AA's  private  life
     included the pursuit of a  career  or  business  and  he  relied  upon
     Niemietz v Germany (1993) 16 EHRR 97 at  para  29.   The  decision  to
     refuse an extension was a sufficiently serious interference with  that
     right.  He pointed out that AA had been induced to come to the UK  and
     make it his main home with his family; he had given up his job and had
     sold his property in Pakistan; he will suffer hardship if returned  to
     Pakistan  and  had  to  re-establish  himself.   Further,   in   those
     circumstances the decision not to extend AA's leave is proportionate.

111. AA's appeal is exclusively concerned with his right to respect for his
     private life.  The immigration judge's conclusion  that  the  decision
     did not interfere with his "family life" is  unassailable  given  that
     his wife and son could (and there is no reason to believe  they  would
     not) return with AA to Pakistan which was their home until  travelling
     to the UK in 2006.

112. As regards AA's private life, the notion of "private life" under Art 8
     must be given a broad compass and includes "the right to establish and
     develop relationships with other human beings" (see Niemietz at [30]).
       We do, however, have considerable doubts as to whether it extends to
     business or professional activities.  Although the Court's decision in
     Niemietz (especially at [29]) offers some support for that  view,  its
     precise  scope  is  unclear.   It  may  well  be  difficult,  as   the
     immigration judge said at para [21] of his determination, to extract a
     'right to settle and work' in the UK  from  Art  8.1.   The  right  to
     associate must, of course, be distinguished  from  the  right  to  any
     business assets or the business itself which, if at all, are protected
     by Art 1 of the First Protocol of the ECHR which is not relied upon by
     AA.  Nevertheless, for the purposes of this appeal we are  content  to
     assume that AA has established  "private  life"  in  the  UK  and  its
     interference on removal would engage Art 8.1.   There can be no  doubt
     that the decision was "in  accordance  with  the  law"  and  taken  in
     furtherance of a legitimate interest, namely the  economic  well-being
     of the UK.  The crucial  issue  identified  by  Mr  Gillespie  in  his
     skeleton was whether the decision was proportionate to that legitimate
     aim under Art 8.2.

113. It is seems to us that the immigration judge approached  the  question
     of proportionality correctly as a matter of law.  He sought to  strike
     a "fair balance" between AA's (and the  other  appellants')  interests
     and the legitimate aim of the economic well-being of the UK underlying
     the change in  the  HSMP.   He  sets  out  a  length  earlier  in  his
     determination the appellants' evidence.  We are left in no doubt  that
     he fully took into account the  appellants'  individual  circumstances
     and the impact of removal upon them.  The  appellants  had  neither  a
     legal right nor a legitimate expectation to stay in the UK.  They  had
     only been here for varying short periods of time  during  2006.   They
     would return to the country of their nationality where they had  lived
     prior to coming to the UK.  The immigration judge's findings  that  AA
     was  unable  to  bring  himself  within  the   requirements   of   the
     transitional provisions for the self-employed  and,  indeed,  that  AA
     failed to meet the previous requirement  in  para  135D(ii)  of  being
     "lawfully economically active" were not  challenged  before  us.   The
     immigration judge's conclusion that the Respondent's decision was  not
     disproportionate comes nowhere near being perverse and,  in  fact,  is
     the conclusion we would reach on the facts  of  these  appeals.    The
     immigration judge did not materially err in law in concluding that the
     appellants had failed to show a breach of Art 8 and  his  decision  to
     dismiss their appeals stands.

      MC

114. The immigration judge's reasons for dismissing MC's claim under Art  8
     are set out at para [14] of his determination:

          14. With regard to Article 8 of the European Convention on  Human
              Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, I accept that  the  decision
              of the Respondent interferes with the Appellant's right to  a
              private life at the very least in the United Kingdom.  It may
              ultimately interfere with his right to a family life  in  the
              United Kingdom although his family are  currently  living  in
              Pakistan.   Nevertheless,  the  decision  is  lawful  and  is
              legitimate in the proper pursuit of Immigration  control.   I
              also find that the decision is proportionate.  The  Appellant
              currently lives in one room in a terrace house in Leeds.   He
              is clearly hard working.  He earns in the order of  950  per
              month of which he sends over 300 per month to his family  in
              Pakistan.  He gave up a government job in order  to  come  to
              the United Kingdom and I accept that it would not be possible
              for him to return to that government job if  he  returned  to
              Pakistan.  He would have to look for a  job  in  the  private
              sector.  It may not pay as much as he would expect.   I  also
              accept that since coming to the United Kingdom  he  has  been
              able to put his children into private  education  and  if  he
              were to return to Pakistan he may not be able to keep them in
              private education.  I accept that it was his  intention  that
              his wife and family would come to the  United  Kingdom  where
              they would settle permanently in due course.   I  accept  the
              submissions made, which were not challenged in  detail,  that
              the Appellant would have met the criteria for a  continuation
              of the HMSP in the United Kingdom under the  rules  prior  to
              the 8th November 2006.   The  Appellant  has  acted  properly
              throughout his time  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  has  made
              applications in accordance with the rules.  I sympathise with
              his situation.  Nevertheless, his private life in the  United
              Kingdom is limited.  He is in what may be  considered  to  be
              temporary phase.  He wishes to bring his family to the United
              Kingdom in due course, but if he were to return  to  Pakistan
              he would be able to have a family and private life with them.
               I believe that he would be able to find a job even if it was
              not the same  job  as  he  once  had  previously.   There  is
              obviously a question of fairness which has to  be  considered
              when Immigration  Rules  change  and  affect  those  involved
              adversely.  It may  be  that  the  Appellant  would  wish  to
              challenge the fairness of the Immigration  Rules  in  another
              forum.  However, in the case of this Appellant  I  find  that
              the decision of the Home Office which is now  being  appealed
              did not interfere  disproportionately  with  the  Appellant's
              Article 8 rights."

115. The judge accepted that the Respondent's decision interfered with  the
     appellant's private life and so engaged Art 8.1.  As we understood  Ms
     Phelan's submissions, she  only  challenged  the  immigration  judge's
     conclusion that the decision was proportionate.  Ms Phelan's submitted
     both orally and in her skeleton that the  judge  had  failed  to  have
     regard to the unfairness to MC in the effect of the change in the HSMP
     rules when assessing proportionality.  We do not  agree.   We  do  not
     understand the judge's reference to challenging the  fairness  of  the
     change  in  the  Immigration  Rules  "in  another  forum",  by   which
     presumably he had in mind the Administrative Court, to  have  excluded
     proper consideration of the  appellant's  own  circumstances.   It  is
     clear in reading para [14] of the determination that the  judge  fully
     had regard to the appellant's circumstances and the impact of decision
     upon him and his family who were in Pakistan.   The  judge's  decision
     is properly reasoned on the basis of all the relevant matters.  He too
     was dealing with an appellant who had only lived in the UK for a short
     period in 2006.  He had no right or legitimate expectation  to  remain
     in the UK.  His family remained in Pakistan where he had lived, so far
     as we can tell, all his live until coming to the UK.  The  Immigration
     Judge's conclusion that any interference with the appellant's  private
     life  in  these  circumstances  was  not  disproportionate  is  wholly
     sustainable and, in our view, the correct  decision.  The  immigration
     judge did not materially err in law in concluding that  the  appellant
     had failed to show a breach of Art 8 and his decision to  dismiss  the
     appeal stands.

      KS

116. In KS's appeal the immigration judge allowed the appeal under  Art  8.
     The judge's reasoning is set out at paras [5.18]  and  [5.22]-[5.23]of
     his determination:

             18. This appeal is also put on  human  rights  grounds.   I  am
                 satisfied that the appellant has established  private  life
                 in the United Kingdom  He gave an undertaking that he would
                 reside in the United Kingdom on a long-term basis.  He gave
                 up much to be here.
                       ....
           5.22  I am satisfied that the refusal to vary the leave to enter
                 amounts to an interference in the appellant's private life.
                  That interference will have consequences of  such  gravity
                 so as to engage Article 8.  It would require the  appellant
                 to return to India  and  nullify  the  very  elaborate  and
                 costly actions he took in leaving his family and career  to
                 come to the United Kingdom.  The refusal of  variation  was
                 in accordance with the law as it stood as from 5th December
                 2006.  It is necessary for the economic well-being  of  the
                 country and for the prevention of disorder or crime to have
                 proper   regulation   of   immigration.    But,   in    the
                 circumstances of this particular  case,  was  the  decision
                 proportionate?


           5.23  I take into account the clear expectation derived from the
                 old HSMP  Scheme.   I  also  take  into  account  that  the
                 respondent appeared to give  no  consideration  to  persons
                 such as the appellant who had entered in good  faith  under
                 the old scheme but, because of the timing of  their  entry,
                 would not be able to  succeed  under  the  new  scheme.   I
                 mention in passing that I accept entirely  the  appellant's
                 reason  for  his  delayed  entry  to  the  United   Kingdom
                 following the grant of leave.   His  mother  was  seriously
                 ill.  But in any event that point may be  academic  because
                 whilst  the  new  scheme  has  a  requirement  of  previous
                 employment in the United Kingdom the old scheme did not.  I
                 am satisfied  that,  for  this  particular  appellant,  the
                 decision to refuse variation of leave was not proportionate
                 and amounted to a breach of his Article 8 Right."

117. Mr Kovats accepts that the judge was entitled  to  find  that  KS  had
     established private life in the UK.  However, he  submitted  that  the
     judge erred at para [5.22] in concluding that the decision  to  refuse
     him leave would interfere with his private  life  and  also  that  the
     judge's conclusion at para [5.23] in relation to  proportionality  was
     perverse.

118. We do not accept the first part of Mr Kovats' submission.  It seems to
     us that the judge was entitled to conclude  that  the  decision  would
     have the practical effect of requiring the appellant to leave  the  UK
     and return to India.  Given the  acceptance  that  the  appellant  had
     established private life in the UK, we see no  error  in  the  judge's
     conclusion that the  decision  to  refuse  leave  had  the  effect  of
     interfering with that private life.

119. We do, however, see the underlying force of  the  second  part  of  Mr
     Kovats'  submission  in  relation  to  the   judge's   assessment   of
     proportionality.  In the first sentence  of  para  [5.23],  the  judge
     takes into account "the clear expectation derived from  the  old  HSMP
     Scheme".  That expectation, as we have shown  earlier,  has  no  legal
     basis.  In itself, this amounts to a material  misdirection.   In  any
     event, we are unable to see any  semblance  of  the  'fair  balancing'
     exercised required by Art 8.2 in para  [5.23]  of  the  determination.
     Rather, the judge only identifies those factors he considered to weigh
     in the appellant's favour.  The importance of  the  policy  underlying
     the change in the HSMP is not referred to and neither is the fact that
     the appellant's family  are  all  still  in  India  and  there  is  no
     suggestion that he could not return there and given  his  history  and
     qualifications re-establish himself in his own country.   The  judge's
     reasoning is legally flawed and cannot stand.

120. We must, therefore, substitute our own decision.  We accept  that  the
     appellant came to the UK with the subjective expectation that he would
     be allowed to stay.  That expectation  was,  however,  not  reasonably
     founded.  We accept that, nevertheless, he gave up his University  job
     in India and moved to the UK.  We accept  that  the  family  farm  was
     sold.  We also accept that it is intended that his  wife  should  join
     him in the UK but at present she remains  in  India  where  she  is  a
     school teacher and looks after the appellant's mother.  We  note  that
     KS's employer declined to assist the appellant to become a work permit
     employee under the transitional provisions.   The  appellant  accepted
     in his evidence that he would not be destitute  on  return  to  India,
     that he has good qualifications and experience and a supportive family
     and accommodation (see para [5.13] of the judge's determination).   In
     these circumstances, the  appellant  can  reasonably  be  expected  to
     return to India to live with his wife and re-establish himself in time
     in employment.  The appellant has no legal  right  or  expectation  to
     remain in the UK.   We  have  already  set  out  above  the  important
     legitimate aim underlying the change in the HSMP.  Taking  fully  into
     account the effect of the Respondent's decision on the  appellant,  we
     conclude that the right to respect for his private life is  outweighed
     by the public interest and therefore the interference with that  right
     is proportionate.

121. For these reasons, the immigration judge materially erred  in  law  in
     his decision in relation to Art 8 and it cannot stand.  We  substitute
     a decision dismissing KS's appeal under Art 8.





Decisions

122. In respect of AA, RM and MF, the decisions dismissing  each  of  their
     appeals stand.

123. In respect of MC, the decision to dismiss his appeal stands.

124. In respect of KS, the decision to allow his appeal on the grounds that
     it was not in accordance with the law and under Art  8  cannot  stand.
     We substitute a decision dismissing his appeal on both grounds.








                                                                     A GRUBB
                                                    SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE
                                                                       Date:
