

Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
                            SC (Double jeopardy - WC considered) China CG
                             [2006] UKAIT 00007

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Nottingham                             |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 10th August 2005                             |                           |
|                                                |23rd January 2006          |


                                   Before

                   MR D K ALLEN (Senior Immigration Judge)
                      MR A A WILSON (Immigration Judge)

                                   Between

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Weston, instructed by for Paragon Law
For the Respondent:    Mr D Hollings-Tennant


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

For a Chinese citizen convicted of a crime in the United Kingdom on  return
to China there is not a real risk of a breach  of  protected  human  rights
whether by way of judicial or extra-judicial punishment, even if the  crime
has a Chinese element. WC (no  risk  of  double  punishment)  China  [2004]
UKIAT00253 applied and considered.

1.   The Appellant appeals  to  the  Tribunal  against  a  decision  of  the
      Secretary of State of 30 July 2003 to deport  him  and  a  refusal  of
      asylum made on 25th January 2005.

   2. The Appellant's immigration history is briefly as follows.  He came to
      the United Kingdom in March 1998.  He was aged  approximately  16�  at
      the time.  Several weeks after he arrived in the United Kingdom he was
      involved  together  with  a  number  of  other  ethnic  Chinese  in  a
      kidnapping and extortion attempt made on other ethnic Chinese  in  the
      United Kingdom.  He was arrested on 14th June 1998, and  convicted  on
      21st July  1999  for  conspiracy  to  kidnap,  conspiracy  falsely  to
      imprison and conspiracy to blackmail.  He was  sentenced  to  fourteen
      years for each of the first two offences and eight years for the third
      offence  to  run  concurrently  and   recommended   for   deportation.
      Subsequently on 21st March 2001 his sentence was reduced on appeal  to
      one of twelve years.

   3.   He gave evidence before us as follows.  He adopted both his  initial
      statement and the subsequent statement which comprised comments on the
      Home Office Refusal Letter.  He was  referred  in  particular  to  his
      belief that there would be a particular interest in him on the part of
      the state authorities in China because  one  of  the  hostages  had  a
      relative who was a policeman from China who had been involved  in  the
      investigation  in  conjunction  with   the   United   Kingdom   police
      authorities.  He said he had got this information  from  his  criminal
      solicitors and he had heard this during the sessions in the court  and
      there had been mention about the hostages in the court sessions.

   4.   On cross-examination the  Appellant  said  that  he  had  only  been
      involved with the Snakeheads in the  incident  of  looking  after  the
      hostages.  This had been for a period of about two  weeks  and  before
      that and subsequently  he  had  had  no  other  involvement  with  the
      Snakeheads.  The policeman to whom he had referred was the brother  of
      the hostage's wife.  He was not able to  remember  the  name  of  this
      person.  He was from Fujien.

   5.   The Appellant still owed money to the Snakeheads.  He feared that if
      he returned to China he could not go to another province in  China  as
      he needed to approach the authorities to get identity to live in other
      places and he would have to get an ID card from the  local  area.   He
      was asked whether there was any reason in principle why he  could  not
      move to another area if he could get these documents and  he  said  he
      had no relatives or friends in China and the Chinese Government  would
      not be able to protect him.  He had not had any friends  or  relatives
      in the United Kingdom when he originally arrived.

   6. The next  witness  was  Dr  Michael  Dillon  who  gave  his  name  and
      professional address.  He is a senior lecturer in  the  Department  of
      East  Asian  Studies  and  founding  director  of   the   Centre   for
      Contemporary Chinese Studies at the  University  of  Durham.   He  had
      provided a written report dated 5th August 2005 and a copy of his  CV.
      He had been professionally involved in Chinese studies for  37  years.
      He has frequently been to China, most recently in June 2005.

   7. On cross-examination he was asked about the reference at page 3 of his
      report to it being "highly  probable"  that  the  Appellant  would  be
      prosecuted with the same offences under the double jeopardy provisions
      in the Chinese criminal code.  He said that it  was  not  possible  to
      produce clear evidence for or against this argument.   The  nature  of
      Chinese society was such that it lacked  openness  and  there  was  no
      system of reporting of cases as in the West.  He was asked whether  if
      the Appellant were returned to China, Article 10 of the Chinese  penal
      code would be very important and he said that the Chinese  penal  code
      had provisions for re-prosecuting and the authorities  would  be  very
      likely to use this.  He was asked whether it was  the  case  that  the
      Appellant would not  be  re-prosecuted  but  prosecuted  for  a  crime
      committed in China,  this  being  the  extorting  of  money  from  the
      hostages' relatives.  He could not say.  He was not an expert  on  the
      distinction.  He did say however that anyone returned to  China  would
      be in real danger of being dealt with under the Chinese penal  system.
      He was asked whether the Chinese authorities would be likely  to  deal
      with the Appellant under the penal system rather than extrajudicially.
       He said that they would deal with him but he could not be certain  in
      which way.  They would be pragmatic and whatever  was  appropriate  at
      the time would be employed.  Extrajudicial treatment was widely  used,
      more often than making use of the penal code, as it  was  quicker  and
      simpler and did not require the case to be brought before a court  and
      it could involve up to four years' labour.  There would simply  be  an
      arrangement between the police and  the  local  authority.   He  would
      estimate that this case  was  relatively  severe  and  might  well  be
      brought before the courts, but he had no evidence of that.

   8. He was asked whether he thought  that  the  Chinese  penal  code  with
      regard to double jeopardy would be likely to be used to make a  public
      example of someone.  He thought that  it  would.   He  said  that  the
      Chinese authorities did not apply the same weight to  the  code  as  a
      Western country would do and it would be used if it  suited  political
      expediency or alternatively might be ignored.  The fact that the  same
      sort of terminology as in Western legal systems was employed  did  not
      mean that it was applied in the same way as in the West.

   9. He was referred to  the  fact  that  there  was  no  evidence  of  re-
      prosecution cases coming out of China.  He said that this was  a  real
      problem.  There had been big changes in Chinese society in the last 30
      years but it remained very secretive.  There were not reports  in  the
      press as here and the absence of reports could not be assumed to  mean
      an absence of cases.  In local papers he had seen in China there  were
      selected reports of court proceedings but there was no reason to think
      that all court cases were reported.  Amnesty International  and  other
      non-governmental organisations suggested that there was  not  full  or
      frank reporting of court proceedings and therefore a lack of  evidence
      did not mean that there were no re-prosecutions.   He  was  asked  why
      they would not report it if there was  evidence  they  could  use  the
      penal code to make a public example of someone.  In  reply  he  argued
      that they could use it and not that they would  use  it.   Reports  in
      local papers or radio were not usually made available in  English  and
      to people abroad and the Chinese concept of  state  secrecy  was  very
      wide.  He was asked whether there would be  a  public  record  of  the
      court process if they were re-prosecuted and he said there would be  a
      court record but not a public record.

  10. He was referred to page 7 of his report and  the  reference  to  death
      sentences being regularly reported  by  the  local  press,  radio  and
      television, and it was suggested  that  these  would  be  a  potential
      source of evidence of re-prosecutions.  He said that  he  thought  the
      issue was that the reporting was not free and independent and it would
      only be reported if seen as in the interests  of  the  state  and  its
      local institutions.  Records of broadcasts by local stations could  be
      checked with regard  to  re-prosecutions  but  he  had  not  seen  any
      evidence of such in these records.  However, one again, he  said,   no
      evidence did not mean it did not happen.   There  was  very  selective
      reporting of court proceedings.

  11. He was asked why there would not be a report if it was in the  state's
      interest if they were making a public example of somebody by way of re-
      prosecution.  He said that it was in the state's interests  to  report
      on a case where someone was involved with a Snakehead gang  so  as  to
      deter others.  He was asked whether therefore it was the case that  in
      a case  like  this  it  would  be  reported  as  an  instance  of  re-
      prosecution.  He said it might be,  but he was not aware that  it  had
      been.  The fact that a case was not  reported  did  not  mean  that  a
      person had not been re-prosecuted.

  12. He was referred to the fact  that  seven  other  people  with  similar
      records had been deported to China and he was given the opportunity to
      read the documentation concerning these people.  It  was  put  to  him
      that there was no evidence of any harm occurring to them.   Dr  Dillon
      questioned whether there was any evidence that no harm had been caused
      to them.  He referred to the fact that Chinese society  was  secretive
      and the lack of a report did not mean that there was  not  a  problem.
      Enquiries could be made but it would be difficult and records were not
      made  public.   Where  people  had  approached  the  police  they  had
      generally got nowhere in seeking information about people who had been
      through the judicial system.

  13.  He  was  asked  where  therefore  organisations   such   as   Amnesty
      International got their information from and in particular the figures
      and he said he did not speak for them but it seemed to be from talking
      to them and Human Rights Watch that there was  a  variety  of  sources
      including  reports  in  China  or  translated  from  local  media  and
      individuals who made representations to them but  they  would  not  be
      helped by the Chinese authorities.  He did not think that the families
      could be contacted by Amnesty International though  it  could  be  the
      other way around.  A family would be in a very difficult  position  if
      they approached such an organisation.

  14. With regard to the reference to "endangering state security" at page 7
      of his report and whether the Appellant would fall foul  of  this,  Dr
      Dillon considered  it  likely  that  he  was  involved  with  criminal
      activities which had an international dimension.  It was not definite.
       China was now trying to deal with the Snakehead gangs and  trying  to
      crack down on organised crime.  There was a high level of police links
      between the United  Kingdom  and  China  including  a  senior  officer
      involved in liaison work at the British Embassy in Beijing.

  15. He was asked whether he had any comments on the ideological right to a
      re-trial if there was a political element to the case, which had  been
      referred to.  He did not entirely understand what this meant.   Issues
      in China which were thought to present  China  in  a  bad  light  were
      likely to be dealt with more seriously.  The Chinese Government wanted
      to protect China's image and a court case putting China in a bad light
      would be treated seriously.  It was put to him that that would be  the
      case if there were a re-prosecution in this case and he said it  would
      not be a concern in China at all and there was no  feeling  that  they
      needed to adhere to  international  human  rights  standards  and  the
      Chinese population would probably not be concerned either.

  16. With regard to the reference in his report at  page  9  to  "exemption
      from punishment or mitigated punishment being possible" he  said  that
      this was not speculation.  He had studied Article 10 in  the  original
      and in translation and the word "keyi" was a very loose  word  and  it
      was as he had said in his report.  He was asked how, where  there  was
      no evidence of re-prosecutions, he could say that this case would  not
      be remitted.  He said he was not saying that, just that that  was  the
      wording of Article 10 and he assumed the word was  used  deliberately.
      He was asked whether the Appellant would be able  to  benefit  from  a
      possible exemption under Article 10 and he said he did not  think  so.
      He thought this was a case that would be dealt with rather severely as
      it would be seen as damaging China's image abroad.

  17. He was referred to paragraphs 44 and 45 in the Tribunal  determination
      in WC [2004] UKIAT 00253.  With regard to paragraph 45,  he  found  it
      quite surprising that Professor Palmer had  accepted  that  there  had
      been persons convicted abroad who had returned.  In his view there was
      no evidence of prosecutions but that did not mean there had  not  been
      any.  He would be surprised if Monsieur Becquelin accepted  there  had
      been no cases of prosecution.  There was no evidence.

  18.   It was put to him with regard to the reference to anecdotal evidence
      that such evidence was subjective and unreliable.  He said it was  not
      necessarily unreliable or  untrustworthy  but  there  was  a  lack  of
      documentary evidence and it was necessary to have recourse to informal
      discussions and there was no reason to  assume  that  the  authorities
      would not apply Article 10.  He was also asked about  paragraph  4  at
      page 10 of his report and it was suggested to  him  that  Article  239
      would apply and it would not be a  case  of  the  death  penalty.   Dr
      Dillon thought this reflected the wording of the penal code  and  that
      was applied.  It was not necessarily seen by  the  Chinese  courts  as
      limiting their action.  The courts were subject to political pressures
      unlike the West.  If there was a political campaign such as  the  kind
      he had referred to, it was likely to override the penal code.  It  was
      therefore not a reference to the  penal  code  but  to  that  sentence
      outside the penal code.  The authorities were not  restricted  by  the
      penal code and they would use the death penalty if  they  thought  the
      case merited it so Article 10 could apply and they could seek  to  re-
      prosecute.

  19. We asked Dr Dillon whether  there  was  anything  in  the  penal  code
      relevant to the fact that the Appellant was under 18  when  the  crime
      was committed.  He said he was not aware of anything and he was  aware
      of people under 18 having been executed in the past.

  20. On re-examination Ms Weston asked Dr Dillon how  important  the  whole
      issue of re-prosecution was, if adherence to the  terms  of  the  code
      could be manipulated or ignored according to  the  circumstances.   He
      said that it was quite likely that such a person would be  dealt  with
      in some way by the Chinese authorities and that it could be  a  formal
      re-prosecution  in  the  courts  or  they  could  be  dealt  with   by
      extrajudicial measures such as re-education.  The  Fujian  authorities
      could decide to make an example of him.  He was  asked  whether  there
      were anomalies in that there was reporting of executions and a  figure
      cited by NGOs in contrast to the lack of reporting with regard to  the
      situation which could face deportees such as the Appellant.   He  said
      that he read  the  papers  and  listened  to  the  radio  and  watched
      television and it was clear that reporting was very limited  and  that
      cases before the courts were not reported, however they were  reported
      if they were political.  He gave an example  of  short  detentions  of
      20,000  to  30,000  people  and  one  instance  which  had  been  done
      essentially for political reasons as a consequence of part of a  Qusay
      Independence Movement and the  numbers  arose  from  information  from
      emigres from the region.

  21. As regards  the  current  view  of  the  Chinese  authorities  on  the
      Snakeheads he said they were very concerned and  that  their  response
      was  indicative  of  a  clamp  down  being  in  prospect.   They  were
      determined to control the gangs, though  they  had  not  yet  found  a
      system to do so and they would be likely to want to  clamp  down  more
      fully on gangs in the future.

  22. In his submissions Mr  Hollings-Tennant  relied  on  the  reasons  for
      refusal letter.  Credibility was not a major factor.  He  referred  to
      the absence of evidence of any re-prosecutions and  the  lack  of  any
      clear understanding as to how  the  Chinese  authorities  would  apply
      Article 10 of the penal code.  It was accepted that there was  a  lack
      of evidence and there was secrecy in China, but  Dr  Dillon  had  said
      that if this sort of re-prosecution were reported, it  would  be  most
      likely to be found in a local newspaper or radio in China and  yet  he
      read the local newspapers and listened to the local radio,  but  still
      there was no  evidence  produced  of  re-prosecutions.   There  was  a
      theoretical  risk  and  no  more.   He  referred   to   the   Tribunal
      determination in WC at paragraphs 44 and  45.   There  were  cases  of
      people who had returned to China who had been  involved  in  the  same
      crime and there was no evidence as to what had happened to  them.   He
      took us to several examples of cases of people who had been  convicted
      at the same time as the Appellant and had been returned going back  to
      September 2003 but there was no indication of any problems experienced
      by them.  The Foreign Office  had  attempted  to  find  out  what  had
      happened but had experienced problems  in  this  regard.   The  expert
      referred to a public example being made but if so, why had it not been
      done with the returnees already.  The sentence had been served in  the
      United  Kingdom.   Although  there  was  evidence   of   extrajudicial
      punishment, it was not for this or similar cases and so there  was  no
      real risk of this.  There were examples to be found for example in the
      US  State  Department  Report  of  arbitrary  detentions  and  it  was
      emphasised that reports were available for examples of executions. The
      lack of evidence demonstrated the lack of real risk.

  23. He also maintained that there was  a  degree  of  speculation  in  the
      expert's report about the double jeopardy risk for the Appellant.  The
      words "highly probable" could  not  be  borne  out  as  there  was  no
      evidence of such  cases.   The  anecdotal  evidence  referred  to  was
      unsupported  and  unreliable.   The  burden  of  proof  had  not  been
      discharged.   China  would  be  unlikely  to  cooperate  with  the  UK
      authorities  by  providing  travel  documentation  and  then   causing
      returnees to disappear.  There had been no approach by the families of
      other returnees even if there were concerns.  It would be  speculation
      either  way.   We  now  had  further  evidence  about  Chinese  prison
      conditions.  There was no reason to think that the Appellant would get
      a further ten years.

  24. In the course of her submissions Ms  Weston  highlighted  two  general
      points.  The first was that the risks extended beyond  the  letter  of
      Chinese Law and it was not therefore simply a question of a risk of re-
      prosecution.  The rule of law did not apply in the same way as was the
      case in the West and it could not safely  be  predicted  how  the  law
      would be applied.

  25. Her second general point was  with  regard  to  Mr  Hollings-Tennant's
      submissions on the lack of evidence.  She argued  that  this  was  not
      strictly true.  There were matters referred to in the determination of
      Mr P J M Hollingworth, [now reported on reconsideration: FL and others
      (Rule 30: extension of time?) [2005] UKAIT 00180], which the  Tribunal
      had had reason to consider on the previous  day  and  which  had  been
      found to contain no error of law.  There were also the examples to  be
      found at paragraph 47 in WC.   She also emphasised that  human  rights
      issues only were before us.

  26. With regard to the applicable legal framework, Ms Weston commended the
      analysis in WC to us.  It drew  on  the  available  sources  of  human
      rights law, and, as a reported case it was appropriate for  it  to  be
      followed.  She also made the point that it was clear that, as could be
      seen from paragraph 36 in that  determination,  prison  conditions  in
      China had properly been taken into account.

  27. Thereafter she referred us to the content of various paragraphs in  Mr
      Hollingsworth's determination in FL  and  others  referred  to  above.
      Paragraph 44 dealt with the distinction between that and  WC  and  why
      the latter case did not apply.  Paragraph 45 dealt with  the  question
      of risk of extrajudicial action.  In both instances the findings  were
      supported by Dr Dillon's evidence.  It was clear that the  word  "may"
      in Article 10 of the Chinese penal code was highly unlikely  to  avail
      the Appellant.  There was  clear  evidence  of  re-punishment  by  the
      Chinese authorities.

  28.  Dr  Dillon  had  given  more  detailed  evidence   with   regard   to
      extrajudicial punishment and this supported paragraphs 47 and 48 in FL
      and others.  The Chinese authorities did not consider themselves to be
      bound by the penal code when they were seeking to re-punish  and  they
      would make use of extrajudicial punishments such as re-education.  The
      Tribunal was asked by the Secretary of State to imply from the absence
      of evidence as  to  what  had  happened  to  the  deportees  that  the
      Appellant would be safe.  The Secretary of State however had failed to
      provide evidence as to what had happened to them,  and  in  accordance
      with the principles set out in  Karanakaran  and  Kaya,  it  would  be
      appropriate to give a positive role to uncertainty in  favour  of  the
      Appellant.  There was no system for ascertaining what had happened  to
      them so no weight could be attached to the effect  of  their  returns.
      Dr Dillon's evidence in this regard was also relevant in that he  made
      it clear that China did not allow external scrutiny of  its  treatment
      of individuals.

  29. Ms Weston also referred to various points in  the  objective  evidence
      bundle.  This was indicative of the general behaviour of  the  Chinese
      authorities.  It was not  generally  contentious  but  she  wished  to
      emphasise the points set out at paragraphs 5.29, 5.30, 5.34,  5.52  to
      5.58 of the Country Report.  With regard to the point  concerning  the
      specific number of executions identified and the lack  of  information
      about re-prosecutions, it was the case that there would be  far  fewer
      deportees to China who had been convicted of very serious crimes  than
      the number of executions generally in China.   Paragraph  5.7  onwards
      dealt with prison conditions and 5.89 with arbitrary  arrest  and  re-
      education.  The arbitrary  nature  of  the  response  of  the  Chinese
      authorities was emphasised.  The evidence of the  expert  should  have
      weight attached to it.

  30. Ms Weston also referred us to evidence in the State Department  Report
      concerning the Snakeheads at page 229, and argued that  the  Appellant
      would be likely to be seen as in the debt collector category.  His age
      would be irrelevant.  There was very little in the Country  Report  on
      double jeopardy.  The latest State Department Report was silent on the
      cases but it was  relevant  to  the  Chinese  authorities  whether  an
      individual was seen to be involved with trafficking.  With  regard  to
      the arbitrary arrests and detentions set out at page 10 of the report,
      these were all politically oriented and this was why  their  existence
      had been discovered so this was not adverse to the Appellant.

Determination and Reasons

  31. The essential issue in this case, as encapsulated by Ms Weston in  her
      outline submissions, is whether there is a real risk that if  returned
      to China the Appellant would face adverse  treatment  by  the  Chinese
      authorities by way of judicial or extrajudicial punishment such as  to
      give rise to breach of his rights under Articles 3, 4, 5 and 6 of  the
      Human Rights Convention.

  32.   We start our consideration by setting out relevant provisions of the
      Chinese Criminal Law.  Article 10 states as follows:

             "Any person who commits a  crime  outside  the  territory  and
             territorial waters and  space  of  the  People's  Republic  of
             China, for which according to the law he should bear  criminal
             responsibility,  may  still  be  investigated   for   criminal
             responsibility according to this law, even if she  or  he  has
             already been tried in a foreign country.  However  if  he  has
             already received criminal punishment in the foreign country he
             may  be  exempted   from   punishment   or   given   mitigated
             punishment."

  33.  Article 239 of the Code states as follows:

             "Those kidnapping others with the purpose of  blackmailing  or
             kidnapping others as hostages are to be sentenced to ten years
             or more in prison or to be given life sentences,  in  addition
             to  fines  or  confiscation  of  their  property.   Kidnappers
             causing the death of their hostages or killing their  hostages
             are to be sentenced to death and their property confiscated."

  34. The issue of double jeopardy in China was recently considered  by  the
      Immigration Appeal Tribunal in  WC  [2004]  UKIAT  00253.   Ms  Weston
      attached a good deal of weight to the exposition by  the  Tribunal  in
      that determination of the legal position, and also commended to us the
      analysis  and  application  of  it  by  the  Adjudicator,  Mr  P  J  M
      Hollingworth in FL and others to which we have referred above.  In  WC
      the Tribunal concluded at paragraph 50 that a close examination of the
      cases  cited  did  not  bear  out  the  contention  that  the  Chinese
      authorities enforced re-prosecutions  and  double  punishment  in  the
      context of offences wholly committed abroad.  As the case  before  the
      Tribunal concerned an Appellant who, unlike the Appellant  before  us,
      had committed kidnapping, false imprisonment  and  blackmail  offences
      solely in the United Kingdom, there is, we accept, a  clear  point  of
      differentiation.

  35. There was a good deal of argument before us  concerning  the  lack  of
      evidence of re-prosecutions.  Mr Hollings-Tennant  argued  that  there
      was no evidence of re-prosecutions, and re-prosecutions could  not  be
      inferred from the  general  conduct  of  the  Chinese  state  and  its
      approach to human rights.  Dr Dillon in his  evidence  both  oral  and
      written stated that the absence of evidence could not be  seen  as  in
      any sense determinative.  He  referred  to  the  secretive  nature  of
      Chinese society and the lack of publicity generally attaching to court
      decisions other than when it was in the interests of  the  authorities
      for them to be published, as supportive of this point.  At paragraph 3
      of  his  report  he  nevertheless  states  that  the  double  jeopardy
      provisions in the Chinese criminal code suggest that  prosecution  for
      the same offences on the Appellant's return is highly probable.   This
      does not to our mind sit well with his evidence which for example  can
      be found at page 9 of the report that there does not appear to be  any
      reliable publicly available data  on  the  frequency  with  which  the
      Chinese authorities apply the double jeopardy rule, and  at  paragraph
      10 of his report he states that there is no reliable data on which  to
      base an opinion as to how  likely  it  is  that  a  returnee  will  be
      prosecuted for a crime for which he had already been sentenced in  the
      United Kingdom.  He is only able to refer  to  anecdotal  evidence  to
      suggest that it  is  applied.   He  goes  on  to  state  that  in  his
      professional opinion the rule is likely to be  applied  in  this  case
      given that the Appellant is well-known to the authorities as a  result
      of the publicity given to the case in  both  the  United  Kingdom  and
      China  and  the  pressure  on  the   Chinese   Government   from   the
      international community to curb the activities on the Snakehead gangs.
       He also refers to the amount of evidence on the file  concerning  the
      Appellant and his associates as a person convicted by a British court.

  36.  We  have  to  say  that  we  regard  this  evidence  as   essentially
      speculative.  Mr Hollings-Tennant properly reminded us that the burden
      of proof is on the Appellant.  He also made the  relevant  point  that
      there are a number of cases of people who were convicted at  the  same
      time as the Appellant of essentially the same offences who  have  been
      returned to China in one case as relatively long ago as  October  2003
      without there being any indication as to what has  happened  to  them.
      Enquiries the Home Office was directed to  have  made  concerning  any
      possible indication as to their whereabouts have not met with success.
       We do not agree with Ms Weston that  it  is  appropriate  however  to
      interpret such a factor favourably to the Appellant.  It is consistent
      with the general lack of evidence  in  this  regard  but  that  is  an
      essential difficulty that the Appellant's case has to surmount  if  it
      is to succeed.

  37. In any event Ms Weston argued that examples of cases provided  to  the
      Tribunal in WC by Professor Michael Palmer of the School  of  Oriental
      and African Studies of London University indicated that,  contrary  to
      Mr  Hollings-Tennant's  submissions,  there  were  examples   of   re-
      prosecutions.  The Tribunal in WC did not find the examples  given  of
      assistance to it since it was concerned with re-prosecution and double
      punishment in the context of offences wholly committed abroad  as  was
      the case before it.  It is argued however that, as was also considered
      by Mr Hollingworth in FL and others, certain of these examples are  of
      relevance to the particular situation before us which  is  essentially
      the situation that was before Mr Hollingworth.

  38. The first case considered by the IAT in WC concerned three people  who
      had returned to China after serving sentences in Hong Kong before 1997
      who were considered not to have served  enough  imprisonment  and  may
      have been imprisoned or sent to a re-education camp.  It seems however
      that Professor Palmer accepted that he did not know  whether  in  fact
      the convictions in that case were  for  other  offences  committed  in
      China.  That case would therefore appear to be of little relevance  to
      the appeal before us.

  39. The second example was a case of a man said by Professor Palmer in  an
      earlier statement to have been  convicted  of  offences  in  which  he
      caused financial losses to a Chinese company in  Kuwait  and  to  have
      been sentenced by the court in Kuwait to a term of imprisonment as his
      conduct was considered to  have  had  an  adverse  impact  on  China's
      reputation abroad and he was  reconvicted  and  required  to  serve  a
      further three years of imprisonment.  However  in  his  oral  evidence
      before the Tribunal Professor Palmer accepted that he had misread  the
      report on this case and it was in fact a case falling under Article  7
      of the Chinese Law rather than Article 10 in that both of  the  trials
      concerned took place in China.

  40. The next example concerned a person who committed  burglary  in  Japan
      and was tried and sentenced to eleven years' imprisonment in  Shanghai
      although the maximum penalty for the offence in Japanese Law was  only
      seven years.  However Professor Palmer concluded that it  seemed  that
      this man was not tried in Japan and therefore it was not a case of re-
      prosecution  or   double   punishment.    Mr   Hollingworth   in   his
      determination made the point that  it  illustrated  that  the  Chinese
      authorities did not take into  account  the  maximum  penalty  in  the
      country where the offence was committed.

  41. There were two further cases before the Tribunal provided by Professor
      Fu Hua Ling, an associate professor of law at the University  of  Hong
      Kong.  The first of these concerned a Chinese couple  who  hijacked  a
      flight from mainland China to Taiwan in 1993  and  were  convicted  of
      hijacking  in  Taiwan  and  sentenced  to  nine   and   seven   years'
      imprisonment respectively, and on repatriation to the mainland in 1999
      were sentenced to  a  further  fifteen  and  ten  years'  imprisonment
      respectively.  The  other  case  involved  essentially  similar  facts
      involving a man who was convicted and sentenced for hijacking a  plane
      from China to Taiwan in 1993, repatriated to the mainland in 1997  and
      re-convicted and sentenced to twenty years' imprisonment.

  42. The Tribunal in WC made the point at paragraph 49 of its determination
      that, bearing in mind that the People's Republic  of  China  does  not
      recognise Taiwan as a  separate  state  and  in  particular  does  not
      recognise the Taiwanese courts, these cases  had  to  be  regarded  as
      hijackings of flights  of  Chinese  aircraft  flying  from  China  and
      therefore were not regarded by the Chinese authorities as constituting
      offences taking place outside Chinese territory as a  matter  of  law.
      Mr Hollingworth in his determination made the point that  these  cases
      show that  where  the  Chinese  Government  is  of  the  opinion  that
      insufficient punishment has been handed down in respect of an  offence
      to be regarded as  perpetrated  on  the  mainland  of  China,  further
      substantial punishment will follow.

  43. We do not regard any of these cases as being of  particular  relevance
      to the case before us.  None of them involves a case of the kind  with
      which we are concerned for the reasons set  out  in  our  analysis  of
      those cases.  The Taiwan cases in our view indicate no more than China
      taking a view of the appropriate sentence to be awarded  in  cases  of
      hijacking rather than taking a view concerning the  appropriate  level
      of punishment laid down by the Taiwanese court which of course it  did
      not recognise and does not recognise.  In the Kuwait case, as we  have
      seen, both trials took place in China and it is therefore not a double
      jeopardy case.

  44. We cannot ignore the absence of evidence in this case.   It  is  clear
      that experts such as Dr Dillon visit China regularly  and  read  local
      newspapers and listen to local radio, yet he,  like  Professor  Palmer
      who gave evidence in WC can point to  no  examples  of  re-prosecution
      where a person has been prosecuted abroad.  Dr Dillon made  the  point
      that there was a distinction between there not being evidence  of  re-
      prosecutions and accepting or not accepting that  there  had  been  no
      cases of prosecutions, and we agree that there is a distinction there.
      But we have to be concerned with evidence of a real risk as opposed to
      speculation in coming to our conclusions.  Much has been made of  both
      the general attitude of the Chinese authorities to human  rights,  the
      secretive nature of that society and the control  exercised  over  the
      media, in seeking to persuade us that the absence of  evidence  should
      be regarded as unsurprising and not stand in the way of the case being
      made out.  In this regard however we consider it is also  relevant  to
      bear  in  mind  the  absence  of  any  evidence  concerning  the   co-
      conspirators of the Appellant who have been returned to China over the
      last twenty months or so and the absence of any indication as to  what
      their fate may be.  Dr Dillon no doubt properly raised the question as
      to whether there was proof that they were all right, but he is  not  a
      lawyer, and that ignores the obvious point that the burden of proof is
      on the Appellant.

  45. In coming to our conclusions we do not ignore the profile of this case
      and the fact that there was clear cooperation between the Chinese  and
      the United Kingdom  authorities.   Nor  do  we  ignore  the  point  of
      distinction that we have identified above at paragraph 34 between this
      case and the  facts  of  WC.   We  also  bear  in  mind  the  evidence
      concerning the preparedness of the Chinese state to act  in  defiance,
      if it may so properly be described, of the provisions of the  criminal
      code in cases which it deems  to  be  appropriate,  and  the  apparent
      compliance of the Chinese courts with such  an  approach.   These  are
      clearly matters of significance which cannot properly be ignored,  and
      in this regard we  also  bear  in  mind  the  points  made  concerning
      extrajudicial punishments such  as  labour  camps  which  exist  as  a
      further option, it seems, to the authorities.  But in the end  we  are
      not persuaded that  the  Appellant  has  shown  a  real  risk  of  re-
      prosecution in China with regard to the  offences  for  which  he  was
      convicted in the United Kingdom or prosecution for any  other  reason.
      Though we do not doubt the expertise  or  probity  of  Dr  Dillon,  we
      consider that  his  report  with  regard  to  risk  in  this  case  is
      essentially speculative.  At one point in his evidence to us  he  used
      the phrase that he would "argue" as follows, and we  do  not  consider
      that argument is appropriate for an expert witness, whose role  is  to
      present the facts dispassionately and given an  opinion  supported  by
      evidence.  No doubt in an expert  report  there  may  have  to  be  an
      element of speculation, but we have to deal with a burden of proof and
      a standard of proof that have been clearly set  down  as  requiring  a
      real risk to be shown by the appellant, and in our view the  facts  in
      the evidence in this case are not such as to show a real risk to  this
      Appellant on return of breach of Articles 3, 4, 5 and 6 of  the  Human
      Rights Convention.

  46. We were invited by Ms Weston in her outline  submissions  and  in  her
      oral submissions to us  to  take  as  our  starting  point  the  legal
      position as set out by the Tribunal in  WC  at  paragraphs  32  to  38
      concerning the view it would have taken if it had  accepted  that  the
      Appellant would face a real  risk  of  re-prosecution  in  that  case.
      Essentially the Tribunal was of the view that cumulatively on  account
      of the risks of  double  jeopardy/double  punishment,  adverse  prison
      conditions and identification as a public example,  the  Appellant  in
      that case would have faced a real risk of  breach  of  his  Article  3
      rights.  In  those  paragraphs  the  Tribunal  valuably  set  out  the
      relevant provisions  of  international  human  rights  law  concerning
      double punishment, contained in such documents as Article 4(1) of  the
      Seventh Protocol to the ECHR, Article 14(7) of  the  UN  International
      Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and Article 50 of  the  Charter
      of Fundamental Rights of the European Union (2000).  Though it is  not
      strictly necessary in the light of our findings above to set  out  our
      conclusions on this alternative situation, it may be helpful if we  do
      so.

  47. We agree with the Tribunal in WC that the ne  bis  in  idem  principle
      (i.e. the principle precluding retrial or repunishment for an  offence
      for which the person has already been finally convicted or  acquitted)
      does not yet constitute a peremptory norm prohibiting  the  punishment
      of a person twice in two different states for the same offence. We  do
      not however consider that if the appellant were  sentenced  to  up  to
      five years imprisonment in China on  return (on the basis taken by the
      Tribunal at paragraph 35 in  WC;  even taken   with  the  evidence  of
      prison conditions in China, would give rise to a real risk  of  breach
      of his human rights.  The risk alluded to in paragraph 37  of   WC  of
      the appellant being made a  public  example  of  seems  to  us  to  be
      unnecessarily speculative,  bearing  mind  the  absence  of  any  hard
      evidence before us of a  'strike hard' approach such as that  referred
      to in that paragraph.

  48. We were not addressed on the deportation appeal.  No  doubt  that  was
      because in the view of both  representatives  that  appeal  could  not
      succeed if we were of the view that we have  come  to  concerning  the
      Article 3 claim and that it would succeed or perhaps become irrelevant
      if we were in the Appellant's favour in that regard.  For the sake  of
      completeness we conclude that the Appellant has  not  shown  that  the
      decision to make a deportation order is in any way wrong.  This appeal
      is dismissed on all grounds.






                                                                Mr D K Allen
                                                    Senior Immigration Judge







