
KJ ("Own or occupy exclusively") Jamaica [2008] UKAIT 00006

                       ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at: Field House
Date of Hearing: 16 October 2007


                                   Before:


 Mr C M G Ockelton, Deputy President of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
                      Senior Immigration Judge Waumsley

                                   Between

                                     KJ
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr P Richmond, instructed by Alexander & Partners
For the Respondent:          Mr G Saunders, Home Office Presenting Officer

The requirement in the Immigration  Rules  that  a  person  "own  or  occupy
exclusively"  property  does  not  carry  any  technical  legal  meaning  of
exclusive occupation.  It is sufficient if there is a  defined  place  where
the person lives and which he has as  his  home,  with  the  implication  of
stability that that implies.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, a citizen of Jamaica, appealed to the  Tribunal  against
    the decision of the respondent on 8 June  2007  refusing  to  vary  his
    leave in order to allow him to remain in the United Kingdom as a person
    exercising rights of access to a  child  who  is  resident  here.   The
    Immigration Judge dismissed  the  appeal.   The  appellant  sought  and
    obtained an order for reconsideration.

 2. The Immigration Rules relevant to this appeal are in paragraph 248A  of
    the Statement  of  Changes  in  Immigration  Rules,  HC  395.   We  are
    concerned only with sub-paragraph (ix), which requires that:

        "There will be adequate accommodation for  the  applicant  and  any
        dependants without recourse to public funds in accommodation  which
        the applicant owns or occupies exclusively."

      The ground for refusal, as set out in  the  notice  of  decision,  was
that:

        "The Secretary of State is not satisfied that your son can and will
        be accommodated adequately without  recourse  to  public  funds  in
        accommodation which you own or occupy exclusively."

 3. The appellant lives with his girlfriend and her son in a flat of  which
    she is the tenant.  There are two bedrooms: they  share  one,  and  the
    appellant's girlfriend's son has the other.  The appellant's  son  (the
    child  to  whom  he  has  rights  of  access)  has  never  yet   needed
    accommodation overnight with the appellant.  If he did  stay  with  the
    appellant,  however,  he  could  share  the  second  bedroom  with  the
    appellant's girlfriend's son without  causing  statutory  overcrowding.
    There is no doubt  that  the  appellant's  girlfriend's  flat  provides
    adequate accommodation for herself and her son and the  appellant;  and
    would also accommodate the appellant's son adequately.  The question is
    whether it is properly described as accommodation "which the  applicant
    [that is to say the  appellant]  owns  or  occupies  exclusively".   Mr
    Richmond submits that the Immigration Judge failed  to  make  it  clear
    whether he regarded the appellant as occupying the  flat  in  which  he
    lives with his girlfriend.  It is, however, clear that he decided  that
    he did not occupy it exclusively.  Mr Richmond's grounds for review set
    out a dictionary definition of "occupy" but not of  "exclusively".   He
    does neither himself nor his client any favour by setting out  extracts
    from a few  unreported  Tribunal  decisions,  with  no  regard  to  the
    Practice Direction and little regard to the fact that at least  one  of
    them has reference to a different formulation of the Immigration Rules.
     In the  circumstances  we  have  not  been  able  to  find  very  much
    assistance in previous authority and must do our best  to  decide  what
    the requirements  in  the  Immigration  Rules  are  intended  to  mean,
    assisted only slightly by Mr Saunders who  told  us  that  he  did  not
    oppose the appellant's appeal with any great vigour.

 4. The  characterisation  of  accommodation  as  accommodation  which  the
    applicant or applicants own or occupy  exclusively  is  very  far  from
    peculiar to paragraph 248A.  It is a feature of many of the rules  that
    have an  accommodation  requirement,  including  most  or  all  of  the
    provisions relating to the entry, remaining or settlement of persons as
    family members of other persons.   The  requirement  is  not  typically
    found in the rules relating to admission for short or definite periods,
    nor in those relating to indefinite leave to remain unrelated to family
    membership.  The question of the meaning of the phrase is therefore  of
    considerable importance.  In ordinary or indeed in legal language there
    would  be  little  difficulty  about  it.   The  phrase  "ownership  or
    exclusive occupation" of property typically simply contrasts the  owner
    or tenant with a licensee.  Exclusive occupation is  precisely  what  a
    tenant normally has.  If the rules were read in that  way,  they  would
    require an applicant either to own the property in question  or  to  be
    the tenant of it.  But, as is not uncommon,  the  Secretary  of  State,
    having  chosen  to  express  the   rules   relatively   clearly,   adds
    considerable confusion by providing a commentary on them in the form of
    Immigration Directorates Instructions.  The  relevant  passage  of  the
    IDIs (at Chapter 8, section 1, annex F, paragraph 6) is as follows:

      "Accommodation


        The word 'exclusively' was added to HC  395  in  reference  to  the
        accommodation requirement in order to  make  the  Rules  consistent
        with Tribunal determinations.  [There  is  no  indication  of  what
        these determinations were.]  Accommodation can be shared with other
        members  of  a  family  provided  that  at  least   part   of   the
        accommodation is for the exclusive  use  of  the  sponsor  and  his
        dependants.  The unit  of  accommodation  may  be  as  small  as  a
        separate bedroom but:


         . Must be owned or legally occupied by the sponsor;
         . Its occupation must not contravene public health regulations;
         . Its occupation must not cause overcrowding  as  defined  in  the
           Housing Act 1985."

 5. This provision makes it very difficult indeed  to  understand  what  is
    meant by "exclusively".  Not the least difficulty is the requirement of
    "exclusive use" by the sponsor (not the applicant or appellant) and his
    dependants.  Further, the provision that "the unit of accommodation may
    be as small as a separate bedroom" appears to mean that that unit  need
    not be the subject of  any  separate  formal  legal  agreement.   That,
    further, means that the phrase "legally occupied" in the  first  bullet
    point must mean not "as a matter of law, occupied"  but  "occupied  not
    unlawfully".

 6. If "occupied exclusively" is not to be given its ordinary meaning as  a
    phrase, one might have nevertheless have thought the word "exclusively"
    itself, apparently added deliberately to the Immigration  Rules,  might
    be taken to have some determinative value.  But it is difficult to  see
    that any of the ordinary meanings of  the  word  "exclusively"  can  be
    intended to apply.  "Exclusively" clearly implies  either  a  power  to
    exclude others or the actual exclusion of others, or  both.   A  person
    can be described as occupying property exclusively in three situations.
     The first is where he is being described as living in one property  to
    the exclusion of other properties: "he owns a cottage in  Cornwall  but
    lives exclusively  in  London".   We  do  not  think  this  meaning  of
    "exclusively" has any relevance to the Immigration Rules.   The  second
    meaning is that of the actual  exclusion  of  others.   In  this  sense
    "exclusively"  means  "alone".   A   person   who   occupies   property
    exclusively would then be occupying it alone.  The third sense is  akin
    to the legal meaning and means  "with  the  power  to  exclude  anybody
    else".  In this sense, a person occupies property exclusively if he has
    the right to prevent anybody else from  occupying  it.   A  person  who
    takes a hotel room for the night by himself may be said to  occupy  the
    room exclusively in the second sense but not in the  third.   A  person
    who is owner or tenant of a property may occupy it exclusively  in  the
    third sense, even if (because somebody else lives with him) he does not
    occupy it exclusively in the second sense.  But  two  people  who  live
    together may together occupy the property  exclusively  in  the  second
    sense; and co-owners or co-tenants may  together  occupy  the  property
    exclusively in the third sense.

 7. The problem is, however, that notions of actual  exclusion  or  of  the
    power to exclude do not sit well either with the IDIs as set out  above
    or with the general purposes and approach  of  the  Immigration  Rules.
    Once it  is  accepted  that  what  is  technically  in  law  "exclusive
    occupation" is not required, it is very difficult to see what notion of
    exclusivity is being applied.  If a young married couple have their own
    bedroom in a sufficiently large house belonging to and also occupied by
    the parents of one of them, it appears from the IDIs that they can meet
    the  requirement  (here  in,  for  example,   paragraph   281(iv))   of
    accommodation which they own or occupy exclusively.  So far as it goes,
    that could be a reference to the second meaning of "exclusively":  they
    occupy that bedroom, but nobody else does.  After that simple  example,
    however, things become more difficult.  For  any  children  of  theirs,
    there would also have to be accommodation in which the parents  own  or
    occupy exclusively (see, for  example,  paragraph  297(iv)).   At  this
    point the possibility of using  the  second  meaning  of  "exclusively"
    vanishes, because the parents cannot be the  only  ones  occupying  the
    premises if the child is envisaged as living there as  well.   And  the
    difficulty of applying the  second  meaning  of  "exclusively"  becomes
    acute in the rule with which we are particularly concerned: because  if
    the applicant occupies the property exclusively in the sense of  living
    there alone, it follows that, quite apart from any difficulty  relating
    to the addition of his dependants, he cannot be  in  a  co-habitational
    relationship with anybody else.  That would mean that the rules  permit
    leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom  in  order  to  exercise
    access rights to a child would be  limited  to  applicants  who  remain
    single.  We cannot imagine that that was  intended.   It  follows  that
    "exclusively" cannot mean "alone".

 8. But it also cannot mean "with a right to exclude  others".   The  young
    couple who together are the only people who use  their  bedroom  cannot
    claim to exclude the owner of the house from that room in the way  that
    a tenant can exclude his landlord.  In the present case the  appellant,
    who lives in his girlfriend's flat, has no right to  exclude  her  from
    any part of it and probably has no rights against the landlord.

 9. Nevertheless, "occupies exclusively" in the Immigration Rules  must  be
    given some meaning.  From what we have said it is clear that it  cannot
    mean either "alone" nor "with a legal right to exclude all others".  As
    we have said, however, the phrase occurs in those parts  of  the  rules
    relating to admission for some family purposes and we hope it is  right
    to draw from that context some indication of what this otherwise  clear
    phrase, rendered obscure by the IDIs, is intended to mean.   Where  the
    rules permit immigration for family purposes, they may be  presumed  to
    do so with the intention of the continuation of  family  life,  and  it
    would be alien to  such  a  notion  to  suggest  that  the  immigrants,
    sponsors  and  their  dependants  should  be   living   apart   or   in
    accommodation that is entirely precarious.  Thus it  ought  not  to  be
    enough for an applicant to say that he will be accommodated by a series
    of friends allowing him to sleep on sofas, or that he has enough  money
    to put up his dependants in hotels from time to time,  or  that  he  or
    they will find space in hostels.  What appears to be required  is  that
    there is somewhere that the person or people in question can  properly,
    albeit without any legal accuracy, describe as their  own  home.   They
    may not own it; and they may share it; but it is adequate for them,  it
    is in a defined place, and it is properly regarded as where they  live,
    with the implications of stability that that phrase implies.

10. Applying that definition to the appeal  before  us,  there  is,  as  Mr
    Saunders acknowledged,  little  doubt  that  the  appellant  meets  the
    requirements of the rules.  He has lived with  his  girlfriend  in  her
    flat for some time (as a matter of fact,  they  have  moved  since  the
    commencement of these proceedings, but still live together).  Her  flat
    is his home.  Within the arcane meaning of the phrase  as  deployed  in
    the Immigration Rules, he occupies that flat exclusively.

11. For the foregoing reasons we find that the Immigration Judge materially
    erred  in  law  in  his  interpretation   of   the   phrase   "occupies
    exclusively".  We substitute a determination allowing  the  appellant's
    appeal.






                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT



