
NM (No retrospective cancellation of leave) Zimbabwe [2007] UKAIT 00002

                       ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at: Field House by video link
Date of Hearing: 4 October 2006
                                            Promulgated on: 20 December 2006

                                   Before:


 Mr C M G Ockelton, Deputy President of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
                      Senior Immigration Judge Chalkley

                                   Between

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the Appellant:           Mr M Uddin, instructed by Blakemores
Solicitors
For the Respondent:          Mr N Smart, Home Office Presenting Officer


There appears to be no power under the  Immigration  Acts  to  cancel  leave
retrospectively, even if it has been obtained  by  deception.   Leave  which
has been granted and is current may be curtailed, but only with  prospective
effect.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is the reconsideration, at the instance of the respondent, of  the
    appellant's appeal against the decision of the respondent on  15  March
    2006 refusing to grant him leave to remain in the United Kingdom.   The
    appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe.  He is married to a student who has
    leave to remain here.  He too was granted leave  as  the  spouse  of  a
    student.  That leave was extended in 2004 and was due to expire  on  30
    November 2005.  On 25 November 2005 he applied for a further  extension
    under paragraph 76 of the Immigration Rules.  He received a response in
    the form of a Notice of Decision worded as follows:

                      "REFUSAL TO GRANT LEAVE TO REMAIN


                   Paragraph 322(2) of HC 395 (as amended)


      To [the appellant]


        You applied for further leave to remain in the United Kingdom as
        the dependent spouse of a student but your application has been
        refused.


        You have applied for leave to remain in the United Kingdom as the
        dependent spouse of ... a student in the United Kingdom, but in
        view of the fact that you have provided a passport which has been
        altered in support of your application, the Secretary of State is
        satisfied that you have made false representations for the purpose
        of obtaining leave.


        You made an application on 25 November 2005.  However, as details
        have been altered in your passport this invalidates your previous
        period of leave you are not considered to have had valid leave at
        the time of your application.


        There is no right of appeal against this decision."

 2. Despite the final words of  that  notice,  the  appellant  submitted  a
    Notice of Appeal against the respondent's decision.  He  said  that  he
    had not altered his passport, and that, if he had,  it  was  surprising
    that the respondent had previously granted him leave to remain  on  the
    strength of it and had indeed affixed a notice of  that  leave  in  the
    disputed passport.  The matter came before an  Immigration  Judge,  who
    decided that there was no reason to think that the  passport  had  been
    altered.  He therefore  allowed  the  appellant's  appeal  against  the
    refusal to grant him further leave:  he  specifically  found  that  the
    appellant met the requirements  of  paragraph  76  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.

 3. The respondent seeks reconsideration on two grounds.  The first is that
    as the immigration decision was a refusal  to  grant  leave  to  remain
    there is no appeal against it, and that the Immigration Judge therefore
    acted without jurisdiction.  The  second  is  that  in  any  event  the
    Immigration Judge erred in allowing the  appeal,  because  no  evidence
    going to compliance with paragraph 76 of the Immigration Rules had ever
    been considered.

 4. We may say first that we are perfectly satisfied on the material before
    us, including a letter from the Embassy of the  Republic  of  Zimbabwe,
    that there is no substance  in  the  allegation  that  the  appellant's
    passport contains an unauthorised alteration or is anything other  than
    a genuine document.  It is fair to say that  the  respondent  does  not
    challenge that part of the  Immigration  Judges's  determination.   The
    challenge to jurisdiction is  more  troublesome.   We  heard  extensive
    submissions from Mr Smart in support  of  the  grounds.   We  were  not
    persuaded by them.

 5. There is no doubt that the appellant had leave to remain expiring on 30
    November 2005.  The Secretary of State had power to curtail that  leave
    if he considered that false  representations  had  been  made  for  the
    purpose of obtaining it.  That power is  in  paragraph  323(i)  of  the
    Immigration Rules, which makes reference to  paragraph  322(2).   Until
    the leave is curtailed, however, it remains in force.  The  Rules  give
    no power to cancel leave retrospectively.  This,  then,  is  the  first
    problem  for  the  respondent.   Neither  paragraph  322(2),  which  he
    invoked, nor any other part of the Immigration  Rules,  enable  him  to
    treat the appellant's application as made at a  time  when  he  had  no
    leave.  At the time the appellant made the application  he  had  leave,
    and no subsequent decision of the respondent could change that fact.

 6. The consequence is that,  by  making  his  application,  the  appellant
    obtained the benefits of s3C of the Immigration Act  1971.   His  leave
    continued until a decision was made  on  his  spouse  application,  and
    continued or continues further during the time for bringing any  appeal
    against that decision, or during the  time  when  any  such  appeal  is
    pending.  That means that, on 15  March  2006,  when  the  decision  in
    question here was made, the appellant still had leave.

 7. Given the terms of  the  Notice  of  Refusal,  it  is  clear  that  the
    respondent intended to exercise whatever powers he had to terminate the
    appellant's leave.  As  we  have  explained,  he  could  do  that  only
    prospectively.  It follows that so far as the appellant's current leave
    is concerned, the notice of 15 March 2006 must have  been  intended  to
    curtail it so as to end on that date.  Here,  however,  is  the  second
    problem for the respondent.  A decision to  curtail  a  person's  leave
    (that is to say, a decision to vary his leave in such a way  that  when
    the variation takes effect he has no leave)  is  a  decision  which  is
    appealable under s82(1)(e) of the 2002 Act.  And any decision which  is
    appealable has to be notified in the manner required by the Immigration
    (Notices) Regulations 2003 (SI 650/2003).  The notice of 15 March  2006
    does not comply with those regulations, because so far from  indicating
    what the rights of appeal are, it alleges that there  is  no  right  of
    appeal.

 8. The regulations  are  meant  to  be  for  the  benefit  of  prospective
    appellants, and so, as  the  Tribunal  has  remarked  on  a  number  of
    occasions, they may be waived by the giving of a Notice of Appeal  even
    in response to a Notice of Decision which says there  is  no  right  of
    appeal.  That is what the appellant did in the present  case,  alleging
    in the grounds that the basis upon which the  Secretary  of  State  had
    sought to reconsider (to use a neutral word) a grant of  leave  to  him
    was erroneous in fact.  The Immigration Judge clearly had  jurisdiction
    to hear that appeal.  In his determination he found that the  appellant
    had not altered his passport.  He concluded that the respondent had not
    made out the requirements of paragraph 322(2) (which contains the  only
    relevant substantive condition to which reference is made in  paragraph
    323(i))  and  that  therefore  the  appellant  had  made   his   spouse
    application during  the  currency  of  existing  leave.   Although  the
    Immigration Judge was no doubt  rather  confused  by  the  respondent's
    attempts to do things he had no power to do, it appears to us that  the
    determination is sufficient to deal with that issue.

 9. As we have explained, nothing could alter the fact that  the  appellant
    had leave to remain at the  time  when  he  made  his  application  for
    further leave.  The effect of the Immigration Judge's determination  is
    that, instead of the appellant's s3C  leave  terminating  on  15  March
    2006, it continues or continued for the period limited by s3C.

10. The appellant's substantive application was for leave to remain as  the
    spouse of a student.  The notice of 15 March 2006 does not  purport  to
    deal with that application on  its  merits.   It  purports  instead  to
    refuse it on the ground that it was made at a time when  the  appellant
    had no current leave.  It further purports to refuse to grant leave  (a
    decision which, we agree, would not be appealable) and  fails  to  deal
    with the application to extend leave  (a  refusal  of  which  would  be
    appealable).  As the appellant had leave at the time when he  made  his
    application, a refusal to make a grant of leave to him as a person  who
    had no current leave is entirely inappropriate.

11. The Immigration  Judge  ought  not  to  have  concluded  that  all  the
    requirements of paragraph 76 are met.  There has been no  consideration
    of them by the Secretary of State, and it may not be right to say  that
    they are not contested.  But the real problem is  that,  in  our  view,
    there has never been any valid  decision  on  the  spouse  application.
    That of itself would deprive the Immigration Judge of  jurisdiction  to
    hear an appeal  against  such  a  decision.   The  Secretary  of  State
    purported to make a decision which he could not make, and he has failed
    to make the decision that he ought to have made.   The  in-time  spouse
    application is still undecided.

12. For the foregoing reasons we take the view that the  Immigration  Judge
    materially erred in law.  We substitute a  determination  allowing  the
    appellant's appeal against the curtailment  of  his  leave  only.   The
    appellant's original application, which began the present  process,  is
    still outstanding before the Secretary of State awaiting decision.  The
    appellant has his leave under s3C in the meantime.








                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT
                                                             Date:
