
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


        Samir (FtT Permission to appeal: time) [2013] UKUT 00003(IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 12 September 2012                          |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                      Mr C M G Ockelton, Vice President
                          Upper Tribunal Judge Gill

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             SULTAN AHMED SAMIR

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms C Gough, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr D Bazini, instructed by Trott & Gentry Solicitors

In a case where, following Boktor and Wanis(late application for
permission) Egypt [2011] UKUT 00442 (IAC), a grant of permission has to be
regarded as conditional upon a decision whether time should be extended,
the latter decision is part of the original decision on the application.
If the application was to the First-tier Tribunal, the decision as to time
is therefore made by the First-tier Tribunal, and if the application is not
admitted there is the possibility of renewal to the Upper Tribunal.








 DECISION UNDER RULE 21(7) OF THE TRIBUNAL PROCEDURE (UPPER TRIBUNAL) RULES
                                    2008

Introduction

 1. This case raises questions relating  to  out-of-time  applications  for
    permission to appeal to  this  Tribunal.   Suppose  that,  following  a
    determination of the First-tier  Tribunal,  a  party  applies  to  that
    Tribunal for permission to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  but  the
    application is not submitted within the time prescribed by  the  Rules.
    Suppose  further  that  the  First-tier   Tribunal,   considering   the
    application, fails to notice that the application was out of time,  and
    so  makes  no  decision  on  whether  to  extend  time,  but  issues  a
    determination granting permission to appeal.  In  those  circumstances,
    what precisely has happened so far?  And what should happen next?


The Facts

 2. Mr Samir ("the claimant") is a national of Afghanistan.  He came to the
    United Kingdom in 2000 and claimed asylum.  He was refused asylum,  but
    granted leave to remain, until 18 February 2005.  Within  the  currency
    of that leave he applied for indefinite leave to remain as a person who
    had  completed  four  years  exceptional  leave:  that  was  a  routine
    application under the Secretary of State's policy at  that  time.   The
    Secretary of State then  embarked  on  the  consideration  whether  the
    claimant was guilty of war crimes.  The Secretary of State reached  the
    conclusion that he was, and on 9 February 2007 refused  him  indefinite
    leave to remain for that reason: he had been  a  member  of  KhAD,  the
    Afghan State Security Organisation, which had committed crimes  against
    humanity in the 1980's and 1990's.   The claimant appealed against that
    decision.  His appeal was dismissed on the basis that he  was  excluded
    from the Refugee Convention, and hence from  the  grant  of  indefinite
    leave to remain under the Secretary of State's policy, because  of  his
    association with KhAD.

 3. Reconsideration was ordered. On 18 May 2008, Senior  Immigration  Judge
    Deans dismissed the appeal, having found that  article  1F(a)  applied.
    The claimant then sought permission to appeal to the Court  of  Appeal.
    Permission was granted following the judgements in MH  (Syria)  and  DS
    (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ  226,  but  the  appeal  was  then
    stayed in order to await the decision of the Supreme Court in  JS  (Sri
    Lanka) v SSHD [2009] UKSC 15.   Following that decision, the appeal  to
    the Court of Appeal was settled by  consent,  on  the  basis  that  the
    Secretary of State would make a new decision.   No  decision  was  made
    until 31 March 2011,  but  on  that  date  a  new  decision  was  made,
    essentially repeating the old one: it was assessed  that  the  claimant
    was excluded from the Refugee Convention  by  article  1F(a),  and  was
    therefore also not entitled to humanitarian  protection  or  indefinite
    leave to remain.

 4. The claimant appealed against that decision to the First-tier Tribunal.
     His appeal was heard on 22 June 2011 by Judge N Manuel.  The  claimant
    did not attend the hearing.  The judge made her decision on  the  basis
    of documentary evidence stretching back a number  of  years,  including
    material which had  been  before  the  Tribunal  and  courts  that  had
    previously considered the claimant's case.  She heard oral  submissions
    from Mr  Bazini  and  from  a  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer.   She
    concluded  that  the  claimant  was  not  excluded  from  the   Refugee
    Convention, but was  not  a  refugee:  he  was,  however,  entitled  to
    indefinite leave to remain, on the basis of the policy that applied  at
    the date of his application.   Her determination was signed on  7  July
    2011.  It was  sent  to  the  Secretary  of  State  (only),  under  the
    procedure regulating decisions in asylum appeals, to be found  in  rule
    23 of the First-tier Tribunal's Procedure Rules.  It  was  received  by
    the Secretary of State on 13 July.  Late in the afternoon  of  25  July
    2011, the Tribunal received notice of an application by  the  Secretary
    of State for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.   The  grounds
    were, in summary, that the judge erred in concluding that the  claimant
    was not excluded by article 1F.   The  part  of  the  application  form
    dealing with time limits was completed  properly.   In  a  box  at  the
    beginning of part B of the form, the date of receipt of the  First-tier
    Tribunal's determination is entered as  "13/07/2011".   The  form  then
    goes on to set out the time limits for making an application, which for
    present purposes was five days after receipt of the determination.   In
    the box for giving reasons  why  the  application  is  made  late,  the
    following has been entered:

        "This application is  being  submitted  3  days  after  time.   The
        determination was allocated to me to consider on the 18/07/2011 but
        unfortunately was misplaced between various court bundles  provided
        in anticipation of hearings on 25/07/2011.  I became  aware  of  it
        being outstanding last  night  (24/07/2011),  and  therefore  I  am
        seeking to rectify this error at the  first  available  opportunity
        having been required to attend Field House earlier today.


        This error is purely of my doing for which  I  apologise  sincerely
        and  request  that  the  Secretary  of  State's  position  be   not
        prejudiced as a result.  The appeal, as relating to exclusion is of
        paramount importance to the department so I would again ask that my
        error be not held against the organisation I represent.  I would be
        happy to address to the court personally on this point if  believed
        to be necessary."

 5. That explanation was provided by a Presenting Officer, Caroline  Gough,
    who signed the application form.

 6. The application was dealt with by Senior Immigration Judge Waumsley  as
    a judge of the First-tier Tribunal.  He said that he had

        "little (if any) hesitation in concluding that the grounds on which
        the respondent has applied for permission to appeal raise  arguable
        points of law which merit, indeed require, further consideration".

    He  granted  permission,  saying  nothing  about  the  fact  that   the
    application was late.

 7. The  appeal  was  accordingly  listed  for  hearing  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal, and came before Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge  Lever  at  Field
    House on 29 February 2012.  The claimant was again  represented  by  Mr
    Bazini; Mr Walker  represented  the  Secretary  of  State.   Mr  Bazini
    submitted that the Secretary of State should not be allowed to  proceed
    with her appeal because  the  application  was  out  of  time  and  the
    Tribunal had not extended time.  Mr Walker was not able  to  expand  on
    the reasons  given  in  the  application.   Judge  Lever  reserved  his
    decision on this issue.  After considering the authorities, Judge Lever
    concluded that he should treat the grant of appeal  as  conditional  on
    his decision whether time should be extended; and after considering the
    authorities and the facts concluded that time should not  be  extended.
    He concluded his written decision as follows:

        "I do not grant the respondent's application for  an  extension  of
        time for appealing the decision of the First-tier Tribunal in  this
        case and in accordance with rule 24 of the Asylum  and  Immigration
        Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.  I  therefore  do  not  admit  the
        respondent's application for grant  of  permission  to  appeal  and
        accordingly I uphold the decision of the First-tier Tribunal."

 8. That  decision  was  sent  out,  again  in  accordance  with  procedure
    applicable to asylum appeals, to the Secretary of State  (only)  on  20
    March 2012.  The covering letter was in the form IA150, indicating that
    the enclosure was the Upper Tribunal's determination of the appeal, and
    that any further recourse was, with permission, to the Court of Appeal.
      A response by the Secretary of State, on  5  April,  was  a  form  of
    application to the Upper Tribunal for permission to appeal to it.   The
    application is again signed by Caroline Gough  and  is  dated  5  April
    2012.  It was received late in the evening of that day.   It  describes
    itself  as  "potentially"  out  of  time,  and  gives   the   following
    explanation:

        "As will be seen from the grounds themselves, the decision  we  are
        appealing against has been recorded as being an IA150, which  would
        allow 14 days for submission on an in-time appeal.  If the Tribunal
        ultimately decide to proceed on the basis that the decision remains
        an IA150, these grounds should be viewed as in time.


        There is however some confusion as to exactly what decision the SOS
        is appealing against.  On advice we are  instructed  to  treat  the
        decision above as a refusal to admit the application for permission
        to appeal (please see paragraph 32 of Judge Lever's decision) as  a
        result  of  FTT  Judge  Waumsley  omitting  consideration  of   the
        extension of time argument.  A decision ultimately on behalf of the
        FTT.  If that is in fact the case then this  application  is  being
        made out-of-time.


        We would request that due to the confusion highlighted above,  and,
        the  need  to  secure  a  funding  agreement  before  pursuing  any
        application  to  the  Court   of   Appeal,   the   application   be
        substantively considered and an extension of time be granted.  This
        application has been, up until this time treated as a  response  to
        an IA150 and therefore UKBA has complied with the time limits set."



 9. The grounds begin as follows:

        "This application is being made to the Upper  Tier  Tribunal  (UTT)
        [sic] as a result of what we deem to be a refusal to extend time by
        the First Tier Tribunal (FTT).  Although it was a Deputy  Judge  of
        the UTT who refused to admit the application, this  occurred  as  a
        result of the omission by Judge Waumsley, acting on behalf  of  and
        in response to an application to the FTT.


        In the alternative we would ask for the  decision  to  be  reviewed
        under the UTT Procedure Rule 21.
        If we are wrong to assume either  of  the  above  apply,  we  would
        request that this application be treated as one made via the UTT to
        the Court of Appeal."

10. The grounds go on to challenge Judge Lever's decision, and to ask  that
    the substantive grounds supporting the application made to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal be considered.

11. It is that application that was ordered for an oral hearing.


The Law

12. Section 11 of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act  2007  provides
    for a right of appeal from a determination of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    to the Upper Tribunal on a point of law.  The right  may  be  exercised
    only with permission, which may be given by the First-tier Tribunal  or
    the Upper Tribunal.  Section 22 of the same Act allows  the  making  of
    "Tribunal Procedure Rules", and paragraph 4 of Schedule 5 allows  rules
    to make provisions for time limits "as respects initiating,  or  taking
    any step in, proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal  or  the  Upper
    Tribunal".

13. The procedure rules of the First-tier Tribunal are those which apply to
    the  Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal  before  the  transfer  of  its
    functions in 2010, when they were adopted  by  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    Committee.  They are therefore  the  Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal
    (Procedure) Rules 2005 (SI 230/2005) as amended.  Part 3 of  the  rules
    is headed "Appeals to the Upper Tribunal" and the  relevant  provisions
    are as follows:

        "24. (1) A party seeking permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal
               must make a written application to the [First-tier] Tribunal
               for permission to appeal.
             (2) Subject to paragraph (3) [which  does  not  apply  in  this
               case], an application under paragraph (1) must  be  sent  or
               delivered to the Tribunal so that it is  received  no  later
               than 5 days after the date on which  the  party  making  the
               application is deemed  to  have  been  served  with  written
               reasons for the decision.
        ...
             (4) If a person makes an application under paragraph (1)  later
               than the time required by paragraph (2) -
               (a) the Tribunal  may  extend  the  time  for  appealing  if
                  satisfied that by  reason  of  special  circumstances  it
                  would be unjust not to do so; and
               (b) unless the Tribunal  extends  time  under  sub-paragraph
                  (a), the Tribunal must not admit the application.
             (5) An application under paragraph (1) must -
               (a) identify the  decision  of  the  Tribunal  to  which  it
               relates;
               (b) identify the alleged error  or  errors  of  law  in  the
               decision; and
               (c) state the result the party  making  the  application  is
               seeking. "

14. Rule 25  requires  a  decision  to  be  made  on  an  application,  and
    communicated to the parties in writing.

15. The rules governing  the  procedure  in  the  Upper  Tribunal  are  the
    Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008  (SI  2698/2008)  as
    amended.  The relevant provisions are as follows:

        "21(2) A person may apply to the Upper Tribunal for  permission  to
              appeal to the Upper Tribunal against a  decision  of  another
              tribunal only if
              (a) they have made an application for permission to appeal to
                 the tribunal which made the decision challenged; and
              (b) that  application  has  been  refused  or  has  not  been
              admitted.
        (3) An application for permission to appeal must be made in writing
           and received by the Upper Tribunal no later than -
        ...
           (aa)  subject to paragraph (3A)  ,  in  an  asylum  case  or  an
               immigration case  where  the  appellant  is  in  the  United
               Kingdom at the time that the application is made -
               (i) seven working days after the date on which notice of the
                  First-tier Tribunal's refusal of permission was  sent  to
                  the appellant;
           ...
           (ab)  subject to  paragraph  (3A),  in  an  asylum  case  or  an
               immigration case where the appellant is outside  the  United
               Kingdom at the time that the application is made, fifty  six
               days after the  date  on  which  notice  of  the  First-tier
               Tribunal's refusal of permission was sent to the appellant;
        ...
        (3A) Where a notice of decision is sent electronically or delivered
             personally, the time limits in paragraph (3)(aa) and (ab) are -
             (a) in sub-paragraph (aa)(i), five working days;
             (b) in sub-paragraph (aa)(ii), two working days; and
             (c) in sub-paragraph (ab), twenty eight days.
        ...
        (6) If the appellant provides the application to the Upper Tribunal
           later than the time required by paragraph (3) or by an extension
           of time allowed under rule 5(3)(a) (power to extend time) -
           (a) the application must include a request for an  extension  of
              time and the reason why the application was not  provided  in
              time; and
           (b) unless the Upper Tribunal extends time for  the  application
              under rule 5(3)(a) (power to extend time) the Upper  Tribunal
              must not admit the application.


        (7)  If the appellant makes an application to  the  Upper  Tribunal
             for permission  to  appeal  against  the  decision  of  another
             tribunal,  and  that  other  tribunal  refused  to  admit   the
             appellant's application for permission because the  application
             for permission or for a written statement of  reasons  was  not
             made in time -
             (a) the application to the Upper  Tribunal  for  permission  to
               appeal must include the reason why the  application  to  the
               other tribunal for permission to appeal  or  for  a  written
               statement of reasons, as the case may be, was  not  made  in
               time; and;
             (b) the Upper Tribunal must only admit the application  if  the
               Upper Tribunal considers that it  is  in  the  interests  of
               justice for it to do so. "

16. "Appellant" is defined in rule 1(3) for present purposes as the  person
    who applies for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  The  Upper
    Tribunal rules relate  largely  to  decisions  where  one  party  is  a
    Minister of the  Crown.   In  these  circumstances  the  definition  is
    somewhat odd: although whether the  Minister  in  question  is  in  the
    United Kingdom on a particular date is  probably  a  matter  of  public
    record, it is odd that the rule should be framed in such a way that the
    time limit appears to depend on the Minister's engagements or the place
    of his or her holiday.  It is probably fair to assume, as the Secretary
    of State's representatives in the present case appear to  assume,  that
    the true "appellant" in an application by the  Secretary  of  State  is
    some entity independent of the Secretary of State herself,  perpetually
    present in the United Kingdom.

17. Issues as to the effectiveness of the grant of permission  in  response
    to an application whose lateness had not been considered by  the  judge
    granting the permission were the subject of the decision in Boktor  and
    Wanis [2011] UKUT  00442  (IAC).   That  decision  was  made  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Allen and is recorded as a decision  of  this  Tribunal.
    The Tribunal's summary of the decision is as follows:

        "Where permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal has been granted,
        but in circumstances where the  application  is  out  of  time,  an
        explanation is provided, but that explanation is not considered  by
        the judge granting permission, in the light of AK (Tribunal  appeal
        - out of time) Bulgaria [2004] UKIAT 00201 (starred) and the  clear
        wording of rule 24(4) of the  Asylum  and  Immigration  (Procedure)
        Rules 2005, the grant of permission to appeal is  conditional,  and
        the question of whether there are special circumstances  making  it
        unjust not to extend time has to be considered.".




         Discussion

18. We see no reason to depart from either the reasoning or the decision of
    Judge Allen in Boktor and Wanis.  The present rules both of the  First-
    tier Tribunal and of the  Upper  Tribunal  made  clear  the  importance
    attached to making applications in time; and the separate notion of the
    admission of applications on the grant of  permission  makes  it  clear
    that an out of time  application  has  to  go  separately  through  the
    process of being  admitted  before  it  is  eligible  for  a  grant  of
    permission.  The only doubt we have as to the decision  in  Boktor  and
    Wanis is whether it is correctly described as a decision of  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

19. In our judgement it is clear from the Rules, and to  a  limited  extent
    also from the 2007  Act,  that  it  is  intended  that  a  party  whose
    application to the First-tier Tribunal is unsuccessful should have  the
    opportunity  of  making  an  application  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  for
    permission to appeal to it.  That that  process  applies  even  if  the
    First-tier Tribunal refuse to admit the application because it was late
    is confirmed by Upper Tribunal rule 21(7), which we  have  set  out  in
    paragraph 15 above.  It follows that  the  process  set  out  by  Judge
    Allen, in which a grant  on  the  merits  is  treated  as  conditional,
    subject to time being extended  when  the  matter  is  brought  to  the
    Tribunal's attention, must be seen as part of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    process of considering the application for permission  to  appeal.   If
    the outcome of that process is a decision that the  application  should
    not be admitted, because it was out of time  and  time  should  not  be
    extended, the applicant must have an opportunity to put his case  again
    to the Upper Tribunal.

20. After all, if the judge considering the application to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had dealt with the issue of time and had refused to admit  the
    application, there would be no doubt that  the  applicant  could  apply
    again to the Upper Tribunal.   It  cannot  be  that  the  applicant  is
    deprived of a level of application simply by  the  judge's  mistake  in
    failing to appreciate or deal with matters of time.

21. For these reasons, when a judge of the Upper  Tribunal  is  faced  with
    these issues, he will need to sit as a judge of the First-tier Tribunal
    to determine them.  Properly interpreted, that is  clearly  what  Judge
    Allen was doing (or should have been doing) in Boktor and Wanis, and it
    must be what Judge Lever is to be interpreted as  having  done  in  the
    present case.   Despite  the  trappings  of  the  Upper  Tribunal,  the
    decision he made  was  the  completion  of  the  task  begun  by  Judge
    Waumsley, which was the consideration of the application for permission
    to appeal, made to the First-tier Tribunal.

22. Following that decision, the Secretary of State, as applicant, had  the
    opportunity of making an application to the Upper Tribunal,  which  she
    did.  She was out of time again, but we do not think that that  can  be
    held against her, because the Tribunal  itself  had  wrongly  indicated
    that the method  of  challenging  Judge  Lever's  decision  was  by  an
    application for permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal, for  which
    a longer  time  limit  is  appropriate.   Indeed  the  correct  notice,
    indicating that the application for permission to appeal to the  First-
    tier Tribunal had not been admitted, has never been sent out.

23. The application made by the  Secretary  of  State  does  not,  however,
    comply with the rules: rule 21(7)(a) requires material to  be  included
    in it, which was not included.  Although in the present case, it is  no
    doubt possible for the Upper Tribunal to discover what  had  been  said
    previously, the intention of the  rule  is  clearly  that  the  reasons
    originally given should be repeated (or even  amplified)  so  that  the
    application before the Upper Tribunal can be dealt  with  properly,  on
    the basis of all that the applicant wishes to say.  We  doubt  (without
    wanting to decide the issue) whether non-compliance with rule  21(7)(a)
    would be sufficient to invalidate  an  application:  nevertheless,  the
    failure to comply with it is a matter  to  take  into  account  in  the
    circumstances of the present case.


The application to the Upper Tribunal for permission to appeal to the  Upper
Tribunal

24. The application is in the following terms:

        "The history of this appeal is set out between  paragraphs  2-6  of
        Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever's determination, which came about
        as a result of the hearing on 29th  February  2012,  following  the
        grant of permission to appeal by First Tier Tribunal Judge Waumsley
        dated 5th August 2011.


        Paragraphs 7 & 8 of the determination  notes  a  challenge  to  the
        grounds made by the appellant's representative, on the  basis  that
        the Tribunal had not addressed the issue  of  the  application  for
        permission being out of time.  Judge Lever went on  to  refuse  the
        application for an extension of  time  and  therefore  the  grounds
        themselves received no substantive consideration.


        The Judge gives the following  summary  reasons  for  the  decision
        within paragraph 31:


              1) The explanation for the delay provided did not explain  the
                 totality  of  the  delay  and  pointed   towards   "systems
                 failure".
              2) The matter  of  whether  the  appellant  should  have  been
                 excluded as a war criminal should have been dealt with back
                 in 2000.
              3) The respondent granted the appellant  ELR  for  four  years
                 setting in train the appellant's stay.
              4) The respondent failed to deal with the  specific  issue  of
                 1F(a) for over a 2 year period.
              5) The evidence of previous serious delays in this case.
              6) Prejudice to the appellant who was granted ILR 9 months ago
                 after a 12 year process and lengthy delay on  the  part  of
                 the respondent.


        It is submitted that the above reasons are flawed for the following
        reasons (respectively):


              1)  Paragraph   23   of   the   determination   features   the
                 consideration with regards to the above finding.  It  shows
                 the unexplained delay, as referred to by the Judge, was  in
                 fact a two day period after receipt of  the  determination,
                 whilst still "in time", during which the determination made
                 its way from the post room to the Specialist  Appeals  Team
                 and then onto me as an individual.  It is submitted firstly
                 that as the matter was still "in time" it was not  in  fact
                 part of the "delay" that needed to be  justified,  however,
                 in addition it  is  submitted  that  two  days  is  not  an
                 unreasonable length of time to  process  the  determination
                 from receipt to consideration, especially  considering  the
                 size of the organisation.  The explanation provided for the
                 remaining delay was accepted, and was down to a mistake  by
                 myself rather than system failure as assumed.  This  was  a
                 material mistake of fact and in law.
              2) In 2000 when the appellant  was  initially  refused  asylum
                 there was in fact no system in  place  to  exclude  someone
                 from the convention on  the  basis  of  war  crimes.   Post
                 government change, when  a  process  was  implemented,  the
                 organisation was quick to action exclusion  in  this  case:
                 interviewing, investigating and issuing the appellant  with
                 a decision within 2 years of applying to extend his  leave.
                 This period included requests for further information.
              3) Exceptional Leave to Remain was granted to the appellant in
                 2000 after the refusal of his asylum application.  This was
                 simply as a result of the country situation  at  that  time
                 and due to an inability  to  remove  the  appellant.   This
                 blanket policy position, coupled with the  absence  of  any
                 war crimes procedure at the time in question,  can  not  be
                 said to  have  given  rise  to  any  expectation  that  the
                 appellant would not  later  be  held  to  account  for  his
                 contribution to the commission of crimes against humanity.
              4) It is submitted that the time taken  in  dealing  with  the
                 1f(a) issue is neither exceptionally long, nor has  it  had
                 the effect as described within EB (Kosovo) v  Secretary  of
                 State for  the  Home  Department  [2008]  UKHL  41  between
                 paragraphs  14-16.   It  is  further  submitted  that   the
                 approach taken in Strbac & Anor v Secretary  of  State  for
                 the Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ 848 adds support to the
                 submission that the decision in this  respect  was  flawed.
                 The case was reconsidered by agreement after the  appellant
                 himself chose to wait for the outcome of new caselaw on the
                 1f issue.  Our agreement to do so should not  now  be  held
                 against us.
              5) This matter is discussed in paragraph 30.  It  is  evidence
                 of delays due to all parties, not  just  the  Secretary  of
                 State.
              6) It is submitted the judge made mistakes  of  fact  in  this
                 instance.  This matter has in  fact  been  live  for  seven
                 years rather than twelve.   As  noted  above,  the  initial
                 decision took around two years, including investigation and
                 consideration.  There was then 3 years of judicial  process
                 before the matter came back to the Secretary  of  State  to
                 reconsider the matter simply as a result  in  a  change  in
                 caselaw.  It is also incorrect that ILR was granted to  the
                 appellant,  because  although  his   initial   appeal   was
                 successful, the decision was vitiated by an error  of  law,
                 and no grant was in fact ever made.  Finally, relying  upon
                 prejudice to an appellant who has failed to attend the last
                 two appeal hearings, hearings which arose as  a  result  of
                 his  involvement  in  serious  crimes,   appears   somewhat
                 irrational when the remaining reasons are removed.


        In addition to those points it is also worthy to mention  that  the
        challenge from the appellant's representatives was  made  only  the
        day before the hearing directly to Field House.  The respondent was
        therefore not on notice about this issue, and  whilst  it  is  true
        that no adjournment request was made, it is submitted that it could
        not have been in the mind of  the  representative  that  the  Judge
        would take points against the  Secretary  of  State  of  the  above
        nature.  Having accepted that the grounds had merit and related  to
        an important and significant  issue,  it  was  essential  that  the
        Secretary of State be  given  proper  opportunity  to  address  any
        concerns that troubled the  Tribunal,  especially  considering  the
        expectation given as a result of the grant of permission  by  Judge
        Waumsley,  and  the  late  stage  at  which  the  application   was
        challenged.  It should  also  be  noted  that  within  the  grounds
        themselves I offered to attend if the matter required  any  further
        evidence.


        It is also unclear whether or not the Judge applied  the  "general"
        principles highlighted from the case BO  and  Others  [2008]  UKAIT
        00035 [30(e)], which it is  submitted  would  be  a  further  error
        considering  the  significance  and  importance   noted   in   this
        particular case [28].


        It is requested that time be extended to cover the 5 day  delay  in
        submitting the initial application, that the substantive grounds be
        considered and the decision of FTT Judge Manuel be set aside."


25. We have considered those matters, as amplified before us by Miss Gough,
    but we remind ourselves that we are concerned  primarily  with  whether
    the Secretary of State, who had allowed her  appeal  rights  to  become
    exhausted by the  passage  of  time  following  the  receipt  of  Judge
    Manuel's decision, should be allowed to reinstate the appeal  in  order
    to demonstrate that the claimant ought  not  to  have  succeeded.   The
    delay is that set out by Miss Gough in her  original  application,  and
    recorded by us at para 4 above.  What  we  now  have  is  a  series  of
    objections to Judge Lever's conclusions on those issues.

26. The position is that time ran from receipt of the determination by  the
    Secretary of State on  13  July.   An  application  for  permission  to
    appeal, if made in time, had to be made  by  20  July:  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's rules provide at rule 57(1) that:
        "Where a period of time for doing any act  is  specified  by  these
        Rules or by a direction of the  Tribunal,  that  period  is  to  be
        calculated -
             (a) excluding the day on which the period begins; and
             (b) where the period is 10 days  or  less,  excluding  any  day
               which is not a business day (unless the period is  expressed
               as a period of calendar days)."


27. 16 and 17 July 2011 were the weekend, so the five days in question were
    14, 15, 18, 19 and 20 July, by the end of  which  day  the  application
    needed to be submitted.  As Judge Lever correctly observed, there is no
    exclusion of non-business days for the calculation  of  time  in  other
    circumstances, and so an application received on 25 July was five  days
    late: that is to say, that the time taken to put in the application has
    to be regarded as double that allowed by the rules.

28. It is also, in our judgement, quite wrong to suggest that the period of
    time elapsing while an in-time application could have been made  is  to
    be ignored: if an application had been put in time it does  not  matter
    whether it was put in at the beginning or  the  end  of  the  requisite
    period, but if the application is out of time, there  needs  to  be  an
    explanation covering the whole of the period of time available  to  the
    applicant.  As Judge Lever observes, there is, in the present case,  no
    explanation at all for the Secretary of State's failure  to  deal  with
    the matter for the  first  three  working  days  (over  half  the  time
    allowed).  After that, the explanation for the failure  to  put  in  an
    application during the rest of the time allowed, and during  the  whole
    of the next five days, is that of an individual personal failure by the
    Secretary of State's employee.

29. Those explanations have to be considered in the context of the case  as
    a whole, as set out by Judge Lever.  What is now said is that this is a
    very important case, raising issues as to the application of article 1F
    and the appellant's  potential  exclusion  from  the  benefits  of  the
    Refugee Convention.  We note what the Secretary of State says about the
    lack of a policy on such matters in  2000,  but  by  then  the  Refugee
    Convention had been in force for  very  nearly  fifty  years,  and  its
    principal provisions must have been  well-known  to  the  Secretary  of
    State's predecessors.  No point was taken on the  claimant's  potential
    exclusion  from  its  benefits.    Secondly,   despite   Miss   Gough's
    submission, we agree with Judge Lever that this is not a case which has
    been dealt with very speedily at  a  time  when  a  decision  from  the
    Secretary of  State  has  been  awaited.   Thirdly,  and  perhaps  most
    important for present purposes, the  treatment  of  this  case  in  the
    period after the sending out of Judge Manuel's determination  does  not
    give any reason to suppose that anybody thought that it was a matter of
    great importance.  Indeed, none of the material submitted either to  us
    or to Judge  Lever  suggests  that  Judge  Manuel's  determination  was
    identified as raising any difficult or important question  of  law,  in
    advance of the drafting of Miss Gough's grounds.

30. Miss Gough has also  relied,  at  both  stages,  on  the  size  of  the
    Secretary of State's organisation.  The  Secretary  of  State  has  the
    advantage, not shared by individual applicants, of a very large  budget
    and a very large salaried staff.  It does not seem to us that it is  in
    principle open to the Secretary of State to say that the  size  of  her
    organisation puts her at a disadvantage in meeting the requirements  of
    those rules which also have to be met  by  individual  applicants.   We
    have little doubt that the Secretary of  State  has  opportunities  for
    prioritising matters that she considers are of  particular  importance,
    and making sure that they are dealt with appropriately promptly.  As we
    have said, it does not look as though anybody  other  than  Miss  Gough
    thought that this was a  case  of  particular  importance,  and  it  is
    difficult to see why the mere fact that,  perhaps,  mistakes  are  more
    likely to be made in a large organisation than a small one should  lead
    to the conclusion that the outcome of a mistake should be condoned.

31. In dealing with the facts, we have had to mention Miss Gough  a  number
    of times.  We would emphasise that we do not intend that  any  personal
    blame should be attributed to her.  She is not the Secretary of  State,
    and she is not personally responsible  for  the  Secretary  of  State's
    policy in allocating either funds or work.  Mistakes do happen in large
    organisations as well as small  ones:  the  consequences  arising  from
    policy decisions as to the allocation of funds and of work need  to  be
    faced by those responsible for the policy decisions.

32. Looking at the matter as a whole as we do  it  seems  to  us  that  the
    Secretary of State took double the time allowed in order  to  make  the
    present application.  There is no reason given for the decision not  to
    deal with the matter promptly on its arrival, and no evidence that  the
    matter  was  then  regarded  as  having  the  importance  that  is  not
    attributed to it.  To put it bluntly, the judgement of Judge Manuel was
    first ignored, and then forgotten about.  That is not a good reason for
    extending time.

33. It is right nevertheless in the circumstances of this case to  look  at
    the strength of the grounds of appeal.   They  are  that  Judge  Manuel
    failed to resolve conflicts of evidence and  made  findings  that  were
    "irrational/inadequately reasoned in light of statutory guidance".   No
    statutory guidance  is  identified,  but  the  interpretation  and  the
    precise ambit of the exclusionary  provisions  of  article  1F  of  the
    Refugee Convention cannot be regarded as settled.  So far as  concerned
    matters of the conflict of evidence, the Immigration Judge had all  the
    evidence before her, and reached  her  own  findings  of  fact.   Those
    findings may be ones  that  not  every  immigration  judge  would  have
    reached, but this is not a case in  which  it  can  be  said  that  the
    grounds of appeal have  a  high  prospect  of  success.   In  order  to
    succeed, the Secretary of State  would  have  to  show  both  that  the
    immigration judge's findings of fact were not open to her and that  she
    had misunderstood the impact of article 1F.  It does not appear  to  us
    that any substantial injustice is suffered by allowing  Judge  Manuel's
    determination to stand.

34. Judge Lever's decisions for refusing to extend  time  were  good  ones.
    For the reasons we have given we are not satisfied that it  is  in  the
    interests of justice that  time  for  the  application  for  permission
    should now be extended, and we therefore decline to admit the Secretary
    of State's application.  There is no appeal pending  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal.




                                                              C M G OCKELTON

VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                       Date: 5 December 2012
