








R (on the application of MS) (a  child  by  his  litigation  friend  MAS)  v
Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department  (Dublin   III;   duty   to
investigate) [2019] UKUT 00009 (IAC)



                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber


Heard at Field House
On 17 and 18 May 2018


                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb
                          Upper Tribunal Judge Blum




                            Between




                    The Queen (on the application of MS)
                   (a child by his litigation friend MAS)
                         (Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                   Applicant

                                      v


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

Appearances:

For the Applicant:       Ms C Kilroy and Ms M Knorr instructed by
Bhatt Murphy Solicitors
For the Respondent:   Mr G Lewis instructed by Government  Legal
Department


   1) A Member State considering a  Take  Charge  Request  ("TCR")  made  by
      another Member State under the Dublin III Regulation  has  a  duty  to
      investigate the basis upon which that TCR request is made and  whether
      the requirements of the Dublin III Regulation are met.    (R  (on  the
      application of MK, IK (a child by his litigation friend MK) and HK  (a
      child by her litigation friend MK) v Secretary of State for  the  Home
      Department (Calais; Dublin III Regulation -  investigative  duty)  IJR
      [2016] UKUT 00231 (IAC) followed).


   2) The Member State's duty is to "act reasonably"  and  take  "reasonable
      steps" in carrying out the investigative duty,  including  determining
      (where appropriate) the options of DNA testing in the requesting State
      and, if not, in the UK (MK, IK explained).

   3) The duty of investigation is not a 'rolling one'.  The duty  does  not
      continue beyond the second rejection, subject to the  requirements  of
      fairness (MK, IK not followed).

   4) Fairness requires that the applicant, even after a  second  rejection,
      must know the 'gist' of what is being said against him in  respect  of
      the application of the criteria relevant to the TCR and must  have  an
      opportunity to make representations on the issues and  material  being
      relied on  if  that  has  not  previously  been  the  case.  In  those
      circumstances, fairness requires  that  the  respondent  consider  any
      representations and material raised (perhaps for the  first  time)  to
      deal with a matter of which the individual was 'taken by surprise'  in
      the second rejection decision. To that extent only, the duty continues
      and may require the requested State to reconsider the rejection of the
      TCR.

   5) In judicial review proceedings challenging a Member State's refusal to
      accept a TCR, it is for the court or tribunal  to  decide  for  itself
      whether the criteria for determining responsibility under  the  Dublin
      III Regulation have been correctly  applied.   This  may  require  the
      court or tribunal to reach factual findings on the evidence and it  is
      not restricted to public law principles of challenge.

   6) The tribunal or court's role should not be taken as an open invitation
      to parties to urge the court or tribunal to review and  determine  the
      facts in a Dublin case and, as a concomitant, to admit  oral  evidence
      subject to cross-examination. Often there will be no factual  dispute:
      the issue will be a legal one on the proper application of the  Dublin
      III Regulation.  Even if there is a factual issue, the need to  assess
      the evidence may  not  always  mean  also  admitting  "oral"  evidence
      subject to cross-examination.  It will only be so if it is  "necessary
      in order to resolve the matter fairly and accurately".



                                  Judgment


UT Judge Grubb:

   1. This is the judgment of the Tribunal to  which  both  members  of  the
      Panel have substantially contributed.


   2. The Tribunal has made an anonymity direction and the applicant will be
      referred to throughout as "MS".  The applicant's claimed brother  will
      be referred to as "MAS" and other  relevant  witnesses  are  similarly
      anonymised.


    INTRODUCTION

   3. The underlying issue in this challenge is whether MAS, who is lawfully
      present in the UK, is the brother of MS, an  unaccompanied  minor  who
      has made an asylum application in France. If MS is the sibling of  MAS
      then, under Council Regulation  (EU)  No  604/2013  (the  "Dublin  III
      Regulation"), the UK has responsibility for  determining  MS's  asylum
      claim, as long as this is in his best interests.


   4. Arising from this underlying issue are  other  issues  concerning  the
      proper interpretation of the Dublin III Regulation, and in particular,
      whether the UK has a duty of investigation once it receives a  request
      from the French authorities to take charge of MS's asylum application,
      and the scope of any such duty. This in turn raises issues  concerning
      the scope and power of the Tribunal to order the respondent to use his
      best  endeavours  to  obtain  DNA  evidence,  and  the  scope  of  the
      Tribunal's reviewing power.


   5. Some of these issues were considered by the Upper Tribunal (the  "UT")
      in R (on the application of MK, IK (a child by his  litigation  friend
      MK) and HK (a child by her litigation friend MK) v Secretary of  State
      for the Home Department (Calais; Dublin III Regulation - investigative
      duty) IJR [2016] UKUT 00231 (IAC) (McCloskey J and UTJ Peter Lane,  as
      he then was) (hereinafter "MK"). The  respondent  contends  that  this
      decision was wrongly decided and should not be followed.


BACKGROUND AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY

   6. We can set out the background and procedural  history  to  this  claim
      relatively briefly.


   7. The applicant is a national of Afghanistan. His given date of birth is
      1 January 2001. He is, therefore, now 17 years old. The applicant left
      Afghanistan in 2016 and arrived in France in late 2016.  He  initially
      lived in a makeshift camp in Dunkirk. The camp  burnt  down  in  April
      2017. Thereafter, the applicant was transferred to a children's centre
      in Roubaix,  and  is  now  residing  in  an  accommodation  centre  in
      Armenti�res.


   8. MAS, who it is accepted is an  Afghan  national,  entered  the  United
      Kingdom on 24 May 2006. He was granted indefinite leave to  remain  on
      21 August 2013. His partner ("MOS") is a Polish  national.  They  have
      two children, twins aged two years old, who are British  citizens.  In
      addition, MOS has two other children, aged 12 years and 8  years,  who
      live with them. MAS and MOS married on 12 March 2018.


   9. The applicant contends that MAS is his older  brother.  Since  January
      2017 he has been seeking to join MAS in the UK in accordance with  the
      Dublin III Regulation.

  10. MS made an asylum claim in France on 13 June 2017.  Accepting that  MS
      had an older brother in the UK, on 19 June 2017 France  made  a  'take
      charge request' ("TCR") to the UK under Art 8(1)  of  the  Dublin  III
      Regulation.


  11. On 27 July 2017 the respondent refused the TCR.   The  respondent  was
      not satisfied that MAS was the applicant's brother as he claimed.

  12. On 9 August 2017 France made a second TCR.  On  21  August  2017,  the
      respondent again refused the TCR on the basis that the  applicant  had
      not established he was MAS' brother.

  13. The applicant's solicitors send a pre-action protocol  ("PAP")  letter
      on 3 November 2017 challenging the respondent's decisions of  27  July
      2017 and 21 August 2017.  Additional supporting evidence and  material
      was included.


  14. On 10 November 2017,  the  respondent  responded  to  the  PAP  letter
      maintaining her  decisions  to  refuse  the  TCRs.  At  that  time  no
      consideration was given to the further evidence and material that  had
      been submitted on the applicant's behalf.

  15. On 13 November 2017, the applicant's solicitors wrote requesting  that
      the respondent consider the material and reconsider his  decision  not
      to accept the TCR.

  16. On 20 November  2017,  the  applicant  lodged  these  judicial  review
      proceedings challenging the respondent's decisions not to  accept  the
      TCR requests.  The applicant sought various  orders  including  orders
      quashing the  decisions  of  27  July  2017  and  21  August  2017,  a
      declaration that the respondent's refusal to admit MS was unlawful and
      a mandatory order requiring the respondent to admit MS to the  UK,  to
      facilitate DNA testing and to remake the decision  whether  to  accept
      the TCR.

  17. On 20 November  2017,  UT  Judge  King  ordered  that  the  permission
      application be considered at an oral hearing.

  18. On 7 December 2017, UT Judge Canavan refused an  application  made  by
      the applicant to list the application as a rolled-up hearing.

  19. On 14 December 2017, the respondent filed an Acknowledgment of Service
      and Summary Grounds of Defence.

  20. Following an oral hearing  on  21  December  2017,  UT  Judge  Freeman
      granted the application permission to bring these proceedings.  He did
      so in the following terms relying upon MK:

           "arguably...the  respondent's  investigative  duties  under  the
           Dublin  Convention  required  her  to  pursue  with  the  French
           authorities the possibility of DNA testing being carried out  by
           this applicant solicitor's, if necessary facilitating  obtaining
           any necessary order by a French judge."

  21. UT Judge Freeman also  made  a  number  of  specific  case  management
      directions   relating   to   disclosure   (which    the    applicant's
      representatives had expressed concerns over) and, again following  MK,
      specifically that

           "The Secretary of State shall (a) take all reasonable steps  and
           use her best endeavours to facilitate and secure the DNA testing
           of  this  applicant  and  shall  liaise   and   communicate   as
           appropriate  with  the  relevant  French  authorities  in   this
           exercise, which must be completed by 2 February  2018,  and  (b)
           make a further decision by 16 February."

  22. The latter date was varied to 23 February  2018  by  a  consent  order
      sealed on 31 January 2018.


  23. There then followed correspondence exchanges  between  parties'  legal
      representatives.  An application was made by the respondent to vary UT
      Judge Freeman's order specifically in relation to the obtaining of DNA
      testing of the applicant in France.  There  was  also  an  application
      relating to the linkage of this case with another, about which we need
      to say no more, other than that the cases were not linked at the  time
      of the hearing before us.


  24.  On  12  March  2018  the  respondent  made  a  further  decision,  as
      contemplated by UT Judge  Freeman's  order  of  21  December  2017  as
      subsequent varied, again refusing  France's  TCR  in  respect  of  the
      applicant on the basis that he was still not satisfied that MS and MAS
      are brothers.


  25. On 23 March 2018, the respondent filed Detailed Grounds of Defence.

  26. On 6 April 2018, the applicant applied for  permission  to  amend  his
      claim to include a challenge to the decision of 12 March 2018.

  27. Following a case  management  hearing  on  16  April  2018,  UT  Judge
      Lindsley granted permission for the claim to be  amended  additionally
      to challenge the decision of  12  March  2018.  The  judge  also  gave
      permission to the applicant to rely on further evidence  including  an
      additional expert report.


 THE CHALLENGED DECISIONS

  28.  In  these  proceedings,  the  applicant  challenges  three  decisions
      rejecting the TCRs made by France dated: (1)  27  July  2017;  (2)  21
      August 2017; and (3) 12 March  2018.   We  will  take  each  of  these
      decisions in turn.


      Decision letter of 27 July 2017


  29. The Respondent's decision  of  27  July  2017  was  reached  following
      France's TCR dated 19 June 2017.  The  decision  first  sets  out  the
      material which has been considered and which was, as we understand it,
      forwarded pursuant to the Dublin III Regulation regime  by  France  to
      the respondent.  The evidence was:

            . Take charge request 19 June 2017
            . Copy of minor's fingerprint
            . Copy of consent letter from minor
            . Copy of UK Residence permit
            . Copy of Afghan passport
            . Copy of utility bill
            . Copy of family tree [diagram]


  30. The decision then continues:


           "No evidence has been provided to demonstrate the  link  between
           the above and his brother. Therefore, it is not  accepted  as  a
           familial link has been shown.  In  an  effort  to  initiate  the
           family link the UK has consulted the above's claimed  relation's
           previous Home  Office  submissions.  Regrettably,  there  is  no
           mention of siblings and the names of the parents of the  above's
           claimed brother are different. Consequently, I regret to  inform
           you that your take charge request is respectfully denied."


  31. The reference to MAS' previous Home  Office  submissions  include  his
      screening interview when he claimed asylum on  24  May  2006.  In  the
      record of that interview at  para  3.2  under  the  heading  "siblings
      details" there is entered: "NO SIBLINGS". In addition, in a supporting
      statement dated 22 September 2006 provided by MAS's  asylum  claim  he
      said:


           "I do not have any siblings."


  32. In his asylum statement dated 22 September 2006, MAS also said: "I  do
      not have any siblings".


      Decision letter of 21 August 2017


  33. In response to this decision, further material was provided on  behalf
      of the applicant including a statement from MAS dated  31  July  2017,
      photographs and two untranslated Afghan documents. France then made  a
      further TCR which was again rejected by the respondent in his decision
      dated 21 August 2017.


  34. Again, the respondent set out the material he had  considered:  first,
      the material previously considered in response to the first  TCR;  and
      then secondly, the new material as follows:

            . Copy of un-translated Afghan document
            . Copy of UK Driver's licence
            . Copies of photographs
            . Copy of a Written letter from brother
            . Copy of family tree [diagram]
            . Copy of Residence permit
            . Copy of un translated AFG document
            . Copy of AFG passport

  35. The decision letter then goes on to state the respondent's  conclusion
      and decision as follows:


           "Please note that in order for these documents to be considered,
           English translations must be provided along  with  the  original
           copies. The documents provided do not establish a  family  link.
           Whilst it is recognised that official Afghan documents have been
           provided which may demonstrate a family  link,  these  have  not
           been translated into English or French. No English  copies  have
           been provided. Therefore, it is not considered that the evidence
           provided sufficiently demonstrates the link  between  the  above
           and his claimed brother.


           Also as previously stated, the claimed brother  claimed  he  did
           not have any siblings  in  his  previous  submissions  the  Home
           Office.


           Consequently I once again regret to inform you  that  your  Take
           Charge request is respectfully denied under article 8.1."


  36. As can be seen, central to the respondent's conclusion that MS has not
      established that he is the brother of MAS was the recorded evidence of
      MAS in his screening interview in 2006 that he had "NO  SIBLINGS"  and
      its confirmation in his witness statement submitted in support of  his
      asylum claim. This was despite what was said by MAS in his  letter  of
      31 July 2017 which the respondent had, namely that:


           "I informed the officer that I had 1 brother aged 5 at the  time
           (he is 16 now), and 2 sisters aged approximately  8  and  25  at
           that time (who are 19 and 36 now).


           However it was not  requested  from  me  to  provide  additional
           information including their names."

      Decision letter of 12 March 2018


  37. As we have already alluded to, following the  decision  of  21  August
      2017, in the lead up to, and  during  the  course  of  this  claim,  a
      considerable number of documents  and  witness  statements  have  been
      submitted to the respondent on behalf of the applicant to seek to make
      good his claim to be the  brother  of  MAS.  In  addition  to  witness
      statements from MAS and MOS, was a  written  statement  from,  it  was
      claimed, their cousin (referred to in  the  respondent's  decision  as
      "SS").  A  certified  translation  of  what  was  claimed  to  be  the
      applicant's Taskira or Afghan ID document was submitted.   The  latter
      was subject to verification with the Afghan authorities.  In  response
      to this material, and the order of UT Judge  Freeman,  the  respondent
      reconsidered his rejection of the TCR in his detailed decision  of  12
      March 2018.  The earlier conclusions and decision were re-affirmed  in
      the following terms:

            "3.  ...The SSHD has considered the evidence  contained  within
                 the Tribunal bundle, as well as the additional evidence you
                 provided on 16/02/2018.  This evidence has been  considered
                 in  its  totality  in   conjunction   with   the   previous
                 information submitted by the French  authorities  in  their
                 formal requests.


            Credibility


            4.   The SSHD remains of the view that MAS is not your client's
                 brother.  The further material you have recently  filed  on
                 your client's behalf is not sufficient to persuade the SSHD
                 as to the claimed family link.


            5.   When MAS was interviewed by the SSHD, he made  no  mention
                 of  having  any  siblings  in  Afghanistan  or   elsewhere.
                 Rather, he confirmed in his asylum interview that he had no
                 siblings.  He further  submitted  a  witness  statement  in
                 support of his claim positively  stating  that  he  had  no
                 siblings.


            6.   You have submitted three witness statements from MAS which
                 seek to address the fact that he  did  not  mention  having
                 siblings in  his  previous  contact  with  the  immigration
                 authorities in the UK.  However, the explanation given  for
                 this omission in these witness statements is inconsistent:


                    i) In the first witness statement, MAS sought to rely on
                       the fact that his  interviews  with  the  immigration
                       authorities took place over 11 years ago.  He  claims
                       that, to the best of his recollection, he  did  refer
                       to his siblings in his interview, but not by name.



                   ii) In his second witness statement (submitted at the pre-
                       action  protocol  stage),  MAS  did  not   offer   an
                       explanation as to why he had not previously mentioned
                       his siblings, but said that he did not  know  why  it
                       was  not  recorded  that   he   had   siblings,   the
                       implication being that he must have referred to them.




                  iii) In his third and final statement, MAS has offered  an
                       explanation as to why he  might  not  have  mentioned
                       having any siblings.   He  now  claims  that  it  was
                       possible an agent advised  him  not  to  mention  any
                       siblings to the  UK  immigration  authorities.   This
                       latest explanation contradicts MAS'  claimed  initial
                       recollection that he mentioned his siblings  but  did
                       not refer to them by  name.   Moreover,  if,  as  MAS
                       suggests, he was advised not to refer to any siblings
                       he had in Afghanistan, he surely would have mentioned
                       this in his first witness statement.  It is important
                       to note that, when MAS provided  this  first  witness
                       statement in support of his asylum  application,  MAS
                       was represented.  If it was genuinely the  case  that
                       an agent had advised MAS not to mention his  siblings
                       in  Afghanistan,  this   would   surely   have   been
                       identified and scrutinised by the  solicitor  at  the
                       time as part of  the  overall  assessment  of  family
                       circumstances.   For  these  reasons,   the   various
                       explanations  offered  by  MAS  for  not   previously
                       referring to his claimed siblings are not accepted.




            7.   Other information submitted  in  support  of  MAS'  asylum
                 application gives rise to further credibility issues.  In a
                 statement MAS submitted in  response  to  his  reasons  for
                 refusal letter at page 74 of Tab B of the bundle, he sought
                 to address one particular argument in  the  refusal  letter
                 whereby the decision maker referred to  the  death  of  his
                 mother.  MAS stated that he was not sure if his mother  had
                 died but that he had been informed by his  neighbours  that
                 his house had been attacked. It  is  notable  that  in  his
                 attempt to clarify his answer, MAS made no mention  of  any
                 concern for any  other  family  members.   Given  that  the
                 attack on the family home was alleged to have  taken  place
                 in 2004, your client's claimed brother, MS, would have been
                 3  years  old  at  the  time,  MAS  has  not  offered   any
                 explanation for not referring to any  family  member  other
                 than his mother in these submissions.


            8.   In support of your client's case you have also submitted a
                 Taskira  with  certified  translations  which   you   claim
                 corroborates the claimed family link  between  your  client
                 and MAS.  These documents have been  considered.   However,
                 after conducting investigations with the FCO in  Kabul,  it
                 has been found that these  documents  do  not  assist  your
                 client.   The  Afghanistan   Central   Civil   Registration
                 Authority was asked to verify the Taskira.   The  Authority
                 produced a report concluding that  the  document  was  'non
                 genuine' (see attached).  The rationale for this  rejection
                 was that the serial number listed on the document could not
                 be matched with any internal records in either the Kabul or
                 Laghman province archives.


            9.   In addition to  the  written  statements,  you  have  also
                 provided evidence in the form of bank transfers,  allegedly
                 showing transactions made between MAS and an individual who
                 was resident in Calais at the same  time  as  your  client.
                 You state that this individual then withdrew this money  to
                 give to your client.  Whilst it is accepted that  you  have
                 evidence that  these  transfers  are  genuine,  it  is  not
                 accepted that you have sufficient evidence that your client
                 was the intended recipient of these transfers.  Aside  from
                 a screenshot of the Facebook profile of the  individual  in
                 question, you have not provided any evidence to  show  that
                 this individual was resident in France at the same time  as
                 your client, or indeed that he is  known  to  your  client.
                 There is nothing to  substantiate  any  link  between  this
                 individual and MS at all.


            10.  Along with the above transaction  details  you  have  also
                 provided alleged evidence of contact  between  your  client
                 and MAS.  This is presented in the form of translated  text
                 conversations between MAS  and  your  client.   It  is  not
                 possible to verify if these messages were in  fact  between
                 the two individuals in question.  In any event, it  is  not
                 accepted that these corroborate a sibling relationship;  at
                 best, they show that the two individuals are known to  each
                 other in some capacity.


            11.  You have also provided a written statement by the  claimed
                 cousin of your client and MAS,  who  for  the  purposes  of
                 anonymity shall be referred to as  SS.   SS  asserted  that
                 both your client and MAS grew up in the same  household  in
                 Afghanistan before they all subsequently fled.  In  support
                 of the written statement you have provided a  copy  of  the
                 asylum interview SS underwent in 2004.  In this  interview,
                 SS referred to his father and his uncle.   The  name  given
                 for the uncle is not the same as the  name  given  for  the
                 claimed father  of  your  client  and  MAS.   SS  was  also
                 questioned on the  children  of  his  uncle,  to  which  he
                 responded that he had one son and two  daughters.   In  his
                 witness statement, SS seeks to address the fact that he did
                 not mention both individuals  in  his  interview,  claiming
                 that as your client was very young at the time he  did  not
                 think it would be relevant to list him.  It is not accepted
                 that this adequately explains  this  omission  particularly
                 when taking into consideration  that  SS  claims  that  all
                 three grew up in the same family  household.   Rather  than
                 support  the  claimed  sibling  relationship  between  your
                 client and MAS the submissions provided  on  behalf  of  SS
                 have considered to undermine these claims.


            12.  You have also provided two  witness  statements  from  the
                 partner of MAS.  You claim that these statements also  help
                 to corroborate the relationship  between  your  client  and
                 MAS.  However, neither of these statements seeks to address
                 the inconsistencies in MAS' account.  It is considered that
                 these statements are self-serving and do not come close  to
                 substantiating the claimed family link between your  client
                 and MAS, when the evidence is assessed in the round.


            13.  It is noted that neither MAS nor his partner have  visited
                 MS in France despite referring to  their  concern  for  his
                 wellbeing.  In her first statement, MAS' partner stated  at
                 paragraph 5 that she and MAS tried to  visit  MS  but  they
                 were stopped at Dover because  MAS  did  not  have  a  visa
                 (having not realised that he needed one).   In  her  second
                 witness statement MAS' partner states that  they  have  not
                 applied for a visa for MAS to go to  France  as  it  "takes
                 time and is costly".  This is not an  adequate  explanation
                 for why neither MAS nor his partner  have  taken  steps  to
                 visit MS, if the family relationship is genuine as claimed,
                 especially  given  the  concerns  they  express  about  his
                 wellbeing.  In particular, MAS' partner  does  not  need  a
                 visa to visit France as a  Polish  national  and  so  there
                 would be no difficulty in her making arrangements to  visit
                 MS who she describes as family.  MAS appears to have  taken
                 no steps to investigate whether he could obtain a visa  and
                 how much the cost  is:  a  quick  search  on  the  internet
                 indicates  that  a   visa   can   be   obtained   for   �51
                 (https://www.schengenvisainfo.com/france-visa/uk).  This is
                 not a prohibitively expensive sum.  MAS and  his  partner's
                 failure to take any steps to visit  MS  further  undermines
                 the claimed family relationship between MAS and MS.


            14.  Assessing all  the  evidence  in  the  round,  it  is  not
                 accepted that MS and MAS are  brothers,  as  claimed.   The
                 claimed basis for the  take  charge  request  is  therefore
                 rejected.


            Vulnerability


            15.   You  have  claimed  that  the  case  of  your  client  is
                 especially compelling given his current vulnerabilities. In
                 submissions  sent  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  requesting  an
                 expedited hearing, you attached  an  email  from  Dr  Helen
                 O'Keefe which outlined a  telephone  assessment  which  had
                 been  undertaken  on  01/12/2017.   Dr   O'Keefe   gave   a
                 preliminary opinion that there  were  grounds  for  concern
                 about your client's physical and mental  health,  including
                 that  he  may  be  experiencing  suicidal   ideation.   You
                 subsequently submitted a  mental  health  assessment  dated
                 05/12/2017 which came to the conclusion that your client is
                 suffering from [sic]. Within the report Dr O'Keefe referred
                 to gaining  assurances  from  those  responsible  for  your
                 client's care that his referral  to  the  relevant  medical
                 authorities  would  be  prioritised.  You  have  not  since
                 provided an update as to the  referral  or  what  treatment
                 your client has received since.  In her formal diagnosis of
                 your client Dr O'Keefe stated that your  client  "currently
                 meets the diagnostic criteria  for  Post  Traumatic  Stress
                 Disorder" but that his symptoms may also be symptoms of  "a
                 co-morbid psychotic illness such as schizophrenia".   Since
                 your client is under the care of the French authorities, it
                 is France who owes  him  a  duty  of  care.   Any  concerns
                 regarding your client's wellbeing  should  be  referred  to
                 those caring for him in France.  Should your client present
                 himself to the relevant authorities as  requiring  support,
                 including for any  mental  health  condition,  he  will  be
                 treated   in   accordance   with   internationally   agreed
                 standards.  You have not provided any evidence  to  suggest
                 that the French authorities  have  failed  to  comply  with
                 these standards.


            Section 55 consideration


            16.  Section 55 of the Border, Citizenship and Immigration  Act
                 2009 (the 2009 Act) places a duty on the Secretary of State
                 to ensure that functions in relation to immigration, asylum
                 or nationality are discharged having regard to the need  to
                 safeguard and promote the welfare of children "who  are  in
                 the United Kingdom".  As the section 55 duty  applies  only
                 where a child is physically present in the UK, it does  not
                 provide a separate basis, in law, for  accepting  the  take
                 charge request in this case."




    THE HEARING


  38. The hearing before us took place over  two  days.  The  applicant  was
      represented  by  Ms  Charlotte  Kilroy  and  Ms  Michelle  Knorr.  The
      respondent was represented by Mr Gwion Lewis. We were provided with  a
      large file of documents  and  three  files  of  relevant  authorities.
      During the course of the hearing a number of witnesses gave  evidence,
      in some cases simply adopting their witness statements as Mr Lewis did
      not wish to cross-examine them.  In the case of MAS, MOS and  a  third
      witness ("SS"), who claimed to be the applicant's  cousin,  they  were
      cross-examined. We heard this evidence on a de bene esse basis subject
      to the legal argument we later  heard  on  whether  the  Tribunal  was
      required to make its own decision in the current  proceedings  on  the
      issue of whether MS and MAS were related as they claimed.


  39. Counsel for both parties provided us with detailed skeleton  arguments
      and, following the conclusion of the hearing,  additional  submissions
      on the oral evidence and, in the  case  of  the  applicant,  counsel's
      written reply to Mr Lewis' oral submissions. We are  grateful  to  all
      counsel for their assistance and helpful submissions on the issues.


    THE APPLICANT'S CASE

  40. The basis of the applicant's legal challenge is set out in the Grounds
      of Claim and in counsels' written and oral submissions.  It is fair to
      observe that the specificity of the challenge has evolved over time.

  41. As we understand the final resting place of the claim as  advanced  by
      Ms Kilroy before us in her oral submissions, the core of the claim, in
      summary, is as follows.


  42. First, in reaching all  three  decisions,  the  respondent  failed  to
      comply with  his  obligation  to  take  steps  to  investigate  and/or
      facilitate with the French authorities the carrying out of DNA testing
      on MS in France or failed to consider whether to admit him  (and  then
      to admit him) into the UK in order to undergo DNA testing.


  43. In support of that obligation, Ms Kilroy relies upon the terms of  the
      Dublin III Regulation itself  and  the  high  importance  given  to  a
      child's 'best interests' in the Dublin III Regulation and elsewhere in
      the law, the procedural obligations imposed by Art 7 of the Charter of
      Fundamental Rights of the European Union and Art 8 of  the  ECHR,  and
      the common law duty to act fairly, all of which,  Ms  Kilroy  submits,
      came together in the UT's decision in MK.  That decision, although not
      binding on us, she submits, should as a matter of 'comity' be followed
      unless wrong or clearly wrong - which it is not.


  44. Ms Kilroy submits that the respondent failed adequately to investigate
      whether a DNA test could be carried out in France, particularly -  she
      emphasised in her oral submissions - in one of the juxtaposed areas of
      Calais and Sangatte under the control of the UK authorities.  Further,
      the respondent has  not  properly  considered  whether  the  applicant
      should be admitted to the UK for a DNA test as happened, in  fact,  to
      MK following the UT's decision in respect of him. The Tribunal  should
      make a mandatory order requiring the Secretary of State to  admit  the
      applicant to the UK in order to undergo DNA testing.


  45. Secondly, Ms Kilroy contends that the evidence before  the  respondent
      prior to each decision was such that, in any event, it was  irrational
      to conclude MS and MAS were not related as they claimed.


  46. Thirdly, and as an alternative approach to our role, Ms Kilroy submits
      that the UT should reach its own decision on whether MS and  MAS  were
      related, applying a balance of probabilities standard of proof, on the
      basis of all the  evidence  including  the  oral  and  other  evidence
      submitted as part of these proceedings.  Ms Kilroy submits  that  such
      an approach is warranted in order to provide  the  applicant  with  an
      'effective remedy' in challenging a "transfer decision" as required by
      Art 27 of the Dublin III Regulation. She relies, in  particular,  upon
      the  Grand  Chamber  decisions   of   the   CJEU   in   Ghezelbash   v
      Staatssecretaris van Veiligheid en Justice (Case C-63/15) [2016] 1 WLR
      3969 and Mengesteab v Bundersrepublik Deutschland (Case C-670/16)  (26
      July 2017). Further, she submits that the issue of  whether  they  are
      brothers is a 'precedent fact' (relying principally on R(A) v  Croydon
      LBC [2009] UKSC 8) or because the  applicant's  human  rights  are  at
      stake and it is  for  the  Tribunal  to  determine  whether  they  are
      breached by the  respondent's  decision  (relying  on  cases  such  as
      Belfast City Council v Miss Behavin' Ltd [2007] UKHL 19).




THE RESPONDENT'S CASE


  47. The respondent's case is set out in the Detailed  Grounds  of  Defence
      and in Mr Lewis'  skeleton  argument  and  oral  submissions.  We  may
      summarise the core of it as follows.


  48. First, Mr Lewis submits that the decision of the Tribunal  in  MK  was
      'clearly wrong' and should not be followed. There was no duty upon the
      UK on receipt of a TCR to investigate, in particular to  take  any  or
      any reasonable steps to facilitate and secure a DNA test on an  asylum
      applicant  in  the  requesting  State.  The  only  obligation  on  the
      requested  state  was  to  "check"  the  evidence  submitted  by   the
      requesting state. There was no obligation to procure evidence relating
      to the individual.


  49. Secondly, Mr Lewis submits that there was no  such  obligation  during
      the course of the 'take charge' process but, even if there were,  that
      did not impose an obligation on the requested state to consider  on  a
      "rolling and piecemeal basis" evidence  submitted  on  behalf  of  the
      applicant after the 'take charge' process was completed, namely  after
      the rejection the second request to take charge. In effect,  Mr  Lewis
      submits that the Dublin III Regulation process was a  finite  one.  To
      that extent, at least, the decision in MK was clearly wrong.


  50. Thirdly, Mr Lewis submits that the role of the Tribunal was restricted
      to reviewing the legality of the decision to reject the  TCR.  Whether
      or not the applicant was the brother of MAS was not a 'precedent fact'
      or a matter upon which the Tribunal  should  properly  reach  its  own
      decision on the evidence. He  submits  that,  as  a  consequence,  the
      evidence which we heard de bene esse at the hearing was irrelevant and
      inadmissible  in  determining  the  legality   of   the   respondent's
      decisions.


  51. Fourthly,  Mr  Lewis  submits  that  if  there  was  an  investigative
      obligation imposed upon the respondent, he had  taken  all  reasonable
      steps and used his best endeavours to secure and  facilitate  the  DNA
      testing of MS. He submits that the evidence demonstrated that  testing
      could not properly be undertaken in France under French law  and  that
      there was no power to do so in the juxtaposed areas.

  52. Fifthly, Mr Lewis submits that there was  nothing  irrational  in  the
      respondent's  assessment  of  the  evidence  such  as  to  justify   a
      conclusion that any of the decisions were unlawful.


  53. Sixthly, Mr Lewis submits  that  if  the  Tribunal  did  consider  the
      evidence given at the hearing the proper conclusion, assessing all the
      evidence in the round, was that the applicant has failed to  establish
      on a balance of probabilities that MAS is his brother.


  54. Finally, in respect of remedy, Mr Lewis submits that it would be wrong
      for the Tribunal to make a mandatory order requiring the Secretary  of
      State to grant the applicant entry clearance  in  order  to  seek  DNA
      testing in the UK. That, he submits, would run counter to the approach
      of the Court of Appeal in R(RSM) and another v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ 18
      which disapproved of the Upper Tribunal issuing a mandatory  order  in
      that case requiring the Secretary of State to admit that applicant  to
      the UK.



RELEVANT LEGAL FRAMEWORK

      The Dublin III Regulation


  55. Council Regulation (EU) No 604/2013 (the "Dublin III  Regulation")  is
      one of the component parts of the Common European Asylum  System  (the
      "CEAS").  It establishes the criteria and mechanisms  for  determining
      which EU Member State is responsible for  examining  a  third  country
      national's asylum application (see respectively, Arts 7 to 15, Chapter
      III and Arts 20 to 26, Chapter VI).  One of its aims is to ensure that
      there will only be one EU Member State responsible for dealing with an
      individual's asylum claim.  The  criteria  set  out  a  hierarchy  for
      determining that responsibility. This  prevents  as  asylum  applicant
      effectively 'forum shopping' in making such a claim.  The  responsible
      Member State is usually the one in which the individual is  physically
      present but not always. This obviates the individual being transferred
      repeatedly between Member States. If a Member State  where  an  asylum
      application is lodged considers, on the basis of strict criteria, that
      another Member State is responsible for  determining  the  claim,  the
      first State (the "requesting State") must ask the  second  State  (the
      "requested State") to take charge of the  applicant  (a  'Take  Charge
      Request' or "TCR").

  56. As the challenge before us concerns the proper interpretation  of  the
      provisions of the Dublin III Regulation, it is necessary  to  consider
      the recitals to that Regulation. According to recital (5)  the  Dublin
      III Regulation aims to:
           ".... make it possible to determine  rapidly  the  Member  State
           responsible,  so  as  to  guarantee  effective  access  to   the
           procedures for granting  international  protection  and  not  to
           compromise the objective of the rapid processing of applications
           for international protection."
  57. Recital (13)  identifies  the  relevance  of  the  best  interests  of
      children:


           "In accordance with the 1989 United Nations  Convention  on  the
           Rights of the Child and with the Charter of  Fundamental  Rights
           of the European Union, the best interests of the child should be
           a primary consideration of  Member  States  when  applying  this
           Regulation. In assessing the best interests of the child, Member
           States should, in particular, take due account  of  the  minor's
           well-being  and  social   development,   safety   and   security
           considerations and the views of the minor in accordance with his
           or her age and maturity, including his  or  her  background.  In
           addition,  specific  procedural  guarantees  for   unaccompanied
           minors should be  laid  down  on  account  of  their  particular
           vulnerability."


  58. Recital (14) reads:

           "In accordance with the European Convention for  the  Protection
           of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms and with the Charter of
           Fundamental Rights of the European  Union,  respect  for  family
           life should be a primary consideration  of  Member  States  when
           applying this Regulation."

  59. Recital (19) relating  to  'transfers  to  Member  State  responsible"
      states:

           "In order to guarantee effective protection of the rights of the
           persons  concerned,  legal  safeguards  and  the  right  to   an
           effective remedy in respect of decisions regarding transfers  to
           the  Member  State  responsible  should   be   established,   in
           accordance, in particular, with Article 47  of  the  Charter  of
           Fundamental Rights of the European Union.  In  order  to  ensure
           that international law is respected, an effective remedy against
           such  decisions  should  cover  both  the  examination  of   the
           application of this Regulation and  of  the  legal  and  factual
           situation  in  the  Member  State  to  which  the  applicant  is
           transferred."

  60. Recital (39) indicates that the Dublin  III  Regulation  respects  and
      observes the "fundamental rights" and "principles" of, inter alia, the
      Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union (CFR):

           "In particular, this Regulation seeks to ensure full  observance
           of the right to asylum guaranteed by Article 18 of  the  Charter
           as well as the rights recognised under Articles 1, 4, 7, 24  and
           47  thereof.  This  Regulation  should  therefore   be   applied
           accordingly."


  61. It is clear that the purpose of the Dublin III Regulation is to enable
      the rapid determination of  which  Member  State  is  responsible  for
      considering an asylum claim, and that, in  so  determining,  the  best
      interests of a child and respect for family life should be  a  primary
      consideration.

  62. Chapter II of the Dublin III Regulation deals with 'General Principles
      and Safeguards'. Article 3 states so far as is relevant:


           "1. Member States shall examine an application for international
           protection by a third-country national [...] who applies on  the
           territory of any one of them. [...]  The  application  shall  be
           examined by a single Member State, which shall be the one  which
           the criteria set out in Chapter III indicate is responsible."


  63. Article 4 establishes that, as soon as an asylum claim is lodged in  a
      Member State,  its  authorities  will  inform  the  applicant  of  the
      application of the Dublin III Regulation including,  inter  alia,  the
      consequences of making an asylum claim in another  member  state,  the
      hierarchy  of  criteria  for  determining  which   Member   State   is
      responsible, the possibility of submitting information  regarding  the
      presence of family members in other Member States, and the possibility
      to challenge a transfer decision. This information must  be  contained
      in a specific leaflet for unaccompanied minors.


  64. Article 6 provides guarantees for minors:

           "1.  The  best  interests  of  the  child  shall  be  a  primary
           consideration for Member States with respect to  all  procedures
           provided for in this Regulation.


           ....
           3. In assessing the best interests of the child,  Member  States
           shall  closely  cooperate  with  each  other   and   shall,   in
           particular, take due account of the following factors:
           (a) family reunification possibilities;
           (b) the minor's well-being and social development;
           (c) safety and  security  considerations,  in  particular  where
           there  is  a  risk  of  the  minor  being  a  victim  of   human
           trafficking;
           (d) the views of the minor, in accordance with his  or  her  age
           and maturity.

           4. For the purpose of applying Article 8, the Member State where
           the unaccompanied minor lodged an application for  international
           protection shall, as soon as possible, take  appropriate  action
           to identify the family members, siblings  or  relatives  of  the
           unaccompanied minor on the territory of  Member  States,  whilst
           protecting the best interests of the child.

           5. With  a  view  to  facilitating  the  appropriate  action  to
           identify the  family  members,  siblings  or  relatives  of  the
           unaccompanied minor living in the territory  of  another  Member
           State pursuant to paragraph 4 of this  Article,  the  Commission
           shall adopt implementing acts including a standard form for  the
           exchange of relevant information between  Member  States.  Those
           implementing acts  shall  be  adopted  in  accordance  with  the
           examination procedure referred to in Article 44(2)."

  65. Chapter III of the Dublin III Regulation establishes the criteria  for
      determining the Member State responsible.


  66. Article 7, relating to the hierarchy of criteria,  explains  that  the
      criteria for determining the State responsible shall be applied in the
      order in which they are set out in the Chapter. Article 7 (3) states:

           "In view of the application  of  the  criteria  referred  to  in
           Articles  8,  10  and  16,  Member  States   shall   take   into
           consideration any available evidence regarding the presence,  on
           the territory of a Member State, of family members, relatives or
           any other family relations of the applicant, on  condition  that
           such evidence is produced before another  Member  State  accepts
           the request to take charge or take back  the  person  concerned,
           pursuant to Articles  22  and  25  respectively,  and  that  the
           previous  applications  for  international  protection  of   the
           applicant have not yet been the  subject  of  a  first  decision
           regarding the substance."

  67. Article 8(1), which is headed 'Minors', reads, in material part:

           "1. Where the applicant is an unaccompanied  minor,  the  Member
           State responsible shall be that  where  a  family  member  or  a
           sibling of the unaccompanied minor is legally present,  provided
           that it is in the best interests of the minor."


  68.  Provided  therefore  that  it  is  in  the  best  interests  of   the
      unaccompanied minor, if he has a sibling legally  present  in  another
      Member State, by virtue of Article  8(1)  that  Member  State  becomes
      responsible.

  69. The procedures for 'take  charge  requests'  (TCR)  are  contained  in
      Articles 21 and 22. Article 21(1) states:

           "1.  Where  a  Member  State  with  which  an  application   for
           international protection has been lodged considers that  another
           Member State is responsible for examining  the  application,  it
           may, as quickly as possible and in any event within three months
           of the date on which  the  application  was  lodged  within  the
           meaning of Article 20(2), request that  other  Member  State  to
           take charge of the applicant.
            ...
           Where the request to take charge of an  applicant  is  not  made
           within  the  periods  laid  down  in  the   first   and   second
           subparagraphs, responsibility for examining the application  for
           international protection shall lie  with  the  Member  State  in
           which the application was lodged.
            ...
           3. In the cases referred to in paragraph[s] 1 ...,  the  request
           that charge be taken by another Member State shall be made using
           a standard form and including proof or  circumstantial  evidence
           as described in the two lists mentioned in Article 22(3)  and/or
           relevant elements from the applicant's statement,  enabling  the
           authorities of the requested Member State to check whether it is
           responsible on the basis of  the  criteria  laid  down  in  this
           Regulation."

  70.  Article 22, which deals with the reply to a TCR, reads,  in  material
      part:

           "1. The requested Member State shall make the necessary  checks,
           and shall give a decision on the request to take  charge  of  an
           applicant within two months of receipt of the request.

           2. In the procedure for determining the Member State responsible
           elements of proof and circumstantial evidence shall be used."

      Article  22(3)  requires  the  Commission  to  establish  two   lists,
      indicating the relevant elements of proof and circumstantial  evidence
      in determining which Member State is responsible:


           "(a) Proof
                    i)  This  refers  to  formal  proof   which   determines
                       responsibility pursuant to this Regulation,  as  long
                       as it is not refuted by proof to the contrary;
                   ii) .....


            (b) Circumstantial evidence:

                  (i) this refers to indicative elements which  while  being
                       refutable  may  be  sufficient,  in  certain   cases,
                       according to  the  evidentiary  value  attributed  to
                       them;
                  (ii)  their  evidentiary  value,  in   relation   to   the
                       responsibility  for  examining  the  application  for
                       international protection shall be assessed on a case-
                       by-case basis."

      Article 22(4) indicates that


           "...  the  requirement  of  proof  should  not  exceed  what  is
           necessary  for  the  proper  application"  of  the  Dublin   III
           Regulation."


      Article 22(5)-(7) states:


           "5. If there is no formal  proof,  the  requested  Member  State
           shall  acknowledge  its  responsibility  if  the  circumstantial
           evidence is coherent, verifiable and  sufficiently  detailed  to
           establish responsibility.


           6. Where the requesting Member  State  has  pleaded  urgency  in
           accordance with the provisions of Article 21(2),  the  requested
           Member State shall make every effort to  comply  with  the  time
           limit  requested.  In  exceptional  cases,  where  it   can   be
           demonstrated that the examination of a request for taking charge
           of an applicant is particularly complex,  the  requested  Member
           State may give its reply after the time limit requested, but  in
           any event within one month. In  such  situations  the  requested
           Member State must communicate its decision to postpone  a  reply
           to the requesting Member State within the time limit  originally
           requested.


           7. Failure to act  within  the  two-month  period  mentioned  in
           paragraph 1 and the one-month period mentioned  in  paragraph  6
           shall be tantamount to accepting the  request,  and  entail  the
           obligation  to  take  charge  of  the  person,   including   the
           obligation to provide for proper arrangements for arrival."

  71. Also of relevance is Article 27, dealing with remedies. Article  27(1)
      reads:

          "1. The applicant or another person  as  referred  to  in  Article
          18(1)(c) or (d) shall have the right to an  effective  remedy,  in
          the form of an appeal or a review, in fact and in law,  against  a
          transfer decision, before a court or tribunal."


  72. One of the issues in this case concerns the application of Article  27
      and the role of the court or tribunal when considering a challenge  to
      a rejection of a TCR. The  applicant's  case  is  that  the  court  or
      tribunal is not limited to considering the legality of the decision on
      public law principles but is required to determine for itself  whether
      the 'criteria' for determining which Member State is  responsible  for
      determining the individual's asylum claim have been correctly applied.




      The Implementing Regulations

  73. The Implementing Regulations, which put  into  effect  the  provisions
      considered above, are contained in Regulation (EC) No  1560/2003  (the
      "2003 Regulation"), which is amended by Regulation  (EU)  No  118/2014
      (the "2014 Regulation").

  74.  Article 1 of the  2003  Regulation  deals  with  the  preparation  of
      requests for taking charge. This reads,

          "1. Requests for taking charge shall be made on a standard form in
           accordance with the model in Annex I.  The  form  shall  include
           mandatory fields which must be duly filled in and  other  fields
           to be filled in if  the  information  is  available.  Additional
           information may be entered  in  the  field  set  aside  for  the
           purpose.


          The request shall also include:

          (a) a copy of all the proof and  circumstantial  evidence  showing
           that the requested Member State is responsible for examining the
           application  for  asylum,  accompanied,  where  appropriate,  by
           comments on the circumstances in which it was obtained  and  the
           probative value attached to it by the requesting  Member  State,
           with reference to the lists of proof and circumstantial evidence
           referred to in Article 18(3) of  Regulation  (EC)  No  343/2003,
           which are set out in Annex II to the present Regulation;


          (b) where necessary, a copy of any written declarations made by or
           statements taken from the applicant."

      [The reference to Art 18(3) should now refer to the equivalent article
      of the Dublin III Regulation, i.e. Art 22(3).]

  75. Article 3 of the 2003 Regulation, under the heading "Processing
      Requests for Taking Charge", provides:
           "1. The arguments in law and in fact  set  out  in  the  request
           shall be examined in the light of the provisions  of  Regulation
           (EC) No 343/2003 and  the  lists  of  proof  and  circumstantial
           evidence  which  are  set  out  in  Annex  II  to  the   present
           Regulation.
           2. Whatever the criteria and provisions of  Regulation  (EC)  No
           343/2003 that are relied on, the requested Member  State  shall,
           within the time  allowed  by  Article  18(1)  and  (6)  of  that
           Regulation, check exhaustively and objectively, on the basis  of
           all information directly or indirectly available to it,  whether
           its responsibility for examining the application for  asylum  is
           established. If the checks by the requested Member State  reveal
           that it is responsible under at least one  of  the  criteria  of
           that Regulation, it shall acknowledge its responsibility."

  76. Article 5 provides for a negative reply to a TCR and  the  possibility
      of the Requesting State requesting that the TCR be re-examined.


           "1. Where, after checks are carried out,  the  requested  Member
           State considers that the evidence submitted does  not  establish
           its  responsibility,  the  negative  reply  it  sends   to   the
           requesting Member State shall state full  and  detailed  reasons
           for its refusal.

           2. Where the requesting Member State feels that such  a  refusal
           is based on a misappraisal, or where it has additional  evidence
           to put forward, it may ask for its request  to  be  re-examined.
           This option must  be  exercised  within  three  weeks  following
           receipt of the negative reply. The requested Member State  shall
           endeavour  to  reply  within  two  weeks.  In  any  event,  this
           additional procedure shall not extend the time limits laid  down
           in Article 18(1) and (6) and Article 20(1)(b) of Regulation (EC)
           No 343/2003."


      [The reference to Art 18(1) and (6) and Art  20(1)(b)  should  now  be
      taken  to  refer  to  the  equivalent  articles  of  the  Dublin   III
      Regulation, i.e. Arts 22(1) and (6) and Art 23(2).]

  77. Article 12 of the 2003 Regulation, as amended by the 2014  Regulation,
      applies to unaccompanied minors.

           "1. Where the decision to entrust the care of  an  unaccompanied
           minor to a relative other  than  the  mother,  father  or  legal
           guardian   is   likely   to   cause   particular   difficulties,
           particularly where  the  adult  concerned  resides  outside  the
           jurisdiction of the Member State in which the minor has  applied
           for asylum, cooperation between the competent authorities in the
           Member  States,  in  particular  the   authorities   or   courts
           responsible for the protection of minors, shall  be  facilitated
           and the necessary steps taken to ensure that  those  authorities
           can decide, with full knowledge of the facts, on the ability  of
           the adult or adults concerned to take charge of the minor  in  a
           way which serves his best interests.


           Options now available in the field of  cooperation  on  judicial
           and civil matters shall be taken account of in this connection.


           2. The fact that the duration of procedures for placing a  minor
           may lead to a failure to observe the time limits set in  Article
           18(1) and (6) and Article 19(4) of Regulation (EC)  No  343/2003
           shall not necessarily be an obstacle to continuing the procedure
           for determining the Member State responsible or carrying  out  a
           transfer.


           3. With  a  view  to  facilitating  the  appropriate  action  to
           identify  the  family  members,  siblings  or  relatives  of  an
           unaccompanied minor, the Member State with which an  application
           for international protection  was  lodged  by  an  unaccompanied
           minor shall, after holding the personal  interview  pursuant  to
           Article 5 of Regulation (EU) No 604/2013 in the presence of  the
           representative referred to in Article 6(2) of  that  Regulation,
           search for and/or take into account any information provided  by
           the minor or coming from any other credible source familiar with
           the personal situation or the route followed by the minor  or  a
           member of his or her family, sibling or relative.
           The authorities carrying out the  process  of  establishing  the
           Member State responsible for examining  the  application  of  an
           unaccompanied minor shall involve the representative referred to
           in Article 6(2) of Regulation (EU) No 604/2013 in  this  process
           to the greatest extent possible.
           4. Where in the application of the  obligations  resulting  from
           Article 8 of Regulation  (EU)  No  604/2013,  the  Member  State
           carrying out  the  process  of  establishing  the  Member  State
           responsible for examining the application  of  an  unaccompanied
           minor is in possession of information that makes it possible  to
           start identifying  and/or  locating  a  member  of  the  family,
           sibling or relative,  that  Member  State  shall  consult  other
           Member States, as  appropriate,  and  exchange  information,  in
           order to:
           (a) identify  family  members,  siblings  or  relatives  of  the
              unaccompanied minor, present on the territory  of  the  Member
              States;
           (b) establish the existence of proven family links;
           (c) assess the capacity of  a  relative  to  take  care  of  the
              unaccompanied minor, including where family members,  siblings
              or relatives of the unaccompanied minor stay in more than  one
              Member State.
           5. Where the exchange of information referred to in paragraph  4
            indicates that more family members, siblings  or  relatives  are
            present in another Member State  or  States,  the  Member  State
            where the unaccompanied minor is present  shall  cooperate  with
            the relevant Member State  or  States,  to  determine  the  most
            appropriate person to whom the minor is to be entrusted, and  in
            particular to establish:
           (a) the strength of the family links between the minor  and  the
              different persons identified on the territories of the  Member
              States;
           (b) the capacity and availability of the  persons  concerned  to
              take care of the minor;
           (c) the best interests of the minor in each case.
           6. In order to carry out the exchange of information referred to
            in paragraph 4, the standard form set out in Annex VIII to  this
            Regulation shall be used.
           The requested Member State shall endeavour to reply within  four
            weeks from the receipt of the request. Where compelling evidence
            indicates  that  further  investigations  would  lead  to   more
            relevant information, the requested Member State will inform the
            requesting Member State that two additional weeks are needed.
           The request for information pursuant to this  Article  shall  be
            carried  out  ensuring  full  compliance  with   the   deadlines
            presented in Articles 21(1), 22(1), 23(2), 24(2)  and  25(1)  of
            Regulation  (EU)  No  604/2013.  This  obligation   is   without
            prejudice to Article 34(5) of Regulation (EU) No 604/2013."

  78. Annex II, List A of the 2014 Regulation is entitled 'Means of  Proof'.
      This provides:


         "I. Process of determining the State responsible for examining  an
         application for international protection
           1. Presence of a family member, relative  or  relation  (father,
           mother,  child,  sibling,  aunt,   uncle,   grandparent,   adult
           responsible for a child, guardian) of an  applicant  who  is  an
           unaccompanied minor (Article 8)
           Probative evidence
           - written confirmation of the information by  the  other  Member
           State;
           - extracts from registers;
           - residence permits issued to the family member;
           - evidence that the persons are related, if available;
           failing this, and if necessary, a DNA or blood test."

  79. List  B  in  Annex  II  is  headed  "Circumstantial  Evidence".   This
      provides:


           "I. Process of determining the State responsible for examining
           an application or international protection


             1. Presence of a family member (father, mother, guardian) of
             an applicant who is an unaccompanied minor (Article 8)


               Indicative evidence


                  - verifiable information from the applicant;


                  - statements by the family members concerned;

                  - reports/confirmation of the information by an
                    international organisation, such as the UNHCR."


  80. Annex VIII contains a standard form to be used  by  Member  States  in
      fulfilling  their  obligation  under  the  Dublin  III  Regulation  to
      "exchange information" headed  "Standard  Form  For  The  Exchange  of
      Information On The family, Siblings Or relatives Of  An  Unaccompanied
      Child In A Dublin Procedure Pursuant To  Article  6(5)  of  Regulation
      (EU) No 604/2013".


  81. Part A deals with information from the requesting  State  and  Part  B
      information from the requested Member State. Included in Part B is the
      following:


           "In situations where the person/persons mentioned  above  is/are
           present on the territory of the requested Member State:


            Relationship of the person with the child:


    -  Please  specify,  following  inquiry,  the  presumed  nature  of  the
      relationship of the person identified with the child:
    - Please provide information on the type of data used to  establish  the
      relation (e.g. administrative certificates or other types of  official
      documents found in the possession of the person)".


      The Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union

  82. Article 7 of the CFR relates to respect for private and family life.

           "Everyone has the right to respect for his or  her  private  and
           family life, home and communications."

  83. Article 24 of the CFR is concerned with the rights of the child.

           "1. Children shall have the right to such protection and care as
           is necessary for their well-being. They may express their  views
           freely. Such views shall be taken into consideration on  matters
           which concern them in accordance with their age and maturity.


           2. In all actions relating to children, whether taken by  public
           authorities or private institutions, the child's best  interests
           must be a primary consideration.


           3. Every child shall have the right to  maintain  on  a  regular
           basis a personal relationship and direct contact with  both  his
           or  her  parents,  unless  that  is  contrary  to  his  or   her
           interests."

  84. Article 47 of the CFR relates to the right to an effective remedy  and
      a fair trial.

           "Everyone whose rights and freedoms guaranteed by the law of the
           Union are violated has the right to an effective remedy before a
           tribunal in compliance with the conditions  laid  down  in  this
           Article.


           Everyone is entitled to a  fair  and  public  hearing  within  a
           reasonable  time  by  an  independent  and  impartial   tribunal
           previously  established  by  law.  Everyone   shall   have   the
           possibility of being advised, defended and represented.


           Legal aid shall be made available to those who  lack  sufficient
           resources in so far as such aid is necessary to ensure effective
           access to justice."

      The Human Rights Act 1998 and Article 8 ECHR

  85. Also of relevance is Section 6(1) of the Human Rights Act 1998,  which
      makes it unlawful  for  any  public  authority  to  act  in  a  manner
      incompatible with a Convention right. Article 8 of the ECHR provides:

           "1. Everyone has the right to respect for his private and family
           life, his home and his correspondence.
           2. There shall be no interference by a public authority with the
           exercise of this right except such as is in accordance with  the
           law and is necessary in a democratic society in the interests of
           national security, public safety or the economic  well-being  of
           the country, for the prevention of disorder or  crime,  for  the
           protection of health or morals, or for  the  protection  of  the
           rights and freedoms of others."

THE ISSUES

  86. We can summarise the principal legal issues raised  in  this  case  as
      follows:


          I. Is the Secretary of State under  a  duty  to  investigate  the
             relevant circumstances when considering a TCR under the Dublin
             III Regulation?


         II. If there is such a duty, what is  the  proper  scope  of  that
             duty? Does any duty include a duty to facilitate and/or secure
             the obtaining of a  DNA  sample  from  an  individual  in  the
             requesting state?


        III. If there is such a duty, does  that  duty  continue  once  the
             Dublin III Regulation process is concluded?


         IV. How should  a  court  or  tribunal  approach  a  challenge  in
             judicial review proceedings to a refusal to accept a TCR?   Is
             it restricted to considering a challenge based upon public law
             principles or is it required to decide for itself whether  the
             criteria for determining responsibility under the  Dublin  III
             Regulation have been correctly applied?


  87. In addition, and depending upon the particular resolution of  some  or
      all of those issues, a number of  issues  arise  in  relation  to  the
      challenge to the specific decisions in this case:


         V. In reaching each of the three  decisions  challenged,  has  the
            respondent breached any duty to investigate?


           VI.  Are any or all of the three decisions unlawful on any other
               basis?


       VII. If the UT must decide, for itself, whether  the  criteria  have
            been correctly applied, what findings do we make?


      VIII. In the light of the above, what is  the  appropriate,  if  any,
            remedy to grant?



DISCUSSION: (1) THE LEGAL ISSUES

  88. The legal issues raised before, and decided by,  the  UT  in  MK  were
      substantially similar to those raised before  us  (issues  I,  II  and
      III). Issue IV was also raised but it was left undecided by the UT. It
      is convenient, therefore, that we begin with the UT's decision in MK.


      MK

  89. IK and HK were unaccompanied minors who made  asylum  applications  in
      France. They maintained that they were the  children  of  MK.  MK  was
      recognised as a refugee by the Secretary of State in  March  2010  and
      had been granted ILR. In her asylum interview she made no  mention  of
      IK or HK. In February 2016, in response to a  TCR,  the  Secretary  of
      State rejected the claimed relationship based on MK's  answers  during
      her asylum application. Although the French authorities asked for  the
      TCR to be re-examined, the Secretary of State maintained her  decision
      in a subsequent decision in March 2016 and for substantially the  same
      reasons. Further evidence provided to  the  Secretary  of  State,  not
      originating from the French authorities, resulted in a third  decision
      being made in April 2016, again rejecting the TCR.

  90. It was argued on behalf of the applicants that the Secretary of  State
      was under a positive legal duty to admit  IK  and  HK  to  the  United
      Kingdom for  the  purpose  of  reunification  with  MK  and  that  the
      Secretary of State  acted  unlawfully  by  failing  to  discharge  his
      investigatory and evidence gathering obligations, and, in  particular,
      properly to investigate the viability and availability of DNA  testing
      for IK and HK in France. This, it was submitted, led to  a  breach  of
      Article 8  ECHR  and  Article  7  of  the  CFR.  It  was  additionally
      submitted, in reliance on R (Al-Sweady) v SSHD [2010] HRLR 2, that the
      UT was obliged to examine all the evidence and was entitled to  differ
      from the Secretary of State's assessment as to the  existence  of  the
      family relationship.

  91. The UT set out the relevant provisions of the  Dublin  III  Regulation
      and the Implementing Regulations, the ECHR (including the  obligations
      on a state to admit persons to  its  territory  in  order  to  achieve
      family reunification and the procedural dimension of  article  8)  and
      the CFR, the United Nation's Convention on the  Rights  of  the  Child
      (UNCRC) and the General Comment Number 14 (2013) on the Right  of  the
      Child  to  have  his  or  her  best  interests  taken  as  a   primary
      consideration" (the "General Comment").  The UT then referred  to  the
      "best interests" obligations imposed upon the Secretary of State under
      domestic  law  detailed  in  s.55  of  the  Borders,  Citizenship  and
      Immigration Act 2009 (restricted by its own terms to children  in  the
      UK: s.55(1)(a)) and the authorities of ZH (Tanzania) v SSHD  [2011]  2
      AC 166 and Zoumbas v SSHD [2013] 1 WLR 3690, and the Upper  Tribunal's
      assessment of the "best interests" duty in JO and Others  (Section  55
      Duty) Nigeria [2014] UKUT 00517 (IAC).  The  UT  also  considered  the
      principles expounded in Secretary of State for Education and Science v
      Metropolitan Borough Council of Tameside [1977] AC 1014 by  which  the
      Secretary of State in reaching decisions, as a matter  of  public  law
      obligation, is required to take reasonable steps to  acquaint  himself
      with and take into account relevant information and exclude irrelevant
      matters.


  92. At [34] the UT noted  the  concession  by  the  Secretary  of  State's
      counsel, that a duty to investigate existed, at least up to the  point
      that the first TCR was rejected:


           "... Mr Keith accepted that the Secretary of State, upon receipt
           of the "take charge"  request,  had  a  duty  under  the  Dublin
           Regulation to investigate. His associated  submission  was  that
           since the initial refusal decision was made there  has  been  no
           continuing duty of this nature."


  93. Even though this concession was made, the UT, nevertheless, made clear
      that it was correct on an analysis of the Dublin  III  Regulation  and
      the legal obligations otherwise imposed upon the  Secretary  of  State
      that a duty to investigate was imposed upon the Secretary of State. At
      [36]-[39], the UT said this:

           "(36) The available evidence points  readily  to  the  threefold
           conclusion that the Secretary  of  State  has  at  no  time  (a)
           investigated, in conjunction  with  the  French  authorities  or
           otherwise, the viability or availability of DNA testing  for  IK
           and HK in France, (b)  investigated  what  the  relevant  French
           domestic  laws  are  in  this  respect  or  (c)  considered  the
           possibility of admitting IK and HK to the United Kingdom for the
           purpose of carrying out DNA testing. We consider that these  are
           all material considerations, none of which has been  taken  into
           account. This analysis is reinforced when one  superimposes  the
           "Tameside" duty of enquiry. It follows that,  viewed  through  a
           pure public law prism, the  Secretary  of  State's  initial  and
           subsequent decisions are unlawful.


           (37) This is not, however, the only  dimension  from  which  the
           legality of the Secretary of  State's  rejection  of  the  "take
           charge" request is to be evaluated. As the  outline  in  [14]  -
           [27]  shows,  the  governing  legal   framework   has   multiple
           constituent elements, many of them  interlocking.  The  analysis
           that the dominant instrument in this legal matrix is the  Dublin
           Regulation seems to us uncontroversial.  In  contrast  with  the
           situation prevailing in ZAT, the processes and procedures of the
           Dublin Regulation had been fully observed in the  present  case.
           In summary, IK and HK made their respective claims for asylum in
           France, these claims were examined by the French authorities,  a
           "take charge" request ensued and the Secretary of State made her
           refusal decision accordingly and reaffirmed it subsequently. The
           contrast with ZAT, where no Dublin  Regulation  steps  had  been
           taken, is striking."

           (38) We consider  that  duties  of  enquiry,  investigation  and
           evidence gathering  course  through  the  veins  of  the  Dublin
           Regulation and its sister instrument,  the  2003  Regulation  as
           amended. In some of the provisions  of  the  Dublin  Regulation,
           these duties are explicit: see  for  example  Article  6(4)  and
           Article 8(2). These duties are also explicit in  Article  22(1),
           which requires a requested Member State to "make  the  necessary
           checks" upon  receipt  of  a  "take  charge"  request  prior  to
           reaching  its  decision.  In  other  provisions  of  the  Dublin
           Regulation, these duties are clearly implicit. The scheme of the
           Dublin Regulation is that the more detailed outworkings of these
           duties are not specified in the measure itself but are,  rather,
           to be found in the ancillary, implementing  legislation  adopted
           by the Commission, namely the 2003 Regulation as amended.  These
           two measures must be considered together and as a whole.
           (39)  It  follows  that  we  reject  the  Secretary  of  State's
           contention (as pleaded) that she had no  duty  of  investigation
           upon receipt of the "take charge" requests  and  the  associated
           contention that the  onus  to  provide  all  necessary  evidence
           rested  on  the  Applicants.  These  contentions  are,  in   our
           judgment, confounded by the provisions of the Dublin  Regulation
           and its sister instrument considered  as  a  whole.  We  further
           reject the Secretary of State's selective reliance on one of the
           various components of Article 22, namely Article 22(5),  of  the
           Dublin Regulation, for the same reason."

  94. The UT saw the duty as being derived from a confluence of a number  of
      legal bases, principally the terms  and  context  of  the  Dublin  III
      Regulation itself which envisages the  requested  state  carrying  out
      "checks" before reaching a decision in respect of a TCR.  The UT  also
      relied upon the public law duty stated succinctly by Lord  Diplock  in
      the well-known Tameside case, at 1065b:


           "It is for a court of law  to  determine  whether  it  has  been
           established that in reaching his decision....[the  Secretary  of
           State]  had  directed  himself  properly  in  law  and  had   in
           consequence taken into consideration the matters which upon  the
           true construction of the Act he ought  to  have  considered  and
           excluded from his consideration matters that were irrelevant  to
           what he had to consider ....


           Or, put more compendiously, the question for the  court  is  did
           the Secretary of State ask himself the right question  and  take
           reasonable  steps  to  acquaint  himself   with   the   relevant
           information to enable him to answer it correctly? "


  95. Further, the UT was undoubtedly influenced, as  that  case  (like  the
      present) involved children, by the obligation  to  further  a  child's
      best  interest  set  out  in  the  Dublin  III  Regulation  and  which
      undoubtedly exists in our domestic law even if s.55  of  the  BCI  Act
      2009 could not apply to a child overseas.


  96. The scope of the investigative duty was considered by the UT  at  [40]
      and required him to take "reasonable steps":

           "We must now consider the Secretary of State's modified position
           at this stage of the hearing. This entailed  an  acknowledgement
           that  there  was  a  duty  of  investigation  under  the  Dublin
           Regulation when the initial "take charge" request was  received.
           What did this  duty  require  of  the  Secretary  of  State?  We
           consider that the investigative and  evidence  gathering  duties
           imposed  on  Member  States  by  the   Dublin   Regulation   are
           unavoidably factually and contextually  sensitive.  The  content
           and scope of such duties will vary from one context to  another.
           While we did not receive  detailed  argument  on  this  discrete
           issue, we are inclined to the view that  these  duties  are  not
           absolute,  in  the  sense  that  they  apply   irrespective   of
           considerations such as excessive or disproportionate burden.  It
           seems to us that  implicit  in  the  Dublin  Regulation  is  the
           principle that these duties require the Member  State  concerned
           to take reasonable steps. The court or tribunal concerned  will,
           having regard to its duty under Article 6 TEU, be the arbiter of
           whether this duty has been acquitted in any given case."

  97. The UT then considered, at [41], the extent of the investigative  duty
      and rejected the Secretary of State's contention that it  was  limited
      to the period up to the initial decision to not accept a TCR:

           "We find nothing in either the Dublin Regulation or  its  sister
           instrument to support the argument that the Secretary of State's
           acknowledged duty of investigation  was  extinguished  once  the
           initial refusal decision had been made. There is nothing in this
           regime to suggest that a decision on a "take charge" request  is
           in all  cases  final  and  conclusive,  subject  only  to  legal
           challenge under (inter alia) Article 27. Furthermore, this would
           be entirely inconsistent  with  the  concept  of  practical  and
           effective protection and the broader context of the  real  world
           of asylum  claims.  The  phenomenon  of  renewed  "take  charge"
           requests and successive "take charge" decisions by the requested
           State is, in our  view,  implicitly  recognised  in  the  Dublin
           Regulation. Furthermore, it was not argued that the Secretary of
           State's reconsidered decision, made pursuant to a renewed  "take
           charge" request, was in some way a voluntary act  of  grace,  as
           opposed to the discharge of a decision making duty. Nor  was  it
           argued that the Secretary of State's later  decisions,  made  in
           the course of these proceedings, were in some way divorced  from
           the Dublin Regulation context."


  98. In [44], having noted that DNA evidence was likely to be determinative
      of the TCR, the Tribunal concluded that the  Secretary  of  State  was
      obliged, as a  minimum,  to  properly  consider  the  relevant  French
      domestic  laws  in  respect  of  DNA  testing,  to   investigate,   in
      conjunction with the French authorities or otherwise, the viability or
      availability of DNA testing in France, and to consider the possibility
      of admitting IK and HK to  the  United  Kingdom  for  the  purpose  of
      carrying out DNA testing. The Tribunal concluded that:


            "... the investigative  and  evidence  gathering  duties,  both
           explicit and implicit, in Articles 6 and 8  of  the  Dublin  III
           Regulation, considered in tandem with  the  2003  Regulation  as
           amended, were not discharged."


  99. And at [45] the UT stated:

           "The key to breaking the logjam was DNA evidence: but  none  was
           available. The Applicants were unable to provide  such  evidence
           for a variety  of  reasons,  including  in  particular  lack  of
           resources  and  uncertainties  relating  to  French   law.   The
           Secretary of State was at all material times in  a  position  to
           proactively take steps to at  least  attempt  to  overcome  this
           impasse. However, the evidence establishes  beyond  peradventure
           that nothing was done. ... Relying upon  a  mistaken  assessment
           that she was entitled, in  law,  to  be  purely  passive  and  a
           further erroneous view of onus of proof the Secretary  of  State
           proceeded to make  a  decision  adverse  to  the  Applicants  of
           fundamental significance  to  their  lives.  We  consider  these
           failures to be incompatible with the progressively strengthening
           mechanisms and provisions contained in the  current  incarnation
           of  the  Dublin  Regulation,  reflected  particularly   in   the
           investigative and evidence gathering duties identified above and
           the new  (and  welcome)  emphasis  on  protecting  children  and
           families."

 100. Having found, at [46], that the Secretary of  State's  decisions  also
      breached the procedural dimension of Article 8 ECHR, the UT concluded,
      at [47] that, in the fact sensitive context of  this  case,  that  the
      Secretary of State's investigative and evidence gathering duties  were
      continuing. This followed from the UT's analysis that the Secretary of
      State's duties were not properly discharged in any of the 3  decision-
      making processes  that  had  occurred,  coupled  with  the  Tribunal's
      conclusion that the Dublin III Regulation "... Continued to govern the
      relationship between the parties since the initial decision was made."
      The UT noted, in passing, that it  seemed  unlikely  that  French  law
      enshrined an absolute prohibition against the DNA testing  of  IK  and
      HK.

 101. The UT declined to engage in a detailed examination and make  findings
      that IK and HK were MK's  biological  children,  and  noted  that  the
      Secretary of State was the primary decision-maker and that  there  had
      not yet been a lawful  decision.  The  Tribunal  considered  it  could
      fashion an appropriate remedy by quashing  the  Secretary  of  State's
      three decisions and making a mandatory order requiring  the  Secretary
      of State (a) to take all reasonable steps and use her best  endeavours
      to facilitate and secure DNA testing of IK and HK and  to  communicate
      and liaise with the appropriate French authorities in  this  exercise,
      and (b) to make a further decision thereafter.

 102. We were informed that the Secretary of State had sought to  appeal  in
      MK but that appeal was not ultimately pursued.  We were not  told  the
      reason.


 103. MK was subsequently followed by the UT in R(on the application of  HA,
      AA and NA) v SSHD (JR/10195/2017) (19 April 2017)  (UTJs  Rintoul  and
      Rimington) (hereafter "HA").


 104. If MK is correct, the legal issues identified under issues I,  II  and
      III  (above  para  86)  would  fall  to  be  decided  in  the  present
      applicant's favour.


      Our Conclusions


 105. We were invited by Ms Kilroy to follow MK as a matter of comity  as  a
      decision of co-ordinate  jurisdiction  in  this  Tribunal.   Mr  Lewis
      invited us to depart from it, in large measure at least, on the  basis
      that it was  'clearly  wrong'.   We  were  referred  to  a  number  of
      authorities on  what  might  be  called  the  'comity'  principle,  in
      particular R v Greater Manchester Coroner, ex parte Tal [1985]  QB  67
      and R(Jollah) v SSHD [2017]  EWHC  330  (Admin)  (on  appeal  but  not
      raising this point: [2018] EWCA Civ 1260).


 106. We apprehend we can deal with the authorities briefly as there was  no
      issue between the parties as to the position, although of course there
      was as to their application  in  this  case.  It  is  clear  that  the
      doctrine of precedent applies in a like way to  decisions  of  the  UT
      when exercising  its  judicial  review  jurisdiction  as  it  does  to
      decisions of the High Court (see Secretary of State for Justice  v  RB
      [2010] UKUT 454 (AAC) at [39]-[47]).  The one exception will be  those
      decisions of the UT identified as "authoritative" by  designation  (in
      practice as CG cases) (see para 12  of  Senior  President's  "Practice
      Direction: Immigration and Asylum Chambers of the First-Tier  Tribunal
      and the Upper Tribunal" (10 February 2010 amended 13  November  2014).




 107. It is also clear that the High Court, and by extrapolation, the  Upper
      Tribunal (see RB at [40]), is not, as a matter of stare decisis  bound
      by a decision of the High Court or Upper  Tribunal  but  should  as  a
      matter of 'comity' follow the earlier decision unless persuaded it  is
      wrong.  In ex parte Tal, Robert Goff LJ (as he then was) said this (at
      p.81A-C):


           "If a judge of the High Court sits  exercising  the  supervisory
           jurisdiction of the High Court then  it  is,  in  our  judgment,
           plain that the  relevant  principle  of  stare  decisis  is  the
           principle applicable in the case of a judge  of  first  instance
           exercising the jurisdiction of the High  Court,  viz.,  that  he
           will follow a decision  of  another  judge  of  first  instance,
           unless he is convinced that that judgement is wrong, as a matter
           of judicial comity; but he is not bound to follow  the  decision
           of a  judge  of  equal  jurisdiction  (see  Huddersfield  Police
           Authority v. Watson [1947]  K.B.  842,  848,  per  Lord  Goddard
           C.J.),  for  either  the  judge  exercising   such   supervisory
           jurisdiction is (as we  think)  sitting  as  a  judge  of  first
           instance, or his position  is  so  closely  analogous  that  the
           principle of stare decisis applicable in the case of a judge  of
           first instance is applicable to him."


 108. In Jollah, Lewis J returned to this issue  at  [46]  of  his  judgment
      where, citing ex parteTal, he said this:


           "A judgment of a judge of the  High  Court  is  not  binding  on
           another judge of the High Court but that judge will  follow  the
           earlier decision unless he or she is convinced that it is wrong:
           see R v Manchester Coroner ex p. Tal [1985] 1 Q.B. 67  at  81A-C
           and Police Authority for Huddersfield v Watson [1947] 1 K.B. 842
           at 848. The Privy Council has observed that  High  Court  judges
           are not technically bound  by  decisions  of  other  High  Court
           judges "but they should generally follow a decision of  a  court
           of co-ordinate jurisdiction unless there is  a  powerful  reason
           for not doing so" (see paragraph 9 of the judgment of the  Privy
           Council (sic) in Willers v Joyce (No. 2) [2016] 3 WLR 534). Such
           principles contribute to  coherence  and  certainty  within  the
           legal system. They are likely to  contribute  to  efficient  and
           more cost-effective use of resources as the same point will  not
           normally be re-argued at length and cost before  different  High
           Court judges."


 109. We were not referred to the report of  Willers  but,  given  it  is  a
      decision of the Supreme Court in which nine members of that Court sat,
      it is undoubtedly determinative of the correct approach. At  [9]  Lord
      Neuberger P (with whom the other eight Justices agreed) said this:


           "So far as the High Court is concerned, puisne  judges  are  not
           technically bound by decisions of their peers, but  they  should
           generally  follow  a  decision  of  a   court   of   co-ordinate
           jurisdiction unless there is a powerful reason for not doing so.
           And, where a first instance judge is faced with a point on which
           there are two previous inconsistent decisions from judges of co-
           ordinate jurisdiction, then the second of those decisions should
           be followed in the absence of cogent reasons  to  the  contrary:
           see Patel v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013]  1
           WLR 63, para 59. I would have thought that Circuit Judges should
           adopt much the same  approach  to  decisions  of  other  Circuit
           Judges."


 110. Consequently, we should follow  MK  unless  we  are  persuaded  it  is
      "wrong" (we apprehend the epithet "clearly" -  not  actually  used  by
      Robert Goff LJ in ex parte Tal adds nothing in practice) or there  are
      "powerful reasons" for doing so.


 111. For the reasons that we now give we are neither satisfied that  MK  is
      "wrong" or "clearly wrong", nor that there are any "powerful  reasons"
      for not following it. In essence, therefore, we agree  with  the  UT's
      conclusion in respect of the legal issues identified above  as  I  and
      II.  We do, however, take a slightly modified view in respect of issue
      III.


      Issue I


 112. First, a duty to investigate is, in our judgment, not only  consistent
      with the  terms  of  the  Dublin  III  Regulation  but  is  explicitly
      recognised in Article 12(6) of the 2003 Regulation as amended  by  the
      2014 Regulation. That  is  concerned  with  the  situation  where  the
      requesting State is considering making a TCR pursuant to Art 8 of  the
      Dublin III Regulation because  it  considers  that  the  unaccompanied
      minor has a  relevant  family  member  (such  as  a  sibling)  in  the
      requested State. There is, as we  have  seen,  an  obligation  on  the
      Member States to "exchange" information (see Art  12(4)).   Under  the
      Dublin III Regulation the requested State  is  required,  usually,  to
      respond to the TCR within two months and will usually have 4 weeks  to
      reply to a request for information under Article  12(4)  of  the  2003
      Regulation. Article 12 (6) provides some flexibility in the  following
      circumstances:


           "The requested Member State shall endeavour to reply within four
           weeks from the receipt of the request. Where compelling evidence
           indicates  that  further  investigations  would  lead  to   more
           relevant information, the requested Member State will inform the
           requesting Member State that two  additional  weeks  are  need."
           (our emphasis)


 113. This provision, in our judgment, recognises that  at  least  in  these
      circumstances "investigation" may be required by the  requested  State
      in order to fulfil its obligations under  the  Dublin  III  Regulation
      before responding to a TCR.


 114. We see nothing inconsistent  between  the  imposition  of  a  duty  to
      investigate - at least to do so to a reasonable extent - and adherence
      to the strict time limits for dealing with  TCRs  in  the  Dublin  III
      Regulation.


 115. Secondly, we do not accept Mr Lewis' submission that  the  Dublin  III
      Regulation draws a distinction between the requested State  "checking"
      or "verifying" the evidence and material provided  by  the  requesting
      State and carrying out an "investigation". Aside  from  the  terms  of
      article 12 (6) we referred to above, the terminology and structure  of
      the  Dublin  III  Regulation  does  not  clearly  point  to   a   mere
      'verification'  duty.  In  any  event,  'verification'   may   involve
      investigation.  For example,  a  Document  Verification  Report  often
      involves a detailed investigation.  A similar observation can be  made
      in respect of Art 3 of the  2003  Regulation,  the  heading  of  which
      reads, "Processing requests for taking charge." The 'processing' of  a
      TCR could, on a reasonable understanding  of  the  word,  includes  an
      investigation - it is the 'process' by which a decision is reached. It
      is not apparent that the terminology of the Dublin III Regulation  was
      employed with the precision advanced by the respondent.


 116. Specifically, it is not clear that "check", as used in Articles 21 and
      22, does not involve a duty of investigation, at least to some degree.
      A reply to an urgent TCR (under Art 21(2)) may be given after the time
      limit requested if the "...examination of a request for taking  charge
      of an applicant is particularly complex." If the process requires  the
      requested State to undertake  an  'examination',  and  it  anticipates
      instances where the requests "is particularly complex", this  suggests
      it is more than a simply 'verification'  of  documents.  Nor,  in  our
      view, does the language of Art 22 suggest that the requested State can
      only consider evidence provided by the requesting State.


 117. Although Art 1(1)(a) of the 2003 Regulation  notes  that  the  request
      shall include "... a copy of all the proof and circumstantial evidence
      ..." this does not need to  be  read  as  if  the  information  to  be
      considered is hermetically sealed. The Article imposes  an  obligation
      on the requesting State to  include  a  copy  of  all  the  proof  and
      evidence available to it, but this does not mean  that  the  requested
      State must exclusively consider only that evidence.  Such an  argument
      runs counter to the respondent's own policy document entitled  "Dublin
      III Regulation (Version 1.0, 2 November 2017) which  contemplates  the
      Secretary of State considering, in response to a  TCR,  not  only  the
      evidence  submitted  by  the  requesting  State  (whether   proof   or
      circumstantial) but also:


           "information contained in Home Office records and evidence
           submitted by the person in the UK..."


 118. This was precisely the avenue taken by the  respondent  in  this  case
      when he consulted MAS' asylum application and  related  documents  and
      also considered evidence submitted on  behalf  of  the  applicant.  It
      would be wrong, in our view, to see this process in a narrow sense  as
      not engaging in an "investigation" prior to reaching a decision on the
      TCR.


 119. Further, and linked to the previous point, we do not accept Mr  Lewis'
      submission that the "information" which must be  considered  which  is
      "directly or indirectly" available is limited to that retained by  the
      Home Office itself.  It would, in our judgment, reflect a position  of
      unerring narrowness and, we apprehend,  not  be  consistent  with  the
      respondent's own practice which would disentitle the  respondent  from
      obtaining information from third parties,  for  example  local  social
      services which would, in all probability, be important where  a  child
      is involved in the potential transfer to the UK.


 120. Finally, we are wholly persuaded by the arguments accepted in MK, that
      a confluence of legal principles is a  proper  basis  for  a  duty  to
      investigate.


 121. First, there are the child's best interests and the obligation to  act
      consistently with them.


 122. Second, the Dublin III Regulation must be  applied  consistently  with
      Articles 7, 24 and 47 of CFR.  As a result, the determination of a TCR
      must be reached in accordance with the best interests of children  and
      respect for family life.  There is a procedural obligation inherent in
      article 7 of the CFR (and Art 8 of the ECHR) which supports a duty  to
      investigate imposed upon the respondent  in  considering  a  TCR  (see
      e.g., McMichael v UK (1995) 20 EHRR 205  at  [87];  Mugenzi  v  France
      (Application No 52701/09) (10 July 2014) at [46] and [60]  and  Longue
      and France (Application No 19113/09)  (10  July  2014)  at  [63].  The
      procedural fairness aspect of Article 8 ECHR  was  considered  by  the
      Court of Appeal in R(Gudanaviciene & Ors)  v  Director  of  Legal  Aid
      Casework & Another [2014] EWCA Civ 1622.  We do not accept  Mr  Lewis'
      submission that Art 7 of the CFR (or Art 8 of the ECHR) is not engaged
      - at least procedurally - because the applicant  has  not  established
      his relationship with MAS and, therefore, his 'family life'.   In  our
      judgment, the procedural obligation arises where it  is  claimed  that
      the family life of the individual is engaged. It would be contrary  to
      common sense to eschew that obligation in the very  process  by  which
      the individual claims his family life is engaged.


 123. Third, it was not suggested before us that in reaching a  decision  in
      respect of TCR, the  Secretary  of  State  was  not  required  to  act
      lawfully according to public law principles (see R(RSM and ZAM) v SSHD
      [2018] EWCA Civ 18, especially per Singh LJ at  [171]).  The  Tameside
      duty on a  decision-maker  "to  acquaint  himself  with  the  relevant
      information" to  enable  him  to  reach  an  informed  decision  self-
      evidently provides a basis for the  duty.  Finally,  the  respondent's
      obligation to act fairly  may  require  investigation  and  permit  an
      individual to know the 'gist' of what is being said against him or her
      and to make representations and/or evidence on issues central  to  the
      decision to be taken (see, e.g. R v SSHD, ex parte Doody [1994]  1  AC
      531 per Lord Mustill at p.560). The obligation is succinctly stated by
      Lord Phillips MR (as he then was) in R(Q and others) v SSHD [2004]  QB
      36 at [99]:


           "The second defect is not unconnected with  the  first  and  was
           identified by the Judge in [2003] EWHC 195 (Admin) at  [20].  He
           stressed that it was important  that  the  applicant  should  be
           given a reasonable opportunity to deal with and to  explain  any
           matter which was to be relied on against him. We  agree.  Before
           the decision maker concludes that the applicant is  not  telling
           the truth he must  be  given  the  opportunity  of  meeting  any
           concerns or, as Lord Mustill put it in R v  Secretary  of  State
           for the Home Department, Ex p Doody, [1994]  1  AC  531,560,  he
           should be informed of the gist  of  the  case  against  him.  We
           should add that we also agree with the Judge that  at  the  very
           least the  applicant  must  be  given  the  chance  to  rebut  a
           suggestion of incredibility and to explain himself if he can. As
           the Judge put it [2003] EWHC 195 (Admin) at [20]: "All that  may
           be needed is a warning that the  account  is  too  vague  or  is
           incredible having regard to known practices at ports or  it  was
           not reasonable to rely on advice or to obey instructions."   The
           fact that the burden rests on the applicant makes such a warning
           more, not less, necessary."
 124. None of this is, in our judgment, inconsistent  with  the  Dublin  III
      Regulation and the  regime  for  reaching  decisions  based  upon  the
      criteria  for  determining  responsibility.  Rather   than   adversely
      affecting the integrity  of  that  system,  in  our  judgment,  it  is
      patently focussed on enhancing or maintaining  the  integrity  of  the
      system in reaching lawful and correct decisions.


 125. For these reasons, we agree with the decision in MK on our issue I.


      Issue II


 126. Turning then to issue II, and whether the duty can include a  duty  to
      investigate the possibility of DNA evidence being obtained  either  in
      the requesting State or the UK.  We  agree  with  the  conclusion  and
      reasons of the UT in MK at [44]-[45] (set out above).  We  agree  that
      the emphasis in the Dublin III Regulation (see in particular Art 6(1)-
      (3)) and, indeed elsewhere in the law, on the child's  best  interests
      is a powerful pull in favour of the duty to investigate  including  in
      an appropriate case investigating the potential for DNA testing in the
      requesting state or, if not possible  or  practicable,  admitting  the
      child to the UK to do so. We do not  consider  this  would  impose  an
      unreasonable burden of insufficient  certainty  upon  the  respondent.
      The duty to investigate (in  this  particular  regard  and  otherwise)
      would be one to act reasonably in the light of all the  circumstances.
      It would, as the UT pointed out in MK, be "factually and  contextually
      sensitive" (at [40]).


 127. We were referred to case law, in particular  to  Rhodia  International
      Holdings Ltd v Huntsman International  LLC  [2007]  EWHC  292  (Comm),
      (Julian Flaux QC sitting as a Deputy High Court  Judge)  that  drew  a
      distinction between an obligation to use "best endeavours" and to  use
      "reasonable endeavours"; the former being more onerous than the latter
      (see [33]-[35]).  The UT in  MK  expressed  a  hybrid  test  that  the
      respondent was  to  "take  all  reasonable  steps  and  use  her  best
      endeavours" to facilitate and secure DNA testing.  We do not know  the
      origin of this language - whether it emanated from the parties or  one
      of them or from the UT itself.  We would eschew the language of  "best
      endeavours", derived we apprehend  from  the  commercial  or  consumer
      rather than public context.  In our  judgment,  clarity  leads  us  to
      formulate the content of the duty as one to "act reasonably" and  take
      "reasonable steps" in carrying out the investigative  duty,  including
      in determining the options of DNA testing in the requesting State and,
      if not, in the  UK.   The  test  of  'reasonableness'  and  of  acting
      'reasonably' in all the circumstances is a familiar one in public  law
      and is a sufficiently certain, but malleable, duty properly to  impose
      upon a public body in reaching a lawful decision.


 128. For these reasons we answer issue II in the applicant's favour as  set
      out in the immediately above paragraph.






      Issue III


 129. In MK, the UT saw the duty of investigation as a 'continuing' one.  It
      was not extinguished following the rejection of the  initial  TCR  and
      was not even extinguished following a further request  and  rejection.
      We set out the relevant passage above but it will be helpful to set it
      again here.  It is [41]-[42] of the UT's judgment:


              "(41) We find nothing in either the Dublin Regulation or  its
              sister instrument to support the argument that the  Secretary
              of   State's   acknowledged   duty   of   investigation   was
              extinguished once the initial refusal decision had been made.
              There is nothing in this regime to suggest that a decision on
              a "take charge" request is in all cases final and conclusive,
              subject only to legal challenge under  (inter  alia)  Article
              27. Furthermore, this would be entirely inconsistent with the
              concept of practical and effective protection and the broader
              context of the real world of asylum claims. The phenomenon of
              renewed "take charge" requests and successive  "take  charge"
              decisions by the requested State is, in our view,  implicitly
              recognised in the Dublin Regulation. Furthermore, it was  not
              argued that the Secretary of State's  reconsidered  decision,
              made pursuant to a renewed "take charge" request, was in some
              way a voluntary act of grace, as opposed to the discharge  of
              a decision making duty. Nor was it argued that the  Secretary
              of State's later decisions,  made  in  the  course  of  these
              proceedings, were  in  some  way  divorced  from  the  Dublin
              Regulation context.


              (42)   The present cases are a paradigm illustration  of  the
              truism that, in certain contexts, there may be  a  series  of
              formal requests by one Member State and a  series  of  formal
              decisions by the requested Member State. We are in  no  doubt
              that  all  such  decisions  and  associated  decision  making
              processes are governed  by  the  Dublin  Regulation  and  its
              sister instrument, the 2003 Regulation as amended."


 130. Mr Lewis invited us to depart from this reasoning  and  approach.   He
      submitted that there was no basis for the 'rolling process'  envisaged
      by the UT in MK at [41].  He submitted that it was  inconsistent  with
      the tight time-scales envisaged by  the  Dublin  III  Regulation.   It
      ignored, he submitted, that after the rejection of the second  request
      by the requested State that that state was functus officio  under  the
      Dublin III  Regulation  unless  and  until  a  further  TCR  was  made
      (although this is not envisaged after the second TCR is  rejected)  or
      the relevant TCR decision was quashed.  He submitted  that  the  third
      decision made by the respondent in this case on 12 March 2018 was  not
      made under the Dublin III Regulation  but  in  response  to  UT  Judge
      Freeman's order following the  grant  of  permission  to  bring  these
      proceedings.  Mr  Lewis  submitted  that  the  process  envisaged  was
      administratively unworkable for the respondent.


 131. Ms Kilroy submitted that the evidence now relied upon since the second
      decision was submitted as part of these proceedings.   The  point  did
      not arise on the facts of this case as it was submitted  in  order  to
      allow the respondent to make the  further  decision  envisaged  by  UT
      Judge Freeman's order,  requiring  the  respondent  to  make  a  third
      decision.  Making further decisions - beyond the two envisaged in  the
      Dublin III Regulation - was, Ms Kilroy submitted, common  place.   The
      respondent was unable to explain the legal basis  of  these  decisions
      other than  to  assert  they  were  not  made  under  the  Dublin  III
      Regulation. Indeed, it was the respondent's case  that  the  applicant
      should seek to ask France to make a further TCR if he wished  the  new
      evidence to be considered.


 132. The Dublin III Regulation regime does impose  a  tight  timescale  for
      reaching decisions.  Under Art 21(1), a TCR must be made  "as  quickly
      as possible" and, in any event, within 3 months of asylum  application
      being made. Further, by virtue of Art 22(1) the requested Member State
      must give a decision on TCR within 2 months of receipt. Article  22(6)
      requires, when the requesting State requests an urgent reply, that any
      reply must be within 1 month.


 133. Article 5 of  the  2003  Regulation  does  not  appear  to  have  been
      considered by the Upper Tribunal  in  MK.  This  contains  tight  time
      limits for a requesting State to exercise its option to have  its  TCR
      re-examined  by  the  requested  State.   That  said,  there  is  some
      flexibility.  Art 12(2) of the 2003 Regulation states that:


           "The fact that the duration of procedures for  placing  a  minor
           may lead to a failure to observe the time limits set in  Article
           18(1) and (6) and Article 19(4) of Regulation (EC)  No  343/2003
           shall not necessarily be an obstacle to continuing the procedure
           for determining the Member State responsible or carrying  out  a
           transfer."


 134. The reference to Art 18(1) and (6) in the Dublin II provisions are  to
      the 2 month and 1 month time limit imposed upon the requested State to
      make a decision: the equivalent of Art 22(1) & (6) of the  Dublin  III
      Regulation.  However, once the requested State has made a decision, it
      may well be that the respondent is functus officio as a final decision
      has been reached under the Dublin  III  Regulation.   That  would,  of
      course, be subject to a domestic court in the requested State quashing
      one or more of the TCR rejections.


 135. We were not provided with any supporting  material  on  administrative
      difficulties  that  the  respondent  would  face  if  subject  to  the
      'continuing' duty recognised in MK  and  we  do  not  take  that  into
      account.  However, we do recognise the finite nature of the TCR regime
      under the Dublin III Regulation.   While  we  have  no  difficulty  in
      contemplating a 'continuing' duty to  investigate  (and  thereby  take
      into account new material  provided  by  an  applicant)  following  an
      initial rejection of a TCR, we do see legal difficulties in the scheme
      of the Dublin III Regulation in imposing such a duty after the  second
      rejection. Of course, public law is familiar with  a  decision-maker's
      continuing duty to consider any fresh matter relevant to a  previously
      reached decision and, if appropriate, to reconsider  and  make  a  new
      decision. That, however, pertains in a situation where such a  process
      would not offend a statutory scheme or run counter to its purpose  and
      objectives. A continuing duty in the present context has the potential
      to extend the obligations of the requested State beyond that envisaged
      by the time-scale and scheme of the Dublin III Regulation for  dealing
      with TCRs.  It may be that  the  best  method  for  dealing  with  new
      material is to submit it to the requesting State who may then  make  a
      fresh TCR.  But, even that is not easy to fit within the 'two request'
      only scheme of the Dublin III Regulation - no doubt thought  desirable
      to achieve certainty within a relatively brief time-scale.


 136. We are content, for present purposes, to accept  that  the  respondent
      could reconsider a second rejection of a TCR if he wished but that  is
      not mandated by the Dublin III Regulation itself. The position may  be
      otherwise, and we put it no higher than that, if a further TCR (beyond
      the two envisaged in  the  Dublin  III  Regulation)  is  made  by  the
      requesting State.


 137. To the following extent, we consider that the UT in MK went too far in
      recognising a 'continuing' duty of investigation in [41]-[43]  of  its
      judgment.  We do not consider that the duty of investigation continues
      beyond the second rejection, subject to the requirements of  fairness.
      We say that because in  reaching  that  second  adverse  decision  the
      requested State must act fairly: the applicant must know the 'gist' of
      what is being said against him in respect of the  application  of  the
      criteria relevant to the TCR and must  have  an  opportunity  to  make
      representations on the issues and material being relied on if that has
      not  previously  been  the  case.  In  those  circumstances,  fairness
      requires that the respondent consider any representations and material
      raised (perhaps for the first time) to deal with a matter of which the
      individual was 'taken by surprise' in the second  rejection  decision.
      To that extent, the duty continues and may require the  respondent  as
      the requested State to reconsider the rejection of  the  TCR.  It  may
      well be that it is the implications of the duty to act  fairly  which,
      in many  instances,  explains  why  new  (and  post-second)  rejection
      decisions are made. To the extent we are departing  from  MK  on  this
      issue, it is because we consider on the basis of  the  regime  in  the
      Dublin III Regulation the UT in MK was wrong and there is good  reason
      to depart from it.


 138. For these reasons we decide issue III accordingly.


      Issue IV


 139. Issue IV concerns the permissible scope of the  applicant's  challenge
      to the rejection of the  TCR  by  the  respondent:  is  the  challenge
      limited to public law grounds? Or, is the tribunal required to  decide
      for itself on the evidence  whether  the  'criteria'  for  determining
      which Member State is responsible for deciding the applicant's  asylum
      claim have been correctly applied?  We  will  defer  consideration  of
      issue IV until after we had considered issues V and VI.


 DISCUSSION: (2) APPLICATION TO THE FACTS

 140. Having concluded that there is a duty incumbent on the  respondent  to
      undertake reasonable investigations on receipt of a  TCR,  and  having
      established the general scope of that  duty,  including  the  need  to
      undertake  reasonable  efforts  to  ascertain  the  viability  of  DNA
      testing, we turn  our  attention  to  the  decisions  under  challenge
      (Issues V and VI).

 141. The respondent's understanding of  the  position  of  DNA  testing  in
      France and his ability to facilitate such testing are contained  in  a
      witness statement from Jessica Maria Da Costa, a GLD lawyer, dated  14
      December 2017. Details of the endeavours undertaken by the  respondent
      in compliance with Judge Freeman's Order dated 21  December  2017  are
      contained in Ms Da Costa's 2nd witness  statement,  dated  9  February
      2018. In her 1st statement she describes a meeting  on  12  July  2016
      between the then head of the Asylum and Family Policy Unit in  the  UK
      with, amongst others, the Director General  of  the  Ministry  of  the
      Interior responsible for immigration and asylum and  the  Director  of
      Asylum Services in France. The French officials at the meeting made it
      clear that there was extremely limited scope for DNA  testing  due  to
      its controversial nature in France. The British  officials  understood
      that, "while not strictly unlawful", the French  officials  would  not
      generally recommend  that  legal  representatives  take  samples  from
      individuals in France and bring them back to the  United  Kingdom  for
      testing.

 142. In her 2nd statement Ms Da Costa explains that MK, IK and HK  was  the
      first case requiring the respondent's officials to  deal  with  Dublin
      III Regulation cases that engaged with French law on DNA  testing  and
      that, for cultural reasons, French law imposes particular controls  on
      obtaining DNA evidence. During the proceedings in MK, IK  and  HK  the
      respondent believed that,  while  the  French  authorities  would  not
      themselves carry out DNA tests on individuals, they would  not  object
      to individuals doing this themselves if they  wished.  This  reflected
      the contents of her 1st  statement.  Since  then  the  respondent  has
      learnt that the availability of DNA testing in  France  is  much  more
      constrained then he previously understood. As there were various other
      claims raising the same issue in or around  the  summer  of  2016  the
      respondent continued to make enquiries  with  the  French  authorities
      about the legal position in France.


 143. On 11 July 2016 UK officials were provided with a note  written  by  a
      French lawyer, Mr Guillaume Toutias, the legal adviser to the Director
      General of Foreigners in France  (State  Councillor).  The  translated
      note indicated that there was no provision  within  the  French  Civil
      Code for the establishment  of  family  ties  relating  to  entry  and
      residence of foreigners and the right to asylum, or during proceedings
      relating to entry, stay or asylum in France.  While  a  provision  was
      introduced in November 2007 to enable genetic testing  in  respect  of
      family reunification applications, which  could  only  be  used  after
      authorisation by a judge and with  the  consent  of  the  person,  the
      provision  aroused  controversy  and  was   never   implemented,   its
      constitutionality being admitted  to  the  Constitutional  Council  in
      November 2007. The authorisation relating to  the  provision,  in  any
      event, expired on 31 December 2009. The French Civil Code only  allows
      for the identification of a person by DNA testing by reference  to  an
      exhaustive list, which appear to have no application  to  the  present
      circumstances. The note stated:

           "The use of genetic  tests  to  establish  the  parentage  of  a
           foreigner who, by virtue of this family  link,  is  entitled  to
           entry, stay or asylum in France  or  in  a  foreign  country  is
           therefore not authorised by French law. On a summary application
           for a request that the conduct of a genetic test to  be  ordered
           for the purposes of  establishing  the  affiliation  of  a  visa
           applicant who has links with a person residing  in  France,  the
           Conseil d'Etat has judged that it is not for the  administrative
           judge to decide, in case of serious  doubt,  the  state  of  the
           persons,  consequently,   order   measures   of   expertise   or
           instruction to establish, where applicable,  a  relationship  of
           affiliation such as those provided for [in  the  relevant  Civil
           Code]."

 144. The note indicated that using  genetic  tests  outside  of  the  cases
      provided for in the Civil Code render  a  person  liable  to  criminal
      prosecution with a punishment of up to one year's imprisonment  and  a
      fine of E15,000, and that the mere  fact  of  requesting  the  genetic
      identification of a 3rd party is punishable by a fine of E3,750.

 145. According to Ms Da Costa's 2nd statement, in order to obtain 'absolute
      clarity' on the legal regulation of DNA testing France, the respondent
      made further detailed enquiries of the  French  authorities  following
      the order of Judge Freeman on  20  December  2017.  The  Head  of  the
      European Intake Unit within UK Visas and Immigration, Ms Julia Farman,
      discussed this matter with Mr Pierre  Chareyron  of  the  Dublin  Unit
      within the French Government who in turn raised  it  with  Mr  Raphael
      Sodini, the Head of Direction of  Asylum  (who,  according  to  Ms  Da
      Costa's statement, also has the legal authority of  an  Administrative
      Judge in France both at first-tier and appeal). Ms Farman also met  Mr
      Chareyron and his line manager, Mr Pascal Baudouin,  to  discuss  this
      issue in the context of the present litigation on 29 January 2018.  Ms
      Da Costa believes the position is  now  clear,  that  DNA  testing  in
      France is contrary to the law  (except  for  very  specific  exception
      which do not apply to the applicant), and that the French  authorities
      have clarified that the taking of  samples  is  unlawful  rather  than
      simply not being recommended.

 146. Ms Da Costa was authorised by  the  respondent  to  make  her  witness
      statements, and her statements were based on  her  own  knowledge  and
      documents she had seen, and from legally privileged  discussions  that
      lawyers from the Foreign Office and Home Office conducted  with  their
      mutual clients. There is no reason  for  us  to  doubt  that  she  has
      accurately described the information provided to her.  Although  there
      is no separate statement from Ms Farman,  we  reject  the  applicant's
      contention that the statements from Ms Da Costa are  somehow  unworthy
      of appropriate weight. As  Mr  Lewis  submitted,  given  that  several
      people were involved in obtaining the relevant information, the use of
      a single statement is a concise and cost-effective way  of  giving  an
      overview of the endeavours  undertaken  and  information  gleamed.  In
      particular, there is no reason for us to reject the  accuracy  of  the
      assertions contained within Ms Da Costa's 2nd  statement  relating  to
      the information imparted to her by Ms Farman, which in turn relate  to
      her discussions with Mr Chareyron and  the  information  he  provided,
      despite the absence of any notes  of  the  meeting.  It  does  however
      appear that,  at  the  time  of  Ms  Da  Costa's  1st  statement,  the
      respondent understood that it was "not strictly unlawful" for a DNA to
      be taken in France by a person's legal representatives. We  note  that
      no consideration at all appears to have been given to this possibility
      in the 1st and 2nd decisions under challenge. By the time Ms Da  Costa
      wrote her 2nd statement, the  position,  at  least  according  to  the
      respondent, had sufficiently crystallised such that the taking of  DNA
      samples was now considered  unlawful  rather  than  simply  not  being
      recommended.

 147. In a further disclosed email from Mr Chareyron to Ms Farman,  sent  on
      29 January 2018, Mr Chareyron  confirmed  the  contents  of  the  note
      prepared by Mr Toutias, and stated that, since the juxtaposed  control
      areas are on French territory, the rules summarised by him apply.  The
      applicant relies on another email which  purports  to  contain  advice
      from Mr Chareyron at some undisclosed time in the past suggesting that
      the French authorities could not refuse  a  lawyer  recovering  a  DNA
      sample from a  client  as  long  as  it  was  voluntarily.  Given  the
      considerable uncertainties relating to the age of the advice, and  the
      inconsistency with the more detailed analysis provided by Mr  Toutias,
      we find we cannot attach any significant weight to this email.


 148. In her 2nd statement Ms Da Costa then considered other routes by which
      the applicant might be able to be DNA tested in France; (1) at the  UK
      Embassy in Paris; (2) at the  juxtaposed  control  zones,  whether  by
      French or UK border officials; (3) by having a DNA sample taken by the
      applicant's representatives in France which could then be brought back
      to the UK for testing; and (4) and by enquiring whether there was  any
      other way in which the applicant's DNA could  be  lawfully  tested  in
      France.


 149. In respect of DNA testing  at  the  UK  Embassy,  the  respondent  was
      advised by Foreign and Commonwealth Office (FCO)  officials  that  the
      British Embassy is on French territory  and  therefore  within  French
      jurisdiction, and that French law applies to the site and  its  staff.
      Although diplomatic staff have some diplomatic immunities, and that in
      theory an official at the UK Embassy could  take  a  sample  from  the
      applicant and then liaise with Home Office officials in the UK to  get
      this tested,  Article  41  of  the  Vienna  Convention  on  Diplomatic
      Relations (which makes it the duty of all Embassy staff to respect the
      law and regulations of the receiving state) is  taken  very  seriously
      and any attempt by  UK  officials  to  use  the  cover  of  diplomatic
      privileges and immunities in this way would raise very  real  concerns
      that it may lead to foreign diplomats in the UK having less regard  to
      UK law, possibly resulting in damage to the  UK's  reputation  in  the
      international community. Ms Da Costa stated:


           "It is the understanding of Home Office  officials  from  having
           spoken to the French authorities that they would be unhappy with
           any attempt by the UK authorities to do this and that they would
           see this as an abuse of the diplomatic immunity principle."

 150. We pause to note that Ms Kilroy did not pursue the suggestion that DNA
      evidence could be obtained through the British Embassy in Paris either
      in her skeleton argument or in her oral submissions.

 151. In respect of the juxtaposed control areas, Ms Da  Costa  states  that
      the Control Zones, which are designated for the exercise of  functions
      by UK officials, do not constitute UK territory and the  UK  does  not
      enjoy exclusive jurisdiction within them.  The  UK's  jurisdiction  is
      limited to the exercise of the functions  specified  in  the  relevant
      international treaties. She records Article 2 of the Le Touquet Treaty
      (relating to Calais and Dunkirk) which defines "Frontier  Control"  as
      "the  application  in  the  Control  Zone  of  all  of  the  laws  and
      regulations of the Contracting Parties concerning immigration controls
      and the investigation of offences relating to immigration", and  that,
      according to Article  4,  the  purpose  of  the  immigration  controls
      carried out by the UK is to  verify  whether  persons  leaving  France
      fulfil the Frontier Control conditions and requirements laid  down  by
      the UK. Ms Da Costa maintains that, with respect  to  the  Le  Touquet
      Treaty (which was given effect in domestic  law  by  the  Nationality,
      Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (Juxtaposed Controls) Order 2003)  and
      the  Sangatte  Protocol  (relating  to  the  Eurotunnel  terminal   at
      Coquelles), there is no power for immigration  officers  to  take  DNA
      samples.

 152. We appreciate that Ms Da Costa is essentially giving a  legal  opinion
      as to  whether  the  juxtaposed  control  treaties  allow  immigration
      officers to take DNA samples. Ms Kilroy  was  nevertheless  unable  to
      satisfactorily identify any specific provision of the Immigration  Act
      1971 that could bestow upon immigration offices, as opposed to medical
      inspectors, the power to take DNA samples. Her general assertion  that
      this was covered by Schedule 2 of the  1971  Act  in  respect  of  the
      respondent's powers to examine was not adequately  particularised.  Ms
      Kilroy relied on a  pilot  scheme,  'Nationality  Swapping  -  isotope
      Analysis and DNA Testing', under which Asylum Screening Unit  officers
      (immigration  officers)  took  DNA  samples.  However,  having  sought
      instructions, Mr Lewis informed us that the lawful basis of the  pilot
      was "dubious" and that the  respondent  was  unable  to  identify  the
      particular legal power that enabled immigration officers to  take  DNA
      samples under the scheme. An Immigration  Directorate  Instruction  of
      November 2009 (Annex N,  Chapter  8,  section  5A,  relating  to  'DNA
      testing of Children'), also relied on by Ms Kilroy, primarily  related
      to DNA  testing  undertaken  by  Entry  Clearance  Officers  in  entry
      clearance cases and, presumably, would also suffer from the absence of
      legal basis so far as it related to  immigration  officers.  Mr  Lewis
      made it plain that the respondent did not  consider  that  immigration
      officers had any power to take DNA samples, and,  given  the  emerging
      laws on data protection,  we  accept  that  such  a  power  cannot  be
      reasonably implied. The fact that the applicant has indicated that  he
      would give his consent to DNA testing cannot establish a  legal  basis
      for taking DNA samples where none exists.

 153. Article 2 of the Le Touquet Treaty defines "Responsible  Officers"  as
      the "... Officers given responsibility  by  each  Government  for  the
      exercise of Frontier Controls."  Immigration officers are  responsible
      for the exercise of frontier Controls. Article 3 of the Treaty enables
      British immigration officers (Responsible Officers) to carry out their
      functions relating to Frontier Controls within the Control  Zone,  and
      states that the laws and regulations relating to Frontier Controls  of
      the UK shall be applicable in the Control Zone in the same way as they
      are applicable within the UK. Article 14(3) states that criminal  acts
      undertaken in the Controlled Zone in the exercise of  their  functions
      may not be prosecuted by the authorities of the State of Departure (in
      this case, France). Given the  absence  of  any  clearly  identifiable
      legal basis that would enable  immigration  officers  to  take  a  DNA
      sample, we find  that  Article  14  cannot  form  a  legitimate  legal
      mechanism through which a DNA sample could be taken as this would  not
      be in the exercise of  an  immigration  officers  functions.  We  also
      accept Mr Lewis's observation that the treaties to which our attention
      was drawn (the Sangatte Treaty of 1991  (the  Protocol  entering  into
      force on 2 August 1993)  and  the  Le  Touquet  Treaty,  contain  very
      detailed provisions relating to the powers that can  be  exercised  in
      the  Control  Zones  and  yet  omit  any  reference  to  DNA  testing,
      suggesting that no such power was anticipated,  especially  given  the
      cultural sensitivity in France relating to DNA testing.

 154. With respect to securing a DNA sample in accordance with  French  law,
      Ms Da Costa confirms in her  2nd  statement  that  the  note  from  Mr
      Toutias was still accurate and that the French Civil Code only  allows
      DNA testing in (1) investigative measures in the context  of  domestic
      legal proceedings; (2) for medical  or  scientific  purposes  for  the
      purpose of establishing,  where  unknown,  the  identity  of  deceased
      persons; (3)  for  the  purposes  of  national  defence;  and  (4)  to
      establish the identity and prior involvement in hostilities of persons
      who died in combat or were captured by armed forces. As none of  these
      cover the current situation, Ms Da Costa concludes the applicant would
      not be able to make any kind of application for a court order that  he
      be DNA tested, even if he consented. On the  basis  of  the  inquiries
      said to have been made by the respondent, and  having  regard  to  the
      evidence stemming from those inquiries, and in  particular,  the  Note
      from Mr Toutias, we accept that there would be no  realistic  prospect
      of being  able  to  negotiate  immunity  from  prosecution  for  legal
      representatives who wished to take a sample of the applicant's DNA.

 155. In her 2nd statement Ms Da Costa indicates that the  respondent  would
      not agree to admit the applicant to the UK for DNA testing and that  a
      refusal would not be unlawful. The only reason the Secretary of  State
      for the Home Department admitted IK and HK to the UK was  because  the
      Tribunal had quashed the take charge decisions and the position as set
      out in French law was, at that stage, still unclear. She considers the
      most appropriate course of  action  would  be  for  the  applicant  to
      provide the French authorities with additional  material  setting  out
      the family link and explaining, in particular, why MAS said he had  no
      other siblings during his asylum application. Ms  Da  Costa  does  not
      identify the source of the decision not to admit  the  applicant  into
      the UK, and does not indicate when this decision was taken.


 156. The applicant, being of the view that he is  not  under  any  duty  to
      investigate the possibility of DNA evidence being taken in France, has
      not produced any evidence relating to DNA testing in  France  himself.
      We are satisfied, having  regard  to  the  evidence  produced  by  the
      respondent and the for reasons give above, that the respondent had, by
      the date of the 3rd  decision,  undertaken  all  reasonable  steps  in
      carrying out his investigative duty to determine the viability of  DNA
      testing in France.


 157. Having assessed the evidence produced by the  respondent  relating  to
      DNA testing, and in light of our conclusion relating  to  the  general
      scope of  the  respondent's  duty  to  investigate,  we  consider  the
      challenged decisions.

      The decision of 27 July 2017

 158. There is nothing to indicate in  this  decision  that  the  respondent
      undertook reasonable steps to investigate the viability  of  obtaining
      DNA evidence in France, including the  possibility  of  obtaining  DNA
      samples in the juxtaposed control zones, in  order  to  determine  the
      relationship between the applicant and MAS, or that he considered  the
      possibility of admitting the applicant to the UK for  the  purpose  of
      carrying out DNA testing. Despite the respondent having been  provided
      with the note from Mr Toutias on 12 July 2016, there is no  indication
      that the content of that note was considered by the decision-maker. In
      any  event,  the  further  detailed  inquiries  made  of  the   French
      authorities following the Tribunal's order of 20 December  2017  could
      not have been available to  the  respondent  when  this  decision  (or
      indeed his second decision) was made. Given the respondent's  concerns
      regarding the relationship, the  absence  of  extracts  from  official
      registers  or  other  probative  evidence  detailed  in  Annex  II  of
      Implementing Regulation  118/2014, and the fact that the applicant  is
      a child and  is  likely  to  have  limited  resources  or  ability  to
      investigate the possibility of DNA testing himself, and  in  light  of
      the cogent nature of DNA evidence to the single reason advanced by the
      respondent for refusing the TCR, it was incumbent on  the  respondent,
      as a material element of his duty to investigate, to  take  reasonable
      steps to determine the options of DNA testing in France or to consider
      the option of admitting the applicant  to  the  UK  to  undertake  DNA
      testing.  No  such  reasonable  steps   were   taken.   Such   failure
      additionally points to a failure by the  respondent  to  consider  MS'
      best interests as required pursuant to Art  6(1)  of  the  Dublin  III
      Regulation.

 159. We are additionally satisfied that the respondent acted unlawfully  by
      failing  to  inform  the  applicant  of  his  concerns  regarding  the
      applicant's  relationship  with  MAS  before  refusing  the  TCR.  The
      requirement, as a material element of his investigative duty, for  the
      respondent to acquaint himself with the relevant information to enable
      him to reach an informed decision and to act in  a  procedurally  fair
      manner (at common law, and by  reference  to  the  procedural  aspects
      inherent in Art 7 CFR and Art 8 ECHR, and by reference to the need  to
      ensure the applicant's best interests as a  primary  consideration  in
      accordance with Article 6(1) of the Dublin III Regulation) obliged the
      respondent to inform the applicant of his concerns  arising  from  the
      assertions contained in MAS' asylum application  and  to  give  him  a
      reasonable opportunity, albeit within the confines of  the  applicable
      time limits, to respond to those concerns. The applicant did not  know
      and was not made aware of the gist of the case  against  him  and  was
      denied an opportunity to meet those concerns.


 160. We consequently quash the 1st decision.

      The decision of 21 August 2017

 161. For the reasons given above, we again find that the respondent  failed
      to  undertake  reasonable  steps  to  investigate  the  viability   of
      obtaining DNA evidence in France, or that the possibility of admitting
      the applicant to the UK for DNA testing  was  considered.  The  letter
      dated 31 July 2017 sent on behalf of MAS specifically  indicated  that
      he was willing to undertake DNA testing to prove his relationship with
      the applicant. The respondent failed to  engage  with  this  evidence.
      Having found that the respondent unlawfully failed to  carry  out  his
      duty to take  reasonable  steps,  we  quash  the  2nd  decision  under
      challenge.

      The decision of 12 March 2018

 162. The respondent's 3rd decision is a much more  detailed  assessment  of
      the evidence presented to her. It is therefore surprising that it does
      not make any reference to the contentious issue of DNA  testing,  even
      though this was again specifically raised  by  MAS  in  his  statement
      dated 16 November 2017. It may be that the decision-maker expected the
      decision to be read in conjunction with Ms Da Costa's statement  dated
      9 February 2018. If so, this should have  been  expressly  stated.  We
      have nevertheless found, with reference to our conclusion in paragraph
      156 above, that the respondent has undertaken all reasonable steps  in
      considering the viability of obtaining  DNA  evidence  in  France,  in
      accordance with the Order of Judge Freeman.

 163. We  are  not  however  satisfied  that  the  respondent  has  lawfully
      considered the option of admitting the applicant into the UK  for  the
      purpose of obtaining a DNA test. Ms Da Costa's 2nd statement was vague
      in respect of this option. While stating that the respondent would not
      agree to admit the applicant into the UK, no  details  were  given  in
      relation to this decision, either in respect of when it  was  made  or
      who made it. Ms Da Costa supports the respondent's stated position  by
      reference to the fact that this Tribunal had not  yet  determined  her
      decisions as unlawful, and because the  position  in  French  law  was
      clearer. With respect, the fact that the position  in  French  law  is
      clearer, and that there is no realistic prospect of DNA testing  being
      undertaken in France, arguably provides an ever more compelling reason
      for admitting the applicant into the UK in order to undertake  a  test
      that is likely to be conclusive of the issue in contention. We do  not
      find the reasoning advanced on behalf of  the  respondent,  and  which
      does not even appear in the 3rd decision itself, to  be  satisfactory.
      The failure to adequately consider that  option  constitutes,  in  our
      judgment, a breach of the respondent's investigative duty.

 164. In his 3rd decision the respondent has, on the whole, engaged with the
      evidence presented to him and has given generally rational reasons for
      rejecting that evidence. The respondent  was  unarguably  entitled  to
      hold against the applicant his brother's assertions during his  asylum
      application that he had no siblings and the  inconsistencies  in  MAS'
      three statements concerning this omission. We note that there  was  no
      engagement with MAS' evidence, contained in  his  statement  dated  17
      November 2017, that the letter written on 31 July 2017 was not written
      by him but by a French lawyer to whom he spoke in English and that  he
      did not see the letter before it was submitted. This failure does  not
      however, on  its  own,  render  the  respondent's  assessment  of  the
      evidence unlawful. It was open to the respondent to  draw  an  adverse
      inference based on the failure  by  MAS  to  mention  his  brother  in
      respect of an attack on the family home in Afghanistan  in  2004.  The
      respondent was entitled to find the failure by SS, the claimed  cousin
      of MAS and the applicant, to mention that SS' uncle had two  sons  (SS
      claimed his uncle had one son and  two  daughters).  The  respondent's
      assessment of the bank transfers showing  transactions  through  which
      MAS allegedly provided funds to the  applicant  accurately  noted  the
      absence  of  clear  evidence  that  the  applicant  was  the  intended
      recipient, or indeed that the recipient of the funds was  actually  in
      France at the same time as the applicant.  The  respondent  placed  no
      reliance on a Taskira (an identification  document)  produced  by  the
      applicant following an investigation conducted  by  the  FCO  and  the
      Afghanistan Central Civil Registration Authority which concluded  that
      the document was 'not genuine' as  the  serial  number  could  not  be
      matched with any internal records  maintained  in  Kabul  and  Laghman
      Provinces. The drawing of an adverse inference based on the failure by
      MAS or his partner, MOS, to visit the applicant was within  the  range
      of reasonable responses open to the respondent.

 165. We are however satisfied that the respondent acted unlawfully  in  his
      consideration of the two statements from MOS, the partner of MAS.  The
      respondent did not engage with the content  of  the  statements  other
      than to note that they did not address  the  inconsistencies  in  MAS'
      account and that they were self-serving, and, as such,  did  not  "...
      come anywhere close to substantiating the claimed  family  link."   In
      her first witness statement, dated 11  December  2017,  MOS  indicated
      that she and MAS had been together for about 6  years  and  had  lived
      together for over 5 years. They had two children together (as well  as
      MOS' two children from a previous relationship) and were engaged to be
      married. MOS stated that she heard her partner talk about his  family,
      including the applicant, over a period of years. MAS and the applicant
      spoke to each other daily and an attempt to  visit  the  applicant  in
      August 2017 was aborted because MAS did not realise that, although  he
      had ILR, he also  needed  a  Schengen  visa.  In  her  second  witness
      statement, dated 26 January 2018, MOS stated she was 'absolutely sure'
      the applicant was MAS' brother and there was no  way  MAS  could  have
      pretended to have a brother throughout the years.  She  had  witnessed
      MAS speaking to his mother and the applicant about  2  or  3  times  a
      week. MOS'  own  children  said  'Salaam-Alaikum'  when  she  saw  the
      applicant during a video call  and  called  him  'Kaka',  which  means
      uncle. It was clear to her that MAS felt responsible for the applicant
      and was anxious and frustrated by the delay in his case. MOS confirmed
      that a transfer of money to the applicant occurred in a friend's name.
      MOS witnessed an emotional bond between the applicant and MAS and they
      also looked like each other. She loved and the applicant and was  very
      concerned for him.

 166. In R (SS) v SSHD ("self-serving" statements) [2017] UKUT 00164  (IAC),
      Upper Tribunal Judge Lane (as he then was), stated, at [30] and [31]:

           "The decision letter criticised the letter from the  applicant's
           father as being "self-serving".  The  expression  "self-serving"
           is, to a large extent, a  protean  one.  The  expression  itself
           tells us little or nothing. What is needed is a reason,  however
           brief, for that designation. For example, a letter from a  third
           party may be "self-serving" because it bears  the  hallmarks  of
           being written to order, in circumstances where  the  applicant's
           case is that the letter was a spontaneous warning.


           In the present case, the reasons given in  the  decision  letter
           for the father's  letter  being  regarded  as  self-serving  are
           because "it is from your father and does not demonstrate how you
           as an individual will face fear or persecution upon your  return
           to Sri Lanka". The first reason falls foul of the point made  at
           paragraph 28 of AK, where the Court  of  Appeal  criticised  the
           respondent for stating that "an affidavit from a  family  member
           cannot add probative or corroborative weight  to  your  client's
           claim". A statement from a family member is, of course,  capable
           of bearing weight. The issue is whether, looked at in the round,
           it does so in the particular case in question. For  instance,  a
           statement from a family member may  be  incapable  of  saving  a
           claim which, in all other respects,  lacks  credibility.  Whilst
           the pressure on the respondent's caseworkers can  be  great  and
           their decision letters are not in any sense to be  construed  as
           if they were carefully-crafted pieces of legislation, I consider
           that this reason  for  the  rejection  of  the  father's  letter
           displays a lack of anxious scrutiny."

 167. We are satisfied  that  similar  criticism  can  be  levelled  at  the
      respondent's assessment of MOS' statements.  No  lawfully  sustainable
      reasons have  been  given  for  rejecting  the  statements  as  'self-
      serving'. The statements from MOS were capable of bearing  weight  but
      no consideration was given to  this,  indicating  a  lack  of  anxious
      scrutiny. Had the respondent approached the  statements  in  a  lawful
      manner his overall conclusion may have been different.

 168. We are additionally satisfied  that  the  respondent  failed  to  take
      account of relevant evidence, namely the report dated 5 December  2017
      from Helen O'Keeffe, an Independent  Psychiatric  Social  Worker  with
      Approved Mental Health Professional status, with supervision  from  Dr
      Susannah Fairweather, a Consultant Child and Adolescent  Psychiatrist,
      when considering whether MAS and the applicant were related. While the
      respondent did consider the report from Ms O'Keeffe at paragraph 15 of
      her  decision,  this  was  only  in   respect   of   the   applicant's
      vulnerability. In paragraph 14 the respondent  had  already  concluded
      that the applicant and MAS were not brothers and the TCR was therefore
      rejected. It is readily apparent that the report from Ms O'Keeffe  did
      not form part of the respondent's assessment of the relationship.


 169. While clearly  not  determinative,  the  report  from  Helen  O'Keeffe
      nevertheless gave some relevant insight in determining the  nature  of
      the applicant's relationship with MAS. Her professional opinion partly
      attributed the applicant's  emotional  state  and  distress  to  being
      separated from his claimed family member (e.g. 6.7.3  -  he  "appeared
      particularly distressed, when discussing his wish to join his  brother
      and the distress he suffers at night times", 6.7.5 - "He is focused on
      joining his brother in the UK", 6.7.8 - "Compounding  his  frustration
      is the sense of injustice at not being believed by  the  British  Home
      Office in regard to  being  the  brother  of  [MAS],  along  with  the
      apparent impossibility of completing any DNA or blood test  in  France
      due  to  the  unhelpful  legislative  provisions.  He   appears   most
      distraught when describing these last aspects of his  situation",  and
      7.4.5 - "He is particularly frustrated by his inability to  do  a  DNA
      test in France so that he can prove his disputed relationship with his
      brother"). Had the respondent taken account of this evidence,  he  may
      have reached a different conclusion. We are therefore  satisfied  that
      the respondent acted unlawfully in her 3rd decision letter by  failing
      to take account of relevant considerations.


 170. We consequently quash the 3rd decision.


DISCUSSION: (3) FURTHER LEGAL ISSUES


 171. Although our conclusions above lead us to quash  all  three  decisions
      under challenge, Ms Kilroy  urged  upon  us  a  more  expansive  role:
      namely, that the Tribunal  should,  for  itself,  decide  whether  the
      'criteria' for determining responsibility in Article 8 of  the  Dublin
      III Regulation are met on the facts.  That is issue IV  we  identified
      above.


 172. Under the regime  pertaining  in  the  EU  prior  to  the  Dublin  III
      Regulation  (i.e.   under   the   "Dublin   II"   arrangements),   the
      determination of the 'criteria' for responsibility  was  seen  as  one
      between the  'requesting'  and  'requested'  State  alone.   While  an
      individual could challenge removal on human rights' grounds based upon
      a 'systematic failure' or 'systematic flaws'  in  the  system  in  the
      receiving state, no challenge could be made per se to the decision  to
      transfer under the Dublin  II  arrangements  on  the  basis  that  the
      criteria determining the Member State responsible  for  examining  the
      individual's  asylum  application  had  been  misapplied  (see,   e.g.
      Abdullahi v Bundesasylamt (Case C-394/12) [2014] 1 WLR 1984 (CJEU) and
      R(NS) v SSHD (Cases C-411/10 and C-493/10) [2013] 1 WLR 102 (CJEU)).


 173. Article 27 of the Dublin III  Regulation  has  changed  the  position.
      Article 27, so far as relevant, provides as follows:


           "1.      The applicant ... shall have the right to an effective
           remedy, in the form of an appeal or a review,  in  fact  and  in
           law, against a transfer decision, before a court or tribunal.
           2.      Member States shall provide for a reasonable period  of
           time within which the person concerned may exercise his  or  her
           right to an effective remedy pursuant to paragraph 1."


 174. Ms Kilroy submits that article 27, read with article 47  of  the  CFR,
      provides for an "effective remedy" against a "transfer decision". That
      applies to the respondent's decisions to reject  TCRs.   Further,  the
      scope of that challenge is not restricted to  traditional  public  law
      grounds, but requires the tribunal to decide for  itself  whether  the
      applicant  meets  the  relevant  'criteria  under  'the   Dublin   III
      Regulation, namely that he is the brother of MAS.   Ms  Kilroy  relies
      upon a number of decisions of the Grand Chamber of the CJEU which, she
      submits, have acknowledged that a 'transfer decision' under the Dublin
      III Regulation may be challenged by an individual on the  ground  that
      the 'criteria' in the Regulation for determining which Member State is
      responsible for deciding  the  individual's  asylum  claim  have  been
      incorrectly applied: Ghezelbash v Staatssecretaris van  Veiligheid  en
      Justice  (Case  C-63/15)  [2016]  1  WLR   3969   and   Mengesteab   v
      Bundersrepublik Deutschland (Case C-670/16)  (26  July  2017)  and  AS
      (Case C-490/16) (26 July 2017). She submits that,  as  a  consequence,
      the tribunal should reach its own factual conclusion, based  upon  all
      the evidence that  submitted  statements  and  oral  evidence  at  the
      hearing, on the issue of whether MS and MAS are brothers.


 175. We begin with the Grand Chamber decision in Ghezelbash. In that  case,
      the CJEU was concerned with a challenge to a decision to transfer  the
      applicant from the Netherlands to France on the basis that  under  the
      'criteria 'in article 12 of the  Dublin  III  Regulation,  France  was
      responsible for examining  his  asylum  application  as  he  had  been
      granted a visa residence document in France. Having been requested  by
      the Dutch authorities to  "take  charge"  of  the  applicant's  asylum
      claim, the French authorities accepted responsibility under the Dublin
      III Regulation.  The Grand Chamber accepted that article 27,  read  in
      the context of the Dublin III Regulation as a whole,  meant  that  the
      applicant was entitled to challenge the application on the  'criteria'
      upon which the transfer decision was  based.  The  applicant  was  not
      restricted, as had been the case under Dublin II, to  a  challenge  to
      the conditions he would face in the EU country to which  he  would  be
      returned relying upon  article  3  of  the  ECHR.  The  Grand  Chamber
      recognised that such a challenge is not inconsistent with the  overall
      scheme,  including  the   timescales   for   reaching   decisions   on
      responsibility under the Dublin II Regulations. The Grand Chamber drew
      support for a more extensive right  of  challenge  which  extended  to
      cover both "fact and law" from Recital (19) which is in the  following
      terms:


           "In order to guarantee effective protection of the rights of the
           persons  concerned,  legal  safeguards  and  the  right  to   an
           effective remedy in respect of decisions regarding transfers  to
           the  Member  State  responsible  should   be   established,   in
           accordance, in particular, with Article 47 of  the  Charter  of
           Fundamental Rights of the European Union.  In  order  to  ensure
           that international law is respected, an effective remedy against
           such  decisions  should  cover  both  the  examination  of   the
           application of this Regulation and  of  the  legal  and  factual
           situation  in  the  Member  State  to  which  the  applicant  is
           transferred."


 176. At [35]-[41], the Grand Chamber said this:


           "35      The scope of the appeal provided for in Article 27(1)
           of Regulation No 604/2013 must therefore be determined  in  the
           light of the wording of the provisions of that  regulation,  its
           general scheme, its objectives and its  context,  in  particular
           its evolution in connection with the system of  which  it  forms
           part (see, to that effect,  judgment  of  10 December  2013  in
           Abdullahi, (C-394/12, EU:C:2013:813, paragraph 51).
           36      It is apparent from the wording  of  Article 27(1)  of
           Regulation No 604/2013 that the legal remedy  provided  for  in
           that article must be effective and cover questions of both  fact
           and law. Moreover, the  drafting  of  that  provision  makes  no
           reference to any limitation of the arguments that may be  raised
           by the asylum seeker when availing himself of that  remedy.  The
           same  applies  to  the  drafting  of  Article 4(1)(d)  of  that
           regulation, concerning the information that must be provided  to
           the applicant by the competent authorities as to the possibility
           of challenging a transfer decision.
           37      In particular, it is clear that the EU legislature  did
           not provide for any specific link or, a fortiori, any  exclusive
           link between the legal remedies established  in  Article 27  of
           Regulation No 604/2013 and the rule, now set out in Article 3(2)
           of  that  regulation,  which  limits   the   possibilities   for
           transferring  an  applicant  to  the  Member   State   initially
           designated as responsible where there are systemic flaws in  the
           asylum procedure and in  the  reception  conditions  for  asylum
           seekers in that Member State, resulting in a risk of inhuman  or
           degrading treatment within the  meaning  of  Article 4  of  the
           Charter of Fundamental Rights.
           38      Furthermore, the scope of the remedy  available  to  an
           asylum seeker against a decision to transfer him is  made  clear
           in recital 19 of Regulation No 604/2013, the content  of  which
           did not appear in Regulation No 343/2003.
           39      That recital states that, in order to ensure compliance
           with international  law,  the  effective  remedy  introduced  by
           Regulation No 604/2013 in respect of transfer decisions  should
           cover (i) the examination of the application of that  regulation
           and (ii) the examination of the legal and factual  situation  in
           the  Member  State  to  which  the  asylum  seeker  is   to   be
           transferred.
           40      While the second examination mentioned in that  recital
           refers only to the review of the  situation  prevailing  in  the
           Member State to which the applicant is to be transferred and  is
           designed to check that it is not impossible to proceed with  the
           transfer  of  the  applicant  for  the  reasons   set   out   in
           Article 3(2) of the regulation, the first examination mentioned
           in that recital is designed to ensure, more generally, review of
           the proper application of the regulation.
           41      It is apparent from the general  scheme  of  Regulation
           No 604/2013 that its application is based  essentially  on  the
           conduct  of  a  process  for  determining   the   Member   State
           responsible as designated by the criteria listed in Chapter  III
           of the regulation."
 177. Then at [44]-[53], the Grand Chamber continued:


           "44      Accordingly, the reference in recital 19 of Regulation
           No 604/2013 to  the  examination  of  the  application  of  the
           regulation in an appeal against a transfer  decision  for  which
           provision is made in Article 27(1) of the  regulation  must  be
           understood as being intended to ensure, in particular, that  the
           criteria for determining the Member State responsible laid  down
           in  Chapter  III  of  the  regulation  are  correctly   applied,
           including the criterion for determining responsibility  set  out
           in Article 12 of the regulation.
           45      That conclusion is supported by the general  thrust  of
           the developments  that  have  taken  place  in  the  system  for
           determining the Member State responsible for examining an asylum
           application made in  one  of  the  Member  States  ('the  Dublin
           system') as a result of the adoption of Regulation  No 604/2013
           and by the objectives of the regulation.
           46      Thus, with regard, first,  to  those  developments,  it
           should be noted that, as the EU legislature  has  introduced  or
           enhanced  various  rights  and   mechanisms   guaranteeing   the
           involvement of asylum seekers in the process for determining the
           Member State responsible, Regulation No 604/2013 differs, to  a
           significant degree,  from  Regulation  No 343/2003,  which  was
           applicable in the case  which  gave  rise  to  the  judgment  of
           10 December 2013 in Abdullahi (C-394/12, EU:C:2013:813).
           47      In the first place, Article 4 of Regulation No 604/2013
           confers a right on the applicant to be informed of, inter  alia,
           the criteria for determining the Member  State  responsible  and
           the relative importance of those criteria,  including  the  fact
           that an application for international protection lodged  in  one
           Member State may result in that Member State becoming the Member
           State responsible, even if that designation of responsibility is
           not based on those criteria.
           48      In the second place,  Article 5(1),  (3)  and  (6)  of
           Regulation No 604/2013 provides that the Member State  carrying
           out the determination of the Member State responsible must, in a
           timely manner and, in any event, before a transfer decision  has
           been taken, conduct a personal interview with the asylum  seeker
           and ensure that the applicant or the counsellor representing him
           has access to a written summary of the  interview.  Pursuant  to
           Article 5(2) of the regulation, the interview does not have  to
           take place if the applicant has already provided the information
           relevant to the determination of the  Member  State  responsible
           and, in that case, the Member State in question  must  give  the
           applicant the opportunity to  present  any  further  information
           which may be relevant  for  the  correct  determination  of  the
           Member State responsible before a decision is taken to  transfer
           the applicant.
           49      In the  third  place,  Section  IV  of  Chapter  VI  of
           Regulation No 604/2013, entitled 'Procedural safeguards',  sets
           out at considerable length the arrangements for the notification
           of transfer decisions  and  the  rules  governing  the  remedies
           available in respect of such decisions, matters which  were  not
           covered  with  the  same  degree   of   detail   in   Regulation
           No 343/2003.
           50      It is apparent from Article 27(3) to (6) of Regulation
           No 604/2013 that, in order to ensure that  those  remedies  are
           effective, the asylum seeker must,  inter  alia,  be  given  the
           opportunity to request within a  reasonable  period  of  time  a
           court or tribunal to suspend the implementation of the  transfer
           decision pending the outcome of his or her appeal and have legal
           assistance.
           51      It follows from the foregoing that the  EU  legislature
           did  not  confine  itself,  in  Regulation   No 604/2013,   to
           introducing  organisational  rules  simply  governing  relations
           between Member States for the purpose of determining the  Member
           State responsible, but decided to involve asylum seekers in that
           process by obliging Member States to inform them of the criteria
           for determining responsibility  and  to  provide  them  with  an
           opportunity  to  submit  information  relevant  to  the  correct
           interpretation of those criteria, and by  conferring  on  asylum
           seekers the right to an  effective  remedy  in  respect  of  any
           transfer decision that may be taken at the  conclusion  of  that
           process.
           52      As  regards,  second,  the  objectives  of  Regulation
           No 604/2013, it is apparent from recital 9 thereof that,  while
           it confirms the principles underlying  Regulation  No 343/2003,
           Regulation  No 604/2013  is  intended  to  make  the  necessary
           improvements, in the  light  of  experience,  not  only  to  the
           effectiveness of the Dublin system but also  to  the  protection
           afforded applicants under that system,  to  be  achieved,  inter
           alia, by the judicial protection enjoyed by asylum seekers.
           53      A restrictive interpretation of the scope of the remedy
           provided in Article 27(1) of Regulation No 604/2013 might, inter
           alia, thwart the attainment of that objective by  depriving  the
           other rights conferred on asylum seekers by that  regulation  of
           any practical  effect.  Thus,  the  requirements  laid  down  in
           Article 5  of  the  regulation  to  give  asylum  seekers  the
           opportunity to provide information  to  facilitate  the  correct
           application of the criteria for determining responsibility  laid
           down by the regulation and to ensure that such persons are given
           access to written summaries  of  interviews  prepared  for  that
           purpose would be in danger of being deprived  of  any  practical
           effect if it were not possible for an incorrect  application  of
           those criteria - failing, for example, to take account  of  the
           information provided by the asylum seeker - to  be  subject  to
           judicial scrutiny."


 178. At [61] the Grand Chamber stated its conclusion as follows:


           " In the light of all the foregoing considerations, the  answer
           to the first  question  is  that  Article 27(1)  of  Regulation
           No 604/2013, read in the light of recital 19 of the regulation,
           must be interpreted as meaning that, in a situation such as that
           in the main proceedings, an asylum seeker is entitled to  plead,
           in an appeal against a decision to transfer him,  the  incorrect
           application   of   one   of   the   criteria   for   determining
           responsibility laid down in Chapter III of  the  regulation,  in
           particular the criterion relating to the grant of a visa set out
           in Article 12 of the regulation."


 179. It is readily apparent to us that the Grand Chamber  accepted  that  a
      'transfer decision' could be challenged by an individual on the  basis
      that the 'criteria' determining responsibility for examining an asylum
      application had been wrongly or incorrectly applied.  The challenge is
      not limited to the legality of such a decision.  Further, it is  clear
      to us that the Grand Chamber envisaged  such  a  challenge  to  "cover
      questions of both fact and law" (at [36]).

 180. The decision in Ghezelbash was subsequently applied by  Grand  Chamber
      in Mengesteab.  The Grand Chamber accepted that the  remedy  envisaged
      by article 27  applied  to  allow  for  a  challenge  to  a  'transfer
      decision' even where the requested Member State  is  willing  to  take
      charge even after the time for making a TCR under Art 21 of the Dublin
      III Regulation has expired and the requesting state is deemed to  have
      taken responsibility.


 181. Having made extensive reference to  the  decision  in  Ghezelbash,  at
      [55], the Grand Chamber said this:


           "...in order to  satisfy  itself  that  the  contested  transfer
           decision was adopted following a proper application of the  take
           charge procedure laid down in that regulation, the court dealing
           with an action challenging a transfer decision must be  able  to
           examine the claims made by an asylum applicant  who  invokes  an
           infringement of the provisions set out in Article 21(1) of that
           regulation (see, by analogy, judgment of 7 June 2016, Karim, C-
           155/15, EU:C:2016:410, paragraph 26)."


 182. Then at [57], the CJEU said:


           "...it must  be  stated  that  Article 27  of  the  Dublin  III
           Regulation makes no distinction between the rules which  can  be
           relied on in the context of the remedy for  which  it  provides,
           and that recital 19 of that regulation refers, in general terms,
           to review the application of that regulation."


 183. Recognising the breadth of Art 27 in mandating a  judicial  remedy  in
      which the 'criteria' for responsibility can be  challenged,  the  CJEU
      added (at [58]-[62]):


           "58      Moreover, the restriction of the scope of the judicial
           protection afforded by the Dublin III Regulation  relied  on  in
           this respect would not be consistent with the objective, set out
           in recital 9 of that regulation, of strengthening the protection
           for  applicants  for  international   protection,   since   that
           strengthened protection is manifested principally by the  grant,
           in essence, of procedural safeguards for those applicants  (see,
           to that effect, judgment of 7 June 2016,  Ghezelbash,  C-63/15,
           EU:C:2016:409, paragraphs 47 to 51).
           59      The fact, mentioned by the referring court in its second
           question, that the requested Member State would  be  willing  to
           take charge of the person concerned despite the  expiry  of  the
           periods laid down in Article 21(1) of that regulation, cannot be
           decisive.
           60      Indeed, as the remedy provided for in Article 27(1) of
           the Dublin III  Regulation  can  be  applied,  as  a  matter  of
           principle, only in a situation where the requested Member  State
           has   accepted,   either   explicitly,   in   accordance    with
           Article 22(1)  of  that  regulation,  or   implicitly,   under
           Article 22(7) thereof, that fact cannot, in general, lead to  a
           limitation of the scope  of  judicial  review  provided  for  in
           Article 27(1) (see, to that effect, judgment  delivered  today,
           A.S., C-490/16, paragraphs 33 and 34).
           61      Moreover, as regards more specifically Article 21(1) of
           that regulation, it is necessary to point  out  that  its  third
           subparagraph provides, in the case of the expiry of the  periods
           laid down  in  the  two  preceding  subparagraphs,  for  a  full
           transfer of responsibility to the  Member  State  in  which  the
           application for international  protection  was  lodged,  without
           making that transfer subject to any reaction  by  the  requested
           Member State.
           62      In the light of all the foregoing  considerations,  the
           answer to the first and second questions is that  Article 27(1)
           of the Dublin III Regulation, read in the light  of  recital  19
           thereof, must be interpreted as meaning that  an  applicant  for
           international protection may rely, in the context of  an  action
           brought against a decision to transfer him, on the expiry  of  a
           period laid down in Article 21(1) of that regulation,  even  if
           the requested Member State is willing to  take  charge  of  that
           applicant."
 184. The decisions in AS and also Shiri v Bundesamt  fur  Fremdenwesen  und
      Asyl (Case C-2-1/16) [2018] 2 CMLR 3 (Grand Chamber, CJEU)  apply  and
      adopt the same approach and it is not  necessary  to  deal  with  them
      further.

 185. Mr Lewis submitted that the remedy envisaged by  article  27  did  not
      apply in this case  because  there  was  no  'transfer  decision'.   A
      refusal of a TCR did not result in such a decision.  Whilst Mr Lewis's
      submission is not without  some  force,  we  do  not  consider  it  is
      correct.


 186. We accept that, on a narrow reading, a 'transfer decision' will result
      from an application of the 'criteria' for responsibility, whether as a
      result of accepting a 'take back' request or a TCR or, indeed,  as  in
      Mengesteab as a 'deemed' acceptance following the expiry  of  a  time-
      scale set out in the Dublin III Regulation (see Mengesteab  at  [60]).
      Here, as a result, on this reading, at least, there  is  no  'transfer
      decision'. But, that narrow reading  is  not,  in  our  judgment,  the
      correct one.


 187. First, Recital (19) is, on its face, of broader import.  It recognises
      the need for an "effective remedy in respect  of  decisions  regarding
      transfers..." (our emphasis). In interpreting article 27, it is proper
      to have regard to the terms of any relevant recital. In our  judgment,
      a rejected TCR is itself a decision "regarding" a transfer.  The  fact
      that it does not lead to a transfer decision does not make it any  the
      less, as a matter of common sense, one "regarding" such a decision.


 188. Secondly, the  decisions  of  the  Grand  Chamber  in  Ghezelbash  and
      Mengesteab acknowledge both  the  breadth  of  recital  (19)  and  the
      judicial (effective) remedy envisaged in article  27.  If  Mr  Lewis's
      submission were correct, an individual would only be able to challenge
      the application of the 'criteria' for  determining  responsibility  in
      circumstances where that will lead to transfer. We  are  in  no  doubt
      that the Grand Chamber contemplated an individual  being  entitled  to
      challenge  the  correctness  in  application  of  the  'criteria'   to
      determine which Member State  is  responsible  under  the  Dublin  III
      Regulation whether the effect of the decision led to the  individual's
      transfer to another Member State or, as in this case, left him or  her
      in the Member State in which he or  she  currently  was  present.  The
      substance of  what  the  Court  considers  should  be  subject  to  an
      "effective remedy" is the application  of  the  'criteria'.   Were  it
      otherwise, as Ms Kilroy submitted, is it likely that those at the "top
      of the hierarchy', seeking family reunification such as the  applicant
      would be the individuals most likely to be deprived of any  "effective
      remedy".  We do not consider that can have been intended by the  CJEU.
      The distinction between the two situations leading to a difference  in
      an individual's ability to challenge  the  decision  taken  under  the
      Dublin III Regulations would, in our judgment,  be  arbitrary  and  is
      unwarranted.


 189. We reach that conclusion the basis of Art 27 and the approach  of  the
      Grand Chamber to it and having regard to Art  47,  CFR  (requiring  an
      "effective remedy") given the significant of 'family reunion'  in  the
      Dublin III Regulation involving a child.


   1. What, then, is the role of  the  Tribunal  in  these  proceedings?  In
      Ghezelbash, the Grand  Chamber  affirmed  that  the  effective  remedy
      "cover[s] questions of both fact and  law"  (at  [36]).  There  is  no
      suggestion that the court  or  tribunal  in  determining  whether  the
      criteria in the Dublin III Regulation have been "correctly" applied is
      limited to determining the legality of decision based upon public  law
      principles. We were not referred by either party to  any  passages  in
      the relevant CJEU decisions to suggest otherwise.


   2. We note, however, that the Advocate General (Sharpston) in  Ghezelbash
      did consider this issue in her opinion at [90]-[91]:


           "90.  Article 27(1) does not specify how that examination is  to
           be conducted. That is therefore a matter for the national  court
           to oversee pursuant to domestic procedural  rules.  Those  rules
           would also govern the intensity of the review  process  and  the
           outcome - that is, whether a successful challenge would  result
           in the application being  remitted  to  the  competent  national
           authorities for reconsideration,  or  whether  the  decision  is
           taken by the courts themselves, subject always to the  principle
           of effectiveness.
           91.      I therefore conclude that the  Dublin  III  Regulation
           should  be  interpreted  as  meaning  that  an   applicant   (in
           circumstances such as those in the main proceedings) is able  to
           challenge, on appeal or by review,  a  transfer  decision  under
           Article 27(1) and  to  request  the  national  court  to  verify
           whether the criteria in Chapter III have been correctly  applied
           in his case. The effectiveness of judicial review guaranteed  by
           Article  47  of  the  Charter  requires  an  assessment  of  the
           lawfulness of the grounds which were the basis of  the  transfer
           decision and whether  it  was  taken  on  a  sufficiently  solid
           factual basis. The manner in which the examination is  conducted
           as to  whether  the  Chapter  III  criteria  have  been  applied
           objectively and fairly in any particular  case  is  governed  by
           national  procedural  rules.  Subject  to   the   principle   of
           effectiveness, those rules also govern the intensity and outcome
           of the appeal or review process."
   3. We would make a number of observations.  First, the  Advocate  General
      does not state that Art 27 requires a full inquiry into the  facts  in
      relation to the application of the  Dublin  III  Regulation  criteria.
      Rather,  she  recognises  that  it  involved  the  assessment  of  the
      "lawfulness"  of  the  decision  and  whether  it  was  taken   on   a
      "sufficiently solid factual basis".  This is not  whole-heartedly  the
      language of a full merits appeal  for  which  Ms  Kilroy,  in  effect,
      contends  in  this  case.    Secondly,  rather  the  Advocate  General
      recognises the scope of the review is a matter for the domestic courts
      subject to their procedures.   Thirdly, however, the "review  process"
      must  have  the  appropriate  "intensity"  given  the   principle   of
      effectiveness.    Fourthly,   the   Advocate   General    specifically
      contemplated it being for the domestic courts to determine  whether  a
      successful challenge would result  in  the  decision-maker  (i.e.  the
      Secretary of State) to reconsider or result in the  court  taking  the
      "decision" itself.


   4. The Advocate General's opinion is far from an unambiguous statement of
      the approach that Ms Kilroy invites us to  take.   It  does,  however,
      provide some support for the view that the challenge is not restricted
      to legality alone in the  requirement  for  any  decision  to  have  a
      "sufficiently solid factual basis".  It is, perhaps, illuminating that
      the CJEU made no comment on this  aspect  of  the  Advocate  General's
      opinion, confining itself to stating, as we have pointed out, that the
      review  covers  "questions  of  fact  and  law".   That  may,  in  its
      simplicity be, in  effect,  an  unambiguous  acknowledgment  that  the
      individual must have the ability to challenge the application  of  the
      criteria not only as legally wrong, but also as factually  wrong.   We
      have concluded that it is.


   5. It is, of course, relatively rare for a court or tribunal to engage in
      a  factual  assessment  relevant  to  a  claim  in   judicial   review
      proceedings.   This  is  because  historically,  and  still   in   the
      generality of cases, judicial review is a challenge to the legality of
      a decision.  Only if the fact-finding is irrational (e.g.,  Edwards  v
      Bairstow [1956] AC 14) or there is a mistake of fact amounting  to  an
      error of law (e.g. E & R v SSHD [2004] EWCA Civ 49) will the facts be,
      so to speak, in issue.  The former basis  of  challenge  is  sometimes
      said to arise where there is "no evidence  to  support"  the  findings
      (see Edwards v Bairstow at p.36 per Lord Radcliffe); language which is
      reminiscent of the Advocate General in Ghezelbash when  she  spoke  of
      the transfer decision being "taken on  a  sufficiently  solid  factual
      basis".  Consequently, post-decision evidence is rarely relevant  and,
      therefore, admissible in judicial review proceedings.  The evidence is
      that which was before the decision-maker and the facts, if in dispute,
      are generally taken to be in the respondent's favour (see,  e.g.  R  v
      Board of Visitors of Hull Prison, ex parte St Germain (No 2) [1979]  1
      WLR 1401 at p.1410). An enquiry as  to  the  legality  of  a  decision
      rarely requires such evidence and the decision-maker  is  the  primary
      fact-finder (see e.g.  Anisminic  v  Foreign  Compensation  Commission
      [1969] 2 AC 147 per Lord Reid at p.182).  An example  where  this  may
      not be the case is where some procedural impropriety is  alleged  upon
      which evidence is required (see, e.g. Jones v Secretary of  State  for
      Wales [1995] 2 PLR 26 per Balcombe LJ at pp.30-32). Oral evidence  and
      cross-examination has, however, been potentially available in judicial
      review proceedings since 1977 (see RSC Ord 53 rule 8  and  O'Reilly  v
      Mackman [1983] 2  AC  237  per  Lord  Diplock  at  pp.282-3).   It  is
      available in principle in judicial review claims  in  the  High  Court
      (and the Upper Tribunal) (CPR 54.16 and  CPR  8.6(2)(3))  and  may  be
      ordered where it is just and fair to do so (see, e.g. R(Al-Sweady  and
      others) v Secretary of State for Defence [2009]  EWHC  2387(Admin)  at
      [20] and [29]).


   6. Consequently, there is no  insurmountable  procedural  obstacle  to  a
      factual enquiry  being  undertaken  in  judicial  review  proceedings.
      There are, indeed, cases where  the  tribunal  or  court  in  judicial
      review proceedings is drawn into deciding  the  facts.   Historically,
      the best illustration is that of the 'precedent fact' cases upon which
      Ms Kilroy placed reliance in this case.  Auburn, Moffet and  Sharland,
      Judicial Review: Principles  and  Procedure  (2013)  (at  para  20.23)
      summarise such cases as follows:


           "Parliament has provided that a public body's power or  duty  to
           act in  a  particular  way  depends  upon  the  existence  of  a
           particular factual situation and the public body's assessment of
           that factual situation is challenged, in certain cases the court
           will determine whether the relevant factual  situation  actually
           exists. In such cases, the court will not permit the public body
           to confirm itself power to act (or to deny itself power to  act)
           by an erroneous conclusion as to the relevant fact."


   7. Hence, where there is a power  to  remove  an  individual  who  is  an
      "illegal entrant" that power can only be exercised if  the  individual
      is in fact an "illegal entrant" and the latter  is  a  'precedent'  or
      'jurisdictional' fact which the court must for itself decide (see R  v
      SSHD, ex parte Khawaja  [1984] AC 74).


   8. A more recent illustration, relied upon by Ms Kilroy, may be  said  to
      arise  in  'age  assessment'  cases  where  the  legislation   imposes
      statutory powers upon a  local  authority  when  an  individual  is  a
      "child" in need. The issue of whether the individual is a child  is  a
      factual matter which the court or tribunal  must  decide  for  itself.
      That was decided by the Supreme Court in R(A)  v  Croydon  LBC  [2009]
      UKSC 8. Having set out the traditional approach to issues of  fact  in
      judicial review cases, Lady Hale (with whom Lords  Scott,  Walker  and
      Neuberger expressly agreed)  went  on  to  distinguish  the  issue  of
      whether an individual was a child at [27]-[32]:


           "27. But the question  whether  a  person  is  a  "child"  is  a
                different kind of question. There is  a  right  or  a  wrong
                answer. It may be difficult to determine  what  that  answer
                is. The decision-makers may have to do  their  best  on  the
                basis of less than perfect or conclusive evidence. But  that
                is true of many  questions  of  fact  which  regularly  come
                before the courts. That does not  prevent  them  from  being
                questions for the courts rather  than  for  other  kinds  of
                decision makers.
             1. The arguments advanced by Mr B�ar might have to  provide  an
                answer in cases where Parliament has not made its intentions
                plain. But in this case it appears to me that Parliament has
                done just that. In section  20(1)  a  clear  distinction  is
                drawn between the question whether there is a "child in need
                within their area" and the question whether  it  appears  to
                the local authority that the  child  requires  accommodation
                for one of the listed reasons. In  section  17(10)  a  clear
                distinction is drawn between whether the person is a "child"
                and whether that child is to be "taken to be" in need within
                the meaning of the Act. "Taken to be" imports an element  of
                judgment, even an element  of  deeming  in  the  case  of  a
                disabled child, which Parliament may well have  intended  to
                be left to the local authority rather than the courts.
             1. I reach those conclusions on the wording of the 1989 Act and
                without recourse to the additional argument, advanced by  Mr
                Timothy Straker QC for M, that  "child"  is  a  question  of
                jurisdictional or  precedent  fact  of  which  the  ultimate
                arbiters are the courts rather than the  public  authorities
                involved. This doctrine does, as Ward LJ pointed out in  the
                Court of Appeal [2008] EWCA Civ 1445, [2009] PTSR 1011, para
                19,   have   "an   ancient   and   respectable    pedigree".
                Historically, like the remedy of certiorari itself,  it  was
                applied to inferior courts  and  other  judicial  or  quasi-
                judicial bodies with  limited  jurisdiction.  Thus  a  tithe
                commissioner could not give himself jurisdiction  over  land
                which had previously been discharged from tithe  (Bunbury  v
                Fuller (1853) 9  Ex  111),  [1853]  EngR  768;  and  a  rent
                tribunal  could  not  give  itself  jurisdiction   over   an
                unfurnished letting (R v Fulham, Hammersmith and  Kensington
                Rent Tribunal, Ex p Zerek [1951] 2 KB 1). Although of course
                such a body would have to inquire into the facts in order to
                decide whether or not to  take  the  case,  if  it  got  the
                decision wrong, it could  not  give  itself  a  jurisdiction
                which it did not have.
             1. In R v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department,  Ex  p
                Khawaja [1984] AC 74, the same principle was applied to  the
                power of the Home Office to remove an "illegal entrant". The
                existence of the power of removal depended upon  that  fact.
                It was not enough that an immigration officer had reasonable
                grounds for believing the person to be an  illegal  entrant.
                As Lord Scarman put  it,  ".  .  .  where  the  exercise  of
                executive power depends upon the precedent establishment  of
                an objective  fact,  the  courts  will  decide  whether  the
                requirement has been satisfied" (p 110).
             1. This doctrine is not of recent origin or limited  to  powers
                relating to the liberty of the subject.  But  of  course  it
                still requires us  to  decide  which  questions  are  to  be
                regarded as setting the limits to the  jurisdiction  of  the
                public authority and which questions simply  relate  to  the
                exercise of that jurisdiction. This too must be  a  question
                of statutory construction,  although  Wade  and  Forsyth  on
                Administrative Law suggest that "As a general rule, limiting
                conditions stated in objective  terms  will  be  treated  as
                jurisdictional" (9th ed (2004), p  257).  It  was  for  this
                reason that Ward LJ rejected the argument, for  he  regarded
                the threshold question in section 20 as the composite one of
                whether the person was a "child in need".  This  was  not  a
                limiting condition stated in wholly objective terms so as to
                satisfy the Wade and Forsyth test (para 25).
             1.  However,  as  already  explained,  the  Act  does  draw   a
                distinction between a "child" and a "child in need" and even
                does so in terms which suggest that they are  two  different
                kinds of question. The word "child" is  undoubtedly  defined
                in wholly objective terms (however hard it may be to  decide
                upon the facts of the particular case). With a  few  limited
                extensions,  it  defines  the  outer   boundaries   of   the
                jurisdiction of both courts and local authorities under  the
                1989 Act. This is an Act for and  about  children.  If  ever
                there were a jurisdictional fact, it might be thought,  this
                is it."


   9. We set this out for two reasons.  First, it illustrates the point that
      a merits/factual review is not  unknown  in  the  public  law  sphere.
      Secondly, Ms Kilroy directly relies on this case and its adherence  to
      the 'precedent fact' approach and submits the present case is, itself,
      a 'precedent fact' case.  The analogy being  that  (1)  the  issue  of
      whether MS and MAS are brothers is a 'hard-edged' fact, capable  of  a
      "right or wrong answer";  and  (2)  the  question  of  the  'criteria'
      (following the Grand Chamber decisions)  has  not  been  left  to  the
      public body to decide.


  10. As will be clear from Lady Hale's judgment at [29], she  preferred  to
      decide the case, not  on  the  'jurisdictional'  or  'precedent  fact'
      basis, but rather as a matter of construction of the  legislation  and
      on the basis of her conclusion that Parliament had intended the courts
      to be the final  arbiters  of  the  'hard-edged'  fact  of  whether  a
      particular individual was a child.  Although, of course, as Lady  Hale
      commented at [32], the issue of whether  an  individual  was  a  child
      under the legislative scheme was quintessentially a  'precedent  fact'
      to the exercise of the local authority's power.


  11. In our judgment, the approach in the Croydon case provides  a  strong,
      and indeed compelling, basis for the approach taken  by  the  CJEU  in
      respect of Art 27 of the Dublin III Regulation and which  we  analysed
      above. The application of the hierarchy criteria  in  the  Dublin  III
      Regulation, in  particular  in  this  case  whether  MAS  and  MS  are
      brothers, is a 'hard-edged' fact. As the CJEU  jurisprudence  signals,
      whether  those  criteria  have  been  correctly  applied  is  intended
      ultimately to be a factual  issue  for  a  court  or  tribunal  to  be
      determine.


  12. Although we were invited to treat the  application  of  the  hierarchy
      criteria as being  a  'precedent'  or  'jurisdictional  fact',  it  is
      unnecessary for us to decide that issue given our view, based upon the
      CJEU's jurisprudence of the scope of Art 27.  Suffice it to say,  that
      there may not be an altogether easy analogy between  cases  where  the
      "fact" arises prior to, and  in  order  to  give  jurisdiction  to,  a
      decision-maker to exercise the power or duty vested in that  decision-
      maker and cases involving the hierarchy criteria under the Dublin  III
      Regulation where the criteria, in effect, are  likely  to  occupy  the
      whole of the decision-making required of the relevant State, here  the
      requested State in accepting a TCR.  But, as we say, it is unnecessary
      for us to decide this issue and we do not.


  13. Ms Kilroy also prayed in aid of her argument that we should decide the
      factual issue of the relationship between MS and  MAS,  the  case  law
      concerning a  court  or  tribunal's  role  in  determining  whether  a
      decision has breached an individual's human rights.  She,  of  course,
      placed reliance upon Art 8 of the ECHR  and  Art  7  of  the  CFR,  in
      particular (but not exclusively) the procedural/fairness dimension  of
      those provisions.  She reminded us that Art 47 of the CFR also creates
      an obligation to provide "an effective remedy"  for  breaches  of  the
      CFR.


  14. It is now well-recognised  that  an  "intense"  review  or,  arguably,
      merits assessment arises in cases where the judicial review  claim  is
      that the decision in determining whether the challenged decisions  are
      contrary to section 6 of the Human  Rights  Act  1998  (see,  e.g.,  R
      (Nasseri v SSHD [2009] UKHL 23, Bank Mellat  v  HM  Treasury  (no.  2)
      [2013] UKSC 38 and 39, and R (Lord Carlile of Berriew) v  SSHD  [2014]
      UKSC 60).  The court or tribunal must, for itself, determine whether a
      breach of the relevant Convention right has occurred.


  15. The principle was encapsulated by Underhill LJ in R(Caroopen &  Myrie)
      v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 1307, where he stated at [73] that:


           "... where the issue raised by a judicial  review  challenge  is
           whether there has been a breach of Convention rights, the  Court
           cannot confine itself  to  asking  whether  the  decision-making
           process was defective but must decide whether the  decision  was
           right."

  16. That language - whether the decision was "right" - echoes the approach
      of the CJEU to scope of the 'effective remedy' required by Art  27  of
      the Dublin III Regulation.
  17. In Belfast City Council v Miss Behavin' Ltd [2007] UKHL 19 Lady  Hale
      said, at [31]:
           "The role of the court in human  rights  adjudication  is  quite
           different from the role of the court  in  an  ordinary  judicial
           review of administrative action. In human  rights  adjudication,
           the court is concerned with whether  the  human  rights  of  the
           claimant have in fact  been  infringed,  not  with  whether  the
           administrative decision-maker properly took them into account."


  18. Consequently, where a breach of Art 8 is alleged, the court  must  for
      itself determine whether the challenged decision  is  a  proportionate
      interference  with  the  individual's  art  8  rights.   It   is   not
      constrained only to determine whether it  has  been  lawfully  applied
      (see, e.g, Miss Behavin' Ltd and R (SB) v Governors  of  Denbigh  High
      School [2006] UKHL 15).  It was this approach which was adopted by the
      UT in the HA case (at [53]-[56]).


  19. We do not consider that this approach  is  limited  to  the  issue  of
      proportionality under Art 8.2.  It must  also  apply  to  establishing
      that the right, upon which reliance is placed,  is  actually  engaged.
      We accept this approach must be applied to Art 8, whether relied  upon
      for its procedural/fairness' dimension or substantively.  It  was  not
      suggested before us that any different approach should be  applied  in
      respect of Art 7 of the CFR.  Whether, therefore, family  life  exists
      between MAS and MS based upon their claimed relationship  as  brothers
      is also a matter which a court or tribunal must determine for  itself.
      We reject Mr Lewis' submission that this, in effect,  puts  the  'cart
      before the horse'.  Only if the right is engaged can the court indulge
      in a merits review.  To say otherwise would  effectively  remove  from
      the court or tribunal in cases where  'engagement'  was  the,  or  an,
      issue, determination of a vital part of the  individual's  claim  that
      his Art 8 right was breached.  We see no basis in the case law for it.
       Indeed, in the Al-Sweady  case,  a  strongly  constituted  Divisional
      Court (Scott Baker LJ and Silber and Sweeney JJ) made plain  that  the
      factual enquiry extended in that case to the underlying facts  of  one
      individual's claim under Arts 2 and 3,  namely  whether  he  had  been
      killed on the battle-field or, as he alleged,  in  a  camp  under  the
      control of British forces in Iraq (see [16]).  The Court accepted that
      cross-examination of witnesses was necessary in order for the Court to
      resolve  that  'hard-edged'  factual  issue.   Mutatis  mutandis,   we
      conclude, so it was in this case for us to  resolve  the  'hard-edged'
      issue of fact of whether MAS and MS  are  related  as  claimed  as  an
      aspect of their reliance upon Art 8 of the ECHR (and Art 7, CFR).


  20. What we say, however, should not be taken as  an  open  invitation  to
      parties to urge the Tribunal (or a court) to review and determine  the
      facts in a Dublin case and, as a concomitant, to admit  oral  evidence
      subject to cross-examination (see the  useful  discussion  in  Auburn,
      Moffett and Sharland, op cit at paras 27-96 to 27.102).  First,  often
      there will be no factual dispute: the issue will be a legal one on the
      proper application of the Dublin III Regulation.   Secondly,  even  if
      there is a factual issue, the need to  assess  the  evidence  may  not
      always  mean  also  admitting  "oral"  evidence  subject   to   cross-
      examination.  It will only be so if  it  is  "necessary  in  order  to
      resolve the matter fairly  and  accurately"  (see  Al-Sweady  at  [2],
      quoting Tweed v Parades Commission for Northern Ireland  [2007]  1  AC
      650 at [3] per Lord Bingham).


  21. Consequently, we determine issue IV in the applicant's favour.


 DISCUSSION: (4) FURTHER FACTUAL ISSUES

  22. In the light of our  conclusion  on  the  scope  of  review  in  these
      proceedings, we turn to consider the written  and  oral  evidence  and
      state our findings and conclusions on that evidence (Issue VII)


  23. At the hearing Ms Helen O'Keeffe and Dr Susannah  Fairweather  adopted
      their Mental Health Assessment report dated 5 December 2017, and their
      second medical  report  dated  6  April  2018.  There  was  no  cross-
      examination by Mr Lewis of either Ms O'Keeffe or Dr Fairweather. Laura
      Diskin, a Field Co-ordinator for Safe Passage, a charity working  with
      unaccompanied  child  refugees  and  vulnerable  adults,  adopted  her
      statement and was not cross-examined. We shall refer to  the  evidence
      from Ms O'Keeffe, Dr Fairweather and Ms Diskin so far as is  necessary
      for our assessment of the relationship between MAS and the applicant.

  24. MAS, MOS and SS adopted their statements and gave their oral  evidence
      in the form of detailed  cross-examination  and  brief  re-examination
      under oath. We shall also  refer  to  their  evidence  so  far  as  is
      necessary to determine the nature  of  the  relationship  between  the
      applicant and MAS.

  25. The starting point for our factual assessment is the omission in  MAS'
      asylum application of any reference to the applicant. At  3.2  of  his
      Screening Interview, which required details of siblings,  there  is  a
      reference to 'No Siblings'. At 3.5 the interviewing officer wrote 'Not
      applicable' in relation  to  a  question  concerning  siblings.  Other
      sections of the Screening Interview included  confirmation,  supported
      by his signature, that MAS understood the  interpreter  and  that  the
      details he provided were understood  and  were  correct.  MAS'  asylum
      statement, prepared by his previous solicitors and signed and dated 22
      September 2006, asserted that he did not have  any  siblings,  and  no
      reference was made to any siblings when troops entered the family home
      in Afghanistan, when the applicant would have been a young  child.  We
      appreciate that these documents were completed some 12 years ago,  and
      that memory  may  fade  over  time.  MAS  maintains  that  he  has  no
      recollection of  the  answers  and  assertions  as  recorded.  He  was
      nevertheless assisted by a Pashtu interpreter and had the  benefit  of
      legal  assistance  during  his  asylum  application.  Moreover,  there
      appears little reason why, if he  did  have  siblings,  he  failed  to
      disclose the fact. We find this evidence goes some  way  to  undermine
      the claimed relationship. We note however that  the  asylum  statement
      was not signed by an interpreter confirming that it was read  back  to
      MAS, and, as he did not speak English at the time, it remains  unclear
      how he was able to approve its contents. This gives some  support  for
      the applicant's submission  that  the  previous  solicitors  may  have
      lifted the information contained in  the  asylum  statement  from  the
      screening interview.

  26. The letter MAS claims was written by a French lawyer and issued on his
      behalf on 31 July 2017 states  that  he  did  inform  an  interviewing
      officer that he had a 5-year-old brother, but was not asked to provide
      further details such as his brother's name. In  his  first  statement,
      dated 2 November 2017, MAS claimed he could not remember exactly  what
      he was asked  by  the  Home  Office  or  how  he  responded.  This  is
      inconsistent with the letter dated 31 July 2017, although we take into
      account MAS' claim that he did not write the letter  himself  and  did
      not check it before it was issued, as detailed in his second statement
      dated 17 November 2017, and his claim that  his  first  statement  was
      obtained by previous  solicitors  without  the  benefit  of  a  Pashtu
      interpreter. In his third statement, dated 8 February 2018,  MAS  says
      it was possible he was told by someone not to mention  his  family  to
      the Home Office during his asylum application, but that he simply  has
      no recollection. While we cannot discount the possibility that MAS may
      have been told not to mention his siblings, given  the  importance  of
      such advice, we find it more  likely  than  not  that  he  would  have
      recalled such advice.

  27. We nevertheless found MAS' oral evidence to be convincing. He gave his
      evidence under oath in  a  direct  and  clear  manner.  There  was  no
      hesitation in his answers and no perceptible attempt at embellishment.
      Indeed, he readily pointed out errors in translation of  the  WhatsApp
      messages that initially suggested the word 'Bro' has been used as term
      of  sibling  endearment.  We  consider  that  MAS  gave   a   credible
      explanation for the delay in visiting the applicant.  His  account  of
      being turned away at the ferry port in Dover in August 2017 because he
      did not have a Schengen visa is detailed, plausible  and  corroborated
      by MOS. In oral evidence he explained his belief that  it  would  take
      time to obtain a Schengen visa and his belief that the applicant would
      be allowed to enter the UK and that he did not, as a  result,  seek  a
      visa. On being married to MOS he was able to enter  France  without  a
      visa. Given that MOS has twin two-year olds (in addition to two  older
      children), we do not find it incredible that she would not  visit  the
      applicant on her own,  especially  given  the  language  barrier.  The
      account given by  MAS  of  his  reunion  with  the  applicant  at  the
      accommodation centre  in  France  was  both  detailed  and  inherently
      plausible.

  28. We have carefully considered the evidence of contact and communication
      between the applicant and MAS.  We  accept  that  the  money  transfer
      receipts and phone top-ups sent by MAS do not identify  the  applicant
      as the recipient, but this is hardly surprising given the  applicant's
      lack of ID documents. We do not find it  implausible  that  MAS  would
      send funds to the  applicant  via  third  persons  identified  by  the
      applicant and based  on  trust.  Several  of  the  references  in  the
      WhatsApp messages refer to transfers of  money,  which  is  consistent
      with the applicant financially relying on MAS. The  transfer  receipts
      cover a wide period of time and the transfer of  funds  suggests  some
      responsibility on  the  part  of  MAS  for  the  applicant's  welfare,
      suggesting there is a relationship  between  the  applicant  and  MAS,
      although, as Mr Lewis points out, it could be a  more  distant  family
      relationship or even a relationship based on friendship. The  WhatsApp
      text  messages  are  poorly  translated  but  once  again  indicate  a
      relationship, as do the media messages and  photographs  sent  by  the
      applicant and MAS to each other, although,  once  again  they  do  not
      disclose the exact nature of the relationship.

  29. We note that the applicant and MAS have  consistently  asserted  their
      relationship as siblings, and that MAS has consistently written of his
      knowledge of, and affection  for,  the  applicant,  and  his  concerns
      relating to the applicant's welfare. While  the  mere  consistency  of
      assertions  does  not  render  those   assertions   true,   they   are
      nevertheless factors we find we are entitled to take into account  'in
      the round' when assessing the nature of the disputed relationship.  We
      additionally note that both MAS and the  applicant  have  consistently
      indicated their willingness to undertake DNA  testing,  and  that  the
      applicant has, according  to  the  medical  reports,  become  somewhat
      fixated on obtaining DNA evidence to  prove  his  relationship.  Their
      willingness to undertake  DNA  testing,  in  circumstances  where  the
      inability to do so is not a result of  their  actions,  is  a  further
      factor we take into account.

  30. The applicant relies on a photograph said  to  show  him  and  MAS  in
      Pakistan in 2009 when MAS visited the country to see  his  family.  We
      caution ourselves of the inherent danger in  comparing  an  individual
      said to  appear  in  photographs  taken  some  8  to  9  years  apart,
      especially if the individual is a child. We are nevertheless satisfied
      that the person appearing in the photograph said to date from 2009  is
      the applicant. We base this conclusion on the similarity  in  features
      between  the  person  appearing  in  the  2009  photograph   and   the
      photographs taken when MAS and the applicant met in  France  in  March
      2018.  While  we  remind  ourselves  that  the  photograph  does   not
      demonstrate that the applicant and MAS are siblings, it is capable  of
      supporting  the  claimed  relationship  as  it  indicates   that   the
      relationship has been maintained for some years. We are not  confident
      that we can discern a family resemblance  between  the  applicant  and
      MAS, although we cannot entirely discount the possibility.

  31. We found MOS to be an honest and  persuasive  witness.  She  gave  her
      evidence, on oath, in an  open  and  direct  manner  and  without  any
      perceptible attempt at embellishment. Her oral evidence was consistent
      with her two statements and consistent with the evidence of  MAS.  Her
      evidence was detailed and plausible, although we bear in mind that she
      is unable to speak Pashtu and would not be privy to the  conversations
      between the applicant and MAS. In considering MOS' evidence we  remind
      ourselves of the relationship between her and MAS and the  possibility
      of bias. MOS confirmed in her written and oral evidence that  MAS  has
      spoken about the applicant many times over the  years.  She  has  also
      regularly heard MAS speaking to his family about  the  applicant,  and
      witnessed MAS speaking to both his mother and  the  applicant  on  the
      telephone during the  same  call.  She  is  aware  that  MAS  and  the
      applicant speak frequently and that MAS sends him money. She  confirms
      the abortive attempt to visit him in  August  2017  and  that  MAS  is
      worried about the applicant and  feels  responsibility  for  him.  She
      makes the valid point that it would  be  difficult  for  MAS  to  have
      pretended to have a brother over the years of  her  relationship  with
      MAS. In her view, it is "obvious"  that  the  applicant  and  MAS  are
      related. MOS gave a detailed and plausible description of the  adverse
      emotional impact of the respondent's decision  on  both  MAS  and  the
      applicant, based on her own knowledge, and cited, as an  example,  the
      manner in which MAS was affected during  Ramadan  when  the  applicant
      would not answer his telephone. We have noted that MOS is  willing  to
      have the applicant  live  with  her  children,  and  the  photographic
      evidence showing MOS and three of her children with the applicant  and
      MAS in Disneyland Paris. Having found MOS to be an  entirely  credible
      witness, we  are  satisfied  that  she  genuinely  believes  that  the
      applicant and MAS are brothers, and that she  has  described  a  solid
      basis for this conclusion.

  32. SS also gave oral evidence on oath. In his asylum interview in 2004 he
      twice mentioned that his uncle (the father of MAS) had a son  and  two
      daughters. This tends to undermine the claimed relationship,  although
      he did mention that MAS had two sisters which,  although  inconsistent
      with MAS' account during his asylum application,  is  consistent  with
      his subsequent  claim  to  have  two  sisters.  SS'  asylum  interview
      occurred  in  2004,  some  13  years  before  the  respondent's  first
      decision. He claims to not remember why he mentioned his uncle  having
      one son, but that he was under a lot of stress at the time and it  may
      have been because the applicant was so young. This explanation is  not
      outside the realms of possibility and we cannot discount it  as  being
      untrue. It is apparent from the photographs taken in 2015 in Pakistan,
      clearly showing the applicant and SS together, that there is likely to
      be some type of relationship between them, and there was no  challenge
      to SS' evidence that he continues to speak to the  applicant  once  or
      twice a week, or his evidence that the applicant has cried and  become
      angry and frustrated during their conversations. We also note that  SS
      is willing to undertake a DNA test. Other than the omission to mention
      the applicant in his asylum interview, we found  SSs  evidence  to  be
      generally consistent with that the MAS and MOS.

  33. Laura Diskin has worked with the applicant since August 2017  and  has
      visited him at his accommodation on a number of occasions. She records
      the applicant's frustration and distress at being  reunited  with  MAS
      and observed MAS and  the  applicant  tougher,  describing  that  they
      interacted in a  familiar  way  and  had  a  family  resemblance.  The
      applicant was clearly pleased to see MAS and was emotional. We have no
      doubt that Ms Diskin believes the applicant and MAS are brothers,  but
      we remind ourselves that  her  evidence  may  reflect  a  relationship
      between the applicant and MAS that is one other than that of siblings,
      although her evidence  does  provide  some  support  for  the  claimed
      relationship.

  34. We have already considered the evidence  contained  in  Ms  O'Keeffe's
      Mental Health Assessment dated 5 December 2017 above at paragraphs 168
      and 169 which partly attributed the applicant's  emotional  state  and
      distress to being separated from MAS. In her updated report,  dated  6
      April 2018, which was again supervised by Dr Fairweather, Ms  O'Keeffe
      describes there being an "immediate and high risk"  of  the  applicant
      self-harming due to  the  severe  stress  of  his  situation  (he  had
      previously cut himself). There was said to be a deterioration  in  his
      mental state. She described how the applicant immediately asked her to
      conduct a DNA test, that he was preoccupied with  this,  and  that  he
      constantly asked Ms Diskin to arrange a DNA test. Ms O'Keeffe was able
      to observe the applicant and MAS and his family together on  14  March
      2018. The applicant described himself as being very happy to  see  MAS
      and Ms O'Keeffe described how he appeared  happier  and  more  relaxed
      with MAS and MOS. She observed the applicant and  MAS  behaving  in  a
      "natural, close and trusting manner towards each other." MAS  appeared
      genuinely worried for the applicant's well-being and there was nothing
      in his interaction with the applicant that caused Ms O'Keeffe to doubt
      they had a close and supportive relationship. The applicant  described
      feeling a sense of injustice  as  to  not  being  believed  about  his
      relationship with MAS and met the criteria  for  PTSD.  There  was  no
      challenge to Ms O'Keeffe's evidence. We remind ourselves that she only
      observed  the  applicant  and  MAS  on  one  occasion,  and  that  the
      description of their interaction could equally  apply  to  cousins  or
      more  distant  relatives.  We  nevertheless  find  the  Mental  Health
      Assessment  Update  to  provide   some   support   for   the   claimed
      relationship.

  35. The applicant relies on a Taskira that the respondent maintains has  a
      Form Number  '884363'.  This  was  the  Form  Number  checked  by  the
      Afghanistan Central  Civil  Registration  Authority  at  the  National
      Identity Verification Centre and which found there was no  match  with
      any records. In email correspondence the  applicant's  representatives
      maintain that the relevant reference number is in  fact  '88/363'.  We
      were shown the most legible copy of  the  Taskira  but  we  could  not
      easily discern whether the figure in contention was a '4'  or  a  '/'.
      Regrettably, no specimen or standard form evidence  was  provided.  We
      find we cannot place any reliance  on  the  Taskira  produced  by  the
      applicant, but nor are we satisfied that it is a false document.

  36. We have approached the evidence described above in a holistic  manner.
      We accord due weight  to  the  significant  omission  in  MAS'  asylum
      application of any mention of a sibling, and the other factors  relied
      on by the respondent in her decision  dated  12  March  2018.  We  are
      nevertheless persuaded, having particular regard to the evidence  from
      MOS, the willingness of the applicant and MAS to undergo DNA  testing,
      taken in conjunction with the evidence of continued communication  and
      support provided by MAS, that they are brothers and not more distantly
      related.




 REMEDY


  37. For the reasons given in paragraphs 158 to 169  above,  we  quash  the
      respondent's decisions dated 27 July 2017,  21  August  2017,  and  12
      March 2018. The respondent has not  yet  made  a  lawful  decision  in
      response to the TCRs issued by France.

  38. We have found that the applicant and MAS are brothers. Under Art 8  of
      the Dublin III Regulation, read in conjunction with Art 3 of the  2003
      Regulation, it remains for the respondent to consider whether it is in
      the applicant's best interests, as a minor, for his asylum application
      to be examined by the UK.


  39. Given that the TCRs remain outstanding awaiting a lawful assessment in
      accordance with  our  judgment,  it  is  not  appropriate  to  make  a
      mandatory order requiring the respondent to accept the TCRs and  grant
      the applicant entry clearance.


                       [pic]
            Signed:


                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb


        Dated:         19 July 2018
