
AZ (rule 57(iv):"external student" - overseas degree) Pakistan [2010] UKAIT
00001


                       ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL

Heard at:   Procession House
On:         18th December 2009


Before:
                      Senior Immigration Judge Freeman
                       Senior Immigration Judge McKee

Between:
                                     AZ
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     Entry Clearance Officer, Islamabad
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:     Mr A Rehman of Mayfair Solicitors

For the respondent:    Miss Z Kiss, Senior Presenting Officer

Although the IDIs are not themselves a guide to the  interpretation  of  the
Rules, a construction of rule 57(iv)  alternative  to  that  adopted  in  YS
(India) [2009] UKAIT 15 is suggested by  them,  and  of  the  definition  of
'external student' at rule 6, is possible, and, as it both agrees  with  the
Home Office view and avoids the unfortunate effect of  the  construction  in
YS (India), it is to be preferred.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.  On 6th  August  2008  the  appellant  was  refused  entry  clearance  to
undertake an  18-month  course  at  Essex  College  (situated,  surprisingly
perhaps, in Wembley) leading to a Master's degree to be awarded by  Barbican
University.  This university is based in the United States of  America,  but
that is not why the application was refused.  Rather,  the  sole  ground  of
refusal was that Essex College was not itself a degree-awarding body,  while
the  appellant  was  not  enrolled  as  an  external  student  at   Barbican
University.  It would  seem  that  the  ECO  either  did  not  realize  that
Barbican University is not a British university, or did not think that  this
was relevant.  At any rate, the immigration rule  cited  in  the  Notice  of
Refusal was paragraph 57(iv), and it is the correct interpretation  of  that
rule which is the only issue in the present appeal.  Rule 57(iv),  which  in
its present form was introduced on 19th April 2007, makes it  a  requirement
for someone seeking leave to enter  as  a  student  that  "if  he  has  been
accepted  to  study  externally  for  a  degree  at  a   private   education
institution, he is also registered  as  an  external  student  with  the  UK
degree awarding body."

2.  When the appeal came before Immigration Judge Ruth on 26th  March  2009,
the case of YS (paragraph 57(iv) : "external student")  India  [2009]  UKAIT
15 had only just been reported, and Mr  Rehman,  who  also  represented  the
appellant before us, very properly handed a copy of  that  determination  to
the judge, who was not familiar with it.  Both Mr Rehman and Mr Harold,  the
Presenting Officer, took the position that, because Barbican  University  is
not a UK degree awarding body, rule 57(iv) did not apply  to  the  appellant
at all.  Reference was made to Chapter  3,  Section  3  of  the  Immigration
Directorates' Instructions ('IDIs'), which deals at 13.5 with the  topic  of
'External Students'.  After noting that from 19th April 2007 a new  category
of 'external student' was introduced into paragraph 57  of  the  Immigration
Rules  (and  defined  at  paragraph  6,  the  Interpretation  Section),  the
guidance goes on to explain that if a  student  is  enrolled  at  a  private
college (which is not itself a 'listed body') and is  aiming  for  a  degree
awarded by a recognized UK university, he must be registered as an  external
student with that university.  The example is given  of  London  University,
which has long issued degrees to students  who  have  studied  for  them  at
private educational institutions.  The crucial passage for our  purposes  is
this:

      "It [i.e. the new  requirement]  does  not  apply  to  those  external
      students at a private education institution in the United Kingdom  who
      are studying for a degree awarded by an overseas university."

3.  Initially, IJ Ruth agreed  with  the  joint  position  adopted  by  both
parties, and indicated that, as the ECO was satisfied about  all  the  other
requirements of rule 57, he would allow  the  appeal.   After  the  hearing,
however, a closer reading of YS (India) induced  the  judge  to  change  his
mind.  The Deputy Presidential panel in that case had compared  the  wording
of rule 57(iv) with the definition of 'external student'  at  rule  6  ~  "a
student studying for a degree from a UK degree  awarding  body  without  any
requirement to attend the UK degree awarding body's premises or a UK  Listed
Body's premises for lectures and tutorials" ~ and concluded  that  a  person
intending to study at a private institution for a degree awarded by  another
body could only satisfy the requirements of rule 57(iv) by registering  with
a UK degree awarding body.

4.  The judge acknowledged that the IDIs said the opposite, but he  observed
(rightly) that the IDIs are not conclusive as to the correct  interpretation
of the Immigration Rules.  In the instant case, the Tribunal had  adopted  a
different interpretation, and that was  the  one  which  he  felt  bound  to
follow.  The appeal therefore fell to be dismissed.

5.  A review was sought, arguing essentially  that  the  guidance  given  to
Home  Office  caseworkers  was  right,  and  the  Tribunal  wrong,  in   the
interpretation  of  rule  57(iv).   Senior  Immigration   Judge   Goldstein,
however, reiterated the point that  the  IDIs  are  no  more  than  internal
guidance for Home Office officials and can in no sense bind the Tribunal  in
the matter of the correct interpretation of the Rules.  The application  for
a review was then renewed to  the  High  Court,  and  on  8th  October  2009
Christopher Symons QC, sitting as a deputy judge of the High Court,  ordered
reconsideration on the basis that the appellant's submissions may have  been
right.  Thus it is that the matter comes before us.

6.  At the 'first stage' of the reconsideration, both representatives  again
adopted the joint position that rule 57(iv) does not apply  to  students  at
private institutions studying for overseas  degrees.   They  invited  us  to
depart from the 'reported' decision in YS (India) and, although it  is  only
with great hesitation that we would venture  to  hold  that  that  case  was
wrongly decided, we have come to the conclusion that it was.   We  give  our
reasons briefly below.

7.  Like Immigration Ruth before them, the Deputy Presidential panel  in  YS
initially thought that, on its face, rule 57(iv) was  apt  to  exclude  from
its ambit those students studying for an  overseas  degree.   They  did  not
accept a submission from the Presenting Officer  that  the  phrase  "the  UK
degree awarding body" was to be read as "a UK degree awarding  body",  which
might have  yielded  the  meaning  for  which  the  Presenting  Officer  was
arguing.  Ironically, as Miss Kiss pointed out to  us,  the  HOPO  seems  to
have been unaware that, by submitting  that  rule  57(iv)  catches  students
studying for overseas degrees, he  was  arguing  against  the  Secretary  of
State's own view of what rule 57(iv) means.  This,  we  remark,  is  not  an
unprecedented phenomenon.  The upshot was that, as he was evidently  unaware
that the IDIs had something to say on the topic, the HOPO did not  draw  the
Tribunal's attention to Chapter 3, Section 3, paragraph 13.5  of  the  IDIs,
which we have set out above.  The appellant's representative also  neglected
to check up on the IDIs.

8.  What prompted the panel to change  their  minds  was  the  discovery  of
another relevant passage which was not brought to  their  attention  at  the
hearing.  This was the definition of 'external student' at  paragraph  6  of
the Immigration Rules, which we have also reproduced above.   In  the  light
of paragraph 6, the panel  thought  that  rule  57(iv)  must  apply  to  any
student studying externally for a degree, which would mean  that  one  could
only be an 'external student' if one was studying  for  a  UK  degree.   The
effect of that was that overseas students would be prohibited from  studying
at private education  institutions  in  the  United  Kingdom  if  they  were
studying for overseas degrees.  The panel could not see the point  of  that,
as overseas students can study at private colleges for other  qualifications
- diplomas, certificates, or whatever - awarded by  overseas  bodies.   What
purpose would be served  by  preventing  them  from  studying  for  overseas
degrees?

9.  The misgivings plainly felt by the Deputy  Presidential  panel  indicate
to us that a different  reading  of  rule  57(iv)  may  be  possible.   What
clinches it is that the panel's interpretation of the rule  was  reached  in
ignorance of the relevant IDI.  It is, of course, trite that  the  IDIs  are
not to be taken as giving the authoritative construction of the Rules.   But
as Lord Justice Sedley pointed out in ZH (Bangladesh)  [2009]  EWCA  Civ  8,
while the IDIs are not to be treated as an aid to the  construction  of  the
Rules, they have "a legitimate bearing" on the Rules, and judges should  not
"adjudicate in ignorance" of them.  If we take the IDIs  into  account  when
looking at rule 57(iv) and the definition of 'external student' in  rule  6,
we can reach an interpretation which avoids the  odd  result  deprecated  by
the panel in YS (India).

10.  The definition of  'external  student'  in  paragraph  6  makes  him  a
student studying for a  degree  from  "a  UK  degree  awarding  body".   The
indefinite article in that phrase, in contrast to the definite article  used
in rule 57(iv), prompted the panel in YS to conclude that one could only  be
an external student if one's degree was to come from a UK  university.   But
in our view, the centrality of that  phrase  allows  the  definition  to  be
construed in the opposite way.  A student is only an 'external  student'  if
he is studying for a degree from a UK degree-awarding body.  If  he  is  not
studying for a degree from a UK degree awarding body, he is not an  external
student.  For the purposes of the Immigration Rules, 'external  student'  is
a term of art,  embracing  a  smaller  class  of  students  than  all  those
studying externally for something.

11.  That construction, we think, both accords with the  meaning  which  the
Home Office evidently intended the new rule to have  when  paragraph  57(iv)
was introduced, and avoids the bizarre  effect  of  the  reading  which  the
panel in YS (India) felt compelled to adopt.  This being the only  issue  in
the present appeal, it follows that the appellant succeeds.


DECISION

A fresh decision is substituted, to allow the appeal.



Richard McKee

