
SS and Others (Sovereign immunity claim - Certificate conclusive) Malaysia
[2009] UKAIT 00007

                                             Asylum and Immigration Tribunal

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Taylor House                         |                             |
|On 27 January 2009                            |                             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before
                        SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE WARR
                          IMMIGRATION JUDGE BREWER

                                   Between

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                   ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - KUALA LUMPUR
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    I A Macdonald QC, instructed by Grange & Castle,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    D Manknell of Counsel, instructed by the Treasury
Solicitors

Where an appellant  claims  State  immunity  a  certificate  issued  by  the
Secretary of State under s.21 of the State Immunity Act  is  conclusive  and
may not be questioned by the Tribunal.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    The appellants are citizens of  Malaysia.   They  seek  to  enter  the
    United Kingdom as part of the entourage of the Sultan of  Pahang.   The
    first three named  appellants  are  police/security  officers  and  the
    remaining appellants are household staff.  The individual circumstances
    of the appellants do not matter for reasons that  will  appear.   Their
    applications for entry clearances were refused  under  paragraphs  159A
    and 320(11) and (12) of HC 395.  Taking the circumstances of the  first
    named appellant as an example, he was born on  19  September  1959  and
    applied for an entry clearance on 14 February 2008 which was refused on
    15 February 2008.  In refusing  the  application  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer noted that the appellant had previously applied  for  an  entry
    clearance on 24 April 2007 as a domestic worker.  When he was called to
    attend an interview in connection with this application he withdrew it,
    obtaining a new passport on 4 May 2007 on which  he  travelled  to  the
    United Kingdom.  He was admitted to the United Kingdom as a visitor  on
    5 May 2007 and 23 July 2007 although he had stated that he had in  fact
    been accompanying his employer, the Sultan, on  those  occasions.   The
    appellant's previous passport indicated he had previously  entered  the
    United Kingdom as a domestic worker and  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer
    drew the inference that there had been a calculated attempt to  deceive
    the Immigration Officer in the United Kingdom as to his intentions  and
    immigration history.  The respondent:

        "was not satisfied on the balance of probabilities  that  you  have
        not worked when you previously entered the UK as a visitor and that
        you have not employed deception to gain entry to the UK.  Paragraph
        320(11) and (12).   These  are  normally  grounds  on  which  entry
        clearance to the UK should be  refused.   I  have  considered  your
        application carefully taking into account the statement  from  your
        employer but I am not satisfied that this is an adequate  basis  to
        satisfy  these  provisions  of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  I  am
        therefore not prepared to exercise discretion in your favour."

2.     The  case  was  reviewed  on  28  July  2008  and  the  decision  was
    maintained.  In paragraph 6 of the explanatory statement it was  stated
    as follows:

        "The appellant's representative has suggested that  he  is  serving
        staff of a 'sovereign or head of  state',  HRH  Sultan  of  Pahang.
        However HRH Sultan of Pahang is  one  of  nine  sultans  of  states
        comprising Malaysia.  There is a king or  Agong  who  is  nominated
        from one of these sultanates and I would  therefore  consider  that
        this immunity would apply only to the head of  state  of  Malaysia,
        the Agong, and not to the other state sultans."

3.    The Entry Clearance Officer noted that the appellant had applied as  a
    domestic worker and had been assessed as such.

4.    In the grounds of appeal it was contended that  the  appellant  was  a
    member of the serving staff of a sovereign or head of state (the Sultan
    of Pahang) and was accordingly immune from immigration control and  the
    respondent had been wrong to conclude that the appellant was coming  to
    work in the United Kingdom within the meaning of the Immigration Rules.
     An amended skeleton argument was served on 14 August 2008 stating that
    the main ground of appeal concerned sovereign immunity and each of  the
    appellants were entitled to immunity from the  immigration  laws  under
    section 8(3) of the Immigration Act 1971 read with section  20  of  the
    State Immunity Act 1978.  The submissions of the six appellants were:


        "premised on the fact that the  Sultan  is  entitled  to  sovereign
        immunity.  This needs to be evidenced by a  letter  or  certificate
        from the Secretary of State for the Foreign and Commonwealth Office
        (FCO) and the submissions were premised on the fact  that  adequate
        proof of exemption is to hand."

5.    On  10  November  2008  the  Head  of  Protocol  at  the  Foreign  and
    Commonwealth Office certified that

        "Pahang is a constituent territory of Malaysia which is  a  federal
        state;


        Haji Ahmad Shah, Al-Musta'in Billah ibni Almarhum Sultan Abu  Bakar
        Ri'Ayatuddin Al-Mu'Adzam Shah is the Sultan  of  the  territory  of
        Pahang and is not the Head of State of Malaysia;


        His Majesty Al-Wathiqu Billah Tuanku Mizan Zainal Abidin  Ibni  Al-
        Marhum Sultan Mahmud Al-Muktafi Billah Shah is the Head of State of
        Malaysia."

6.    By virtue of Section 21 of the State Immunity Act 1978:

        "A certificate by or on behalf of the Secretary of State  shall  be
        conclusive evidence on any question -


        (a)      whether any country is a State for the purposes of Part  1
             of this act, whether any territory is a  constituent  territory
             of a federal State for those purposes or as to  the  person  or
             persons to be regarded  for  those  purposes  as  the  head  or
             government of a State..."

7.    Mr Macdonald in his submissions  relied  on  his  re-amended  skeleton
    argument and confirmed that the concern was  not  with  the  individual
    appellants and the issues were almost entirely legal  ones.   When  the
    Sultan visited the United Kingdom he  required  security  and  domestic
    staff.  The starting point was the Secretary  of  State's  certificate.
    The certificate was right "as far as it goes and only so far as it goes
    it was conclusive".

8.    The Sultan of Pahang was not the Head of the State of  Malaysia.   The
    position in Malaysia was that the duties of Head of State circulated  -
    he had once been Head of State but was unlikely, in view of his age, to
    be Head of State again.  The real issue was whether the Sultan was  the
    sovereign Head of the State of Pahang.  He clearly was under  Malaysian
    law the Head of State entitled to immunity and Mr Macdonald  relied  on
    the opinion of the Attorney General  of  Malaysia.  Sovereign  immunity
    could extend to the constituent states of  a  country  with  a  federal
    constitution.  Reference was  made  to  the  Immigration  Directorate's
    Instructions referred to  in  paragraphs  17  to  20  of  the  skeleton
    argument as re-amended.

9.    Mr  Macdonald  referred  to  Mellenger  v  New  Brunswick  Development
    Corporation [1971] 2 All ER 593 where the Court of Appeal held that the
    province of New Brunswick was a sovereign state in its  own  right  and
    entitled to claim sovereign immunity.  The situation  in  Malaysia  was
    very similar although it was acknowledged that some of the  authorities
    relied  on  by  the  Attorney  General  in  his  opinion  predated  the
    Federation  of  Malaysia  and  the  1978  Act  but  were   nevertheless
    informative.

10.   Mr Manknell submitted that  the  respondent  did  not  object  to  the
    matter being dealt with under section 84(e) of  the  2002  Act  on  the
    basis that it was argued that the decision being challenged was not  in
    accordance   with   the   law.    The   certificate,    however,    was
    unchallengeable.   It  was  accepted  by  the   appellants   that   the
    certificate was conclusive of the matters contained in the certificate.
     The Secretary of State was not in a position to dispute  the  evidence
    that the Sultan was entitled to immunity under Malaysian domestic  law.
    Reliance was placed by the  appellants  on  section  20  of  the  State
    Immunity Act and it was accepted that Pahang constituted a state within
    a federal territory.

11.   It was submitted that the appellants were either entitled to  immunity
    or they were not.   He  referred  to  section  14(1)(a)  of  the  State
    Immunity Act which reads as follows:

        "(1)     The immunities and privileges conferred by  this  Part  of
             the Act apply to any foreign or commonwealth State  other  than
             the  United  Kingdom;  and  references  to  a   State   include
             references to -


             (a)  the sovereign or other head of that State  in  his  public
                 capacity;..."

12.   Counsel submitted that it was clear that in the absence  of  an  Order
    in Council no part of Part 1 of  the  State  Immunity  Act  apart  from
    section 12 would apply to the  constituent  territories  of  a  federal
    state and in support of that submission  he  relied  on  section  14(5)
    which reads as follows:

        "Section 12 above applies to proceedings  against  the  constituent
        territories of a federal State; and Her Majesty  may  by  Order  in
        Council provide for the other provisions of this Part of  this  Act
        to apply to any such constituent territory specified in  the  Order
        as they apply to a State."

13.   Counsel submitted that there  were  only  two  Orders  in  Council  in
    effect and they applied to the constituent territories of  Austria  and
    Germany respectively.  Section 12 related to the service of process and
    judgments in default of appearance.

14.   The certificate was conclusive and the Sultan was not a  sovereign  or
    head of State and there was no Order in Council providing otherwise and
    that was the end of the matter.  Section 20 provided:

        "(1)     Subject to the provisions  of  this  Section  and  to  any
             necessary modifications, the  Diplomatic  Privileges  Act  1974
             shall apply to -


             (a)  a sovereign or other head of State;


             (b)  members of his family forming part of his household; and


             (c)  his private servants,


             as it applies to the head of a diplomatic mission,  to  members
             of his family forming part of his household and to his  private
             servants....


        (5)      This Section applies to the sovereign or other head of any
             State on which immunities and privileges are conferred by  Part
             1 of this Act and it is without prejudice to the application of
             that Part to any such sovereign or head of State in his  public
             capacity."

15.   Counsel submitted that the Sultan of Pahang could not be  a  sovereign
    or other head of State on which immunities were  conferred  by  Part  1
    because he was not head of State  as  confirmed  by  the  Secretary  of
    State's certificate.  Sovereign was a sub-category of heads  of  State.
    One could not be a sovereign without being a head of State.

16.   Counsel submitted that the Diplomatic  Privileges  Act  1964  did  not
    take matters any further since it had not been argued by the appellants
    that they were members of a diplomatic mission and reliance  placed  on
    the 1964 Act arose solely as a result of section  20(1)  of  the  State
    Immunity Act 1978.  The 1978 Act provided  that  the  1964  Act  should
    apply to a sovereign or other head of State but for the purposes of the
    State Immunity Act the Sultan of Pahang is not  a  sovereign  or  other
    head of State and so the Diplomatic Privileges Act 1964 did not  extend
    to him or his staff by virtue of the State Immunity Act.  The Sultan of
    Pahang would have been head of State in Malaysia in the 1980s  but  the
    Diplomatic Privileges Act did not extend to former  heads  of  State  -
    Counsel referred to Article 39(2)  of  Schedule  1  to  the  Diplomatic
    Privileges Act.

17.   With reference to the case law relied upon, it was submitted that  the
    State Immunity Act 1978 significantly changed  the  common  law  Rules.
    They were irrelevant.  The Bank of  Commerce  International  (Overseas)
    Limited (in liquidation) v Price Waterhouse (a firm) [1997]  4  All  ER
    108 ("the Abu Dhabi case") had been relied on heavily by the appellants
    but the crucial point was that the sovereign immunity accorded  to  the
    ruler of Abu Dhabi was  not  a  result  of  his  being  a  ruler  of  a
    constituent territory of the United Arab Emirates but  because  of  his
    concurrent status as President  of  the  United  Arab  Emirates.   That
    distinction  had  been  recognised  in  R  (Alamieyeseigha)   v   Crown
    Prosecution Service [2005] EWHC 2704 (Admin) at  paragraph  11  (Silber
    J).  The correctness of the decision in Mellenger had been doubted.

18.   The circumstances in this case were clear and straightforward and  the
    Secretary of State's certificate was conclusive.

19.   In reply we first canvassed with Mr Macdonald whether  the  appellants
    could succeed under the Immigration Rules were we to be against him  on
    the  sovereign  immunity  point.   It  transpired  that  none  of   the
    appellants could make out a case under  the  Immigration  Rules  -  the
    individual circumstances and the precise requirements of their services
    to the Sultan and other matters meant that they could not  comply  with
    paragraph 159A and no other obvious paragraphs of the  Rules  could  be
    made applicable to them.  Mr Macdonald was constrained to admit that he
    could not bring the appellants within the  Rules  and  accordingly  the
    only issue in the case was state immunity.  If the  appellants  won  on
    that they all won.  If they lost on that they all lost.

20.   In relation  to  the  deception  issue,  it  was  agreed  between  the
    representatives that the burden lay on  the  Secretary  of  State.   Mr
    Macdonald submitted that the Secretary of State had not discharged that
    burden.

21.   On the state immunity issue,  the  certificate  did  not  decide  that
    Pahang was not a state.  In determining whether a body was entitled  to
    sovereign immunity one needed to look at the constitution of the  state
    concerned.  In Almieyeseigha the  Court  had  considered  the  Nigerian
    constitutional provisions.  The circumstances in Malaysia were  totally
    different.  Furthermore the Nigerian authorities had waived immunity.

22.   Regard should be  had  to  paragraph  32  of  the  Attorney  General's
    opinion where there was reference to Article  36  of  the  constitution
    which provided: "'Sovereign' means the Sultan and ruler of the state of
    Pahang and includes his successors".

23.   The Abu Dhabi case turned on its own facts.   Merely  because  a  case
    was recent, that did not overturn the doctrine  of  precedent  and  the
    case of Mellenger was still a binding authority.  The Court  of  Appeal
    in Mellenger had referred to a statute of  the  Westminster  Parliament
    and it decided that sovereign  immunity  extended  to  the  constituent
    states of a country which had a federal constitution such as a Canadian
    province.  The certificate ducked the issue.  If the Secretary of State
    had said that Pahang was not a sovereign state that would be the end of
    the issue.  In the absence of a certificate one had to go back  to  the
    basic principles.  If we were against  him  on  the  certificate,  that
    would be the end of the matter.

24.   At the conclusion of the submissions  we  reserved  our  determination
    and we must express our thanks to  Counsel  on  both  sides  for  their
    helpful guidance through somewhat unfamiliar territory.

25.   Counsel also helpfully narrowed the issues.  The sole point  on  which
    the appellants rely is the issue of state immunity.   If  they  win  on
    that all the appeals are to be allowed and if they lose on that all the
    appeals are to be dismissed.  No argument  is  put  forward  that  they
    could otherwise succeed under the Immigration Rules.

26.   On the issue of jurisdiction, attention was given to  the  possibility
    of applying for judicial review but it was felt appropriate to exercise
    a statutory appeal right as it might be said that  the  appellants  had
    not exhausted their alternative  remedies.   We  approach  the  issues,
    therefore, on the  footing,  agreed  by  both  parties,  that  we  have
    jurisdiction to investigate the issue of state immunity  on  the  basis
    that if state immunity applied the decision  taken  by  the  respondent
    would not be in accordance with the law.

27.   As we are not concerned with the Immigration Rules,  it  follows  that
    it is not necessary in this determination to deal  with  the  issue  of
    deception.  Had we had to decide  the  issue,  we  would  readily  have
    accepted that the appellants were acting under orders and we would have
    been slow to conclude  that  they  had  been  ordered  to  do  anything
    deceptive.  There is in the papers a witness statement  signed  by  the
    Equerry Officer employed by the Sultan  who  sets  out  the  background
    circumstances to the applications.  It is stated that  the  palace  was
    confused when it was advised that  some  colleagues  should  apply  for
    visas while some should not.  The palace brought a number of  passports
    to the Entry Clearance Officer to ascertain whether they  needed  visas
    "in the interests of transparency, and the palace's  desire  to  ensure
    that it complied with all the relevant immigration laws..."

28.   The burden of proof in alleging deception  rests  on  the  respondent.
    The particular paragraphs relied on  by  the  respondent  do  not  make
    refusal mandatory but allow for the exercise  of  discretion.   Had  we
    found it necessary to decide the issue, we would  have  been  extremely
    unlikely to find that anyone  concerned  in  this  case  was  party  to
    contumelious conduct.  Whatever the eventual  outcome,  we  would  hope
    that any suggestion of impropriety was expunged from the records of all
    those concerned.

29.   We have the benefit of an opinion from the  Office  of  the  Malaysian
    Attorney  General.   The  High  Court  in  Almieyeseigha  was  somewhat
    dismissive of the opinions of the Attorneys General in that case -  see
    paragraph 7 of the judgment of Silber J:

        "The issue whether the claimant is entitled to  state  immunity  is
        essentially a question of law for the courts  of  this  country  on
        which the views of either Attorney General is not of any value..."

30.   However Mr Manknell states that the respondent is not  in  a  position
    to dispute the opinion given insofar as it relates to Malaysian law and
    the position of the Sultan under Malaysian law.  Under Article 2 of the
    Constitution of the  Pahang  "The  sovereign  is  the  fountainhead  of
    justice and of all authority in the state and territory of  Pahang  and
    all  its  dependencies  and,  thereby,  the  head  of  all  titles  and
    dignities, honours and awards in the state and the government thereof".
     The Sultan ascended to the throne on  7  May  1974.   The  Sultan  was
    elected Yang Di-Pertuan Agong on 26 April 1979 and served his full five
    year term of office until 25 April 1984.  He was  eligible  to  be  re-
    elected as the Yang Di-Pertuan Agong for as long  as  he  remained  the
    ruler and Sultan of Pahang.  The Yang  Di-Pertuan  Agong  is  appointed
    from among the nine state rulers on a rotational basis of five years as
    provided by the Constitution.

31.   There is no doubt that during the period when he  was  elected  to  be
    the Yang Di-Pertuan Agong the Sultan did enjoy state  immunity  as  the
    sovereign head of the Federation of Malaysia.  However that period  has
    now passed although he is still entitled to be elected in due course to
    that office.  Mr Manknell firmly rests his argument on the 1978 Act and
    the certificate issued thereunder.  The background to  the  legislation
    is set out in the judgment of Laddie J in the Abu Dhabi case as follows
    at p.110:

        "There are two statutes which are relevant to this application, the
        Diplomatic Privileges Act 1964 and the  State  Immunity  Act  1978.
        The first is concerned to bestow immunity in respect of  civil  and
        criminal proceedings on diplomatic staff.  This Act implements many
        of the provisions of the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic  Relations
        and Optional  Protocol  concerning  the  Compulsory  Settlement  of
        Disputes signed in 1961.  In particular, it brings into  effect  in
        our domestic law, the provisions of  art  31  of  that  convention,
        which, so far as relevant to this application, reads as follows:


             '1. A diplomatic agent shall enjoy immunity from  the  criminal
             jurisdiction of the  receiving  State.   He  shall  also  enjoy
             immunity from its civil and administrative jurisdiction, except
             in the case of ... (c) an action relating to  any  professional
             or commercial activity exercised by the diplomatic agent in the
             receiving State outside his official functions ...'


        When the 1964 Act became part of our law, it  did  not  affect  the
        common law immunity of heads of state, but  only  the  immunity  of
        representatives of a state, such as ambassadors.  The 1978  Act  is
        concerned primarily with state immunity.  Until the passing of that
        Act, state immunity was a matter of common law and  the  extent  of
        that immunity was the subject of some difficult case law."

32.   Laddie J then considered the position of states  and  the  head  of  a
    state and it is helpful to set  out  the  following  extract  from  the
    judgment:

        "The 1978 Act includes two significant provisions relating  to  the
        sovereign or head of state, that is to say a sovereign or  head  of
        state of a state recognised by virtue of the issue  of  a  suitable
        certificate.  The first, s 20(1)(a), provides:


             'Subject to the provisions of this section and to any necessary
             modifications, the Diplomatic Privileges Act 1964  shall  apply
             to - (a) a sovereign or other head of state...'


        Thus, the  head  of  state  has  all  the  immunities  bestowed  on
        diplomatic personnel such as ambassadors.  Secondly, in some cases,
        it is possible to bring proceedings against the head  of  state  as
        representing the state itself.  Because that is so, s  14(1)(a)  of
        the 1978 Act provides:


             'The immunities and privileges conferred by this Part  of  this
             Act apply to any foreign or commonwealth State other  than  the
             United Kingdom; and references to a State include references to
             - (a) the sovereign or other head of that State in  his  public
             capacity ...'


        This means that when a head of a recognised state is acting in  his
        private capacity, he has the same immunities as say, the ambassador
        of that state under the 1964 Act.  On the other hand,  when  acting
        in his public capacity, effectively as the embodiment of the state,
        he has all the immunities the state has under  the  1978  Act.   It
        would appear at first blush that  the  immunities  are  cumulative,
        thus the fact that he  has  immunities  when  acting  in  a  public
        capacity, does not detract from the  immunities  derived  from  the
        1964 Act by virtue of s 20(1) of the 1978 Act.  (see in this regard
        s 16 of the 1978 Act.)


        If in this case the defendants had been trying to bring third party
        proceedings against the head of a recognised state in  his  private
        capacity, the provisions of the 1964 Act would  give  him  immunity
        from suit.  In particular, the provisions of art  31(1)(c)  of  the
        convention only removes the immunity from suit where the diplomatic
        agent, or in his case head of state, is carrying on a  professional
        or commercial activity  in  the  receiving  state,  that  means  in
        England.  There is no suggestion that Sheikh Zayed is  carrying  on
        or has carried on any relevant activity in  England.   Furthermore,
        as Mr Goldsmith accepted, to avoid immunity it would  be  necessary
        to show that the head of state carried  on  a  continuous  business
        activity here with a view to profit.  That also  was  not  asserted
        against Sheikh Zayed.


        However, these are not the only statutory  provisions  relevant  to
        this application.  A recognised state may  be  a  federation.   The
        1978 Act makes certain provisions for the  constituent  territories
        of such a federation.  In particular, s 14(5) provides:


             'Section  12  above  applies   to   proceedings   against   the
             constituent territories of a federal State; and Her Majesty may
             by Order in Council provide for the other  provisions  of  this
             Part of this Act to apply to  any  such  constituent  territory
             specified in the Order as they apply to a State.'


        For example, an Order in Council might have the effect of  treating
        the constituent territory as if it were itself a recognised  state,
        so that the head of the constituent territory would also be treated
        as if he were head of a recognised state.


        However, if there is no  such  order,  s  14(6)  applies  and  that
        provides:


             'Where the provisions of this Part of this Act do not apply  to
             a constituent territory by virtue of any such Order subsections
             (2) and (3) above shall apply to it as if it  were  a  separate
             entity.'


        This refers  back  to  s  14(2)(a)  and  (b)  which  are  the  only
        provisions of s 14 to which  it  is  necessary  to  refer  for  the
        purpose of this application.  Section 14(2)  is  in  the  following
        terms:


             'A separate entity is  immune  from  the  jurisdiction  of  the
             courts of the  United  Kingdom  if,  and  only  if  -  (a)  the
             proceedings relate to anything done by it in  the  exercise  of
             sovereign authority; and (b) the circumstances are such that  a
             State (or, in the case of proceedings to which section 10 above
             applies,  a  State  which  is  not  a  party  to  the  Brussels
             Convention) would have been so immune.'


        It is now possible to consider the effect of  these  provisions  on
        the position of a constituent state which is not the subject of  an
        order.  When such a state  does  something,  'in  the  exercise  of
        sovereign  authority',  it  is  given  the  benefit  of  the   same
        immunities as the state of which it forms a constituent  part.   It
        is not in dispute that the 'sovereign authority' in s 14(2)(a) is a
        reference to the sovereign authority of the recognised  state.   In
        other words, when a constituent territory or other separate  entity
        acts for and on behalf of the recognised state and effectively acts
        as if it was exercising the state's sovereign authority, it obtains
        the immunity that the state would have obtained, had  it  acted  on
        its own behalf.


        Secondly, if it does not fall within the provisions of s  14(2)(a),
        the constituent territory or other separate entity has no immunity.
         It neither falls under s 14 nor does it obtain immunity under  the
        1964 Act.  In particular, there  is no equivalent  provision  to  s
        20(1)(a) extending to such a constituent territory any of the  1964
        Act immunities.  This  is  not  surprising  because  the  1964  Act
        immunities are clearly concerned with giving immunities  from  suit
        to individuals rather than territories.


        With that in mind, it is possible to turn to the  particular  facts
        of this case.  Most of these facts I do not  understand  to  be  in
        dispute.  (1) the United  Arab  Emirates  is  a  state  within  the
        meaning of the 1978 Act, a certificate  to  that  effect  has  been
        signed by the Secretary of State.  (2) His Highness Sheikh Zayed is
        the head of that state.  (3) Abu Dhabi is a  constituent  territory
        of the United Arab Emirates for the purpose of  the  1978  Act  and
        once again a certificate to that effect has been issued, signed  by
        the Secretary of State.  (4) It is, however,  not  a  territory  in
        respect of which  an  order  under  s  14(5)  has  been  made.   It
        therefore is treated just like a separate entity under s  14(2)  of
        the 1978 Act.  (5) As such, it has no immunity of its own, it  only
        obtains the immunity it can acquire under s 14(2)(a), when it  does
        things in the exercise of the sovereign  authority  of  the  United
        Arab Emirates.  (6) Sheikh Zayed is the Ruler  of  Abu  Dhabi.   In
        that capacity, he is not a head of state within the meaning of  the
        1978 Act." (pp.111-113)

33.   Mr Manknell's argument under the State Immunity Act is that there  has
    been no Order in Council as provided  for  in  section  14(5)  and  the
    contrary is not argued by Mr Macdonald.  He relies on  the  certificate
    provided by the Secretary of State and submits that that is  conclusive
    of the matter.  He argues that the certificate may not be questioned by
    the courts and cites authority for that proposition -  e.g.  Trawnik  v
    Lennox [1985] 1 WLR 532.  This concerned a certificate issued under the
    Crown Proceedings Act 1947 and while the case is by  no  means  on  all
    fours with the appeal before us, the submission is not challenged by Mr
    Macdonald. However Mr Macdonald argues that while  the  certificate  is
    conclusive it does not deal with the issue with which we are concerned.

34.   In our view this certificate is clear and conclusive.   Section  14(1)
    of the 1978 Act records that the immunities  and  privileges  conferred
    "by this Part of this Act" extends to Commonwealth states which include
    references to "the sovereign or other head of that State in his  public
    capacity". Section 14(5) is the only way in  which  the  provisions  of
    Part 1 of the 1978 Act (apart from section 12 which  is  not  relevant)
    may apply to constituent territories of a federal state.  Malaysia is a
    federal state and Pahang is a constituent part of that federal state.

35.   Reliance cannot be placed on the Diplomatic Privileges Act 1964  -  it
    is not suggested as Mr Manknell submits that either the  appellants  or
    the Sultan are members  of  a  diplomatic  mission.   Any  entitlements
    derive from section 20(1) of the 1978 Act.  However, for the reasons we
    have already given, the appellants  do  not  enjoy  state  immunity  by
    virtue of the 1978 Act.  No reliance is placed by Mr Macdonald  on  the
    fact that the Sultan was once the head of  state  and  as  Mr  Manknell
    notes the 1964 Act makes express provision in relation to former  heads
    of state.

36.   Turning to the case law, it is  clear,  as  Laddie  J  observed,  that
    until the passing of the 1978 Act state immunity was a matter of common
    law and the extent of that immunity "was the subject of some  difficult
    case law".  It is Mr Manknell's submission, which we accept,  that  the
    1978 Act marked a significant change from the previous common law Rules
    and without doing any violence to the doctrine of precedent,  the  case
    of Mellenger, decided  in  1971,  has  to  be  read  in  the  light  of
    subsequent legislation.  Mr Manknell drew our attention to "The Law  of
    State Immunity" by Dame Hazel Fox (2nd Edition, 2008) at pages  255-256
    where it was observed:

        "The Act makes no distinction between political  sub-divisions  and
        constituent units of a federal state and takes a  more  restrictive
        line to the conferment of immunity  on  agencies  created  by  such
        federal units than did the Court of Appeal in Mellenger..."


      There is a passage at page 433 to similar effect.

37.   In our view the certificate issued by the Secretary of State does  not
    duck the question, it answers it conclusively.

38.   In paragraph 12 of the appellant's skeleton argument it is stated,  as
    noted above, that the submissions of the appellants are premised on the
    fact that the Sultan is entitled to sovereign immunity:

        "This needs to be evidenced by a letter  or  certificate  from  the
        Secretary of State for the Foreign and  Commonwealth  Office  (FCO)
        (see below paragraph 8)."

39.   This may have been intended to be a reference to  paragraph  18  which
    also sets out part of the Immigration Directorate's Instructions.

40.   Of course Mr Macdonald recognises that there is now a certificate  and
    we have considered and rejected his submissions  that  the  certificate
    does not deal with the issue herein.  The Instructions refer to section
    20(3) of the State Immunity Act and we  do  not  find  that  they  take
    matters any further.

41.   Although the issues in the Abu Dhabi  case  were  somewhat  convoluted
    the basic principles appear clear  enough.   The  Sultan  is  sovereign
    under Malaysian law in the State of Pahang and there is no doubt  about
    that.  However he is  not  entitled  to  state  immunity  nor  are  his
    servants, the appellants.  That will  remain  the  position  absent  an
    Order in Council or until such time that he becomes the Yang Di-Pertuan
    Agong.

42.   That really disposes of the appeals  but  we  perhaps  should  mention
    that during the  discussion  of  the  appellants'  position  under  the
    Immigration Rules Mr Manknell submitted  that  the  Sultan  was  in  no
    different position from any wealthy private individual  who  wished  to
    take his servants with him.  While we have no doubt that that is so  in
    strict theory, not every private individual has been a  head  of  state
    entitled to sovereign immunity in the past and  nor  is  every  private
    individual entitled to expect (assuming he lives long enough)  that  he
    might be head of state in the future.  Nor is every private  individual
    sovereign in part of a federal state.  Apparently the  appellants  have
    in the past come to the United Kingdom and  no  doubt  the  Sultan  has
    travelled to this country for many years without difficulty  with  such
    members of his entourage as he requires.  Whether the  Sultan  and  his
    household can be accommodated  in  the  future  is  a  matter  for  the
    respondent  though  until  recently  their  peregrinations   were   not
    apparently seen as a source of controversy.

 43.  For the reasons we have given, these appeals must be dismissed.






Signed                                             Date 6 February 2009


Senior Immigration Judge Warr


