


                       ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL

                                   CS (Race discrimination, proper approach,
                                          effect) Jamaica [2006] UKAIT 00004


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Field House                                   Determination
Promulgated: 10. 1.06
On 13th December 2005


                                   Before

              The Honourable MrMr Justice Hodge OBE, President
                   Mr A McGeachy, Senior Immigration Judge


                                   Between

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

In claims of racial discrimination raised in appeals in the AIT,  a  finding
must be made if race discrimination is alleged.   But  it  does  not  follow
automatically where a finding of discrimination is made, that  the  decision
under the immigration rules is itself unlawful.

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Gill (Counsel)
For the Respondent: Ms M Donnelly-Wells (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a national of Jamaica, born on 3rd August 1975.   The
      appellant married the sponsor, his wife, on 10th December 2003, whilst
      he was in the United Kingdom.  He was removed from the United  Kingdom
      by the respondent on 9th January 2004.  He had been granted  leave  to
      enter as a visitor for six months and thereafter overstayed the period
      of the visitor's visa.  On 10th February 2004, the  appellant  applied
      for entry clearance as a spouse.  This was refused by  the  respondent
      in a notice of decision dated 29th April 2004.

This Reconsideration

   2. The appellant's appeal came before an adjudicator  (Miss  Manjit  Kaur
      Obhi) on 22nd October 2004.   In a determination promulgated  on  10th
      November 2004, she dismissed the appeal.

   3. The  Entry  Clearance  Officer  (ECO)  had  rejected  the  appellant's
      application for entry clearance on the basis that he had not  met  the
      requirements of paragraph 281 of the Immigration Rules  [HC395].   The
      appeal brought under  Section  82  (1)  Nationality,  Immigration  and
      Asylum Act 2002 was advanced, under Section 84 (1) (a) and (b) of  the
      2002 Act.  The appellant originally asserted  that  the  decision  was
      "not in accordance with the immigration rules" (Section 84  (1)  (a)).
      At a late stage, he claimed that the decision was "unlawful by  virtue
      of Section 19 B of the Race Relations Act 1976 (C.74)  (Discrimination
      by Public Authorities)" (Section 84 (1) (b)).  Permission was given to
      make this  amendment  on  6th  September  on  2004.   The  appeal  was
      adjourned to enable the entry clearance officer  to  respond  to  this
      allegation.

   4. The adjudicator's decision was as follows:


      "I find that the decision of the entry clearance officer may have been
      affected by the incorporation into  that  assessment,  of  a  negative
      stereo-typical belief.

      In relation to  the  Immigration  appeal,  on  the  basis  of  my  own
      objective assessment of the information before the respondent  at  the
      relevant time, I dismiss the appeal."


   5. The appellant applied for permission for leave to appeal to  the  then
      Immigration Appeal Tribunal.  The grounds of appeal were:
        "The adjudicator has erred in her conclusion  with  regard  to  the
        matter of the allegation that the respondent  (ECO)  had  exhibited
        racism in carrying out his duty.
               a) At paragraphs 38-42 the (sic) states, finds and concludes
                  that  the  ECO  displayed  expression   of   a   negative
                  stereotype of Afro-Caribbean men and the decision of  the
                  entry clearance officer is  unlawful  and  cannot  stand.
                  This indicates that she had found the ECO to  have  acted
                  in  a  manner  contrary  to  the  race  relations  (sic),
                  however, she goes on to dismiss the  immigration  appeal,
                  in particular of the appellant's intention to  live  with
                  his wife.
               b) It is incumbent upon the adjudicator to indicate how  her
                  findings of racism on the part of the respondent does not
                  influence the decision to refuse the appellant.
               c) It is submitted that the adjudicator  has  erred  in  her
                  conclusion that the immigration decision  is  independent
                  of  the  act  of  discrimination  on  the  part  of   the
                  respondent."

   6. Permission to appeal was granted on 1st April 2005, on the basis  that
      the grounds of appeal were "just arguable".

   7. By Article 5 of the Asylum and  Immigration  (Treatment  of  Claimants
      etc) Act 2004 Commencement Number No 5  and  Transitional  Provisions)
      Order 2005 (SI 2005/565)  any  appeal  which  immediately  before  the
      commencement of the 2004 Act was pending before the Immigration Appeal
      Tribunal shall after commencement of that Act be  dealt  with  by  the
      Asylum and Immigration Tribunal as if it had  originally  decided  the
      appeal  and  it  was  re-considering  its  decision.   Hence  we   are
      reconsidering this appeal.

The Racial Discrimination Finding

   8. The adjudicator set out her findings on the race discrimination aspect
      of this appeal between paragraphs 39 and 42.

           "39  ........ it is claimed that Question 61 is not  a  question
           but a series of comments, which set out the ECO's misconceptions
           about Afro-Caribbean men.  These misconceptions are based  on  a
           belief in a negative stereotype of a particular group of people,
           such that that belief undermines the  ability  to  approach  any
           assessment wholly objectively.  To support  this  assertion  the
           appellant relies on the following comments contained in Question
           61 of the interview.


           "You have now married a woman who is older  than  you.   As  you
           know, marriage is not always the norm  amongst  Jamaican  males.
           I'm not making any criticisms, just observations.   Some  people
           would look at this relationship, against those considerations  I
           have just said, and conclude  that  you  married  as  a  way  of
           remaining in the UK.  I am not saying I agree."


           This sentence taken on its  own,  out  of  the  context  of  the
           remainder of the interview  is  highly  offensive,  and  legally
           wrong.  The considerations to which the ECO refers, are not part
           of the rules which he must  apply,  but  are  a  view  of  Afro-
           Caribbean men which in my view would be seen by  any  reasonable
           person to express a negative stereotype  of  a  section  of  the
           community.  If it is a consideration against which the  ECO  has
           assessed the application, then to any  reasonable  bystander  he
           has incorporated a negative stereotype into that assessment  and
           thereby fettered his discretion under the rules.  In addition by
           applying it  he  has  unwittingly  treated  the  appellant  less
           favourably than he would have  done a non-Jamaican man.  It  was
           suggested by Mr Gomez that the reference to Jamaican  males  was
           in essence a reference to black men because when ordinary people
           speak of Jamaican men, they associate them with black  men,  and
           not white Jamaicans and therefore the discrimination  was  based
           on  the  appellant's  colour,  and  not  his  nationality.   The
           distinction between colour and nationality is important  because
           of the disregard  introduced  in  relation  to  nationality  and
           ethnic origins in respect of immigration decisions which appears
           at Section 19D of the  1976  Act  (as  amended).   I  accept  Mr
           Gomez's interpretation in relation to the reference to  Jamaican
           males being  in  reality  a  reference  to  colour  and  not  to
           nationality, as being a reasonable inference to draw.


           40 The dangers  of  applying  negative  stereotypes  to  certain
           sections of the community were considered in some depth by  Lord
           McPherson in the Stephen Lawrence Inquiry Report.  His  Lordship
           quotes extensively  from the work of Dr Robin Oakley and  states
           (in relation to the police, because that was the organisation he
           was studying) that the police are brought into  contact  with  a
           skewed cross  section  of  society,  'with  the  well-recognised
           potential  for  producing  negative  stereotypes  of  particular
           groups.  Such stereotypes become  the  common  currency  of  the
           police occupational culture.'  This in turn leads to a  form  of
           institutionalised racism which is defined by the Commission  for
           Racial  Equality  as  'those  established  laws,  customs,   and
           practices  which  systematically  reflect  and  produce   racial
           inequalities in  society.   If  racist  consequences  accrue  to
           institutional laws, customs or  practices,  the  institution  is
           racist  whether  or  not  the  individuals   maintaining   those
           practices have racist intentions.'


           41 The letter from the Entry Clearance Officer is unhelpful,  in
           that he does not address the allegation.  He says  that  he  has
           not studied the Report of Lord McPherson, or  read  any  of  the
           latest theories on racism.  He says that he is  'vaguely'  aware
           of the theory of institutionalised racism.  At best there  is  a
           superficial and indirect  understanding  by  the  ECO  that  his
           approach  to  this  application  may  have  not  been   entirely
           appropriate.  Yet, he refutes any suggestion that  he  has  ever
           exhibited racist attitudes.  In the context of  the  definition,
           which  I  set  out  above,  I  accept  that  this  ECO  is   not
           intentionally racist or intentionally  discriminatory,  this  is
           apparent from looking the interview as a whole.   The  interview
           does  not  disclose  an  attempt   by   him   to   intentionally
           discriminate against the appellant on the grounds of his colour;
           but as Mr Gomez, in  my  opinion,  rightly  stated,  his  letter
           appears to miss the point, and does not address the allegation.


           42 The comments, which I have quoted, in my opinion, and display
           an expression of a negative stereotype  of  Afro-Caribbean  men.
           There  is  no  other  conclusion  that  I  can  reach.   In  the
           circumstances I find that the decision of  the  Entry  Clearance
           Officer is unlawful and cannot stand."


   9. Allegations of racial discrimination are raised relatively  rarely  in
      appeals before the Asylum & Immigration Tribunal and its predecessors.
       But when such an allegation is raised, the  Tribunal  must  determine
      it.  As was pointed out in Emunefe v Secretary of State for  the  Home
      Department [2005] EWCA Civ 1002, when a claim under the Race Relations
      Act is made in an immigration appeal, there is an obligation to make a
      decision on the claim as a matter of statutory duty  (Section  86  (2)
      (a) Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002).  Under the previous
      legislation, it had been a requirement to reach a decision on any race
      discrimination  claim  but  that  was  provided  for  by  a   Practice
      Direction.


  10. Immigration Judges must therefore decide racial discrimination claims,
      if they are contained in the  grounds  of  appeal  before  then.   The
      standard of proof is the ordinary civil standard, on  the  balance  of
      probabilities.   The burden of proof is on the appellant.  The  proper
      approach to reaching decisions on these sometimes  complicated  issues
      is set out in Anya v University of Oxford and another [2001] EWCA  Civ
      405.

           "..[The Tribunal must] identify clearly, and arrange  in  proper
           order the main issues for decision eg:


              a) Did the act complained of actually occur?   In  some  cases
                 there will  be  conflict  of  direct  oral  evidence.   The
                 Tribunal will have to decide who to believe.   If  it  does
                 not believe the applicant and his witnesses, the  applicant
                 has failed to discharge  the  burden  of  proving  the  act
                 complained of and the case will fail at that point.  If the
                 applicant is believed, has he brought  his  application  in
                 time, and if not, is it just and equitable  to  extend  the
                 time?
              b) If the act complained of occurred  in  time,  was  there  a
                 difference in race involving the applicant?
              c) If a difference in race was  involved,  was  the  applicant
                 treated less  favourably  than  the  alleged  discriminator
                 treated or would treat other persons of a different  racial
                 group in the same, or not  materially  different,  relevant
                 circumstances?
              d) If there was a difference in treatment involving persons of
                 a different race, was that treatment "on  racial  grounds"?
                 Were racial grounds an effective cause of the difference in
                 treatment?   What  explanation  of  the   less   favourable
                 treatment is given by the respondent?
                 In answer to each of these questions the Tribunal must make
                 findings of primary fact, either on the basis of direct (or
                 positive) evidence  or  by  inference  from  circumstantial
                 evidence."

  11. Guidance was given by the Court of Appeal  in  King  v  Great  Britain
      China Centre [1992] ICR 516 as to how to approach any "explanation  of
      the less favourable treatment ....given by the respondent".  At para 7
      (4), it was said " if no explanation is then put  forward  or  if  the
      tribunal considers the explanation to be inadequate or unsatisfactory,
      it  will  be  legitimate  for  the  tribunal   to   infer   that   the
      discrimination was on  racial  grounds.   This  is  not  a  matter  of
      law..... but almost common sense."

  12. The adjudicator in this appeal analysed the evidence appropriately and
      took all the relevant steps as set  out  above.   She  concluded  that
      there was, in effect, race discrimination in that the adverse decision
      in this appeal displayed "an expression of a  negative  stereotype  of
      Afro-Caribbean men".  There is no  challenge  to  this  finding.   The
      adjudicator put the relevant steps in her reasoning as required by the
      law and reached a conclusion on the facts which was open to her.   The
      clear finding she made at  paragraph  42  was  not,  however,  carried
      forward to  her  conclusions  at  paragraph  54  and  following.   She
      concludes "I find that the comment made by  the  ECO  in  question  61
      discloses a negative stereotypical belief and as  such  suggests  that
      the decision  of  the  ECO  may  have  been  discriminatory".   It  is
      unhelpful to qualify the apparently clear findings  made  at  para  42
      quoted above.  Conclusions reached in the body of a judgement must  be
      carried through to any summary of  conclusions  at  the  end  of  that
      judgement.


Error of Law

  13. The appellant contends that the decision of the adjudicator to dismiss
      the  appeal  displays  two  material  errors  of  law.    First,   the
      adjudicator made a finding of racial discrimination.  She went  on  to
      fail, it is said, to show how that did not influence the  decision  to
      reject the appellant's application.   Second,  it  is  said  that  the
      adjudicator erred in  concluding  that  the  immigration  decision  is
      independent of the finding of an act of discrimination on the part  of
      the respondent.

  14. In this case, the adjudicator referred to the apparent view  expressed
      by the entry clearance officer that "marriage was not the norm amongst
      Jamaican males"  and  "this  marriage  was  contracted  as  a  way  of
      remaining in the UK".  The finding that the  Entry  Clearance  Officer
      had racially discriminated against the appellant called into  question
      the genuineness of the appellant's marriage.   But the adjudicator  in
      fact reached a different conclusion and found that the marriage "is  a
      genuine marriage".

  15. It was argued before us for the appellant, that the finding of  racial
      discrimination "infects" the whole  decision  making  process.   As  a
      result, it was said, once the finding is made, the  appeal  should  be
      allowed  to  the  extent  that  it  was  remitted  back  for   further
      consideration.  It appeared also to be argued that  the  appeal  might
      alternatively be neither be  allowed  or  dismissed,  but  in  effect,
      adjourned back for further consideration.  This cannot be right.

      The manner in which appeals are determined is set out in  Section  86.
      The Tribunal must determine any matter raised as a  ground  of  appeal
      (Section 86 (2)).  So Immigration Judges must make  decisions  on  the
      information that is before them.  The  structure  of  the  legislation
      requires two decisions to be made in an  appeal  such  as  this.   One
      decision is whether the decision appealed against is not in accordance
      with the Immigration Rules (Section 84 (1) (a)).  A  further  decision
      must be made as to whether the immigration decision is unlawful  as  a
      result of breach of the Race Relations  legislation  (Section  84  (1)
      (b)).

  16. Section 86 (3) of the 2002 Act provides that the Tribunal

           "must allow the appeal in so far as [it] thinks that a  decision
           against which the appeal is  brought  or  is  treated  as  being
           brought was not  in  accordance  with  the  law  (including  the
           immigration rules). "


      Further, by Section 86 (5),


           "in so far as subsection (3) does not apply [the Tribunal] shall
           dismiss the appeal."


  17. There are distinct grounds of appeal being dealt with  in  this  case.
      The  first  is  whether  the  decision  is  in  accordance  with   the
      immigration  rules.   The  second  is   whether   there   was   racial
      discrimination.  The weighting of the adjudicator's ultimate  decision
      on the race  discrimination  issue  was  not  wholly  clear.   But  we
      consider it can properly be read as meaning the original  decision  by
      the Entry Clearance Officer was "not in accordance with the law".  The
      prohibition within the Race Relations Act had been broken.  Hence  "in
      so far as" that occurred the decision was wrong, and the appeal  might
      have been allowed.  Certainly we consider the adjudicator decided  the
      race relations ground of appeal in favour of the appellant.

  18. However, the adjudicator having made the discrimination finding,  went
      on as she was required  to  do,  to  give  detailed  consideration  to
      whether this appellant's claim actually  satisfied  Rule  281  of  the
      Immigration Rules.  She appears to have doubted that the marriage  was
      subsisting.   She was satisfied that accommodation was available.  She
      was not satisfied that the maintenance requirements were met.  In  our
      judgement, she carried out an independent assessment of  the  evidence
      as she was required to do.  She heard from the sponsor.  She looked at
      all the relevant documentary evidence.  She had submissions from  both
      parties.  She was aware that  the  decision  of  the  Entry  Clearance
      Officer was "infected by racial discrimination".   But she went on and
      considered  whether  the  appellant  met  the  requirements   of   the
      immigration rules.  She clearly decided  that  the  Immigration  Rules
      were not satisfied by this appellant.   Hence  Section  86  (3)  which
      requires the appeal to be allowed, did  not  apply.   Section  86  (5)
      provides "in so far as subsection 3  does  not  apply  [the  Tribunal]
      shall dismiss the appeal."  This is what she did.

  19. In those circumstances, we cannot see that the  adjudicator  made  any
      error of law.  In any case, where race discrimination is alleged,  the
      Immigration Judge must make a  decision  on  that  point.   A  way  to
      approach that decision is set out above. If the racial  discrimination
      alleged is proved, the judge must say so in the determination.   Where
      such a finding is made the appellant has further rights.  The  finding
      may be used to support a claim under part III of  the  Race  Relations
      Act 1976.  By Section 57A (3) of the  Race  Relations  Act  1976,  the
      relevant court is required to treat the act complained of as unlawful.
      A clear decision on the ground of appeal alleging race  discrimination
      needs to be made if these rights are to be available to appellants.

      It will be a matter for the judge to decide, in so  far  as  the  race
      discrimination finding casts doubt on the  ultimate  decision  of  the
      Entry Clearance Officer,  as  to  whether  that  decision  remains  in
      accordance  with  the  law.  That  may  conclude  the  appeal  in  the
      appellant's favour.  But, in so far as it does  not,  the  Immigration
      Judge must make an independent assessment of the case, aware  of,  but
      not adversely affected by any race discrimination.  If it  is  decided
      that the decision  was  in  accordance  with  the  law,  or  with  the
      immigration rules then it will be right to reach  a  conclusion  which
      ultimately dismisses the appeal.

  20. Here, the finding of racial discrimination  made  by  the  adjudicator
      meant the decision by the Entry Clearance Officer  that  the  marriage
      was not genuine was itself wrong.  However, she did  not  accept  that
      the appellant had discharged the burden of proof that he was  able  to
      maintain himself without recourse to public funds.  He did not satisfy
      paragraph 281 (v) of the Immigration Rules.  Her  ultimate  conclusion
      was  also  that  the  marriage   was   not   subsisting.    In   those
      circumstances, her conclusions were not affected,  as  she  found  the
      ECO's may have been, by the apparent discriminatory  attitude  of  the
      Entry Clearance Officer.



Decision

  21. We therefore conclude the original Tribunal did not  make  a  material
      error of law in this case.  But for the sake of clarity we express our
      decision as follows:

      The appeal on race relations grounds is allowed.  The decision of  the
      adjudicator on immigration grounds dismissing the appeal shall stand.



                                                            Mr Justice Hodge
                                                                   President
                                                                  19.12.2005
