

     NA (Customary marriage and divorce - evidence) Ghana [2009] UKAIT 00009


Asylum and Immigration Tribunal


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |                             |
|On 20 November 2008                           |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                       SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE LATTER
                       SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE MCKEE
                               MR A F SHEWARD

                                   Between

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ACCRA

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr L Rooney of Leytonstone Citizens' Advice Bureau
For the Respondent:    Mr J Wright, Home Office Presenting Officer


1.  Customary marriages in Ghana can be  lawfully  dissolved  in  accordance
with the applicable customary law.  Dissolutions can be registered but  this
is optional.

2.  The onus of proving either a customary marriage or dissolution rests  on
the party making the assertion.  It is normally for the appellant  to  prove
that a marriage is valid.  Where  this  involves  proving  that  a  previous
customary marriage has been  dissolved,  it  is  reasonable  to  expect  the
appellant to produce the best available evidence to support this  assertion.


3. As registration of  the  dissolution  of  a  customary  marriage  is  not
mandatory in Ghana, an appellant does not  necessarily  have  to  produce  a
registration of dissolution to  prove  the  divorce  although  it  would  be
sensible to do so.  In the alternative, evidence in the form of a  statutory
declaration or an affidavit produced by family members or other people  able
to confirm the dissolution  of  the  customary  tribal  marriage  should  be
produced.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    This is the reconsideration of  an  appeal  against  the  respondent's
    decision made on 11 January 2007 refusing the  appellant  admission  to
    the United Kingdom as the husband of an EEA national exercising  treaty
    rights.

Background

2.    The background can be briefly summarised as  follows.   The  appellant
    is a citizen of Ghana born in September 1952.  He married his wife (the
    sponsor) on 3 September 2006.  She is also  Ghanaian  and  lived  there
    until 1981 when she went  to  Germany  to  work.   She  met  her  first
    husband, another Ghanaian citizen also working there, and they  married
    in 1989.  They have three children.  They lived together until 2001 and
    were divorced in Germany on 21 November 2002.   The  sponsor  became  a
    German national in 2001.

3.    In 2003 the sponsor visited Ghana and met the appellant  at  a  party.
    They kept in contact by telephone.  In June 2004 she came  to  the  UK.
    At that stage she was  still  hoping  for  a  reconciliation  with  her
    husband but by 2006 she realised that this was  not  going  to  happen.
    She then  resumed  contact  with  the  appellant.   Their  relationship
    developed and they decided to get married.  The  sponsor  travelled  to
    Ghana in August 2006. A customary marriage took place  on  3  September
    2006 in Ntonso, the home town of the appellant's father, and there  was
    a civil marriage in Kumasi on 4 September 2006.   The  sponsor  had  to
    return to the UK on 10 September 2006 because her younger children  had
    to go back to school and she to her employment.

4.    The appellant applied for a family permit to join his wife.   When  he
    was interviewed on 18 September 2006 he was asked whether he  had  been
    married before.  His reply is recorded as: "No ... that  was  customary
    but I divorce". He said that had been in 1974.  When asked for evidence
    of  the  divorce,  he  replied:  "it   was   customary   and   resolved
    traditionally".  The respondent was not satisfied  that  the  appellant
    and sponsor had contracted a valid marriage or that it was  subsisting.
    He regarded it as  a  marriage  of  convenience.   He  found  that  the
    maintenance and  accommodation  requirements  of  the  Rules  were  not
    fulfilled and in these circumstances the appellant could not  meet  the
    provisions of reg. 12(1)(b)(ii) of the Immigration  (European  Economic
    Area) Regulations 2006 ("the 2006 Regulations").

The Hearing before the Immigration Judge

5.    The immigration  judge  said  that  it  was  understandable  that  the
    respondent had decided that this was a marriage of convenience  on  the
    basis of the evidence available to him but he  had  now  heard  further
    evidence from the sponsor whom he found to be  an  impressive  witness.
    He was satisfied that there was a genuine and subsisting  relationship,
    the parties intended to live together  as  husband  and  wife  and  the
    financial requirements of the Rules were met. As the sponsor was an EEA
    national exercising treaty rights,  the  appellant  qualified  for  the
    issue of a family permit under reg. 12 of  the  2006  Regulations.   He
    added that the appellant would also be entitled to admission under reg.
    11(4).

6.    The respondent applied for  reconsideration  on  the  basis  that  the
    judge had failed to make a finding on whether  the  appellant  and  the
    sponsor had entered into  a  valid  marriage  or  to  explain  why  the
    appellant would qualify for admission under reg 11(4).

7.    Reconsideration was granted and on 14 May 2008  the  Tribunal  (Senior
    Immigration Judge Gleeson) found that the judge had materially erred in
    law for the following reasons:

         "1.      The appellant has been granted review  of  the  Tribunal's
             determination dismissing an appeal against the Entry Clearance
             Officer, Accra, Ghana.  The Entry  Clearance  Officer  refused
             entry to the United Kingdom under  the  Immigration  (European
             Economic Area) Regulations 2006.  He was concerned as  to  the
             validity of the claimed marriage.


         2. The marriage issue is a tricky one and the immigration judge did
             not address it.  The appellant when he  met  the  sponsor  was
             still married to his first wife.  He is  a  Jehovah's  Witness
             and so is the  sponsor.   The  sponsor  is  a  German  citizen
             exercising her  Treaty  rights  in  the  United  Kingdom.  The
             sponsor was also married when they met; she  is  divorced  and
             there was no question of her not being free to enter into  the
             claimed marriage. There was no  documentary  evidence  of  the
             appellant's divorce proceedings; his previous marriage is said
             to have been a customary marriage in Ghanaian law but there is
             also no evidence before the Tribunal of  the  terms  on  which
             such marriages may be legally contracted and ended.


         3. The appellant claims  to  have  ended  his  marriage  before  he
             undertook the present marriage with the sponsor.  The  parties
             married on 3 September 2006 in a customary marriage,  followed
             by a civil marriage on 4 September  2006.   There  appears  to
             have been a discussion at the  beginning  of  the  hearing  at
             which   the   appellant's   representatives   understood   the
             Immigration Judge to  say  that  he  was  satisfied  that  the
             marriage was lawful; that the Home Office  Presenting  Officer
             understood  him  to  say   he   was   satisfied   'about   the
             relationship' and that Immigration Judge Markham-David  cannot
             remember what he  said.   He  thinks  there  might  have  been
             evidence that the appellant was divorced but there is none  on
             the file.  The evidence which is on the file is not such as to
             put beyond doubt that the appellant was  free  to  contract  a
             second marriage on 3 or 4 September  2006  and  the  point  is
             plainly  material.   It  may  be  that  evidence  of  Ghanaian
             marriage law will be necessary to resolve the point.


         4. The sponsor was present for the material error of  law  hearing;
             she indicated that as the  first  marriage  had  just  been  a
             customary marriage, they had given a man  some  money  and  he
             gave some money back and that disposed of the first  marriage.
             That sounds unlikely to be legally right; the  appellant  must
             make the  position  clearer.   The  Tribunal  notes  that  the
             present marriage was solemnised both by a  customary  marriage
             and a civil marriage.


         5. The appeal was therefore set down for  full  reconsideration  by
             any Immigration Judge (excluding  Immigration  Judge  Markham-
             David, who determined the appeal under challenge)."

      Directions were given for  filing  of  evidence  including  an  expert
    report on Ghanaian  marriage  law.    At  the  hearing  before  us  the
    appellant produced documentary evidence  in  a  bundle  A  indexed  and
    paginated 1-14.  The respondent's documents are set  out  in  a  bundle
    indexed and paginated 1-38.

Marriage and Divorce in Ghana

8.    In his witness statement dated 8 September  2008  (A1)  the  appellant
    gave the following details about his previous customary  marriage.   In
    1972 he entered into a friendship with a girl and she  became  pregnant
    in 1974.  Under Ghanaian village customary  law  he  was  compelled  to
    marry her.  Unfortunately their baby died a couple of months after  she
    was born and at that stage he was able to seek a divorce.  The marriage
    was dissolved on 7 September 1975 but some time later he and his former
    wife reconciled and they remained friends until 1980  when  she  became
    pregnant again and gave birth to a baby boy on 28 December 1981.   When
    their parents heard about this, it was made clear that they would  have
    to remarry but before negotiations could be completed she left and went
    to live in another town.   In  his  statement  the  appellant  solemnly
    declares he does not have any wife either customary  or  constitutional
    apart from his present wife.

9.    There is  a  statutory  declaration  made  on  18  June  2008  by  the
    appellant's uncle and his first wife's sister jointly and they declare:

         "2 That we are the respective uncle and sister of  AKN and  AO  who
             were born to their respective fathers OKS (deceased)  and  CEO
             (deceased) and their mothers AK (deceased) and  AT  all  being
             Ghanaians.


         3. That a marriage was contracted between the couple in  accordance
             with the Ghanaian customary marriage laws and usages  in  1974
             at Kumasi in the presence of elders of both  parties  and  was
             dissolved under the same customary laws on 7 September 1975.


         4. That we positively confirm now the dissolution of  the  marriage
             under the Ghanaian customary divorce laws between  the  couple
             who are at liberty to  remarry  any  woman  or  man  of  their
             choices irrespective of colour or race from any  part  of  the
             world."

10.   The appellant also relies on  an  expert  opinion  prepared  by  Mercy
    Akman. She was admitted as a barrister in Ghana in April 2004. She  has
    completed a course in Ghanaian customary law in 2004 and worked in  the
    judicial service of Ghana from January 2005 to March 2008.  She is  now
    a member of chambers at 36 Bedford Row, London and has  been  asked  to
    report on how customary marriages and dissolutions operate in Ghana and
    to advise on whether the account  given  by  the  appellant  about  the
    dissolution of his first  marriage  under  customary  law  in  1975  is
    plausible.

11.   She explains  that  there  are  three  types  of  marriage  in  Ghana:
    customary law marriage, marriage under the Marriage  Ordinance  Act  of
    1844,  revised  in  1951  (civil  marriage)  and  marriage  under   the
    Muhammadan Ordinance of 1907.  She goes on to say:

         "5.      The most common form of marriage in Ghana is the customary
             marriage.  It is a  type  of  marriage  contracted  under  the
             particular tradition and customary practices  of  a  group  of
             people.  Indeed until the introduction of civil  marriages  by
             the British in Ghana,  then  Gold  Coast,  the  only  form  of
             marriage was the customary marriage.   These  days,  civil  or
             ordinance marriages and customary marriages co-exist and  both
             are legally recognised.  It is up to  the  parties  to  choose
             which  form  of  marriage  they  desire.   A  valid  customary
             marriage can only be validly contracted between  two  Ghanaian
             citizens and both parties must have capacity to  marry.   This
             means that there should be no violation of any rule of  tribal
             relationship.  These rules differ from tribe to tribe.   Thus,
             whilst in some traditions, a  man  cannot  marry  his  cousin,
             other traditions accommodate cross-cousin marriages.


         6.  A  particular  characteristic  of  customary   marriage   which
             distinguishes it from the system of  marriage  in  Europe  and
             other places is that it is not just a union of "this man"  and
             "this woman".  It is the union of "the family of  this  woman"
             and "the family of  this  man".   Marriage  in  the  customary
             context  therefore  unites  families  and   not   merely   the
             individuals.


         7. It involves payment of a bride price by the bridegroom's  family
             to the bride's family.  If the appropriate bride price is  not
             paid, there is no valid marriage, even if parties live as  man
             and woman for many years.  The acceptance of  drink  from  the
             man's family is an indication of the  consent  of  the  wife's
             family to the marriage.  In the Akan system which is the  area
             from where [the appellant] hails, the bride price may take the
             form of drinks, cash, cloth and in the old  days,  gold  dust.
             It is potentially polygamous in nature; a man  may  decide  to
             marry  as  many  women  as  his  strength  and  resources  can
             accommodate.


         8. There are four types of customary marriages practiced in  Ghana.
             The most common type is where a man and woman agree to  marry.
             The man approaches the woman's parents or family  to  ask  for
             the woman's hand in marriage.  If the parents or family  agree
             to the marriage, the man makes a present or presents  in  cash
             or kind as required by the appropriate custom to  the  woman's
             parents or family and the marriage is  concluded.   There  are
             neither documents  nor  certificates  and  in  many  cases  no
             ceremony.


         9. A marriage may also occur when the families agree  to  a  couple
             getting married after the woman  discovers  she  is  pregnant.
             The  marriage  may   simply   be   after   the   man   accepts
             responsibility for the  pregnancy  and  presents  a  drink  or
             presents which could include money to the woman's family.   If
             the drink and gifts are accepted by  the  woman's  family  the
             couple can start cohabiting.  The woman's family are  said  to
             have acquiesced and  a  valid  marriage  is  found  to  exist.
             Alternatively, when a  woman  becomes  pregnant,  the  woman's
             family sends a representative to the  man  to  enquire  as  to
             whether he accepts responsibility for the pregnancy.  The  man
             may accept responsibility in two ways  -  either  he  sends  a
             message back or he may simply send a drink, usually alcoholic,
             to the girl's family by way of  admission.   To  register  his
             intention to marry the girl he  will  send  additional  drink,
             presents or sum of money to  the  girl's  family  and  if  the
             family accepts these gifts, a  valid  marriage  is  concluded.
             The sending of the additional drink or presents amounts  to  a
             request by  the  man  for  the  hand  of  the  woman  and  the
             acceptance of that additional drink  or  presents  amounts  to
             consent by the family to the marriage.  The marriage  is  then
             deemed to have been concluded.


         10.      There is not always a formal ceremony.  Even if there was,
             the couples do not have to be present at this ceremony  for  a
             valid marriage to take place, provided representatives of  the
             two families are  present  as  witnesses  to  the  meeting  or
             event."

12.   She sets out in paragraph 11 the essential  elements  of  a  customary
    marriage laid down in 1962 in the Ghanaian case of Re Caveat  by  Clara
    Sackitey [1962] GLR as follows:

         "There must be-


         (i)      the agreement by the parties to live together as  man  and
             wife;


         (ii)     consent of the family of the man that he should  have  the
             woman to be his wife - that consent may be  indicated  by  the
             man's family acknowledging the woman as wife of the man;


         (iii)    consent of the family for the woman  that  she  should  be
             joined in marriage to the man, that consent  is  indicated  by
             the acceptance of drink from the man or his family  or  merely
             the family of the woman acknowledging the man as  the  husband
             of the woman;


         (vi)     consummation of the marriage by cohabitation"


13.   She then deals with registration and  certification  of  marriages  in
    Ghana:

       "12.  Customary  Marriage  and  Divorce   (Registration)   Law   1985
        (P.N.D.C.L. 112) provided for mandatory registration  of  customary
        marriages and divorces after 1985, but was this law was amended  in
        1991 by the Customary Marriage and Divorce (Registration) Amendment
        Law 1991 (P.N.D.C.L. 263) to make the registration of marriages and
        divorces optional.  This is the current position of the  law.   The
        parties to a customary marriage may choose to register the marriage
        at any time after the marriage with the Registrar of Marriages  and
        Divorce  but  this  is  not  mandatory  and   records   show   that
        registration of marriages have declined over the years.  Whereas in
        2004 1172 marriages were registered, only 677  were  registered  in
        2007.  If the marriage is registered, the couple are issued with  a
        certificate and the notification is entered on the register."

14.   Ms Akman then turns to  the  dissolution  of  customary  marriages  as
    follows:

           13.  Customary marriages are dissolved informally  as  they  are
        concluded.  The relatives of the parties meet and when all  efforts
        at reconciliation  have  failed,  the  wife's  family  returns  the
        bride's price to the husband's family.  If the husband is at fault,
        he is made to pay compensation to the wife and the  dissolution  is
        sealed by a  special  ceremony  at  the  end  of  which  the  elder
        pronounces that the wife is now divorced and she is handed over  to
        the woman's family.


           14.   When a marriage has been registered with the Registrar  of
        Marriages and Divorce, the parties may register a divorce by making
        a  statutory  declaration  stating  that  the  marriage  has   been
        dissolved in accordance with  applicable  customary  law.   If  the
        dissolution is registered the couple is issued with  a  certificate
        and the notification is  entered  on  the  register.   It  is  also
        possible to terminate a customary law marriage  by  application  to
        the court."


15.   Ms Akman gives her opinion that the account  given  by  the  appellant
    about the circumstances leading to his marriage to his  first  wife  is
    entirely plausible.  At the time of his marriage and divorce there were
    no certificates for customary marriages and  divorces.   The  need  for
    documentary evidence led  the  Ghanaian  government  to  introduce  the
    mandatory registration of such marriages and divorces in 1985  but  the
    law was amended in 1991 to make registration optional.

16.   She confirms that in the absence of registration it can  be  difficult
    to produce evidence to confirm that  customary  marriages  or  divorces
    have taken place.  It is her  view  that  the  best  evidence  is  from
    witnesses who were present at these informal  events  to  confirm  they
    took place.  She refers to the statutory declaration  produced  by  the
    appellant and says that it appears genuine.  The  appellant's  marriage
    and divorce took place in the years 1972 to 1975 and she comments  that
    it is difficult to see  what  further  evidence  he  could  produce  to
    confirm these events beyond the evidence currently available.

17.   The legal position as to the registration of a customary  marriage  is
    confirmed in the Ghana Gazette 1991 (R1) which referring to  the  Ghana
    Customary and Divorce (Registration) Act 1991 Act says:

         "This  Act  amends   Ghana's   Customary   Marriage   and   Divorce
         Registration Act to make the registration  of  marriages  performed
         according to customary law optional  rather  than  mandatory.   The
         parties to such a marriage may register it at any time after it has
         been celebrated unless the Secretary for Justice subsequently  sets
         a time limit.  The Act also makes optional the notification of  the
         registrar of the dissolution of marriages  performed  according  to
         customary law that have been registered under the Act."

18.   The UK BIA website (R2) giving guidance generally on marriage says  in
    respect of Ghana:

         "15.5.1  The Customary Marriage and Divorce (Registration) Law 1985
                  provided  for  the  proper   registration   of   customary
                  marriages and divorces in Ghana, and was retroactive (i.e.
                  applied to customary  marriages  and  divorces  contracted
                  before, as well as after, its enactment).   Non-compliance
                  was punishable by a fine or imprisonment, but the marriage
                  would still be regarded as valid.  However, the  Customary
                  Marriage and Divorce  (Registration)  Amendment  Law  1991
                  provided that  registration  of  customary  marriages  and
                  divorces would no longer be mandatory.


         15.5.2   Since it is possible for Ghanaians living outside Ghana to
                  obtain the proper certificates, certificates  of  marriage
                  or divorce authenticated by the Ghanaian High  Commission,
                  should be requested in all cases where the  marital  state
                  of an applicant is important.  Statutory declarations made
                  by a parent or other family elder of either  party  to  an
                  unregistered customary marriage should  only  be  accepted
                  where they complete  a  chain  of  otherwise  first  class
                  documentary evidence of a claim to citizenship."

19.   Mr Wright referred us to a decision of the  United  States  Department
    of Justice Board of Immigration Appeals in Kodwo (24 I&N Dec 479) which
    considered the issue of the evidence  necessary  to  establish  that  a
    customary marriage in  Ghana  had  been  dissolved.     In  a  previous
    decision in Kumah (1985) 19 I & N Dec 290, the Board had concluded that
    a Ghanaian Court decree that either granted or  confirmed  a  customary
    divorce was an essential element of proof in substantiating a  Ghanaian
    divorce.  It was argued that following the amendments made in the  1991
    Act, a court decree should no longer be required.

20.   The Board held:

         "Based on the arguments of the parties and the  evidence  presented
         by the USCIS, we agree that the holding in  the  matter  of  Kumah,
         supra, has been superseded by  amendments  to  Ghanaian  law.   The
         matter of Kumah is accordingly modified  to  hold  that  affidavits
         executed by the heads of household i.e. the fathers of the  husband
         and wife may be sufficient under  Ghanaian  law  to  establish  the
         dissolution of a customary tribal marriage.  We note, however, that
         in accordance with the Foreign Affairs Manual, the desirable proper
         documentation  continues  to  be  a  court  decree,  both   because
         customary divorce is more difficult to prove and because polygamous
         marriage is permissible under the customary law of some groups, but
         not under civil law."


         In the matter of DaBaase (supra) we held that where a  party  seeks
         to prove the validity of  a  customary  divorce,  he  or  she  must
         present evidence that establishes 1) the tribe to which he belongs,
         (2)      the current customary divorce law of that tribe,  and  (3)
         the fact that the pertinent ceremonial  procedures  were  followed.
         We also stated the following:


             To establish the current customary law of his tribe the  party
             may  present  evidence  derived  from  reported  cases,  legal
             treaties and commentaries, and depositions of legal  scholars.
             The evidence could also  consist  of  advisory  opinions  from
             those organisations traditionally recognised by  the  Ghanaian
             government as possessing knowledge of customary law.


        Moreover the parties must  prove  that  the  divorce  was  properly
        perfected.  Affidavits should be  specific  and  include  the  full
        names and birthdates of the parties;  the  date  of  the  customary
        marriage; the date of, and the grounds for, the dissolution of  the
        marriage; the names, birthdates of, and custody agreement  for  any
        children born of the marriage  and  a  description  of  the  tribal
        formalities that were observed including the names  of  the  tribal
        leaders, the name of the tribe, the place, the type of divorce, and
        any other relevant information."


21.   On the issue of  the  evidence  and  necessary  to  prove  a  Ghanaian
    divorce the UK BIA website nationality instructions say:

        "3.3.1 The Customary Marriage and Divorce (Registration)  Law  1985
        provided for the proper registration of divorces in Ghana, and  was
        retroactive.  All Ghanaians, whether living in or outside of Ghana,
        can now obtain certificates of divorce and they should be requested
        from applicants whenever marital status is important.


        3.3.2  However,  under   the   Customary   Marriage   and   Divorce
        (Registration) Law  1991,  registration  is  no  longer  mandatory.
        Where the relevant certificates are not available, we should expect
        to receive a statutory declaration by the  heads  of  the  families
        concerned (or two people representing the legal  interests  of  the
        parties) confirming the date, place and type (e.g.  tribal  custom)
        of the marriage and/or divorce."

22.   Mr Rooney produced a Notice of Registration  of  the  divorce  of  the
    appellant and his  first  wife  in  the  Accra  Metropolitan  Assembly,
    Marriage District.  The divorce was  registered  on  13  November  2008
    confirming that  the  marriage  was  dissolved  on  7  September  1975.
    However, the registration itself is not evidence that we can take  into
    account as the position must be assessed as at the  date  of  decision,
    the provisions of s.85(5) of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002 having  effect  in  relation  to  an  appeal  under  the  2006
    Regulations by virtue of Schedule 1.

Assessment

23.   We are satisfied, and Mr Wright did not  seek  to  resist  a  finding,
    that the appellant had entered into a customary marriage in 1973  which
    was dissolved in accordance with the appropriate customs on 7 September
    1975.  We accept that the dissolution  is  properly  evidenced  by  the
    statutory declaration made by relatives of both the appellant  and  his
    former wife on 18 June 2008.  Mr Wright accepted in the light  of  this
    finding that the appellant was entitled to a family permit under reg 12
    and that no material issues arose under reg 11(4).

24.   So far as the position relating to customary  marriages  and  divorces
    in Ghana is concerned there is no substantial  difference  between  the
    evidence produced by the  appellant  and  the  respondent  and  we  can
    summarise our findings as follows:

    (a)    A customary marriage is a lawful form of marriage in Ghana which
         must be carried out under the  relevant  particular  tradition  and
         customary practices.


    (b)    Although registration was mandatory from 1985 to  1991,  failure
         to  register  did  not  affect  the  validity  of   the   marriage.
         Registration is now optional.


    (c)    Customary marriages can be lawfully dissolved in accordance with
         the applicable customary law.  Dissolutions may also be  registered
         but again registration is optional.  Once a customary marriage  has
         been  dissolved,  the  parties  are  free  to  enter  into  another
         marriage.  Customary law generally permits polygamy but this is not
         permitted for marriages under the Marriage Ordinance Act.


    (d)    The onus of proving either a customary marriage  or  dissolution
         rests on the party making the  assertion.   Under  the  immigration
         rules it is for the appellant to prove that a  marriage  is  valid.
         Where this involves proving that a previous customary marriage  has
         been dissolved, it is reasonable to expect the appellant to produce
         the  best  available  evidence  to  support  this  assertion.    As
         registration of the dissolution of  a  customary  marriage  is  not
         mandatory in Ghana, an  appellant  does  not  necessarily  have  to
         produce a registration of dissolution to prove the divorce although
         it would be sensible to do so.  In the alternative evidence in  the
         form of a statutory declaration or  affidavit  produced  by  family
         members or other people able to  confirm  the  dissolution  of  the
         customary tribal marriage should be produced.  The fact  that  such
         evidence is  not  produced  does  not  necessarily  mean  that  the
         appellant cannot succeed on the basis of oral evidence alone but in
         such cases  an  appellant  may  need  to  explain  the  absence  of
         documentary evidence which he can reasonably be expected to produce
         and may in consequence fail to  discharge  the  onus  of  proof  of
         showing that a previous marriage has been dissolved.

Decision

25.   The original Tribunal  materially  erred  in  law.   We  substitute  a
    decision allowing the appeal against a refusal of a family permit under
    the 2006 Regulations.





Signed                                             Date: 19 December 2008


Senior Immigration Judge Latter
