

Asylum and Immigration Tribunal

   MK (AB & DM confirmed) Democratic Republic of Congo CG [2006] UKAIT 00001

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 29 November 2005                             |                           |
|                                                |...........................|
|                                                |............               |


                                   Before

                  Dr H H STOREY (Senior Immigration Judge)
                 Mr l v waumsley (Senior Immigration Judge)


                                   Between


                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:       Mr N Sekhon,  Counsel, instructed by Switalski's
Solicitors
For the Respondent:   Mrs R Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer

The June 2005 HJT report concerning suspension by  the  Netherlands  of  the
return of asylum seekers to DRC does  not  afford  a  sufficient  basis  for
modifying the conclusions on failed asylum seekers reached in AB & DM.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a national of Democratic Republic of Congo  (DRC).  By
      a determination notified on 16  August  2005,  the  Immigration  Judge
      allowed on human rights grounds only the appellant's   appeal  against
      the decision  to refuse to grant asylum and to refuse to  grant  leave
      to enter.   The respondent seeks reconsideration of the determination.



2.   The Immigration Judge did not find  the  appellant's  account  credible
      and he  rejected  it  'in  its  entirety...'  (paragraph  57).  Having
      rejected the asylum claim he went on to consider the appellant's human
      rights claim. At paragraphs 59 to 60, with reference  to the issue  of
      risk on return to failed asylum seekers, he stated:

             'I note the discrepancy between the evidence from the  British
             Ambassador and  the human rights activist.  The  letter   from
             the British Ambassador post dates  the  information  from  the
             human rights worker.  There  is  however  evidence  that  this
             practice  of detention  assault  and  extortion  of  deportees
             continues as at 27 June 2005 if a person  is  unmasked  as  an
             asylum seeker (B60).


             Given the findings I have made and  guidance case law which  I
             believe is out of date and does not take account of the  Dutch
             information I accept its is reasonably  likely  the  appellant
             will  be  subjected  to  inhuman  or  degrading  treatment  if
             returned to DRC given paragraph 34 and 35 above.'

3.   Essentially therefore  the  Immigration  Judge  decided  to  allow  the
      appeal because he considered  that the appellant, as a  failed  asylum
      seeker, would be at real risk on return of ill-treatment  contrary  to
      Article 3.

4.   The grounds alleged that this decision manifested a failure  to  follow
      a country guidance determination, that of AB and DM  (Risk  categories
      reviewed - Tutsis added) [2005] CG DRC UKIAT 00188 in particular.

5.   At the reconsideration hearing Mr  Sekhon submitted firstly,  that  the
      Immigration Judge could not be said to have materially erred in law in
      failing to follow  AB and DM because neither of the  parties  had  put
      the case before him and he plainly did not know about  this  decision,
      which was excusable because it had only been promulgated (on  21  July
      2005) some four or five weeks prior to the hearing of this  appeal  on
      12  August 2005.  Secondly, in paragraphs 59-60 the Immigration  Judge
      had effectively  relied on compelling fresh  evidence  consisting   in
      the evidence  of the continuation as at 27  June  2005  of  detention,
      assault and extortion of deportees if  a  person  is  unmasked  as  an
      asylum seeker.  The reference he made  was to  an  HJT  Research  News
      Reporting Service Item of 27 June 2005 which stated:

             'Netherlands  suspends  returns  of  asylum  seekers  to   DRC
             following reported leaks of official documents
             HJT Research News Reporting Service
             27 June 2005


             Dutch immigration minister Rita Verdonk announced a  temporary
             halt of returns of failed asylum  seekers  to  the  Democratic
             Republic of Congo after official documents  were  reported  to
             have been leaked to  Congolese officials,  BBC  news  reported
             on June 24th.


             According to BBC News, the  announcement  came  at  a  special
             sitting of the Netherlands parliament following  a  report  by
             the  Dutch  Netwerk  current  affairs  programme  last   week.
             Congolese officials, BBC  News  reported, were  said  to  have
             obtained confidential documents on   several  deported  asylum
             seekers.  The  deportees  were  then  "abused"  by   Congolese
             officials, BBC News said.


             An independent enquiry would be set up to investigate how  the
             files were leaked, BBC News reported.


             BBC News added that  Dutch media  reports  said  human  rights
             organisations had warned that  deportees  faced  the  "serious
             risk of imprisonment,  extortion and assault  if  unmasked  as
             asylum seekers".


             Expatica News (a news and information website  for  expats  in
             Europe) reported on June 22 that  minister  Rita  Verdonk  had
             been  called on to resign following the revelations.  Expatica
             said that the Netwerk current affairs programme  had  reported
             that  Congolese authorities had  obtained  official  documents
             relating to  Dutch  asylum  applications  in  at  least  three
             cases.


             According to Expatica, anonymous sources within the  Congolese
             immigration service (DGM) and the  country's security  service
             (ANR) had told Netwerk  that  returnee  asylum  seekers  "risk
             being held for detention for days,  assaulted  and  receive  a
             fine". Expatica reported that it  was  also  alleged  by  some
             former asylum seekers that the Congolese authorities had  been
             fully aware of the statements they had made  in  their  asylum
             applications in the Netherlands.


             BBC  News  reported  that  minister  Verdonk  had   previously
             reassured the Dutch  parliament  on   several  occasions  that
             failed asylum seekers' files were kept secret.'

6.   It is clear that that the Immigration Judge  in this case  was  unaware
      of,  or  had  overlooked,  the  AB  and  DM  Country  Guideline   case
      notwithstanding  that  this  had  been  posted  on  the   AIT  Country
      Guideline website list on  27 July 2005,  over  two  weeks  before  he
      heard this appeal. In an earlier section of his determination,  headed
      'Guidance case Law', the only  DRC case he  referred  to  was   [2004]
      UKIAT  L DRC. (This case is now cited as  VL  (Risk  -  Failed  asylum
      seekers) Democratic Republic of Congo CG [2004] UKIAT  0007).  It  can
      only have been this case that he had in mind in paragraph 60, when  he
      referred to '... guidance case law which I believe is out of date'.

7.   In fact the L (DRC) case was not the latest  CG case, even leaving  the
       AB and DM out of the equation for the moment. There were four others.
      These included RK (Obligation to  investigate)  DRC  CG  [2004]  UKIAT
      00129, added on 8 November 2004, which, inter alia, found that L (DRC)
      continued to be applicable guidance.

8.   Be that as it may, the  case  of  AB  and  DM  was  published  and  was
      applicable country  guidance  at  the  date  of  hearing  before  this
      Immigration Judge. By virtue of AIT  Practice  Directions  18.2  made,
      inter alia, under section 107(3) of the Nationality,  Immigration  and
      Asylum Act 2002, he was obliged to treat it as  authoritative  in  any
      subsequent appeal, so far as that appeal:

             '(a) relates to the country guidance issue in question;  and
             (b)  depends upon the same or similar evidence'.

9.   The fact that the Immigration Judge was unaware  of  the  existence  of
      applicable country guidance at the date of hearing does not  make  his
      failure to treat it  as  authoritative  any  less  erroneous:  see  DK
      (Return - Ethnic Serb - Upheld SK - Accommodation) Croatia  CG  [2003]
      UKIAT 00153.

10.  However, whether this error amounted in this case to a  material  error
      of law comes down to the issue of whether or not the appeal before him
      depended upon the same or similar evidence as was before the  panel in
      AB and DM.

11.  There is no specific reference in  AB  and  DM  to  the  27  June  2005
      document.  There could not have been because the hearing of AB and  DM
      took place on 25  February 2005 and no documents had been  taken  into
      account afterwards.   Indeed, the panel hearing this case believed, on
      the basis of materials before it, that the  Dutch government  had  not
      seen any evidence  that  failed  asylum  seekers  were  persecuted  on
      arrival: see paragraph 34.  However, in assessing the issue of risk to
      failed asylum seekers the panel in AB and DM  considered a  prodigious
      body of materials. Further it dealt specifically  with  the  issue  of
      risk arising from returnees from  interrogation on arrival  and  being
      required to pay a fine.  Comparing the materials which  the  panel  in
      AB and DM had before it and those the Immigration Judge had before him
      in this case, we do not think that  the  fresh  evidence  he  had  was
      dissimilar.

12.  In evaluating how the  Immigration Judge approached  the  new  evidence
      in this case it is important to take note of what issue it went to and
      how he approached that issue. The issue was a general one, indeed  one
      of the most wide-ranging issues that can ever arise in respect of  any
      country - failed asylum seekers.  If the Immigration Judge  was  right
      in his assessment, then every national of the DRC who  claimed  asylum
      was potentially entitled to be recognised as at real risk of treatment
      contrary to  Article  3   on  return.   We  shall  come  back  to  the
      importance we attach to the  scope  of  AB  and  DM's  review  of  the
      evidence below.

13.  In our view, when the risk category posited is a significant one it  is
      also incumbent on an Immigration Judge to  pay  particular  regard  to
      paragraph 18.4 of the  AIT Practice Directions:

             '18.4  Because of the principle  that  like  cases  should  be
                   treated in  like  manner,  failure  to  follow  a  clear,
                   apparently applicable county guidance case or to show why
                   it does not apply to the case in question, is  likely  to
                   be regarded as ground for review or appeal on a point  of
                   law.'

14.  Very clear and cogent reasons have  to  be  given  for  departing  from
      country guidance on an issue  which,  by  its  very  nature,  requires
      consideration in the context of comprehensive evidence and argument.

15.  With that in mind, we turn to consider what the Immigration  Judge  did
      in this case. He nowhere explained why he considered that the evidence
      before him was different or  dissimilar  to  that  considered  in  the
      Country  Guideline cases of AB and DM because, as we have said, he was
      plainly  unaware of that case.  In any  event,   simply  to  say  that
      '[t]here is however evidence that this practice of detention,  assault
      and extortion of deportees continues as  at  27  June  2005'  was  not
      enough. The mere existence of evidence proves  nothing.  What  he  was
      required to do was reach a decision  as  to  why  he  considered  that
      evidence weighty.  Furthermore he was obliged by case law to  reach  a
      decision  as to whether the evidence as evaluated was  weighty  enough
      to establish a real risk of treatment contrary to Article 3.

16.  He was also required to consider that evidence  in the context  of  the
      evidence as a whole.  Plainly he failed to do that. In paragraph 59 he
      presented his decision as being based on resolution of  a  discrepancy
      between the evidence   from the  British   Ambassador  and  the  human
      rights activist; and the only reason he gave for preferring the latter
      was that that information post dated the British  Ambassador's letter.
      The 27 June 2005 source, in turn,  referred  specifically  to  only  a
      handful of cases, some specific  to  the  Dutch  government's  alleged
      failure to adhere to the principle of confidentiality  in  respect  of
      asylum claimant details; and it did  not  include  the   text  of  the
      sources relied on.   If  this  Immigration  Judge  had  read  Tribunal
      country guidance on the issue of failed asylum seekers in the  DRC, he
      would have seen  that it has  consistently  not  been   accepted  that
      untested reports of a small number of cases of asylum seekers  said to
      have been ill-treated  on  return  are  sufficient  on  their  own  to
      demonstrate that failed asylum seekers generally are at real  risk  of
      serious harm of treatment contrary to Article 3. In the light of  that
      previous finding, it was incumbent on the Immigration Judge to explain
      why he felt reliance could be placed on reports which appeared  to  be
      similarly untested, and  why  he  felt,  even  if  such  reports  were
      accepted, they demonstrated a real risk to returnees generally, in the
      light of the body of background evidence before him read as a whole.

17.  The Immigration Judge's approach to the issue he sought to  decide  was
      legally flawed and he failed to show that the  evidence  on  which  he
      relied  was  dissimilar  from  the  ongoing  state  of  the  evidence,
      considered in the round, relating to failed asylum seekers.

18.  For an Immigration Judge to approach reversal of  country  guidance  in
      so cavalier a fashion undermines the purpose and validity  of  country
      guidance as endorsed by the Court of Appeal in  R (Iran)  [2005]  EWCA
      Civ 982.  The AIT Practice Directions make clear what  an  Immigration
      Judge needs to do if he is minded  to  depart  from  existing  country
      guidance.  The wider the risk category posited the greater the duty on
      an Immigration Judge to give careful reasons based on an adequate body
      of evidence.

19.  Having decided that the Immigration Judge  materially erred in law,  we
      must now consider what decision  we should substitute for that of  the
      Immigration Judge

20.  We do not consider that what the  Immigration  Judge   referred  to  as
      the 'Dutch Information'  substantiates  the  proposition  that  failed
      asylum seekers  are   generally  at  risk.  We  have  no  evidence  in
      satisfactory  form  before  us  as  to  the  circumstances    of   the
      individuals said to have been  ill-treated.   Some  of  this  evidence
      refers to procedures which are clearly specific to those  involved  in
      Dutch asylum  procedures and how  their  cases  were  handled  by  the
      Dutch authorities.

21.   There  is  nothing  in  this  evidence  which  relates  to  UK  asylum
      procedures. It contains no suggestion that the  DRC  authorities  have
      obtained documents relating to asylum claims made in the  UK.  In  our
      view  the sources referred to and the cases they refer  to  offer  far
      too  slender  a basis for putting to one side the  conclusions reached
      by the panel in AB and DM, particularly given the  very  wide  ranging
      consideration that panel gave to the state of  the  evidence  on  this
      issue and, having heard from a  leading country expert,  Dr Kennes, on
      procedures on return.

22.  For the above reasons:

    The Immigration Judge materially erred in law.

    The decision we substitute for his is to dismiss the appeal   on  human
      rights grounds.



Signed                                           Date

Dr H H Storey
Senior Immigration Judge
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
                            MK (AB & DM confirmed) DRC CG [2006] UKAIT 00001



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Field House       Determination
On 29 November 2005
Promulgated
On

                                   Before

                                Dr H H Storey
                          Senior Immigration Judge



                                   Between


                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:       Mr N Sekhon,  Counsel, instructed by Switalski's
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Petersen,  Presenting Officer


                            FUNDING DETERMINATION

  1. The Tribunal is satisfied that, at the  time  the  Appellant  made  the
     section 103A application and for the reasons  indicated  in  the  SIJ's
     order for reconsideration, there was a significant  prospect  that  the
     appeal would be allowed upon  reconsideration.  Accordingly  it  orders
     that  the  Appellant's  costs  in  respect  of  the   application   for
     reconsideration and in respect of the reconsideration are  to  be  paid
     out of the relevant fund, as defined in  Rule  33  of  the  Asylum  and
     Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005


      Signed
      Dated


      Dr H H Storey
      Immigration Judge


