

Asylum and Immigration Tribunal

           OA (EEA - retained right of residence) Nigeria [2010] UKAIT 00003

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Procession House                     |                             |
|On 2 September 2009                           |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                       SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE STOREY


                                   Between

                                     OA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:         Dr V Onipede, Counsel, instructed by De Soyza &
                    Fernando Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr J Parkinson, Home Office Presenting Officer

   i. Reg 10 of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 is
      a free-standing provision which enables  a  family  member  who  would
      otherwise cease to have a right of residence to continue to do  so  in
      certain circumstances. So far as concerns persons who fall within  reg
      10(5), so long as their marriage or  civil  partnership  is  at  least
      three years old it is possible for them  to  qualify  for  a  retained
      right of residence after just one year  of  residence  in  the  United
      Kingdom. But to achieve a permanent right of residence on the strength
      of a retained right of  residence  it  is  always  necessary  to  show
      residence in the UK for a continuous period of five years.

  ii. Under reg 10(5)(a) the phrase "termination of the  marriage  ..."  can
      only mean the lawful ending of the marriage by legal proceedings (i.e.
      divorce); it cannot mean "breakdown of the marriage"; see also WW (EEA
      Regs. - civil partnership) Thailand [2009] UKAIT 00014.

 iii. To count as a qualifying period of  residence  under  reg  15(1)(b)  a
      person must show, inter alia, that the five years in question are ones
      in which the  said  residence  has  been  "in  accordance  with  these
      Regulations". That entails  that  during  those  five  years  the  EEA
      national on whom the family member relies in order to establish his or
      her right must have been continuously  in  the  UK  exercising  Treaty
      rights (save for certain periods of absence specified in reg 3).

  iv. For the purposes of reg 15(1)(b) the period of  time  during  which  a
      person "has resided in the United Kingdom with  the  EEA  national..."
      must commence from the date the person first became a  family  member,
      that being the date of marriage in the case of a spouse.

   v. By contrast, Reg 15(1)(f) provides a route for acquiring  a  permanent
      right of residence based in part on a  retained  right  of  residence.
      Under reg 15(1)(f) the family member has to show that he was  residing
      in the United  Kingdom  in  accordance  with  the  Regulations  for  a
      continuous period of five years, and at the end of that period he  has
      a retained right of residence.






                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The appellant is a national of Nigeria. In  a  decision  notified  on  29
June  2009  Immigration  Judge  (IJ)  Gillespie  allowed  her  appeal.   The
respondent was successful in obtaining an order for reconsideration  and  so
the matter comes before me.

2. The background to this  reconsideration  is  as  follows.  The  appellant
entered the United Kingdom on February  2000  and  in  about  November  2000
claimed asylum.  On 28 April 2001 she married a French national,  Mr  Abdoul
Aziz Diop. Soon after she applied for the issue of  a  residence  permit  as
the spouse of an EEA national  (under  the  Immigration  (European  Economic
Area) Regulations 2000).  On 14 October 2003 she was granted such a  permit.
On 29 August 2008 she applied  for  issue  of  a  permanent  residence  card
residence permit as  the  family  member  who  had  retained  the  right  of
residence under reg  10(5)  of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
Regulations 2006 (hereafter the "2006 EEA Regulations). In  her  application
for this she stated that her  husband  had  left  home  and  she  had  begun
divorce proceedings. On  12  December  2008  the  respondent  requested  her
solicitors to provide her marriage certificate,  decree  absolute,  evidence
that she had been residing in the UK for five years and  evidence  that  her
EEA spouse had been exercising Treaty rights in the UK up until the time  of
the divorce.  In  the  course  of  further  correspondence  the  appellant's
solicitors provided a number of documents including a birth certificate  for
her son born on 17 December 2003 and  a  letter  from  Her  Majesty's  Court
Service.  The latter stated that the  appellant  was  not  entitled  to  the
decree sought because:

         "The Petitioner continued to live with the respondent  for  sixteen
         months or so after finding out about the  adultery.  She  says  she
         found out in December 2004 and he did not leave  till  April  2006.
         She cannot therefore rely on adultery as grounds for  divorce,  see
         Matrimonial Causes Act 1973, s.2 (1)."

3. On 29 April 2009 the respondent made a decision refusing to issue  her  a
permanent residence card.


Relevant Legal Framework

4. It will assist, before proceeding further, to set out the relevant  legal
provisions and to note relevant  jurisprudence  of  the  European  Court  of
Justice (ECJ).

5. Reg 6 of the 2006 EEA Regulations defines "qualified person"  as  meaning
"a person who is an EEA national  and  in  the  United  Kingdom  as   (a)  a
jobseeker; (b) a worker; (c) a self-employed person; (d)  a  self-sufficient
person; or (e) a student".

6. Reg 7(1) states that:


         "Subject to paragraph (2), for the purposes  of  these  Regulations
         the following persons shall be treated as  the  family  members  of
         another person -
         a) his spouse or his civil partner..."


7. Reg 10, headed "Family member who has retained the right  of  residence".
provides
         "10. -   (1) In these Regulations, "family member who has retained
                  the right of residence" means, subject to paragraph (8),
                  a person who satisfies the conditions in paragraph (2),
                  (3), (4) or (5).

               (2)  A person satisfies the conditions in this paragraph if-

                  (a)  he was a family member of a qualified person when
                      the qualified person died;

                  (b)  he resided in the United Kingdom in accordance  with
                      these Regulations for at least the  year  immediately
                      before the death of the qualified person; and

                       (c)   he satisfies the condition in paragraph (6).

               (3)     A person satisfies the conditions in this paragraph
             if-

                  (a)  he is the direct descendant of-

                      (i)   a qualified person who has died;



                      (ii)  a person who ceased to be a qualified person on
                           ceasing to reside in the United Kingdom; or



                      (iii)       the person who was the spouse or civil
                           partner of the qualified person mentioned in sub-
                           paragraph (i) when he died or is the spouse or
                           civil partner of the person mentioned in sub-
                           paragraph (ii); and

                  (b)   he was  attending  an  educational  course  in  the
                      United  Kingdom  immediately  before  the   qualified
                      person died or ceased to be a  qualified  person  and
                      continues to attend such a course.

      (4)   A person satisfies the  conditions  in  this  paragraph  if  the
                  person is the parent with actual custody of a  child  who
                  satisfies the condition in paragraph (3).

      (5)   A person satisfies the conditions in this paragraph if-

                  (a)  he ceased to be a family member of a qualified person
                      on the termination of the marriage or civil
                      partnership of the qualified person;

                  (b)  he was residing in the United Kingdom in accordance
                      with these Regulations at the date of the
                      termination;

                  (c)  he satisfies the condition in paragraph (6); and

                  (d)  either-

                      (i)   prior to the initiation of the proceedings  for
                           the termination of  the  marriage  or  the  civil
                           partnership the marriage or civil partnership had
                           lasted for at least three years and  the  parties
                           to the marriage or civil partnership had  resided
                           in the United  Kingdom  for  at  least  one  year
                           during its duration;

                      (ii)  the former spouse or civil partner of the
                           qualified person has custody of a child of the
                           qualified person;

                      (iii) the former spouse or civil partner of the
                           qualified person has the right of access to a
                           child of the qualified person under the age of 18
                           and a court has ordered that such access must
                           take place in the United Kingdom; or

                      (iv)   the continued right of residence in the United
                           Kingdom   of   the   person   is   warranted   by
                           particularly difficult circumstances, such as  he
                           or another family member having been a victim  of
                           domestic violence while  the  marriage  or  civil
                           partnership was subsisting.

                  (6)  The condition in this paragraph is that the person-

      (a)   is not an EEA national but would, if he were  an  EEA  national,
                      be a  worker,  a  self-employed  person  or  a  self-
                      sufficient person under regulation 6; or

                  (b)  is the family member of a  person  who  falls  within
                      paragraph (a).

            (7)  In this regulation, "educational  course"  means  a  course
                  within the scope of  Article  12  of  Council  Regulation
                  (EEC) No. 1612/68 on freedom of movement for workers.

            (8)   A  person  with  a  permanent  right  of  residence  under
                  regulation 15 shall not become a  family  member  who  has
                  retained the right of residence on the death or  departure
                  from the United Kingdom of the  qualified  person  or  the
                  termination of the marriage or civil partnership,  as  the
                  case may be, and a family  member  who  has  retained  the
                  right of residence shall cease  to  have  that  status  on
                  acquiring a permanent right of residence under  regulation
                  15."

8. Reg 15, headed "Permanent right of residence", provides:
      "15. -(1) The following persons shall acquire the right to reside in
                  the United Kingdom permanently-

                  (a)  an EEA national who has resided in the United Kingdom
                      in accordance with these Regulations for a continuous
                      period of five years;

                  (b)  a family member of an EEA national who is not himself
                      an EEA national but who has  resided  in  the  United
                      Kingdom with the  EEA  national  in  accordance  with
                      these Regulations for a  continuous  period  of  five
                      years;

                  (c)  a worker  or  self-employed  person  who  has  ceased
                      activity;

                  (d)  the family member of a worker or self-employed person
                      who has ceased activity;

                  (e)        a person who was the family member of a  worker
                      or self-employed person where-

                      (i)   the worker or self-employed person has died;

                      (ii)  the family member resided with him  immediately
                           before his death; and

                      (iii)       the worker or  self-employed  person  had
                           resided continuously in the United Kingdom for at
                           least the two years immediately before his  death
                           or the death was the result  of  an  accident  at
                           work or an occupational disease;

                  (f)  a person who-

                      (i)   has resided in the United Kingdom in accordance
                           with these Regulations for a continuous period of
                           five years; and

                      (ii)  was, at the end of that period, a family member
                           who has retained the right of residence.

              (2)      Once acquired,  the  right  of  permanent  residence
                  under this regulation shall be lost only  through  absence
                  from  the  United  Kingdom  for  a  period  exceeding  two
                  consecutive years.

               3) But this regulation is subject to regulation 19(3)(b)."

9. Reference  should  also  be  made  to  the  corresponding  provisions  of
Directive 2004/38/EC ("the Citizens Directive"). Recital 15 states:

         "Family members should be legally safeguarded in the event  of  the
         death of the Union  citizen,  divorce,  annulment  of  marriage  or
         termination of a registered partnership. With due regard for family
         life and human dignity, and in certain conditions to guard  against
         abuse, measures should therefore be taken to ensure  that  in  such
         circumstances family members already residing within the  territory
         of  the  host  Member  State  retain  their  right   of   residence
         exclusively on a personal basis".

10, Art 2(1) lists as one category of "family member",  "(a) the spouse".

11. Then there are the provisions of Arts 12-14:

         "Article 12


         Retention of the right of residence by family members in the  event
         of death or departure of the Union citizen
         1.  Without  prejudice  to  the  second  subparagraph,  the   Union
             citizen's death or departure from the host Member State  shall
             not affect the right of residence of  his/her  family  members
             who are nationals of a Member State.


             Before acquiring the right of permanent residence, the persons
             concerned must meet the conditions laid down  in  points  (a),
             (b), (c) or (d) of Article 7(1).


         2.       Without prejudice to the second  subparagraph,  the  Union
             citizen's  death  shall  not  entail  loss  of  the  right  of
             residence of his/her family members who are not nationals of a
             Member State and who have been residing  in  the  host  Member
             State as family members for at least one year before the Union
             citizen's death.


             Before acquiring the right of permanent residence,  the  right
             of residence of the persons concerned shall remain subject  to
             the requirement that they are  able  to  show  that  they  are
             workers or self-employed persons or that they have  sufficient
             resources for themselves  and  their  family  members  not  to
             become a burden on the social assistance system  of  the  host
             Member  State  during  their  period  of  residence  and  have
             comprehensive sickness insurance  cover  in  the  host  Member
             State, or  that  they  are  members  of  the  family,  already
             constituted in the host Member State, of a  person  satisfying
             these requirements. "Sufficient resources" shall be as defined
             in Article 8(4).


             Such family members shall  retain  their  right  of  residence
             exclusively on a personal basis.


         3.       The Union citizen's departure from the host  Member  State
             or his/her death  shall  not  entail  loss  of  the  right  of
             residence of his/her children or of the parent who has  actual
             custody of the children, irrespective of nationality,  if  the
             children reside in the host Member State and are  enrolled  at
             an educational establishment,  for  the  purpose  of  studying
             there, until the completion of their studies.


         Article 13


         Retention of the right of residence by family members in the  event
         of divorce, annulment of  marriage  or  termination  of  registered
         partnership


         1.       Without prejudice to  the  second  subparagraph,  divorce,
             annulment of the Union citizen's marriage  or  termination  of
             his/her registered partnership, as referred to in  point  2(b)
             of Article 2 shall  not  affect  the  right  of  residence  of
             his/her family members who are nationals of a Member State.


             Before acquiring the right of permanent residence, the persons
             concerned must meet the conditions laid down  in  points  (a),
             (b), (c) or (d) of Article 7(1).


         2.       Without prejudice to  the  second  subparagraph,  divorce,
             annulment  of  marriage  or  termination  of  the   registered
             partnership referred to in point 2(b) of Article 2  shall  not
             entail loss of the right of residence  of  a  Union  citizen's
             family members who are not nationals of a Member State where:


              (a)      prior to initiation  of  the  divorce  or  annulment
                  proceedings or termination of the  registered  partnership
                  referred to in point 2(b) of Article 2,  the  marriage  or
                  registered partnership has lasted at  least  three  years,
                  including one year in the host Member State; or


             (b)       by agreement between the  spouses  or  the  partners
                  referred to in point 2(b) of Article 2 or by court  order,
                  the spouse or partner who is not a national  of  a  Member
                  State has custody of the Union citizen's children; or
             (c)        this  is  warranted   by   particularly   difficult
                  circumstances, such as having been a  victim  of  domestic
                  violence while the marriage or registered partnership  was
                  subsisting; or


             (d)        by  agreement  between  the  spouses  or   partners
                  referred to in point 2(b) of Article 2 or by court  order,
                  the spouse or partner who is not a national  of  a  Member
                  State has the right of access to a minor  child,  provided
                  that the court has ruled that such access must be  in  the
                  host Member State, and for as long as is required.


         Before acquiring the right of permanent  residence,  the  right  of
         residence of the persons concerned  shall  remain  subject  to  the
         requirement that they are able to show that  they  are  workers  or
         self-employed persons or that they have  sufficient  resources  for
         themselves and their family members not to become a burden  on  the
         social assistance system of the  host  Member  State  during  their
         period of residence and have comprehensive sickness insurance cover
         in the host Member State, or that they are members of  the  family,
         already  constituted  in  the  host  Member  State,  of  a   person
         satisfying these requirements. "Sufficient resources" shall  be  as
         defined in Article 8(4).


              Such family members shall retain  their  right  of  residence
         exclusively on a personal basis.


         Article 14


         Retention of the right of residence


         1.  Union citizens and their family members shall have the right of
             residence provided for in Article 6, as long as  they  do  not
             become an unreasonable burden on the social assistance  system
             of the host Member State.


         2.       Union citizens and their family  members  shall  have  the
             right of residence provided for in Articles 7, 12  and  13  as
             long as they meet the conditions set out therein. In  specific
             cases where there is a reasonable doubt as to whether a  Union
             citizen or his/her family members satisfies the conditions set
             out in Articles 7, 12 and 13,  Member  States  may  verify  if
             these conditions are fulfilled. This verification shall not be
             carried out systematically.


         3.        An  expulsion  measure  shall  not   be   the   automatic
             consequence of a Union citizen's or his or her family member's
             recourse to the social assistance system of  the  host  Member
             State.


         4.       By way of derogation from paragraphs 1 and 2  and  without
             prejudice to  the  provisions  of  Chapter  VI,  an  expulsion
             measure may in no case be adopted against  Union  citizens  or
             their family members if:


             (a)       the Union  citizens  are  workers  or  self-employed
                  persons, or


             (b)       the Union citizens entered the territory of the host
                  Member State in order to seek employment.


             In this case, the Union citizens and their family members  may
             not be expelled for as long as the Union citizens can  provide
             evidence that they are continuing to seek employment and  that
             they have a genuine chance of being engaged."


Diatta v Land Berlin [1985] EUECJ R-267/87

12. It is useful to summarise next  the  Diatta  v  Land  Berlin  case.  Mrs
Diatta had married a French national  who  resided  and  worked  in  Berlin.
After living with her husband for some time she separated  from  him  on  29
August 1978  with  the  intention  of  divorcing  and  thereafter  lived  in
separate accommodation. On the expiry of her residence permit she  requested
an extension. On reference to the ECJ the principal  question  was  whether,
in order to qualify for a right of residence under Article 10 of  Regulation
No. 1612/68, being a member of a worker's family  necessarily  required  her
to live  permanently  with  him.  In  concluding  that  there  was  no  such
requirement the Court stated at paragraph 20:


         "It must be added that the marital relationship cannot be  regarded
         as dissolved so long as it has not been terminated by the competent
         authority. It is not dissolved  merely  because  the  spouses  live
         separately, even where they intend to divorce at a later date."

The appellant's grounds of appeal

13. The appellant's grounds of appeal  contended  that  the  respondent  was
wrong not to find that the appellant had submitted enough evidence  to  show
she had a retained right of  residence.   They  pointed  out  that  she  had
produced evidence that she had resided with her  husband  for  three  years.
They submitted that it was wrong for the respondent to expect to  produce  a
decree absolute as opposed to a divorce petition.

The IJ's determination

14. The IJ  first  considered  whether  the  appellant  was  entitled  to  a
permanent residence card  under  reg  15(1)(b).  Noting  that  reg  15(1)(b)
provides that a family member of an EEA national who has  resided  with  the
EEA national in accordance with the Regulations for a continuous  period  of
five years shall acquire the right to reside in the UK permanently,  the  IJ
found that the appellant could not meet this requirement,  as  she  had  not
been residing with her husband for such a period.

15. In the IJ's judgment there was,  however,  an  alternative  route  to  a
permanent residence card open to this appellant, namely reg  15(1)(f)  which
relates to a person who has retained  the  right  of  residence  within  the
meaning of reg 10 by virtue of being a person who had ceased to be a  family
member on termination of their marriage. According  to  the  respondent  the
appellant could not meet this requirement because she had no final order  of
divorce (decree absolute). But in  the  IJ's  view  such  an  interpretation
would lead to an absurdity in that it would leave a person in  the  position
of the appellant unreasonably unprotected:

         "There is no reason evinced why the right of  residence  should  be
         retained only by a divorced spouse and not by a spouse  who  is  in
         the process of obtaining a divorce.

         The alternative interpretation, that the marriage  relationship  be
         broken down, provides protection to all  family  members  who  have
         suffered breakdown of a relationship with an EEA  spouse.  It  does
         not bring about any artificial  interruption  of  lawful  residence
         during a period when  cohabitation  has  ceased  but  an  order  of
         divorce is not yet made, as does the more  limited  interpretation.
         Had it been the intention of  the  lawgiver  to  require  that  the
         marriage had been terminated by final order of  divorce,  it  would
         have been a simple matter to insert in the  provisions,  after  the
         word 'termination', the words 'by divorce' or any the words  deemed
         appropriate. It is not necessary  to  insert  any  words  into  the
         provision in order to permit  the  word  termination  to  have  its
         widest meaning embracing the effective breakdown  of  the  marriage
         relationship and the termination of cohabitation. I  consider  that
         the wider meaning of the word termination is, for these reasons, to
         be preferred.


         The facts show that the appellant had lived  with  her  spouse  for
         three years prior to the date of institution of the proceedings and
         that they lived together for  at  least  one  year  in  the  United
         Kingdom. The appellant has therefore retained a right of  residence
         and meets the requirements of Regulation 10(5) and  accordingly  of
         Regulation 15(f)(ii)."

Respondent's grounds for reconsideration

16. The respondent's grounds for reconsideration tackled  the  IJ's  reasons
in reverse order. Addressing his finding that the appellant  had  shown  she
had retained a  right  of  residence  under  reg  15(1)(f),  the  respondent
submitted that, contrary to  the  IJ's  view,  the  term  'termination'  was
unambiguous and that his proposed interpretation was also at odds  with  the
principles established by the ECJ in  Diatta v Land Berlin,  namely  that  a
relationship of marriage abides  until  that  marriage  is  ended  and  that
cohabitation is not a requirement.  In  that  case,  as  here,  the  grounds
noted, the subject was estranged from  her  husband  and  living  separately
pending divorce proceedings.

17. As to the IJ's assessment of whether under reg  15(1)(b)  the  appellant
was entitled to a permanent residence  card  through  a  separate  route  by
virtue of being the family member  of  a  qualified  person  throughout  the
period of five years, the respondent's written grounds took a position  that
was in part more favourable than that of the  IJ.  They  averred  that  "the
application  of  Diatta  might  appear  to  mean  that  the  appeal   should
nevertheless have succeeded, as five years residence has accrued  since  the
marriage..." However, the grounds  hastened  to  add,  that  was  still  not
enough to enable the appellant to qualify because,  whilst  she  could  show
that five years had accrued, no adequate evidence of  her  husband's  status
at all material times had been provided and unless he was exercising  Treaty
rights throughout that period, the requirements of reg  15(1)(b)  could  not
be met.


My assessment

18. In  this  case  we  are  only  concerned  with  reg  10  insofar  as  it
constitutes one of the routes by which a person can  qualify  for  permanent
residence under reg 15. It is worth noting, however, that reg 10 is  also  a
free-standing provision, which enables a family member who  would  otherwise
cease to have a  right  of  residence  to  continue  to  do  so  in  certain
circumstances. So far as concerns persons who  fall  within  reg  10(5),  so
long as their marriage or civil partnership is at least three years  old  it
is possible for them to qualify for a  retained  right  of  residence  after
just one year of residence in the United Kingdom. (It is also  to  be  noted
that by virtue of reg 10(5)(c) he or she must also show that he or  she  (if
not an EEA national) is  a  worker,  a  self-employed  person,  or  a  self-
sufficient person under reg 6; or the family member of such a  person.)  But
to achieve a permanent right of residence on  the  strength  of  a  retained
right of residence it is always necessary to show residence in the UK for  a
continuous period of five years.

19. The decision in this case was to refuse an application for  a  permanent
residence card. Mr Parkinson was prepared to accept that  for  the  purposes
of this appeal it did not matter  that  the  claimed  period  of  qualifying
residence pre-dated 30 April 2006 (the date of the coming into force of  the
2006 EEA Regulations). Hence it is not necessary for me  to  decide  whether
or not, by virtue of para 6 of Schedule 4 to the 2006 Regulations,  all  but
two days of the period of residence on which she  relied  (dating  from  her
marriage on 28 April 2000) stood to be treated as a  qualifying  period  for
the purposes of these Regulations. The  respondent  accepts  that  the  past
period can count in principle as a qualifying period.

Reg 15(1)(b)


20. Reg 15(1)(b) can be broken down into four main constituent  elements  as
follows. In order to qualify for a permanent right  of  residence  a  person
must show that:


         . He or she is a family member of  an  EEA  national  who  is  not
           himself an EEA national;


         . He or she is someone who has resided in the United Kingdom for a
           continuous period of five years;


         . The five years in question must be ones in which the person  has
           been "residing with" the EEA national; and


         . The five years in question  must  be  ones  in  which  the  said
           residence must be "in accordance with these Regulations".


21. As we have seen, the IJ did consider whether the appellant was  entitled
to succeed under reg 15(1)(b) but concluded in summary terms  that  she  was
not because she had not been residing with her  husband  for  the  requisite
period of 5 years. However, if in fact the IJ was wrong about that  and  the
appellant met all of the requirements of reg 15(1)(b) in full, then she  was
entitled to a permanent residence card  irrespective  of  whether  she  also
qualified under reg 15(1)(f) and hence any error on the part of  the  IJ  in
relation to the latter provision could not be said to  have  been  material.
That being the case, the respondent's application for reconsideration  would
be bound to fail.


22. As regards the requirement of reg 15(1)(b) that the five years  must  be
ones in which the person has been "residing with" the EEA  national,  it  is
not necessary in this case to consider the precise meaning of  that  phrase,
since Mr Parkinson readily accepted that the period of residence the  couple
enjoyed from the date of their marriage until her husband left her in  April
2006 did amount to  "residing with" each other.

23. As regards the requisite period of five years, it is not entirely  clear
that the respondent was right to consider that  the  appellant  had  resided
with her husband for that period since, on  the  appellant's  own  evidence,
she had married him on 28 April 2001 and he did not leave until April  2006.
If he had left before 28 April 2006 the  period  involved  would  have  been
less  than  5  years.  However,  once  again,  Mr  Parkinson  said  that  he
respondent did not dispute that the appellant had resided with  her  husband
for 5 years. Hence I shall proceed on the footing that  here  this  part  of
the reg 15(1)(b) requirement was met as well.

24. To count as a qualifying  period  of  residence  under  reg  15(1)(b)  a
person must show, inter alia, that the five years in question  are  ones  in
which the said residence has been "in accordance with these  Regulations"  .
That entails that during those five years  the  EEA  national  on  whom  the
family member relies in order to establish his or her right must  have  been
continuously in the UK as a "qualified person" under reg  6  who  exercising
Treaty rights (save for certain periods of absence specified in reg  3).  In
this case the respondent vigorously disputes that the appellant  could  meet
this requirement because there was insufficient evidence  to  show  that  he
continued to be a qualified person for the duration of that period.

25. In  Section  6  of  the  relevant  application  form  (EEA4)  which  the
appellant completed and submitted it is stated that:

         "As evidence of the exercise of Treaty rights in the United Kingdom
         by your EEA or Swiss family member, both currently and continuously
         over the past 5 years, please provide the following documents:


         For time spent in employment letter(s) from  your  family  member's
         employer(s)  confirming  employment,  P60s  and  most  recent  wage
         slips."" (Emphasis added) .

26. The documents produced by the appellant and sent to  the  respondent  on
19 August 2008 included: a letter confirming her husband's  employment  with
Top 4 Securities as a Security Officer, dated 27 June  2002,  together  with
one payslip covering one month in August 2002 and  another  for  April  2003
from the same firm; two payslips covering  the  month  of  April  2004  from
O'Neill & Brennan Construction; a letter from Haypee Stores  dated  4  April
2005 confirming his employment with them  as a  store  supervisor,  together
with one payslip covering one month in November 2005  and  another  covering
April 2006.


 27. In her divorce petition  dated  16  February  2009  the  appellant  had
stated that her husband's occupation was a  "cleaner".  However,  there  was
no evidence that the appellant or her representatives  had  taken  steps  to
obtain evidence to show that her husband had in fact entered  employment  as
a cleaner or to furnish a clearer picture of  whether  her  husband  was  in
employment other than during the periods  covered  by  the  above  evidence.
Plainly these documents did not establish that her husband remained  someone
who was a "worker" continuously for the requisite five years.


28. It must be said that the application form fails to make clear  what  the
commencement date is for the relevant period of residence. By virtue of  the
wording of reg15(1)(b), it would appear to be the period from the date  that
the person has become a family member, so in this  case  from  the  date  of
marriage, whereas the question in the form, by  referring  to  "the  past  5
years", appears to suggest, incorrectly, it is  the  period  dating  back  5
years from the date of application. (If the date is not linked to  the  date
of marriage, then it would also mean that on appeal in this  type  of  case,
by virtue of s.85(4) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002,
one would have to have regard to the  date  of  decision  and  the  date  of
hearing of an appeal.)


29. On the given facts of this case, however, it would  make  no  difference
whether one took the period from the date of  marriage  until  the  date  of
application (28 April 2001 - 19 August 2008)   or  the  period  of  5  years
prior to the application (19 August 2003 - 19 August 2008). In both  periods
there were considerable gaps in  the  evidence  relating  to  the  husband's
employment.

 30. It is necessary, of course, to bear in mind that a person can  continue
to exercise Treaty rights as  a  "worker"  even  though  falling  unemployed
either for reason  specified  in  reg  6(2)  or  those  established  by  ECJ
jurisprudence: see RP (EEA Regs - worker -  cessation)  Italy  [2006]  UKAIT
00025 and IP and others (A2 national - worker  authorisation  -  exemptions)
Bulgaria [2009] UKAIT 00042. However, in this  case,  the  evidence  adduced
covered only very limited periods of time and did not  even  establish  that
the husband was still in the UK at the date of application. Given  that  the
burden is on the appellant to show that her husband  was  exercising  Treaty
rights continuously during the relevant  5  year  period  on  the  basis  of
employment or some other qualifying reason, I cannot see that the  IJ  erred
in concluding she could not succeed  on  the  basis  of  reg  15(1)(b).  His
reasons may or may not have been sound depending on whether her  husband  in
fact left the matrimonial home on or after 28 April), but  on  the  evidence
the appellant had not discharged the burden of proof on  her  to  show  that
her husband had continued to be a worker or otherwise  to  be  a  "qualified
person".

Reg 15(1)(f)

31. The only issue, therefore, is whether the IJ was right to find that  the
appellant was entitled to a permanent residence card under reg  15(1)(f)  by
virtue of  having  had  a  retained  right  of  residence.  Dr  Onipede  has
submitted that the IJ was right because the appellant was  someone  who  had
acquired   a   retained   right   of   residence,   by   virtue    of    the
termination/breakdown of her marriage, and having resided in the  UK  for  a
continuous period of five years.

32. It seems to me that Dr Onipede's submissions founder on  the  fact  that
reg 15(1)(f) contains a twofold test. An appellant must first show  that  he
"has  resided  in  the  UK  in  accordance  with  these  Regulations  for  a
continuous period of five years (reg  15(1)(f)(i))"  and  that  he  is  also
someone who "was, at the end  of  that  period,  a  family  member  who  has
retained the right of residence"(reg 15(1)(f)(ii)).

 33. The appellant fails to surmount the first test. She  does  so  for  the
same reasons as she was unable to surmount the  reg  15(1)(b)  test,  namely
that she is unable to establish that her residence with her husband was  "in
accordance with these Regulations". To  accord  with  the  Regulations,  her
status as a family member had to be based  on  his  continuing  to  exercise
Treaty rights, but there was insufficient evidence to show her  husband  was
continuing to exercise Treaty rights during the relevant period. Unlike  reg
15(1)(b), reg 15(f)(i) does not of course require  that  the  appellant  has
"resided with" the spouse, but otherwise its  conditions  are  the  same  as
under reg 15(1)(b). Accordingly  the  appellant  cannot  succeed  under  reg
15(1)(f).

34. Even if I am wrong in my assessment of the  appellant's  position  under
reg 15(1)(f)(i), I would still not have found that the IJ was right to  have
regarded the appellant as someone who  had  acquired  a  retained  right  of
residence. The fact of the matter was that during the  relevant  period  her
marriage continued in being, albeit the relationship between the couple  had
broken down. It had never terminated. There was still not as yet a point  in
time from which one could look back and calculate whether there had  been  a
qualifying period of residence.

35. The relevant provision for deciding whether there is  a  retained  right
of residence in the first place is, of course,  reg  10(5)(a)  which  states
that a person satisfies the conditions in this paragraph if  "he  ceased  to
be a family member of a qualified person on the termination of the  marriage
or civil partnership of the qualified person". The  IJ's  opinion  was  that
the term "terminated" meant effective breakdown of  a  marriage.  There  are
several reasons why I consider this to be an erroneous construction.

36. First, it is plainly contrary to the judgment of the  ECJ  in  Diatta  v
Land Berlin and it would take the most cogent  reasons  to  seek  to  depart
from an ECJ ruling, especially given that the  Citizens  Directive  did  not
signal any departure from the approach  taken  in  that  case.   Dr  Onipede
sought to argue that the ECJ in Diatta was  only  ruling  on  the  issue  of
marriage law in Germany and  that  it  did  not  necessarily  preclude  that
"termination" could mean something other than lawful ending of  a  marriage.
However, he  was  not  able  to  point  to  any  evidence  to  support  that
contention and it flies in the face of the  clear  fact  that  the  ECJ  was
seeking to provide a Community-wide definition of  Articles  10  and  11  of
Regulation (EEC) No 1612/68 which accords certain rights to the spouse of  a
worker who is a national of a Member  State  and  who  is  employed  in  the
territory of another Member State. The Advocate  General  noted  and  agreed
with the Commission's view that in relation to the argument that Article  10
and 11 required not just  lawful  marriage  but  cohabitation  in  a  common
dwelling, the  Community  legislature  cannot  have  intended  to  make  the
exercise of the right to free movement subject to  a  requirement  which  is
derived from family law which varies according to  the  Member  States.  The
Advocate General considered that in order for a person to show that  he  was
residing with a worker the marital relationship should not be considered  to
be dissolved until there had been a  "judicial  decision  which  has  become
final".   The  Court's  language  was  to  similar  effect:   "the   marital
relationship cannot be regarded as dissolved so long  as  it  has  not  been
terminated by the competent authority".

37.  It is for this reason that it does not assist to examine  what  meaning
in given in UK law in other contexts to the term "spouse".  Even  if  it  is
not always defined domestically as a person in a lawful marriage ( Sch 1  Pt
1 of the Rent Act 1977 as amended by  the  Housing  Act  1988   states  that
"[f]or the purposes of this paragraph, a person  who  was  living  with  the
original tenant as his or her wife  or  husband  shall  be  treated  as  the
spouse of the original tenant: see Ghaidan v Mendoza [2004] UKHL  30),  this
and related terms as they arise in the  2006  EEA  Regulations  have  to  be
given a Community law, not a national law, interpretation and  the  ECJ  has
already given a definitive ruling, which it  has  not  departed  from  since
Diatta v Land Berlin.

38. Second, there is nothing in the wording of  the  Citizens  Directive  or
the 2006 EEA Regulations to suggest that termination should have the  wider,
more diffuse meaning canvassed by Dr Onipede. To the contrary,  Art  12  (2)
refers to "divorce" ("divorce, annulment of marriage or termination  of  the
registered partnership referred to in point 2(b) of Article  2").   And  one
of the ways in which a person can qualify under reg 10(5) of  the  2006  EEA
Regulations is by being someone  who  satisfies  the  condition  in  para  6
(which concerns family members who are themselves workers or  self  employed
or self-sufficient persons) and:

    "(d) either -
           i)  prior  to  the  initiation  of  the  proceedings   for   the
              termination of the marriage  or  the  civil  partnership  the
              marriage or civil partnership had lasted for at  least  three
              years and the parties to the marriage  or  civil  partnership
              had resided in the United Kingdom for at lest one year during
              its duration". (Emphasis added)


39. The reference to "proceedings" can only mean legal proceedings  relating
to divorce and intended to result by operation of law in  the  "termination"
of the marriage. ( Here too the wording in  Art  12(2)(a)  of  the  Citizens
Directive is very similar, "prior to initiation of the divorce or  annulment
proceedings or termination of the registered partnership...")


40. Furthermore, the only other event which is seen by reg 10 to  justify  a
person acquiring a retained right  of  residence  has  a  similar  clear-cut
terminus in a temporal sense: death. Likewise, on the IJ's construction  the
references in reg 10(5)(d) (ii)-(iii) to  "former  spouse"  would  lose  any
sharp definitional edges and become contingent for their  interpretation  on
assessing the fine detail of the process of breakdown.


41.  Third,  Dr  Onipede's  approach,  because  it  would  require  defining
"spouse" in terms of  a purely factual relationship  based  on  cohabitation
and other personal ties, would mean that it would  be  very  difficult  (and
intrusive) in practice to ascertain when the break occurred.

42. Fourth, to construe termination to mean "lawful termination"  also  best
furthers the principle of legal certainty, since persons affected will  have
the security of knowing that their status as  family  members  will  not  be
contingent on being able to show living together  under  the  same  roof  or
cohabitation,  matters  which  by  their  nature  will  sometimes  be   very
difficult to pinpoint in time.

43. Fifth, to  construe  "termination"  as  meaning  lawful  termination  is
consistent with the  object  and  purpose  of  the  Citizen's  Directive  of
legally safeguarding the rights of family members, since it ensures  that  a
family member can continue to  qualify  as  a  family  member  even  if  for
whatever reason the couple do not continue to live under the  same  roof  or
who separate. On Dr Onipede's construction, a person would cease to be  able
to count any period of residence (for  the  purposes  of  qualifying  for  a
retained right of residence) from the date of the breakdown of  his  or  her
marriage, which will often be some significant period  of  time  before  the
date of divorce.


44. Sixth, it is clear from Art 13 of the same Directive that the  Community
legislature saw only a specified number of circumstances  as giving rise  to
a retained right  of  residence.  Recital  15  states  that  family  members
"should be legally safeguarded in the  event  of  the  death  of  the  Union
citizen, divorce, annulment of  marriage  or  termination  of  a  registered
partnership. It is only in respect of  "such  circumstances"  that  measures
should be taken to ensure family members already residing in  the  territory
of the host Member State retain their right of residence  exclusively  on  a
person basis.


45. The IJ thought that construing termination to mean termination by  means
of  legal  proceedings  relating  to  divorce  would  leave  family  members
"unreasonably unprotected" because it would  leave  unprotected  all  family
members who have suffered breakdown of a relationship with an  EEA  national
in  circumstances  similar  to  this  appellant.  It  must  straightaway  be
acknowledged that such an approach does leave some protection  gap.  But  as
already noted, so does his approach. It is not a  case  where  one  approach
seeks to ensure protection whereas the other does not; both may do.  At  its
highest the IJ's argument  based  on  "protection"  only  shows  that  under
either interpretation there will be winners  and  losers.  Furthermore,  the
lack of protection he has in mind is only in respect  of  the  lack  of  the
ability to acquire a retained right of residence. As the example  of  Diatta
v Land Berlin makes clear, the breakdown of a  relationship  with  a  spouse
does not as such place a family member outside the protection  of  Community
law; it depends on the particular circumstances. But  in  order  to  benefit
from Community rights of residence of all kinds the family member must  meet
certain conditions. Examples  of  a  protection  gap  of  this  kind  cannot
justify seeking to rewrite Community legislation or case law.

46. For the above reasons, I conclude that the IJ materially erred  in  law.
The only basis he gave for allowing the appellant's appeal was that she  was
someone who came within Art 15 by  virtue  of  having  acquired  a  retained
right of residence; that approach was based on a mistaken interpretation  of
reg 10 and it  also  overlooked  the  additional  need,  in  order  for  the
appellant to qualify for a permanent residence card, to show  that  she  had
resided in accordance with the Regulations, which she could not,  by  virtue
of the lack of sufficient evidence to show that her spouse exercised  Treaty
rights during the relevant period.


47. I turn to consider what decision to substitute for that of the  IJ.  For
the reasons given above, the only decision that can  be  substituted  is  to
dismiss the appellant's appeal.


Signed



Senior Immigration Judge Storey



