
TR (reg 8(3) EEA Regs 2006) Sri Lanka [2008] UKAIT 00004

                       ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at: Field House
Date of Hearing: 9th October 2007

                                   Before:


                         Mr Justice Hodge, President
                      Senior Immigration Judge Freeman
                        Senior Immigration Judge King

                                   Between

                                     TR
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the Appellant:           Mr Simon Cox (Counsel)
For the Respondent:          Mr Mark Blundell (Home Office Presenting
Officer)


For a relative to satisfy regulation 8(3) of the EEA Regs 2006 the  "serious
health grounds" need to be significantly beyond ordinary ill health  and  as
a matter of practice will require detailed medical evidence  in  support  of
any claim.  Personal care must be provided on a day to day basis and  relate
either or both to the physical and mental tasks and  needs  required  for  a
person to function.  "Strictly" is a  restrictive  or  limiting  requirement
and imports  a  need  for  complete  compliance  or  exact  performance  and
reinforces the need for personal care to be provided on a day to day basis.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    This is an appeal against the respondent's  refusal,  dated  3rd  July
      2006, to issue a residence card to the appellant as confirmation of  a
      right of residence as an extended family member of  an  EEA  national.
      Immigration Judge Turquet dismissed the appeal on 25th September 2006.
       A reconsideration was applied for and ordered, and at a  first  stage
      reconsideration, heard on 9th February 2007, this Tribunal,  similarly
      constituted, concluded that there had been a material error of law  in
      part of the determination of Immigration Judge.  The reasons for  that
      conclusion are set out below.

         1. The appellant was born on the 18 July 1978 and is a  citizen  of
            Sri Lanka. He claimed asylum on arriving in the  United  Kingdom
            in March 2001 but his appeal rights were extinguished by October
            2003. He applied for a residence document on 20  December  2005.
            He claimed a right of  residence  as  the  relative  of  an  EEA
            national exercising his treaty rights.


         2. On 3 July 2006 the respondent gave notice  of  his  decision  to
            refuse to issue a residence card, relying on regulations 7 and 8
            of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 (SI
            2006 no. 1003) (the 2006 Regulations).  The  appellant's  appeal
            was  heard  by  Immigration  Judge  Turquet.  Her  decision  was
            promulgated on 25 September 2006 and the appeal was dismissed.

         3. It was contended on behalf of  the  appellant  by  his  counsel,
            Simon Cox, that the immigration judge erred in  law  by  holding
            that the appellant could not rely on Article 10(2)  of  the  EEC
            Regulations 1612/78 as implemented in  the UK, most recently  by
            the Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations  2000  (SI
            No. 2326) (the 2000 Regulations) because of the repeal of  those
            two sets of regulations with effect from 30 April  2006  by  the
            Council  Directive  2004/38/EC,  as  implemented  by  the   2006
            Regulations.  The  basis  for  this  submission  was  that   the
            application  was  made  on   21   December   2005   before   the
            implementation of the 2004 Directive and the  2006  Regulations.
            It was submitted that the failure to complete  the  decision  on
            the case prior to 31 April 2006 meant that  the  appellant  lost
            the benefit of Regulation 10(2) of  the  2000  Regulations.  The
            appellant was, it was said at all relevant times,  dependent  on
            his sister and brother-in-law, his brother-in-law being  an  EEA
            national who had exercised his  treaty  rights  by  moving  from
            Germany to the UK.  The  appellant  had  never  lived  with  the
            brother-in-law  in  Germany  but  had  been  dependent,  it  was
            claimed, on him and his sister whilst living in the UK.


         4. It is further said  that  as  a  relative  of  an  EEA  national
            exercising Treaty Rights and being also dependent  on  that  EEA
            national, the appellant would have been entitled to the issue of
            a  residence  permit  under  Regulation  10(1)   of   the   2000
            Regulations.  He  met,  it  was  claimed,  the   conditions   in
            regulation 10(4), being a 'relative of an EEA  national  or  his
            spouse and...dependent on the EEA national or his spouse'.

         5. The  immigration  judge  decided  that  the  appellant  was  not
            dependent on the EEA sponsor. This decision might  be  wrong  in
            law given the Tribunal's decision in LS (EEA Regulations 2000  -
            meaning of 'dependent') Sri Lanka [2005] UKAIT 00132. That  case
            had regard to the European Court  of  Justice  case  Lebon  (ECJ
            Reports 316/85 judgment 18  June  1987)  in  deciding  that  the
            dependency need not be one of necessity. Such an error  was  not
            however material to  the  immigration  judge's  decision  as  to
            whether this appellant was an  "extended  family  member"  under
            regulation 8(2) of the 2006 Regulations. The  immigration  judge
            found, and this was, it appears, undisputed, that the  appellant
            had not lived in an EEA country other than the UK with  the  EEA
            national sponsor, nor indeed  in  Sri  Lanka.  For  that  reason
            alone, whether or not he was dependent in the  UK,  he  had  not
            been previously dependent and so could  not  satisfy  regulation
            8(2).

         6. Mr Cox also argued on behalf of the appellant that  because  the
            application for  a  residence  permit  was  made  prior  to  the
            implementation of the 2006 Regulations and the  2004  Directive,
            the application had to be considered under the  older  Directive
            and the 2000 Regulations. To do otherwise he  said,  was  to  go
            against the principles of legal certainty.

         7. Schedule 4, paragraph 3 of the 2006 Regulations provides:


           3(1): An application for  an  EEA  family  permit,  a  residence
           permit or a residence document, made but  not  determined  under
           the 2000 Regulations before 30 April 2006, shall be  treated  as
           an application under these regulations for an EEA family permit,
           a registration certificate, or a resident's card, respectively.


           This provision makes it absolutely clear that applications made,
           as here, prior to the implementation of the 2006 Regulations but
           not decided before their implementation, are to  be  treated  as
           applications under the 2006 Regulations. The provision makes the
           2006 Regulations retrospective. This tribunal in MG  v  VC  (EEA
           Regulations 2006 conducive  deportation)  Ireland  [2006]  UKAIT
           00053) said at paragraphs 16 and 17:


               "16. The first thing  that  is  apparent  is  that  the  new
               regulations came into force immediately on 30 April 2006 and
               that the previous law is no longer in effect. The effect  on
               existing decisions and appeals  is  quite  remarkable...They
               are to be treated as decisions and  appeals  under  the  new
               regulations. The consequence may be that a decision,  lawful
               when it was  made,  and  a  determination  by  the  tribunal
               containing no error  of  law  when  it  was  made,  may  now
               disclose an error of law because of the retrospective change
               of the decision and its authority.
               17. Those  considerations  apply  directly  in  relation  to
               decisions under the previous regulations and appeals against
               EEA decisions under those regulations."


         8. In this case  only  the  application  was  made  when  the  2000
            Regulations were in force. The decision under appeal was in fact
            made on 3rd July 2006 when the 2006 Regulations were  in  force.
            Mr  Cox,  argued  that  the  principle  of  legal  certainty  as
            interpreted by the European  Court  of  Justice  in  Belbouab  v
            Bundesknappschaft (ECR 1978 page 01915) applied. So, it is said,
            as the application was made when the old 2000  Regulations  were
            in force the law applicable to it ought to be the pre 30th April
            2006 law. In Belbouab the appellant was an Algerian national. He
            had been a French national in the 1950s and had worked as a mine
            worker in Germany. When Algeria became a new state he  lost  his
            French nationality. During his period in Germany he had acquired
            rights to a  pension.  His  application  for  that  pension  was
            rejected by the German authorities  on  the  basis  that  he  no
            longer had nationality of a member state of the  European  Union
            and was therefore no longer entitled to the pension.

           So M. Belbouab had been a national of a  member  state  when  he
           acquired his pension rights. The ECJ said at paragraph 7:


           "It is clear from this that the criterion  of  nationality  laid
           down (in regulations) must be examined in direct relationship to
           the periods during which the worker in question carried  on  his
           work."


           Further they provided that:

           "In order to satisfy the principle of legal  certainty,  one  of
           the requirements of which is that any factual  situation  should
           normally, in the absence of any contrary provision, be  examined
           in the light of the legal rules existing at the time  when  that
           situation obtained, the second condition must be interpreted  as
           meaning that the status of being a national of one of the member
           states refers to the time of the employment of  the  payment  of
           the contributions relating to the insurance periods and  of  the
           acquisition of the corresponding rights."


         9. We do not see this as in any way supportive  of  the  submission
            that legal certainty requires decisions in cases such as this to
            be made on the basis of the law  as  it  was  at  the  date  the
            application was made. Mr Belbouab had acquired rights during the
            period he was employed as a mine worker in  Germany,  having  no
            doubt paid relevant insurance contributions. They were  personal
            to him and had been earned by him. He was also a French  citizen
            at the time and so a citizen of an EU state. The dependency here
            is  in  no  way  equivalent.  The  appellant  was  not  by  such
            dependency as he may have had acquiring rights in an  EEA  state
            still less exercising any rights as a worker or a citizen of  an
            EEA state none of  which  he  was.  Belbouab  does  not  in  our
            judgment assist this appellant. The decision by  the  respondent
            and by the immigration judge were  both  properly  made  in  the
            light of the relevant law applying at the time of each decision.
            Each had to apply the 2006 Regulations as do we.

        10. We do not regard  the  position  as  in  any  way  unclear.  The
            transitional provisions are themselves  entirely  clear.  It  is
            open to the legislature to implement the Directive in such a way
            as it chooses. As the immigration judge pointed out, Article  37
            of the Directive "does not inhibit Member States from  repealing
            more favourable provisions or seeking to limit  their  scope  so
            long as any laws, regulations or administrative  provisions  are
            not inconsistent with the Directive". It  may  be  the  position
            might have been more favourable to the appellant under the  2000
            Regulations, but he can no longer benefit from  that  provision.
            This is not an issue in our judgment which requires a  reference
            to the European Court of Justice.

        11. We conclude that there was no material error of law made by  the
            immigration judge in deciding that the 2006 Regulations  applied
            to this case and that the appellant could not satisfy regulation
            8(2) in particular. Nor (although this was not argued before us)
            could he  satisfy  regulation  8(4)  as  he  did  not  meet  the
            requirements in the immigration rules for  indefinite  leave  to
            enter or remain in the UK as a  dependent  relative  of  an  EEA
            national.


        12. However, the immigration judge did make an error of law  in  the
            manner  in  which  she  approached  the  appellant's   potential
            entitlement to be  treated  as  an  extended  family  member  in
            relation to the application  of  regulation  8(3)  of  the  2006
            regulations:


             8(3) A person satisfies the condition in this paragraph if  the
             person is a relative of an EEA national or his  spouse  or  his
             civil partner and, on serious health grounds, strictly requires
             the personal care of the EEA national, his spouse of his  civil
             partner.


             The judge said at paragraph 28:

             "This appellant was not living with  an  EEA  national  or  his
             spouse or  civil  partner  before  they  moved  to  the  United
             Kingdom. He did not come to the United Kingdom because  of  his
             health problems."


             This in our judgment is clearly a wrong approach.  Contrary  to
             the position under regulation 8 (2), there is no requirement in
             regulation 8(3) of the  2006  regulations  that  the  "extended
             family member" needs to have resided  in  another  EEA  country
             with the EEA national sponsor. If an EEA  national  is  in  the
             United Kingdom exercising Treaty Rights he can  be  potentially
             joined by any person who is a relative who  "strictly  requires
             the personal care of the EEA national...or...his  spouse".  The
             requirement for previous  residence  together  in  another  EEA
             state is not present in that regulation, as it  is  in  reg.  8
             (2).

        13. A significant amount  of  consultant  psychiatric  evidence  was
            before  the  immigration  judge.  There  were  two   psychiatric
            reports. One was from a Dr Patterson who had seen the  appellant
            on three occasions from November 2003 to July 2006.  The  second
            was from  Dr  Gunan  Kanagaratnam  who  had  been  treating  the
            appellant for over two years and seeing him, in the  main,  each
            fortnight. There was also evidence before  the  judge  from  the
            appellant, his sister and his brother-in-law, the  latter  being
            the EEA national. The judge accepted  that  the  appellant  "has
            some mental problems". There were some incidents  of  self-harm.
            The judge at no stage addresses the issue of what as a matter of
            law the phrase "strictly requires the personal care  of  an  EEA
            national...or...his spouse" means. There was evidence about some
            health care before the judge. But in our judgment such  evidence
            needs analysing and relating to what the  concept  of  "strictly
            requires personal care" means in the context of the legislation.


        14. It was argued  before  us  by  Mr  Blundell  on  behalf  of  the
            respondent that the test is a high one and there was enough  for
            us to say that it was not satisfied in this case. Mr Cox on  the
            other hand contended that there was adequate evidence for us  to
            make a decision and that the appellant did require such care and
            the  appeal  should  be  allowed.  We  considered   both   these
            submissions and concluded that, before  any  decision  could  be
            made, we required further and fuller submissions on the law  and
            to consider  the  evidence  on  health  care  and  such  further
            evidence on care as might be adduced.


        15. We concluded that there had been a material error of law in this
            case in the handling of the  evidence  relating  to  the  phrase
            "strictly requires the personal care of..." and the  meaning  of
            the phrase itself. We therefore adjourned the case for a  second
            stage reconsideration, so that these matters can be canvassed.

The issues

2.    The issue before the Tribunal  at  the  second  stage  reconsideration
      hearing was whether or not the appellant satisfies  the  provision  of
      regulation  8(3)  of  the   Immigration   (European   Economic   Area)
      Regulations 2006 [SI 2006 Number 1003].  Is he "a relative of  an  EEA
      national or his spouse...  and  on  serious  health  grounds  strictly
      requires the personal care of the EEA national,  (or)  his  spouse..."
      It is accepted that the appellant lives with  an  elder  sister,  here
      called "the appellant's sister", in Sutton, Surrey.   This  sister  is
      married to a Sri Lankan, "the appellant's brother-in-law", who, in the
      1990s, lived in Germany and became a German national.  He and his wife
      lived in Germany and ran a business there  until  approximately  2001.
      Since 2002, both have lived in the UK.  The appellant's brother-in-law
      is therefore in the UK exercising his right as a citizen of the  Union
      to move with his family members and reside freely within the UK.   For
      the purposes of regulation 8(3) of the 2006 Regulations, the appellant
      is a relative, i.e. the brother, of the spouse of an EEA national.  It
      is his case that, "on serious health grounds", he "strictly  requires"
      from his sister "the personal care " of her as the spouse  of  an  EEA
      national.

Factual background

3.    The appellant came to the UK on 5th  March  2001  and  claimed  asylum
      when he arrived.  That claim was refused but he appealed.  His  appeal
      was heard in 2003, and the determination was promulgated on 10th  June
      2003.  The adjudicator (Mr J. Azam) dismissed the appeal.  He did  not
      consider that the appellant was at risk of persecution or of Article 3
      ill treatment on any return to Sri Lanka.

4.    The  adjudicator  made  findings  of  significant  relevance  to  this
      appeal.  He accepted that the appellant had been held  in  custody  by
      the  authorities  in  Sri  Lanka  because  of  his  imputed  political
      opinions.  The adjudicator also accepted that whilst  in  custody  the
      appellant had been anally raped, tortured  and  ill-treated.   He  had
      concluded, however, that the appellant was of no further  interest  to
      the authorities in Sri Lanka, and he had been  held  and  made  to  do
      labour until released on payment of a bribe.

5.    The adjudicator also disbelieved certain aspects  of  the  appellant's
      claim.  In particular, he did not accept the appellant's story  as  to
      how he left Sri Lanka.  He also did not accept  that  the  appellant's
      claimed fears of the LTTE were well founded.  The  asylum  appeal  was
      dismissed and not successfully further  appealed.   On  20th  December
      2005, the appellant applied for a residence card as an extended family
      member of an EEA national.  It is that appeal that is before us and in
      particular we need to consider whether on serious health grounds  this
      appellant strictly requires the personal  care  of  the  EEA  national
      and/or his spouse.

6.    The appellant  has  seen  and  been  reported  upon  by  a  number  of
      consultant psychiatrists.  A psychiatric report by Dr Anthony  Coleman
      on 8th April 2003 diagnosed the  appellant  as  suffering  from  post-
      traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and depression.  Dr  Anne  Patterson,
      in reports dated 29th November 2003, 22nd April 2005,  14th  September
      2006 and 30th September 2007, in all cases confirmed  that  diagnosis.
      Since at least 2005, and  possibly  before,  the  appellant  has  been
      treated on a regular basis, currently monthly, by  another  consultant
      psychiatrist, Dr Kanagaratnam.  He has provided a number  of  reports,
      the most recent being dated 4th October 2007.  He  too  confirmed  the
      diagnosis of PTSD and depression.


7.    It is also accepted that the appellant misled the authorities and  the
      adjudicator who heard the appeal in 2003.  Immigration  Judge  Turquet
      found that the appellant and his relatives had not been honest in  the
      past.  The appellant had not claimed to have a relative who was an EEA
      national or married to an EEA national.  He did not tell  the  authors
      of the medical reports up to 2003 that he was living with his  sister.
      His brother-in-law made a statement describing himself as a  landlord.
      The Immigration  Judge  made  a  finding  that  this  was  an  attempt
      deliberately to deceive the adjudicator.  She did  however  find  that
      the sister and brother-in-law were related as claimed.

8.    The appellant was mugged in March 2003 whilst on the way to  attend  a
      consultation with Dr Patterson.  Prior to that he had held a job  down
      for one month and had gone to college.  Subsequent to the mugging,  he
      and his family say, and the psychiatrists accept, that  his  condition
      has deteriorated.

The respondent's challenge

9.    It is the respondent's case that the evidence  of  the  appellant  and
      his witnesses is full of contradictions and should not be  relied  on.
      In so far as the psychiatrists have relied on what has  been  reported
      to them by the appellant and his witnesses, such findings have  to  be
      open to question.


10.   The respondent moved into the  appellant's  home  in  Sutton  when  he
      arrived in the UK in March 2001.  For the first fifteen months  or  so
      of his stay, it appears that the appellant's sister and brother-in-law
      spent the bulk of their time in Germany, no  doubt  winding  up  their
      business affairs there.  The respondent says that  the  appellant  was
      not, during that period which concluded in 2002,  looked  after  on  a
      regular basis by anybody.  The appellant's  evidence  in  relation  to
      this has not been consistent.

11.    Another brother-in-law, Mr B..., in a statement  dated  21st  January
      2007, purported to deal with a finding by  Immigration  Judge  Turquet
      that the appellant had been left "living alone"  for  a  fifteen-month
      period in 2001/2002.  He said that either himself or his wife, another
      sister of the appellant, went to see the appellant  at  his  house  in
      Sutton nearly every day.  It was not his written evidence that  he  or
      his wife stayed there on any regular basis.  Before us, Mr  B...  gave
      evidence that "somebody stayed every night" with the appellant in  the
      fifteen-month period under consideration.  It was either his wife,  he
      said, or an older brother of the appellant.

12.   It is therefore the respondent's case that the factual evidence  about
      the care both required by and given to the appellant  is  inconclusive
      from the various witnesses and should not be relied upon.  It is  also
      submitted that the psychiatrists Dr Patterson and Dr Kanagaratnam have
      been in  part  misled  by  not  being  provided  with  copies  of  the
      determination of Immigration Judge Turquet, where she  makes  findings
      against the credibility of the appellant.

Our conclusions on the facts

13.   We do not accept on the  evidence  we  have  heard  that,  during  the
      fifteen months in  2001/2002  when  the  appellant's  sister  and  her
      husband were mainly in Germany, on each and every night  somebody  was
      staying with the appellant in the house in Sutton.  We do accept  that
      there was almost daily visiting there and  care  provided  by  various
      relatives in relation to cooking and the provision of medication.  The
      evidence points clearly to that conclusion.  We also accept  that  the
      appellant  during  this  period  did  spend  some  time  staying  with
      relatives.  However, the constant nightly care apparently now  claimed
      was not in our view in fact present.

14.   We are however satisfied that  since  the  appellant's  brother-in-law
      the  EEA  national  and  his  wife,  the  appellant's   sister,   have
      permanently settled in the UK from 2002, the appellant has lived  with
      them and been looked after  by  them  on  a  daily  basis.   We  heard
      evidence that the sister and brother-in-law have been abroad for short
      periods over the five years since 2002.   We were  told,  particularly
      in relation to the more recent absences,  that  the  appellant  either
      stayed with the other sister and brother-in-law or the family  members
      came to stay at the house in Sutton.  The evidence points to the need,
      it is said, for constant assistance to the appellant.  We accept  that
      such assistance has been provided, particularly in more recent years.

15.   We also accept  the  evidence  which  suggests  that  the  appellant's
      condition had improved for a period prior to March 2005, when  he  was
      mugged.  Thereafter, both consultant psychiatrists  are  of  the  view
      that the appellant's condition has worsened.  We accept that view.

16.   We have considered whether the consultant psychiatrists'  reports  and
      diagnosis can have been adversely affected by such  wrong  information
      as may have been given to them by the  appellant  and  his  relatives.
      All three psychiatrists who have reported accept  that  the  appellant
      suffers from PTSD.  The adjudicator has previously accepted  that  the
      appellant had been tortured as referred to in paragraph 4 above.  This
      is the  foundation  of  the  PTSD  diagnosis.   Dr  Patterson  and  Dr
      Kanagaratnam accept the evidence they have heard  from  the  appellant
      and the relatives that the appellant wakes three to four nights  every
      week and screams.  Dr Patterson, in her latest report,  considers  the
      extent to which the appellant is dependent upon his sister, brother-in-
      law and their family because of his mental state.  She says:

      "In my opinion, he remains just as heavily dependent on his  relatives
      as before.  This is confirmed in the statements of  his  relatives  to
      which I have had access and have listed above.   His  sister  and  his
      brother-in-law, with whom he lives, are so concerned about  his  state
      of mind, at night, in particular his waking up  screaming  and  sleep-
      walking, that they have installed the equivalent of a  baby  alarm  in
      his bedroom to monitor him.  The care that he requires because of  his
      impaired mental state is more appropriate to that of a primary  school
      child than a man of nearly thirty.  In my opinion, he  is  unequal  to
      fulfilling the tasks of everyday adult life without their support."

17.   Dr Kanagaratnam in his most recent report notes that the appellant  is
      generally brought to his regular consultations  by  a  member  of  the
      family.  The  consultant  describes  the  appellant  as  demonstrating
      "features of avoidance and emotional numbing, and he  is  not  readily
      able to engage in conversations,  activities  or  visit  places...  he
      becomes quite  aroused  or  agitated  when  he  is  challenged".   The
      consultant says "it is improbable from my observation of him  in  view
      of his mental state that he will be able to understand the  nature  of
      oral questions put to him or give instructions or properly follow  the
      proceedings" at a hearing.

18.   Dr Patterson considered  that  the  appellant  was  not  fit  to  give
      evidence and has said so in all her reports.  She regarded the process
      as "retraumatising" for the appellant.  She  further  considered  that
      the appellant's "state of mind has  not  improved  since  my  previous
      review last year".  Both psychiatrists also regard the appellant as  a
      suicide risk, particularly if he is returned to Sri Lanka.

19.   We acknowledge that a good deal of  the  information  which  has  been
      given to the psychiatrists and on which each of them relies  has  come
      directly from the appellant and periodically and indirectly  from  the
      appellant's witnesses.  We are however satisfied having considered all
      the reports that the psychiatrists have made objective assessments  of
      the appellant.  Both have long knowledge of him and, in particular, Dr
      Kanagaratnam.  Both are convinced that  the  appellant  has  PTSD  and
      depression and is a suicide risk.

Serious health grounds

20.   Most unusually, this appellant has,  since  at  least  2003,  had  the
      benefit of  the  advice  of  three  different  psychiatrists  and  has
      throughout most of that time been treated on a regular basis by one of
      them.  Dr Patterson in particular and Dr  Kanagaratnam,  the  treating
      psychiatrist, both have long knowledge of the  appellant  and  of  his
      continuing treatment.  Their reports are consistent.  We are satisfied
      from the evidence  from  the  psychiatrists  that  the  appellant  has
      serious mental health problems.  To satisfy regulation 8(3) of the EEA
      Regulations 2006 the appellant has to show "serious  health  grounds".
      We have no doubt the use of the word "serious"  requires  the  "health
      grounds" to be well beyond ordinary ill health  and  as  a  matter  of
      practice to require detailed medical evidence in support of any claim.
       We consider the evidence is such as to show that this  appellant  can
      be properly categorised as having "serious health grounds" as required
      by the regulation.

Personal care

21.   Unsurprisingly, there is no  definition  of  "personal  care"  in  the
      legislation.  We were much assisted by Mr Blundell on  behalf  of  the
      respondent who drew our attention to a number of sources  which  might
      provide some guidance as to the meaning of the phrase.  These included
      a Department of Health pamphlet entitled "Supported housing  and  care
      homes - guidance on regulations"  from April 2002; a Disability Living
      Allowance Customer Information Leaflet from the  Department  for  Work
      and Pensions, Disability and Carers Service  from  January  2006;  and
      Acts of the Scottish  Parliament  including  the  Community  Care  and
      Health (Scotland) Act 2002 section 1 and Schedule 1.   The  Regulation
      of Care (Scotland) Act 2001  (ASP8)  at  section  2  (28)  provides  a
      statutory definition of "personal care" for the purposes of  that  Act
      as follows:

       "Personal care means care which relates to the day  to  day  physical
      tasks and needs of the person cared for (as for example,  but  without
      prejudice to that generality, to eating and  washing)  and  to  mental
      processes related to those  tasks  and  needs  (as  for  example,  but
      without prejudice to  that  generality,  to  remembering  to  eat  and
      wash)."

22.   We consider that section 2(28) provides helpful guidance by which  the
      concept of personal care within the EEA Regulations can be considered.
       We have looked at the evidence before us with that in mind.

23.   In Dr Patterson's report of 29th  November  2003,  she  describes  the
      appellant as being looked after and  doing  no  shopping,  cooking  or
      housework.  He said he could not  do  anything.   He  was  "unable  to
      manage" (page 5).  He was "in need of care and attention" and "reliant
      on external sources of support" (page 18).  The doctor  described  the
      appellant then as being not fit to give evidence and she has continued
      in that view throughout all the rest of her reports to that of October
      2007.

24.   In Dr Patterson's report of 20th July 2005,  she  said  the  appellant
      does nothing unless prompted and he  was  entirely  dependent  on  his
      sister-in-law  (page  3).   She  thought  there  was   a   significant
      deterioration in his mental state and level  of  functioning  at  that
      time (page 5).  He was less fit to give evidence than before (page 8).
       On 14th September 2006, she said that the appellant was "dependent on
      his relatives".  He had to be told to bath, manage his clothes, do any
      washing and clean his  room  (page  3).   She  thought  there  was  no
      significant change in his state since the previous year (page 5).  She
      reported at page 6 that the appellant's "sister prompts him with self-
      care, laundry and the importance of eating".   "In  my  opinion",  she
      said, "their constant presence and  vigilance  acts  as  a  protective
      factor against further self-harm, although he has resorted to  burning
      himself in the past and was unable to  guarantee  that  he  would  not
      repeat  this".   She  regarded  him  as  unable  to  function  as   an
      independent adult, and that he needed to be escorted as if he  were  a
      child (page 7).  Her updated report, signed 30th  September  2007,  is
      quoted from at paragraph 16 above and repeats these views.

25.   Dr Kanagaratnam supports these views  in  his  various  reports.   His
      view is summarised in his  supplementary  psychiatric  report  of  4th
      October 2007, page 6, as follows:

      "Mrs S... (the appellant's sister) and her family continue to  provide
      him with  care  and  emotional  support  that  is  essential  for  his
      stability and prevent suicide.  This will continue to be a requirement
      if a satisfactory prognosis is to be achieved.  Mr and Mrs  S...  (the
      people he lives with) continue to play the leading role  in  his  care
      although they are usefully supported in this function by other members
      of the family who live close by."

26.   We have noted above that information on which the  psychiatrists  base
      their views has been provided, as necessarily  is  the  case,  by  the
      appellant and his relatives.  We conclude, however, at  paragraph  19,
      that  the  psychiatrists  have  made  objective  assessments  of   the
      appellant and we remain of that view.  The evidence in  our  judgement
      points clearly to the appellant as having needed  personal  care  from
      his sister, the wife of the  EEA  national,  from  2003  onwards.   We
      accept that the need for personal care was reduced for the  apparently
      brief period when he found a job stacking shelves, and  prior  to  his
      mugging in Croydon on 19th March 2005.   Thereafter  the  evidence  is
      consistent that he needs personal care.

27.   It is clear from the evidence that there have been brief periods  when
      the appellant's sister, the wife of the relevant EEA national, and her
      husband have  been  away.   In  those  circumstances,  care  has  been
      provided on the evidence by other members of the  appellant's  family.
      We do not consider that  the  regulation  has  to  be  interpreted  as
      meaning that the requirement for personal care must be for twenty-four
      hours a day, seven days a week from the relevant person.  There has to
      be  some  allowance  for  respite  for  any  carer.   But  to  satisfy
      regulation 8(3) the "personal care" must be provided on a day  to  day
      basis and relate to either or both the physical and mental  tasks  and
      needs required for a person to function.  The evidence points  clearly
      in our view to the personal care being provided for  the  overwhelming
      majority of the time by the appellant's sister.

28.   We therefore consider that in this case  the  clear  medical  evidence
      shows that the appellant has PTSD, depression and is a  suicide  risk.
      The doctors consider that the appellant functions at a very low  level
      and we consider the evidence shows that he does "require the  personal
      care" of his sister given his current state of health.  If some of the
      uncertainties he faces are removed or reduced, the evidence from  2005
      suggests that he may improve in the future, but, for the  present,  he
      requires the personal care.

Strictly requires

29.   "Strictly" is defined in the Oxford English Dictionary  as  "requiring
      complete  compliance  or  exact   performance".    "Strictly"   is   a
      restrictive word and cases under regulation 8(3) must be restrictively
      construed.  It reinforces  the  need  for  the  personal  care  to  be
      provided on a day to day basis.  In this case, the full  and  detailed
      medical evidence points to the appellant "strictly" requiring personal
      care at the time of the decision on his application by  the  Secretary
      of State and continuing up to the date of this hearing.  The  evidence
      points to the appellant needing such help.  It may be it  was  not  so
      needed when the appellant arrived in the UK in March 2001.  But it  is
      now and has been since 2005.  The Tribunal must consider the  position
      as at the time of the decision appealed against and subsequently.

Conclusion

30.   In our judgement, for  a  relative  to  satisfy  regulation  8(3)  the
      "serious health grounds" need to be significantly beyond ordinary  ill
      health and as a matter  of  practice  will  require  detailed  medical
      evidence in support of any claim.  Personal care must be provided on a
      day to day basis and relate either or both to the physical and  mental
      tasks and needs required for a person to function.   "Strictly"  is  a
      restrictive or limiting requirement and imports a  need  for  complete
      compliance or exact performance and reinforces the need  for  personal
      care to be provided on a day to day basis.

31.   The reasons for refusal letter in this case and the notice of  Refusal
      to Issue a Residence Card were both issued on 3rd July 2006.   Neither
      referred in terms to regulation 8(3) of the EEA  Regulations,  nor  to
      the tests that the  appellant  seeks  to  satisfy  that  he  "strictly
      requires the personal care" of here the spouse of an EEA national  who
      has exercised his treaty rights in moving to the UK.   Both  advocates
      submitted to us that if we declined to  uphold  the  decision  of  the
      Immigration Judge in dismissing this appeal then the matter had to  go
      back to the Secretary of  State.   We  agree.   Accordingly,  on  this
      reconsideration, we do not uphold the Immigration Judge's decision and
      allow the appellant's appeal to the extent only that  the  application
      be referred back to the Secretary of State for a further decision.  In
      reaching any decision on this application, the Secretary of State will
      no doubt have regard to the  findings  we  have  made  and  the  views
      expressed in this determination.





 Decision

32.    The appeal is  allowed  to  the  extent  that  the  decision  of  the
Immigration Judge is not upheld and the  matter  is  referred  back  to  the
Secretary of State for a further decision on the application.






                                                            MR JUSTICE HODGE
                                                                   PRESIDENT
                                                             Date:
                                                   19/12/2007
