


Asylum and Immigration Tribunal

            SA (Work permit refusal not appealable) Ghana [2007] UKAIT 00006

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On  30 October 2006                           |On 10 January 2007           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE WARR

                                   Between

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Nana Amfo, Solicitor with Cedars & Co. Solicitors


For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer

An appeal does not lie against the refusal to issue a  work  permit  and  an
application for a work permit does not cause  an  applicant's  leave  to  be
extended. A further application made for leave  to  remain  made  after  the
refusal of the work permit application will not attract a  right  of  appeal
against the refusal if the appellant has no current leave.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen  of  Ghana  born  on  4  August  1976.    He
    appeals the decision by the Secretary  of  State  to  refuse  leave  to
    remain as a student under paragraph 62 of HC 395 on 17 November  2005.
    His appeal came before Immigration Judge Strowger on 27  January  2006.
    The Immigration Judge allowed  the  appeal.   The  Secretary  of  State
    applied  for  an  order  for  reconsideration  which  was  granted   on
    21 February 2006.    The  principal  ground  was  that  there  was  no
    jurisdiction to hear the appeal at all as the appellant had applied out
    of time for leave to remain as a student.

2.   The appellant arrived in this country on 17 February  2002  and  had  a
    student visa which permitted him to remain until 30  April  2003.    He
    was  enrolled  on  a  BSc.  Course  in  computing   at   St   Patrick's
    International College.   He was employed part  time  with  Circle  Five
    International Ltd., a software company.  The  Immigration  Judge  dealt
    with the facts and the jurisdictional issues in the  following  extract
    from his determination:

    "10. On 22 April 2003 (a week before his visa expired, but after he had
        completed his course), Circle Five applied for a work permit having
        taken the view that he would be of value  to  the  company  in  the
        light of his part time work  for  them.   Meanwhile  the  appellant
        remained in the country, notwithstanding the expiry of his  student
        visa, and, indeed, his own evidence is that he had been accepted on
        an MSc programme in Software  Solutions  and  he  started  on  this
        course in June 2003.  It would appear that he continued doing  some
        part time work with Circle Five during this period. The appellant's
        evidence is that he did not apply for a  variation  to  extend  his
        stay as a student  because  at  that  time  he  did  not  have  his
        passport. This  was  ill  advised.   He  could  have  submitted  an
        application before his student visa  expired  in  April,  with  the
        passport to follow. In the event the application by Circle Five was
        only a week before the expiry of his visa.


    11.  On 25 June 2003 UK Work Permits refused Circle Five's  application
        saying that it did not meet requirements for the issue  of  a  work
        permit  (see  24  of  the  appellant's  bundle).  This  letter  was
        addressed to Mr Thananchayan  of  Circle  Five  international  Ltd.
        Another identical refusal  letter  under  the  same  reference  was
        issued on 2 August 2004. The letters tell the company to inform the
        appellant. To add to the confusion, the HOPO found in  her  file  a
        Notice of Refusal addressed to the appellant dated  4  August  2003
        refusing Circle Five's application  on  his  behalf  for  leave  to
        remain as a work permit holder.  In the appellant's bundle at 30 is
        a 'To whom it may concern' letter dated 27 January 2005 from Circle
        Five stating that they applied for a full time work permit for  the
        appellant on 22 April 2003 and the letter goes on to say 'as far as
        we are aware it was an ongoing application until it was  eventually
        refused and withdrawn in the letter dated December 2004'.  No  copy
        of this letter has been produced.


    12.  The fact is that from 30 April 2003 the appellant has remained  in
        the United Kingdom as a student but  without  any  leave  to  study
        here. The question has arisen as to whether there is any  right  of
        appeal.  The HOPO submitted that no such right arose under  section
        82(2)(e) of the 2002 Act because the  appellant  had  no  leave  to
        remain at the time of making his application.   The  position  with
        regard to this is by no  means clear.  In  MacDonald's  Immigration
        Law and Practice, at page 1181 footnote 6, the  view  is  expressed
        that 'the probable answer, however, is  that  no  right  of  appeal
        accrues if leave had already expired before the application to vary
        was made, since (i) the term 'variation' suggests that  there  must
        be an extant leave to vary, and (ii) if leave had  already  expired
        by the date of the application, the absence of  leave  is  not  the
        result of the refusal, which the section requires'.   My  attention
        was not, however, drawn to any relevant case law on this particular
        point or any definitive authority on that point.  I take  the  view
        that the Home Office is in a weak position to maintain  that  there
        is no valid appeal. There is a letter at page 19 of the bundle from
        the  Home  Office  dated  22  January  2004  to   the   appellant's
        solicitors, Sri and Co, 'writing  to  inform  of  progress  of  the
        application'.  The Home  Office  were,  therefore,  accepting  that
        there was a valid application at that stage. It  was  also  obvious
        that they were making no progress in dealing with it and  certainly
        not meeting the declared target of 13 weeks - the  application  had
        been received some 14 months before but nothing had been done about
        it.   The application had been made on 25 November  2003  with  the
        accompanying letter from the solicitors of the same date. There was
        a chase-up letter from Sri and Co sent  recorded  delivery,  on  27
        July 2004, setting out changes in the appellant's circumstances and
        the course that he was now following. The letter requested that the
        Home Office deal with the application urgently. This request was to
        no avail - there was no response from the respondent even from  the
        chasing email from the appellant some 10  months  later,  dated  28
        April 2005. Indeed there was no  response  until  the  Home  Office
        wrote on 7 November 2005 (no copy was included amongst  my  papers)
        and the refusal of 17 November 2005 -  some  two  years  after  the
        application was  submitted.  In  the  meantime  the  appellant  had
        submitted a formal complaint.


    13.  The refusal also told the appellant that he could  appeal  against
        the decision. It incidentally contains the error  of  referring  to
        the expiry of his visa being 17 February 2003 (whereas it  was  30
        April 2003) and refers to him enrolling at a new college which  was
        not, in fact, the case.


    14.  The Home Office do not emerge from this case with flying  colours.
        Not only has there been unacceptable  delay  in  dealing  with  the
        appellant's application for variation of his leave to remain  as  a
        student, but also the refusal clearly indicated to him that he  had
        a right of appeal.  The appellant has not been free from blame.  He
        should have applied for extension of leave well before  the  expiry
        of his visa in April 2003.


    15.  In the circumstances I find that as the effect of section 82(2)(e)
        of the 2002 Act is unclear as to the right of appeal, and that even
        as eminent authority as MacDonald indicates uncertainty as  to  the
        present position, it would not be appropriate to deny the appellant
        the right of appeal against the refusal and I find he  has  such  a
        right.


    16.  I accept the appellant's explanation (and  given  the  information
        provided by the  college)  of  the  circumstances  surrounding  the
        cancellation  of  his  course  in  Autumn  2003  and  the   ensuing
        complication of his medical problem that led to  him  not  starting
        the further course until June 2004. He has now almost completed his
        studies in the United Kingdom.  The  information  provided  by  the
        college indicates that the appellant  meets the requirements for  a
        variation of his leave under paragraph 60 of the rules with  regard
        to  progress  in  his  studies.  I  also  find  from  the   updated
        information provided by his father as to his financial ability  and
        willingness to support the appellant - together with the  transfers
        of monies indicated from the appellant's bank account - that he can
        be maintained and accommodated for the remainder of his stay in the
        United Kingdom without recourse to public funds (and there being no
        evidence that he has been in receipt of such funds since he came to
        the United Kingdom in February 2002).


    17.  I find on the balance of probabilities the appellant does meet the
        requirements of the rules - and  is  very  near  to  finishing  his
        course and thereafter  leaving  the  United  Kingdom.  I  find  the
        decision of the respondent appealed against is  not  in  accordance
        with  the  law  and  the  applicable  Immigration  Rules.  In   the
        circumstances I allow the appeal."


3.   Mr Tarlow submitted that after the expiry of  his  first  student  visa
    the company had  applied  for  a  work  permit  on  his  behalf.    The
    appellant had not applied for an extension of his  student  visa.    At
    the time when he made his application he had no leave to vary.   It was
    to be noted that even if he had succeeded in getting a work  permit  he
    would still  have  needed  an  entry  clearance.    By  virtue  of  the
    operation of the statute he had no appeal.   The  fact  that  the  Home
    Office had incorrectly advised the appellant that he  had  a  right  of
    appeal did not confer jurisdiction  on  the  Tribunal.   Under  Section
    82(2)(e) immigration decision is defined as "variation  of  a  person's
    leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom if  when  the  variation
    takes effect the person has no leave  to  enter  or  remain...".    The
    application for a work permit was  not  an  application  for  leave  to
    remain.

4.   Ms Amfo stated that the appellant was now on another  course.   He  was
    awaiting a certificate in respect of  his  previous  course.   His  new
    course was due to be completed in September 2007.   The  appellant  had
    suffered because if he had been properly advised he would have been  in
    a position to take a decision earlier.  She submitted there was a right
    of appeal.   While a work permit was not equivalent  to  the  grant  of
    leave  to  remain  there  was  a  pending   application   and   ongoing
    correspondence and the appellant was not in breach of  the  law.    She
    agreed that Section 82(2)(e) of the 2002  Act  applied.   However,  the
    appellant  had  had  leave  at  the  time  by  virtue  of  his  pending
    application.   I referred the representatives to Section 3C of the 1971
    Act.   Mr Tarlow submitted that rule 32  of  the  HC  395  applied  and
    submitted that the application that had been made was not valid.

5.   At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved  my  determination.   I
    have carefully considered the material before me.    I  note  that  the
    Immigration Judge dealt with the appeal on the basis that the appellant
    was very near to finishing his course and thereafter leaving the United
    Kingdom - see paragraph 17 of the determination.  The Immigration Judge
    was dealing with the matter in January 2006.   The  appellant  had  not
    left the United Kingdom and appears to  have  no  intention  to  do  so
    before the expiry of his present course in  September  2007.    It  was
    submitted  that  the  appellant  was  prejudiced  by  the  delays   and
    inefficiencies of the Home Office in this matter.  However,  I  see  no
    evidence of prejudice.  The delays have enabled the appellant to pursue
    his course and now embark on another one.

6.   The only question before the Tribunal is the question of  jurisdiction.
    The fact that the Home Office indicated that the appellant had a  right
    of appeal is neither here nor there.  If he had no such right there  is
    no jurisdiction to entertain the appeal.

7.   It is common ground that the appellant  applied  in  time  for  a  work
    permit.   Both parties referred me to Section 82(2)(e) of the 2002  Act
    where immigration decision  is  defined  as  meaning  "variation  of  a
    person's leave to enter or remain in the United  Kingdom  if  when  the
    variation takes effect the person has no leave to enter or  remain...".
    Mr Tarlow's primary submission was that  an  application  for  a  work
    permit did not fall within Section 82(2)(e).    The  grant  of  a  work
    permit did not have an effect on a person's leave.   It was akin  to  a
    condition precedent to an application for leave to enter from overseas.
     It is clear from the requirements of HC 395 (see  paragraphs  128(ff))
    that an entry clearance is required to undertake work permit employment
    except in the circumstances certified in paragraphs 131A to 131G and no
    submissions were made to me that any of those paragraphs applied to the
    appellant.

8.   There is another route to establishing  the  question  of  jurisdiction
    which I raised at the hearing, that is through the operation of Section
    3C of the Immigration Act 1971.  It was argued  by  Ms  Amfo  that  the
    appellant had a pending application and accordingly he had leave and so
    there was jurisdiction to entertain his application for an extension of
    stay as a student.   The problem with this  submission  is  Section  3C
    itself.  It is true that this section does operate to extend a person's
    leave but only in  certain  circumstances  and  for  certain  purposes.
    Section 3C is as follows:

         "3C. Continuation of leave pending variation decision


         (1)  This section applies if -
             (a)  a person who has limited leave to enter or remain in  the
                  United Kingdom applies  to  the  Secretary  of  State  for
                  variation of leave,
             (b)  the application for variation is made  before  the  leave
             expires, and
             (c)  the leave expires without the application  for  variation
                  having been decided.


         (2)  The leave is extended by virtue of  this  section  during  any
              period when -
             (a)  the application for  variation  is  neither  decided  nor
              withdrawn,
             (b)  an appeal under section 82(1) of the Nationality,  Asylum
                  and Immigration Act 2002  could  be  brought  against  the
                  decision on the application for  variation  (ignoring  any
                  possibility of an appeal out of time with permission), or
             (c)  an appeal under that section  against  that  decision  is
                  pending (within the meaning of section 104 of that Act).


         (3)  Leave extended by virtue of this section shall  lapse  if  the
             applicant leaves the United Kingdom.


         (4)  A person may not make an  application  for  variation  of  his
             leave to enter or remain in  the  United  Kingdom  while  that
             leave is extended by virtue of this section.


         (5)  But subsection (4) does  not  prevent  the  variation  of  the
             application mentioned in subsection (1)(a).


         (6)  In this section a reference to an application being decided is
             a  reference  to  notice  of  the  decision  being  given   in
             accordance with the regulations under section 104 of that  Act
             (notice of immigration decision)."


     This section is subject to amendments made by the 2006  Act  but  they
         are not relevant to this appeal.  The first problem is  that  under
         Section 3C(2)(b)  an  appeal  could  not  be  brought  against  the
         decision - assuming it had been adverse - to refuse to issue a work
         permit.  But even if it had been an  appealable  decision,  Section
         3C(4) prevents an application for variation of leave  to  enter  or
         remain being made while the section operates to extend  the  leave.
         I am not satisfied that it is arguable (and it was not argued) that
         the appellant varied an existing application.  It was a  completely
         different application.


    9.   In my view the operation of the statute is  quite  clear  in  this
         case.   The appellant made  an  application  in  time  for  a  work
         permit.   That application did not trigger the operation of Section
         3C of the 1971 Act for the reasons I have outlined.   It was not an
         application  which  gave  rise  to  an  appealable  decision.   The
         application made by the appellant for leave to remain as a  student
         was made at a time when he had no leave.  He had no leave  to  vary
         and accordingly his case did not fall  within  Section  82(2).    I
         should observe that although both parties referred  me  to  Section
         82(2)(e), Section 82(2)(d)  would  appear  to  be  the  appropriate
         reference - "refusal to vary a person's leave to enter or remain in
         the United Kingdom if the result of the refusal is that the  person
         has  no  leave  to  enter  or  remain...",  However  it  makes   no
         difference. In both cases the applicant has  to  have  a  leave  to
         vary.   Mr Tarlow offered a further argument based on rule 32 of HC
         395 which requires any application to be made to  the  Home  Office
         before the applicant's current leave to enter or remain expires and
         specifies how applications are to be  made  and  that  applications
         made in any other way are not valid.  The first  paragraph  of  the
         rule simply reflects the statutory provisions that I have outlined.
         The operation of the statute appears quite clear in this  case  for
         the reasons I have given.


    10.  For the reasons I have set out  the  appellant  has  no  right  of
         appeal in this matter.  The Immigration Judge was wrong  to  decide
         otherwise.


    11.  Insofar as it  is  necessary  to  do  so,  I  substitute  a  fresh
         decision:


         This purported appeal is dismissed for want of jurisdiction.




Signed                                  Date 8 January 2007

Senior Immigration Judge Warr

