
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal

     TL and Others (sur place activities - risk) Burma CG [2009] UKAIT 00017



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |                             |
|on 29 and 30 October 2008                     |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                      Senior Immigration Judge Spencer
                       Senior Immigration Judge Keki?
                             Miss R I Emblin JP

                                   Between

                                     TL
                                     KSK
                                     NSM

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the appellant:     Mr S Cox and Mr P Nathan, counsel, instructed by
                    Scudamores Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr M Blundell, Home Office presenting officer


 1) The country guidance given by the Tribunal  in  HM  (Risk  factors  for
    Burmese citizens) Burma CG [2006] UKAIT 00012 remains  valid.   Despite
    the release of some long term  detainees  no  significant  or  reliable
    change has occurred in the approach of the authorities in Burma  to  be
    able to say that the human rights situation there is any better than it
    was at the time the Tribunal in HM promulgated its determination.

 2) The identities and roles of genuine activists in Burmese  pro-democracy
    organisations based in London are likely to be  known  to  the  Burmese
    authorities.

 3) Participation in demonstrations outside the Burmese embassy  in  London
    by  Burmese  nationals  is  likely  to  be  recorded  by  the   Burmese
    authorities in London and made known  to  the  Burmese  authorities  in
    Burma.  Those Burmese nationals participating on a  regular  basis  are
    likely to  have  been  photographed  by  the  Burmese  authorities  and
    identified.

 4) If such a person were returned to Burma  and  there  is  an  additional
    factor which would trigger the attention  of  the  Burmese  authorities
    (e.g. lack of a valid Burmese passport; absence of permission  to  exit
    Burma;  previously  having  come  to  the  adverse  attention  of   the
    authorities as an opponent of the regime; or having a  connection  with
    known political opponents) there is a  real  risk  of  persecution  and
    article 3 ill-treatment on return.

 5) It may be that a pro-democracy demonstrator outside the Burmese embassy
    known to the authorities to have a real commitment to the cause without
    an additional risk factor would equally be at risk but each  case  must
    be determined on its own facts.

 6) It is unlikely that the Burmese  authorities  would  persecute  someone
    whom they knew to be  a  hanger-on  with  no  real  commitment  to  the
    oppositionist cause who was demonstrating merely in order to enhance  a
    false claim for asylum but each case must be decided on its own facts.

 7) In granting permission to leave Burma the authorities are not concerned
    with the places which the passport holder may visit nor the  length  of
    time  during  which  they  may  be  absent  from  Burma.   The  Burmese
    authorities are not interested per  se  in  the  places  visited  by  a
    returning Burmese national who had had permission to  leave  Burma  nor
    how long they stayed away.



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The background

      This is the reconsideration of the appeals of the appellants  who  are
    citizens of Burma.  We use this term rather than the  more  technically
    correct Myanmar because it  is  more  widely  known.  The  first  named
    appellant was born on 28 December 1965. She is a  Muslim  from  Yangon.
    She is the mother of the second and third named appellants, born on  16
    September 1992 and 28 April  1995  respectively.   Although  they  have
    separate appeals, it was agreed by the representatives of  the  parties
    that for the purposes of these proceedings, they could  be  treated  as
    dependants of their mother, whom we  shall  refer  to  merely  as  "the
    appellant".

2.    The appellant left Burma and travelled to Thailand  with  her  husband
    and two daughters on 30 March 2007.  They crossed  the  border  legally
    using valid passports and having obtained permission  to  leave  Burma.
    The appellant's husband returned to Burma but she and her children flew
    to the United Kingdom on 29 April 2007 via  Dubai,  arriving  here  the
    following day.  They all had  entry  clearance  as  visitors  and  were
    admitted on that basis until 23 May 2007.  The purpose of the visit was
    to see family members.  The appellant claimed that at the time  of  her
    arrival she intended to return to Burma with her children at the end of
    the visit.

 3.   On 21 May 2007 the appellant claimed asylum alleging  that  she  would
    face ill treatment in Burma because  of  her  political  opinion.   She
    maintained that she and two colleagues had formed  an  organisation  to
    further the cause of democracy and that they were aligned  to  the  All
    Burma Muslim Association (BMA) which operated  overseas.   She  claimed
    that she had purchased a satellite phone in Thailand  for  the  use  of
    this organisation, that she had travelled illegally into  Burma  so  as
    not to be detected with a banned item and had handed  it  over  to  her
    colleague before rejoining  her  family  in  Thailand  for  a  holiday.
    Unfortunately the phone developed a fault and her  colleague  tried  to
    travel to Thailand to have it repaired but he was  intercepted  at  the
    border and the phone was found in his luggage.  He was arrested.  As he
    had the warranty with him which bore the appellant's details and a copy
    of her passport, the authorities raided her house and her husband  fled
    to Thailand where he still remained.

 4.   The Secretary of State refused the application on 13 June 2007 by  way
    of a notice refusing to vary her leave and a letter giving her  reasons
    for the  refusal.  Similar  notices  were  issued  to  the  appellant's
    daughters.  They were all  warned  that  removal  directions  would  be
    issued if they did not appeal or leave voluntarily.

 5.   The  appellant  appealed  under  section  82(1)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 on  asylum  and  human  rights  grounds
    against  the  respondent's  decision  and  her  appeal  was  heard   by
    Immigration Judge Glossop on 31 July  2007.   It  was  dismissed  in  a
    determination promulgated on 5 September 2007.  The  immigration  judge
    heard oral evidence from the appellant and her brother. Although noting
    the concession made by the respondent that the appellant's  father  had
    been granted asylum in the UK for his  anti-government  activities,  he
    rejected her account concerning her activities with  the  BMA  and  her
    claim that the authorities had discovered that  she  had  purchased  an
    illegal satellite phone. The immigration judge also  found  that  there
    was "no evidence that she would be identified as demonstrating  at  the
    Burmese Embassy". In her  statement  of  24  July  2007  the  appellant
    maintained  that   she   had   participated   in   four   pro-democracy
    demonstrations outside the Burmese embassy after her arrival in London.
     She attached photographs confirming her involvement. She  stated  that
    her brother was the Chairman of the BMA.   She  maintained  that  these
    activities in the UK would place her at risk on return to Burma.

 6.   The appellant sought reconsideration of the decision.  She  argued  in
    essence that the immigration judge had erred materially in  overlooking
    the evidence  that  had  been  adduced  to  establish  the  appellant's
    involvement at demonstrations in the  UK  and  that  officials  at  the
    embassy photographed demonstrators,  identified  them  and  sent  their
    details to Rangoon Special Branch.  It  was  further  argued  that  the
    appellant would be at risk on return because  she  had  overstayed  her
    visa and this would  alert  the  authorities  on  return.  Any  ensuing
    investigation would reveal that she had sought asylum  in  the  UK  and
    that she had several  relations  who  had  been  granted  asylum.   The
    grounds made it clear that "no challenge is made to the  IJ's  findings
    on credibility".

 7.   The application was considered by Senior Immigration  Judge  McKee  on
    26 September 2007 and reconsideration was ordered.

 8.   The matter then came  before  Senior  Immigration  Judge  Southern  27
    February 2008.  He found that the immigration judge had made a material
    error of law for the following reasons:

       1.  Reconsideration  has  been  ordered  of  the   determination   of
          Immigration Judge Glossop who, by a determination dated 31st  July
          2007, dismissed the appellant's appeal against a decision  of  the
          respondent to refuse to  vary  the  appellant's  leave  after  her
          asylum and human rights claims had been rejected.

       2. The appellant, who is a citizen of  Burma,  claimed  asylum  about
          three weeks after  arriving  in  the  United  Kingdom  with  entry
          clearance as a visitor.

       3. She claimed to be at risk on return because someone with whom  she
          was associated had been detained  in  possession  of  a  satellite
          telephone  she  had  imported  unlawfully.  That  person  was   in
          possession of documents linking the appellant to the equipment and
          that had led to a raid on her home. The  immigration  judge  found
          the whole of that account to be untrue and there is  no  challenge
          to those findings.

       4. The appellant now pursues her claim on the basis that she will  be
          at risk on return on account of being identified  as  a  dissident
          from the photographs taken of her when she attended demonstrations
          outside the Burmese Embassy in London.

       5. It is agreed between the parties (and the Tribunal so finds)  that
          the immigration judge  made  a  material  error  of  law  and  the
          determination must be set aside to  the  extent  described  below.
          That being the case it is necessary only briefly to  identify  the
          nature of that material error and to make clear the scope  of  the
          reconsideration hearing that is to follow.


       6. The immigration  judge  was  wrong  to  say  that  there  was  "no
          evidence" that the appellant  would  be  identified  as  a  person
          demonstrating outside the Burmese Embassy in London. The appellant
          relied upon the evidence of a former diplomat who  had  experience
          of serving at the London Embassy some years ago and who had made a
          written statement in which he  asserted  that  such  demonstrators
          would be identified and that, in his view, the Embassy  staff  had
          the means to achieve this. The immigration judge was not bound  to
          accept that evidence but if he did not he was required to  explain
          why he rejected it.


       7. The immigration judge erred also in his assessment  of  the  risks
          faced by the appellant upon return. This is because,  although  he
          was entitled  to  find  that  the  appellant  made  a  lawful  and
          officially sanctioned exit from Burma, she would be seen on return
          as someone who had failed to observe  the  conditions  imposed  in
          that she had overstayed her visa. It was not  reasonably  open  to
          the immigration judge to find that this difficulty could be  cured
          by the grant of further  leave  in  order  to  facilitate  a  safe
          voluntary return as there was no evidence that such leave would be
          granted.


       8. That being the case, the decision  of  the  immigration  judge  to
          dismiss the appeal cannot stand and shall be set aside.  But  that
          does not  mean  that  those  credibility  findings  that  are  not
          contaminated by the errors identified above should  be  disturbed.
          It is specifically confirmed in the  grounds  for  reconsideration
          that no challenge is made to the findings of the immigration judge
          as  to   credibility.   Thus,   the   starting   point   for   the
          reconsideration hearing will be  the  findings  of  fact  set  out
          between paragraphs 20 and 23 of the determination. It  is  not  in
          dispute either that the appellant has  overstayed  the  period  of
          leave granted by the entry clearance  obtained  on  the  basis  of
          which she travelled to the United Kingdom.

The hearing before us

9.    The appeal came before us on 29 and 30 October 2008.  At the start  of
    the hearing Mr Cox sought to widen the ambit  of  the  reconsideration.
    He submitted that although he was not seeking to argue that there  were
    further errors of law, there were deficiencies in the determination  in
    that the immigration judge had  failed  to  make  findings  on  several
    relevant matters.  He submitted that we might find it necessary to make
    findings on these matters when assessing the  risk  on  return  to  the
    appellant.  He maintained that we were not restricted to the directions
    given by Senior Immigration Judge Southern and that in the interests of
    justice the issue of the  satellite  phone  should  be  revisited.   He
    submitted that the appellant now had evidence to show that a  satellite
    phone was considered a valuable instrument by the government  of  Burma
    and therefore also by the opposition and that whilst  it  may  be  that
    conversations could be intercepted the authorities believed them to  be
    a secret method  of  communication  which  is  why  they  were  banned.
    Further, there was evidence that a satellite phone looked like a mobile
    phone and the immigration  judge's  description  of  the  phone  as  an
    'instrument' and a 'machine', which suggested that he thought of it  as
    a  large  contraption  easily  detected   by   the   authorities,   was
    misconceived.  These  inaccuracies  meant  that  his  findings  on  the
    plausibility of the appellant's  colleague  hiding  the  phone  in  his
    luggage were factually flawed.  As it was this incorrect  belief  which
    led him to reject the appellant's  account,  we  should  make  a  fresh
    finding in that respect.

10.   Mr Cox also argued that the immigration judge had not made  any  clear
    findings as to the current whereabouts of the appellant's husband, said
    to be in the jungle in Thailand.  He sought to adduce a statement  from
    the appellant's husband confirming his  whereabouts  and  a  supporting
    statement from a Major Hussain who was with him.  He argued that as the
    husband's presence  in  Thailand  was  due  to  the  discovery  of  the
    satellite phone and its link to the appellant, the tribunal  could  not
    separate the issues and  had  to  reconsider  them  as  part  of  these
    proceedings.

11.   Mr Blundell agreed that we had jurisdiction to consider matters  which
    had not been raised as part of the grounds for review but  he  referred
    us to the judgements of the Court of Appeal in DK (Serbia) v  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department [2006] EWCA Civ 1747 and NJ  (Iran)  v
    State for the Home Department [2008] EWCA Civ 77 and pointed  out  that
    whilst there was a discretion to open up areas not  identified  in  the
    order for reconsideration, there must be  exceptional  reasons  for  so
    doing.  He argued that the application to vary  the  grounds  had  been
    made at short notice, just three days prior to the hearing.  It  should
    have been  raised  when  the  application  for  review  was  made  last
    September or at the first stage hearing in February.   He  stated  that
    there had  been  no  challenge  to  the  credibility  findings  of  the
    immigration judge  and  that  Senior  Immigration  Judge  Southern  had
    therefore been  able  to  draw  a  clear  line  and  rule  out  of  the
    reconsideration all matters other than the  appellant's  activities  in
    the UK.  Mr Blundell accepted that no explicit finding had been made on
    a number of  matters  but  he  submitted  that  the  rejection  of  the
    appellant's account by  implication  included  the  activities  of  her
    husband.

12.   Mr Cox apologised for the late submission of the  fresh  evidence.  He
    explained that this was because of difficulties in obtaining statements
    from the appellant's  husband  and  Major  Hussain  but  conceded  that
    attempts to obtain them had not been made prior to September this  year
    in spite of the fact that the first stage reconsideration was  held  in
    February and a 'for mention' hearing  had  taken  place  before  Senior
    Immigration Judge Gleeson in May at which  it  was  directed  that  the
    appeal would be listed for the first available date after 6  July.   Mr
    Cox accepted that in hindsight steps should have been taken earlier but
    pointed out that he had been instructed in August and he had considered
    these documents to be relevant to the proceedings.

13.   After  a  short  break  to  consider  the  submissions  made  and  the
    authorities referred to as well as the judgment of the Court of  Appeal
    in LS (Uzbekistan) v State for the Home Department [2008] EWCA Civ 909,
    we decided that this was not one of those most exceptional cases  where
    the issues should be re-opened.  We  considered  that  the  sole  issue
    before us was the risk to the appellant as a result of  her  activities
    in the UK and because of her association  with  her  late  father,  her
    brother  and  her  husband.   We  agreed  to  admit  evidence  of   the
    appellant's husband and Major Hussain as  to  the  whereabouts  of  the
    husband but not in the context of the findings made by the  immigration
    judge as regards the satellite phone.  The parties confirmed they  were
    clear on the issues at hand and the documentary  evidence  was  checked
    prior to commencement of the oral evidence.  In the event Mr  Cox  made
    no further reference to this additional evidence on the  basis,  as  he
    put it in his address to us, that as we were to accept the findings  of
    the immigration judge in disbelieving the appellant's account as to the
    satellite phone it was unlikely that we would  believe  the  additional
    evidence.

The evidence of the appellant

14.   The appellant gave evidence through the  court  interpreter  and  they
    both confirmed they  understood  one  another.   She  agreed  that  the
    contents of her statement of 16 October 2008 were true and accurate  as
    were those of the earlier statement of 24 July 2007.  Her case is  that
    her late father was a very prominent opponent of the Burmese regime  in
    the 1970s who was detained, imprisoned  and  tortured  by  the  regime.
    When he was released in 1980 he went to the border area  with  Thailand
    and became a leader of the Burmese Muslim armed  resistance.   He  left
    Thailand in 1997 and was granted asylum in the United Kingdom.  He died
    in the United Kingdom on 31 July  2005.  Her  husband  qualified  as  a
    lawyer in Burma but  his  licence  was  withdrawn  by  the  authorities
    because of his involvement  in  the  democracy  movement  of  which  no
    further particulars were given. Her older brother  lives  in  Thailand.
    He took part in the 1988 uprising against the Burmese  authorities  and
    was shot.  He then went to the border area with Thailand and eventually
    left Burma.  Her younger  brother  was  active  in  opposition  to  the
    Burmese regime from the 1980s and  was  given  refugee  status  in  the
    United Kingdom.  The appellant lives with him in  the  United  Kingdom.
    Her two sisters both have refugee status in the United Kingdom, as does
    her mother. After she came to the United Kingdom  she  participated  in
    many pro-democracy demonstrations in front of the  Burmese  embassy  in
    London.  Her brother was very active in organising  demonstrations  and
    other pro-democracy events against  the  Burmese  regime.  He  was  the
    chairman of BMA(UK).  She attached to her statement  dated  16  October
    2008  photographs  confirming  her   participation   in   pro-democracy
    demonstrations

15.   The appellant was referred to the photographs at pages  12-29  of  her
    bundle, described as a "core bundle".  Dealing  specifically  with  the
    photograph on page 26 she said she could not recall  the  date  of  the
    event but believed it to be sometime last year  after  September.   The
    second photograph on the same page related to a different demonstration
    which took place in front of the Burmese  embassy  sometime  last  year
    after the monks' protests. She believed it was  September  or  October.
    With regard to the two photographs on page  27,  the  appellant  stated
    that the first was taken in February or March 2008 at a seaside town on
    an occasion held to remember the Burmese Muslim people; the second  was
    taken around November  2007  in  front  of  the  Burmese  embassy.  The
    photograph on  page  28  was  taken  on  8  August  2008  on  the  20th
    anniversary of the uprising. It had been held in front of  the  Chinese
    embassy during the Olympic opening ceremony for the purpose  of  urging
    the Chinese not to assist the Burmese government. The second photograph
    was taken on the birthday of Aung San Suu Kyi but she could not  recall
    the day or the month. She initially maintained that it had taken  place
    in front of a big park in London but then stated it  had  been  outside
    the Chinese embassy.  The demonstration photographed  on  page  16  had
    taken place outside the Burmese embassy in November or  December  2007.
    It had been to protest against the oppression and killing of  monks  in
    Burma.

 16.  In response to  Mr  Blundell's  questions  in  cross-examination,  the
    appellant confirmed that she was illiterate despite  having  had  about
    five years of education up until the age of  10  or  11.   She  agreed,
    however, that she was proficient with numbers and had no problems  with
    dates.  She accepted that as shown by her statement, she  was  able  to
    recall the dates of important events.  She stated that if  returned  to
    Burma she would continue her political activities despite the risk. She
    stated that she had sought asylum  because  she  had  been  afraid  her
    daughters would be harmed. Her claim was prompted by the arrest of  her
    colleague in Rangoon.

 17.  The appellant agreed  that  she  had  been  involved  with  the  Burma
    Democracy  Movement  Association   (BDMA)   which   was   an   umbrella
    organisation. She named some of the other groups contained  within  it.
    The appellant agreed that she had attended  birthday  celebrations  for
    Aung San Suu Kyi and agreed that the  latter  was  the  most  important
    reformist figure in Burma. She explained that the opposition celebrated
    two important dates in connection with her; these were her birthday and
    the day of her incarceration. She was asked why it  was  that  she  had
    been unable to recall the date of the demonstration held  on  Aung  San
    Suu Kyi's birthday when shown the photograph at page 28.  The appellant
    stated that she had become  forgetful  since  taking  medication.   She
    believed the birthday was on 19 August but then changed her  answer  to
    June.  She denied that her inability to recall the date meant that  she
    was not a supporter of the pro-democracy movement.  She stated that she
    had named her daughter after Aung San Suu Kyi.  Her  forgetfulness  was
    because she had been taking tranquillisers. She had not mentioned  this
    in her statement because she had not realised  it  was  necessary.  She
    also took insulin injections for her diabetes.

18.   The appellant confirmed that she had travelled  to  Thailand  on  four
    occasions and she had exit visas  on  each  occasion.  Those  had  been
    obtained via an agent although the permission received was lawful.

19.   The appellant stated that she had known Mr Kyaw Soe Aung (one  of  her
    witnesses) since 2007. She agreed that he was right to say  she  helped
    organise meetings. Apart from her involvement in  these  meetings,  she
    had no other contact with him.  She did not  know  anything  about  his
    claim to have a secret contact in the embassy  or  about  informers  in
    their midst. She stated that from February 2008 she  had  not  attended
    meetings as frequently as before because her mother worried  about  her
    and did not allow her to go out unaccompanied. She last saw Mr Aung  at
    a demonstration on 24 October 2008.  Prior to that she had seen him  on
    8 August 2008.  When asked whether she had seen him  in  September  she
    was unsure.  She had not conversed with him on any of  these  occasions
    apart from asking him for directions at a  demonstration.   She  was  a
    little surprised to hear about the informer but could not  suggest  any
    reason for why he had not conveyed this news to her other than that  he
    might have thought she would be afraid.

20.   The appellant confirmed that she did not know Mr AB (another  witness)
    personally because she did not speak  English  but  she  had  seen  him
    taking photographs at demonstrations.  She had not seen him at the most
    recent demonstration she attended in October but she  was  certain  she
    saw him at the August demonstration outside the Burmese  embassy.   She
    did not remember whether or not he had his camera with him.  Her  child
    was with her.  The appellant stated  that  on  one  occasion  when  she
    demonstrated outside the Embassy, the walls were being painted and  the
    painters on the scaffolding were taking photographs of the  protesters.
    Additionally on many  occasions  she  had  noticed  people  inside  the
    building taking photographs.  The  protesters  normally  stood  on  the
    opposite side of the road to the embassy  when  demonstrating  although
    last year her daughter went to lay a wreath in honour of those who  had
    died in the August uprising.

21.    In  re-examination  the  appellant  clarified  that  she  had  become
    depressed in February after having given birth.  She had sought medical
    help and  had  been  given  medication  to  assist  with  sleeping  and
    tranquillisers.  She had come to the hearing accompanied by her mother,
    her older daughter and friends.

22.   She stated that she did not know whether it was  unlawful  to  use  an
    agent to obtain an exit visa. She explained that those  who  had  never
    committed any offence would not need to use one  but  because  she  had
    been politically involved she  did  not  visit  the  government  office
    herself. The agent had filled in all the forms including the D form. Mr
    Aung had assisted her with her appeal by acting as  an  interpreter  on
    two occasions.

23.   In response to questions from the tribunal  the  appellant  said  that
    she had been present when her daughter had laid a  wreath  outside  the
    embassy. She stated that she  had  also  used  an  agent  to  obtain  a
    passport. She said that she recognised Mr AB because  he  had  attended
    many demonstrations. The appellant stated  that  in  2008  following  a
    depression she had only attended a few marches. In 2007,  however,  she
    had made semolina cakes and snacks when  meetings  were  held.  On  one
    occasion she made a  wreath  and  helped  make  a  mock  coffin  for  a
    demonstration. She had also helped make banners and  stitch  headbands.
    She could not recall any other activities.

24.    The  appellant  stated  that  she  took  four  different   forms   of
    medication;  insulin  for  diabetes,  folic  acid  as   a   supplement,
    medication for aches in her arms and sleeping tablets.

25.   Mr Blundell had no questions arising from those of  the  tribunal.  In
    response to Mr Cox's further questions, the  appellant  identified  the
    mock coffin from a photograph on page 28. She  explained  that  it  had
    symbolised the killing of a lot of people twenty years ago.

The evidence of Mr AB

26.   Mr AB adopted his statement (pp. 87-89 of the core bundle) with a  few
    amendments. He stated that the date of 13 May (on p.88)  should  be  13
    March and that the photograph on page 113 was taken on 12  March  2008.
    He explained that the picture  at  p.101  was  an  enlargement  of  the
    photograph on the previous  page.    His  evidence,  contained  in  his
    statement, was  that  he  worked  as  a  free  lance  photographer  and
    photographic assistant. He was not acquainted with  the  appellant  but
    may have seen her on demonstrations outside the  Burmese  embassy.   He
    was currently working on a photographic documentary about  the  Burmese
    community in the United Kingdom.   He  joined  the  Burma  Campaign  UK
    around 2000 and had attended almost all of the  demonstrations  outside
    the  Burmese  embassy   and   regularly   took   photographs   of   the
    demonstrations.  At every demonstration he had attended he had observed
    persons inside the embassy taking photographs of the demonstrators.  He
    attached to his statement 9 photographs of such persons taken between 8
    August 2005 and 4 September 2007.

 27.  In cross-examination the witness was asked why  he  had  not  provided
    the dates for the other photographs when he prepared his statement.  He
    said he had prepared it "in a rush" and  had  forgotten.  He  had  used
    another statement  prepared  for  a  similar  case  to  assist  in  his
    preparation for this statement.  His photographs had been used in three
    or four  other  Burmese  cases  and  he  had  attended  court  for  the
    individuals concerned.  He allowed his pictures  to  be  used  by  pro-
    democracy groups and when it became known that he  had  photographs  of
    the embassy officials taking photographs he  was  asked  whether  those
    could be used.  He attended demonstrations to record  the  events.   He
    explained that he had  an  interest  in  Burmese  affairs  because  his
    grandmother was Burmese and  his  grandfather  had  been  posted  there
    during the Second World War.  He  had  not  been  able  to  update  his
    statement because he had recently moved house and had been busy.

28. In re-examination he said he continued to attend  demonstrations  after
    September 2007.  He estimated the number attended this year as  between
    twenty and thirty. He confirmed that the contents of paragraph 8 of his
    statement, in which he said persons inside the  embassy  used  to  take
    photographs of the demonstrators, still held true today.



The evidence of Mr Kyaw Soe Aung (Ko Aung)

 29.  Mr Aung adopted his witness statement (pp. 115-122) as  his  evidence-
    in-chief.  In  that  statement  he  described  participating  in  anti-
    government politics as a student leader in Burma, as a result of  which
    he was imprisoned from 22 September 1988 until 25 May 1994, after which
    he began to rebuild underground networks and  re-group  the  All  Burma
    Federation of Student unions (ABSFU).  He left Burma in 1996  and  came
    to the United Kingdom where he was eventually granted refugee status in
    2001.  He became politically active in the United Kingdom.   He  was  a
    member of the Burma Strategic Group (BSG), a  co-founder  of  the  Free
    Burma Coalition UK (FBC-UK) and an executive committee  member  of  the
    BDMA.  He described how the appellant had been actively involved in the
    Burmese Muslim Association (United Kingdom) and she had participated in
    and helped to organise the BDMA's meetings and conferences.  She became
    a  member  of  the  BDMA  in  December  2006.   This  was  an  umbrella
    organisation.  He knew that she had been involved with the BMA  in  the
    United Kingdom to fight for the rights of her community and knew her to
    be one of the most active female members of the Burmese  community  and
    Burmese Muslims in exile in  London.   Her  brother  was  an  executive
    committee member of BDMA and  chairperson  of  BMA(UK).  He  listed  16
    demonstrations the appellant had participated in during 2007 and  6  in
    2008.  He knew that she had done so because he organised them all.   In
    paragraph 16 of his statement he said:

       "I understand that the Secretary of State does not believe that T...
       L... would be in danger if he (sic) were  to  return  to  Burma.   I
       would like to point out that it is quite clear that every time there
       is a demonstration; photos would be taken by the Burmese authorities
       inside the Burmese Embassy.  We know that these photos are sent back
       to military intelligence in Burma. In 1999, Rachel Goldwyn was shown
       photographs of the crowds outside the Burmese Embassy when  she  was
       interrogated in Burma and it was clear that the officials knew names
       of people, knew about their activities and in some cases  even  knew
       where they were living.  I also produce Ms Rachel  Goldwyn's  report
       called Scratching the Surface."

30.   In cross-examination he was asked by Mr  Blundell  to  point  out  the
    passage in Rachel Goldwyn's report which confirmed his claim  (made  in
    paragraph 16 of his statement) that Burmese officials were aware of the
    names and addresses of opposition members.  Mr Aung explained  that  Ms
    Goldwyn's report did not  focus  on  the  people  who  participated  in
    demonstrations in the UK but she had been his girlfriend  and  she  had
    told him what had happened. He  believed  her,  although  she  had  not
    included those details in this  report.   Mr  Blundell  suggested  that
    given the detail in her report she would have made it  clear  that  the
    authorities already knew the identity of these people if  that  was  in
    fact the case.  Mr Aung reiterated that her report  did  not  focus  on
    these details.

31.   With respect to his claim about an informer within the BDMA,  Mr  Aung
    stated that the executive members met and discussed what  to  do  next.
    He said he had been alerted to the presence of an informer in  2001  by
    two people.  He described their positions and why it  was  he  believed
    they had this information.  The identity of the informer had  not  been
    disclosed and therefore the BDMA undertook their own investigations and
    once they were satisfied they had discovered the identity, that  person
    was dismissed from membership of the organisation.  That took place  in
    2005.  He was asked to explain why he referred to the  presence  of  an
    informer in the present tense in his report, if he had  been  dismissed
    from the BDMA three years ago.  Mr Aung stated  that  there  were  more
    informers who had not yet been identified.  He explained  that  he  had
    not meant there was just one; that was a sincere mistake.

 32.  Mr Aung was asked whether he had  informed  the  appellant  about  the
    existence of informers.  He replied that he  did  not  think  this  was
    necessary because her brother was an executive member and was aware  of
    what was going on.  He was asked whether  he  was  surprised  that  the
    appellant knew nothing about this.  He stated that there  had  been  no
    need to inform her.  She knew that photos were taken at  demonstrations
    and she knew that it was a risk to oppose the regime. He added that she
    was not in a good frame of mind and that it may be for that reason  her
    brother had not disclosed this information to her.  It was pointed  out
    to him that her depression only began in February  2008  but  he  could
    offer no answer to why the appellant's brother had not notified her  of
    these matters earlier.

The expert evidence of Mr Martin Morland CMG

33.   Mr Morland, a former British ambassador to Burma,  prepared  a  report
    in May 2008.  He had been in Burma as third and then  second  secretary
    between 1957 and 1961, returning as ambassador between 1986  and  1990.
    Despite his retirement in 1993 he has continued to take an interest  in
    Burmese affairs through  internet  research,  friends  in  Rangoon  and
    contacts with successive ambassadors. He has also had involvement in an
    educational charity founded after the 1988 uprising to assist  students
    to leave Burma and continue their  higher  education  abroad  with  the
    intention of returning after  the  fall  of  the  military  regime.  Mr
    Morland confirmed that he had produced over  thirty  reports  in  other
    asylum cases. He gave evidence before the Tribunal in HM.

34.   He had been  asked  to  consider  the  treatment  in  Burma  of  anti-
    government activists, demonstrations outside the  Burmese  embassy  and
    the measures taken by the Burmese authorities to deal with them, action
    likely to be taken against demonstrators  if  returned  to  Burma,  the
    likelihood  of  identification  on  arrival  at  the  airport  and  the
    implications of demonstrators having politically active relations.  His
    report  gave  a  brief  history  of  the  military  dictatorship  which
    commenced in 1962 with General Ne Win's coup.  The  general  imprisoned
    all leaders  in  civilian  life  for  varying  terms  and  handed  over
    political control of the civilian population to  military  intelligence
    (MI).  They  were  described  as  intensely  secretive  with  no  known
    defectors. The system of political control that they set up endured  to
    the present day and was said to be based on the East German  Stasi.  It
    relied on random persecution of the civilian population who never  knew
    whom they could trust because of the belief that the MI  had  thousands
    of informers. Any sign of dissent, even minor, was  savagely  punished.
    Disproportionate penalties were prescribed by executive  order  in  the
    absence  of  any  kind  of  independent  judiciary.  For  example   the
    possession of political pamphlets or even  a  complaint  in  a  private
    letter about the educational system could lead to arrest.  There was no
    evidence that a distinction between minor and major  actions  would  be
    made for those Burmese citizens returning home who had engaged in anti-
    government activity abroad.  The report gave information about the case
    of Stanley Van Tha, arrested in April  2004  upon  arrival  in  Rangoon
    after his return by the Swiss government as a failed asylum seeker, and
    sentenced to 19 years imprisonment.  The only political involvement  he
    was accused of was his  attempt  to  seek  the  support  of  a  Burmese
    activist in exile for his asylum application.

35.   In paragraph 10 of his report, Mr Morland said  that  in  his  opinion
    pro-democracy demonstrations outside the Burmese embassy were  anathema
    to the regime.  He said it was the regime's constant fear, as  he  knew
    from personal contacts with Burmese friends  who  kept  in  touch  with
    political activists in Burma and Thailand, that trouble would break out
    again.  Demonstrations in the United Kingdom  were  liable  to  attract
    publicity which may be beamed  back  into  Burma  by  the  BBC  Burmese
    service, the BBC's vernacular service with the largest  audience  apart
    from the Arabic service,  thus  giving  heart  to  the  population  and
    alarming the government. His  opinion  was  because  of  the  generally
    effective suppression of dissent inside Burma activity outside  assumed
    disproportionate importance.  Security cameras  were  attached  to  the
    embassy and were capable of covering demonstrations;  additionally,  Mr
    Morland referred to  photographic  evidence  of  officials  within  the
    embassy taking pictures of demonstrators and to the testimony of U Khin
    Maung Kyi, a former diplomat who defected from the Burmese  embassy  in
    London after the national uprising of 1988, given in a number of asylum
    cases. His  evidence  was  that  during  every  demonstration,  without
    exception, military intelligence staff would video and take photographs
    of demonstrators and  copies  of  these  pictures  were  then  sent  to
    Rangoon. Efforts were also made to identify each  demonstrator  by  the
    security personnel of the embassy. This was done by consulting  records
    of Burmese passport holders and also informants. In paragraph 9 of  his
    report he said there was no evidence that a distinction  between  minor
    and major actions, which  was  evidently  not  observed  inside  Burma,
    should come into play when Burmese who had opposed  the  government  to
    one degree or another while  abroad  returned  home  into  the  Burmese
    jurisdiction.  He gave the example of Mr Stanley Van Tha.  Mr Morland
    did not rely upon the report of the Democratic Voice of Burma  (Norway)
    dated 18 October 2007 which suggested that  government  officials  were
    checking every Burmese passport holder who came  through  the  airport,
    arresting those suspected of  having  participated  in  anti-government
    protests while they were away because he said the evidence came from  a
    single source.

36.   Mr Morland also discussed the arrest of Rachel Goldwyn  in  1999.  She
    was an Englishwoman arrested and detained after  demonstrating  against
    the government in Rangoon.  A prominent Burmese activist and recognised
    refugee, U Ko Aung, known to Mr Morland, testified in another  case  in
    2004  that  when  interrogated  in  Rangoon,  Miss  Goldwyn  was  shown
    photographs of the crowds outside the Burmese Embassy and it was  clear
    that  officials  knew  the  names  of  people  taking  part,  of  their
    activities and, in some cases, their places of  residence.   Given  the
    deterioration in Burma over the last few years, there was no reason  to
    believe that such practices had ceased.

37.   In his conclusion Mr Morland expressed  the  view  that  the  evidence
    indicated that demonstrators outside  the  embassy  were  photographed,
    that security staff had the means to identify demonstrators,  and  that
    the information was relayed back  to  Rangoon.   Any  manifestation  of
    opposition was punished by the government which exercised a  policy  of
    zero tolerance.  If the appellant were to be returned she would  be  at
    risk of arrest, interrogation and torture and a prison sentence, either
    on arrival or subsequently.

38. In evidence in chief Mr  Morland  confirmed  that  he  was  aware  that
    embassy officials took photographs of protesters and  that  he  had  no
    doubt that they used informers.  He had not been aware of Mr Van  Tha's
    release at the time he prepared his report in May but pointed out  that
    there was a  pattern  over  the  years  of  prisoners  being  released,
    particularly if they were well-known,  but  then  of  further  arrests.
    There were no developments that had taken place  which  caused  him  to
    revise his opinion since his report had been prepared.

39. In cross-examination Mr Morland stated that he had last been  in  Burma
    over the New Year in 1995-1996.  Despite his absence, he  had  kept  in
    touch with the situation through information on the Internet, of  which
    he was a proficient user, and through  daily  or  weekly  contact  with
    friends who lived there and others who travelled back  and  forth.   He
    did not have much contact with the current ambassador  and  he  had  no
    contact with other diplomatic staff.  He  had  however  last  week  met
    somebody from the UK Department for International  development  (DFID).
    He had two or three Burmese friends living there and contact  with  the
    charity Prospect Burma and the writer MS, who frequently travelled back
    and forth. He provided details of his contacts.

40. Mr Morland was then asked about the September 2008  report  of  the  UN
    Special Rapporteur contained in the respondent's  bundle  (pp.  23-46).
    He confirmed that he was aware of  it  and  was  also  aware  that  the
    Special Rapporteur had met with prisoners. He disputed  the  suggestion
    that there were signs of improvement.  He stated that although Ms  Aung
    San Suu Kyi had been permitted access to a lawyer recently, that was  a
    right she had been entitled to all along. With regard to the release of
    Mr Win from prison, he pointed out that he should never  have  been  in
    prison in the first place.  With respect to the claim  in  the  Special
    Rapporteur's report that legislation primarily used to detain political
    prisoners was being reformed by the authorities, Mr Morland stated that
    he accepted the UN was trying to do  its  best  but  that  he  did  not
    believe anything would come out of those recommendations; the  promises
    of reform were "all flannel". There had never been any change over  the
    years and according to the US State  Department  report  and  the  Home
    Office Operational Guidance Note (OGN) the situation was deteriorating.
    He attached no weight to the announcement that  legislation  was  being
    reviewed. The Attorney General had not undertaken any  review  as  yet.
    Even if he did, however, it would make no difference as the application
    of laws there was not like in the West; the  Burmese  regime  used  its
    power to imprison people whenever they felt like it.

41. Mr Morland said that he had considered different views but where he did
    not consider them to be valid, he had not included them in his  report.
    He accepted that perhaps he should have done so. With  respect  to  the
    article from Democratic Voice of Burma (Norway) (at p.311 section C  of
    the appellant's large bundle) which listed four categories of detainees
    based  on  their  involvement  in  anti-government  demonstrations,  Mr
    Morland said that he had been  surprised  when  he  read  this  as  the
    authorities were secretive and did not make their  methods  known.   He
    had also not seen any corroboration of this claim during the course  of
    his research.  With regard to the Information Request from the Canadian
    Refugee Board (p. 97 of the respondent's  bundle),  Mr  Morland  stated
    that the opinions set out therein were assertions of one person and the
    source of his information was unknown.  He stated that he was aware  of
    cases where the families of activists had been visited by the military.
    He was not aware of any failed asylum seekers who had been returned  to
    Burma except for Mr Van Tha.

42. Mr Morland confirmed that since the promulgation of  HM  (Risk  factors
    for Burmese citizens) Burma CG [2006] UKAIT 00012 he  had  learnt  that
    the exit 'visa' did not bear  any  time  limits  and  that  in  fact  a
    passenger took along a  D  form  to  the  airport  and  an  immigration
    official placed an exit stamp in the passport.  A note was made  as  to
    the intended destination but it was not unlawful to  travel  elsewhere.
    It was also not a breach of Burmese law if  a  citizen  overstayed  his
    visa in a foreign country.

43. Mr Morland stated that he did not consider it relevant to  the  current
    case that Mr Van Tha had been released from  prison  early.   What  was
    relevant was that he had a  valid  passport  but  had  been  imprisoned
    nonetheless.  According to the information he had obtained from Ms Lewa
    and upon which he had relied when giving evidence to  the  Tribunal  in
    HM, Mr Van Tha had not been active in politics and  had  simply  sought
    asylum and presented a letter from an activist  to  support  his  case.
    That low  level  association  had  been  sufficient  to  place  him  in
    detention.  He pointed out that  the  authorities  hated  any  form  of
    opposition.

44. Mr Morland was not  aware  of  any  individuals  who  had  demonstrated
    outside the embassy here and who had returned.  He  confirmed  that  he
    had not met Rachel Goldwyn, but he had attended a lecture she gave some
    years ago.  Mr Morland stated that it was not  inevitable  that  anyone
    who had demonstrated in London would be punished on return but  he  was
    certain that the authorities had the capability to identify  people  in
    photographs and that this information was then sent to  Rangoon,  where
    people would be treated in the same way as they would have been had the
    'offence' been committed in Burma. The mechanics therefore existed  for
    punishment.  It had been established  practice  well  before  1988  for
    photographs to be sent to Rangoon.  He had no reason  to  believe  that
    such practice had stopped.  He believed  that  military  attaches  were
    attached to the embassy prior to the 1988 uprising and was surprised at
    Mr Kyi's suggestion that this happened after the troubles of 1988.   He
    did not know whether they had ever been expelled.  He believed  Mr  Kyi
    had defected in early 1989.

45. Mr Morland stated that passports were sometimes refused to undesirables
    but that this was not invariable as bribes could be paid.   He  pointed
    out that the US State Department Report observed  that  corruption  was
    widespread.  He emphasised that the government  was  irregular  in  its
    habits;  it  was  arbitrary  in  its  actions  either  for  reasons  of
    incompetence or because "they wanted to keep people  guessing".  Either
    way, it was difficult to predict the actions of the authorities.

46. Mr Morland explained  that  once  an  individual  had  a  passport  the
    controls at the airport were not that vigorous. It was harder to obtain
    a passport than an exit visa but with  an  agent  and  money  this  was
    possible. He did not believe there would be records kept of individuals
    at the airport.  If, however,  someone  committed  an  offence  or  was
    involved in activities which brought about an interest  in  them,  then
    they were liable to be arrested at some point  after  their  return  if
    their background showed an association with  political  activists.   It
    was also likely in such a scenario  that  they  would  receive  harsher
    punishment because of that association but a trigger of some  sort  was
    required to bring them to the attention of the authorities.

47. In re-examination  Mr  Morland  referred  to  a  news  article  in  the
    Democratic Voice of Burma which reported  on  the  questioning  of  all
    returnees after the monks' protests last  year.  He  said  he  did  not
    attach much credence to it as this fact was not reported anywhere else.
     He was not aware of any expert opinion which expressed views  contrary
    to those he had set out.

48. He said he believed that the fact that the appellant had overstayed her
    visa in the UK would cause her problems on return; it might serve as  a
    trigger which would lead to questioning.

49.  The  Tribunal  questioned  Mr  Morland  as  to  whether  the   Burmese
    authorities would take a stronger line in relation to protests in Burma
    compared with those in the United Kingdom on account of the  fear  that
    protests in Burma would grow if left unchecked.  His reply was that the
    Burmese authorities regarded demonstrating in front of the  embassy  as
    an affront which brought the country into dispute and therefore it  was
    likely  that  they  would  act  against  those  participating  in  such
    activities.

The evidence of Mr U Khin Maung Kyi

50.   The appellant relied upon a statement  from  Mr  Kyi  dated  16  April
    2007.  Mr Kyi said that he joined the  Burmese  diplomatic  service  in
    1962 and occupied several posts before  being  posted  to  the  Burmese
    embassy in London in 1985, where he was appointed Chief of Chancery and
    Third Secretary.  Together with two  colleagues  he  defected  in  1989
    because he was appalled at the gross human rights violations  committed
    by the Burmese military government.  He claimed and was granted  asylum
    in the United Kingdom and is now a British national. His  evidence  was
    that from 1986 onwards there had been  regular  demonstrations  outside
    the Burmese embassy during which, without exception, intelligence staff
    would video and photograph demonstrators and make three copies of  each
    video and set of photographs, one copy of which would be  kept  at  the
    embassy, one copy of which  would  be  sent  to  military  intelligence
    headquarters and one copy of which would be sent to the Special  Branch
    in Rangoon in Burma.  He stated that before the photographs and  videos
    were sent to Rangoon each  demonstrator  would  be  identified  by  the
    military attachs at the embassy by  interviewing  consular  staff,  by
    accessing consular records, such as a  list  of  all  Burmese  passport
    holders in the  United  Kingdom  including  their  photographs  and  by
    speaking with contacts in the wider Burmese  community  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  He went on to say that he was aware that some protestors were
    secretly working as spies for the Burmese  authorities.   He  gave  the
    example of his having been surprised that  a  respectable  academic,  a
    professor and an expert on Burma, was revealed as an informer with  the
    Burmese  military  regime  who  passed  on  some  information  to   the
    ambassador regarding a secret meeting held in Berlin of former  Western
    ambassadors to Burma and some experts on Burma.  He  mentioned  in  his
    report that in 1987 the Burmese embassy in London informed the  Foreign
    Office that  the  Burmese  passports  of  pro-democracy  activists  who
    demonstrated in front of the embassy had been declared null and void.

The submissions on behalf of the respondent

51. Mr Blundell asked that  the  appellant's  evidence  be  viewed  in  the
    context of the finding by the immigration judge that she  had  provided
    an incredible account in material  respects.  Although  it  had  to  be
    accepted that she had attended demonstrations in the UK, her commitment
    to the cause was questionable and therefore Sedley LJ's  comment  about
    'hangers on' in paragraph 18 of YB (Eritrea) v Secretary of  State  for
    the Home Department [2008] EWCA Civ 360 was  relevant.   He  questioned
    whether the appellant had such a commitment that she would be compelled
    to pursue her activities in Burma. He accepted that  she  came  from  a
    political family but argued that her commitment  was  limited  and  had
    been overstated before the tribunal. He pointed out that she  had  been
    unable to identify the birth date of Aung San Suu Kyi,  an  anniversary
    celebrated by the pro-democracy movement worldwide. He submitted it was
    significant that she could not even recall the month.  He  referred  to
    the medical evidence that had been adduced during  the  course  of  the
    hearing regarding the appellant's mental  health,  but  submitted  that
    there was no reference to any abnormalities and he reminded us that she
    made no reference in  her  witness  statements  to  possessing  a  poor
    memory.

52.  It  was  accepted,  said  Mr  Blundell,  that  Mr  AB   had   attended
    demonstrations and taken photographs. It was also accepted that some of
    these showed pictures being  taken  by  officials  inside  the  embassy
    building.  Mr Blundell, however, submitted that the statement failed to
    detail any evidence of photographs being taken after September 2007.

53. With regard to the statements of Mr Kyi, Mr Blundell submitted that  he
    had not attended the hearing to give evidence  and  in  any  event  his
    knowledge of practices at the embassy related to  a  narrow  window  of
    time, i.e. between the abuses following the uprising in August 1988 and
    his defection in early 1989. Moreover that had  taken  place  20  years
    ago. There had been no opportunity to put questions to Mr  Kyi  arising
    from  his  statements,  such  as  how  he  knew   the   blacklist   was
    computerised. The  respondent  regarded  his  statements  as  being  of
    historical interest only.

54. Mr Blundell submitted  that  Mr  Aung's  evidence  was  unsatisfactory.
    Although his own background was accepted, the  tribunal  was  asked  to
    note that Mr Aung repeatedly referred to the appellant as "the  client"
    and that he clearly had his own agenda, as could be seen from the Voice
    of America news article which quoted him as saying he wanted  the  Home
    Office to change its  policy.  Mr  Blundell  also  submitted  that  the
    witness had misrepresented what Rachel Goldwyn had said in  her  report
    regarding  the  identification  of  individuals  in   photographs.   He
    maintained that if Ms Goldwyn's interrogators had known the  identities
    of these people, Ms Goldwyn would have said so in her report.

55. Mr Aung's evidence about an informer was also unsatisfactory.  Although
    his statement inferred that there was currently one informer within the
    BDMA, he had altered his evidence and maintained that this informer had
    been identified in 2005 and had been expelled. He had then  added  that
    there were additional informers  at  the  current  time.  This  was  an
    example of how he had  tailored  his  evidence  in  the  light  of  the
    difficulties arising in cross-examination. It  was  also  not  credible
    that he had  failed  to  warn  the  appellant  about  the  presence  of
    informers. Her poor mental health was not an excuse for that failure as
    her problems began in February 2008  and  her  political  activity  had
    commenced last year.

56. Mr Morland had been a frank and robust witness,  however,  less  weight
    should be placed on his evidence than it was in the case  of  HM.   His
    research was deficient and his conclusions negligible in some respects.
     There had been a lack of any investigation into the legislative reform
    detailed by the Special Rapporteur and instead Mr Morland had chosen to
    assume the worst.  He had undertaken no research on  returnees  or  the
    problems they may or may not have encountered. Nor  had  he  undertaken
    research on the fate of  Mr  Van  Tha.   Significant  weight  had  been
    attached to Mr Van Tha's case by the Tribunal in HM yet he had now been
    released and reunited with his family in Switzerland.  There  had  also
    been no research undertaken on the central issue i.e. on the extent  to
    which the security service had identified people who  had  demonstrated
    abroad.  Other than the evidence  of  Mr  Aung,  there  were  no  other
    examples of such practices occurring.  Mr Morland  had  not  discharged
    his duty to the court as he had  failed  to  follow  the  AIT  Practice
    Directions on experts,  the  source  of  which  was  the  CPR.  It  was
    incorrect to read the Practice  Directions  as  requiring  only  expert
    evidence to be summarised and the evidence had shown that there  was  a
    range of opinion that contradicted the claim made by  Mr  Morland  that
    the authorities drew no distinction between  high-level  and  low-level
    activists.  His assertion that there was "no evidence" to support  that
    was factually incorrect as shown by the Immigration and  Refugee  Board
    of Canada report (at p. 97 of the respondent's bundle). That was not an
    obscure reference and would have been easily available on the  Internet
    to a proficient user such as Mr Morland claimed to be.  Even if he  did
    not attach weight to it, he should have acknowledged it in his  report.
    It was notable that Mr Morland repeatedly referred to the  OGN  in  his
    oral evidence and his report  where  it  supported  his  opinions,  but
    ignored sections which contradicted him.  Mr Blundell relied upon other
    items of background evidence which we shall deal with in expressing our
    conclusions.

57. Mr Blundell submitted that it was relevant that Mr Morland had not been
    to Burma for 12 years. His contact  with  the  current  ambassador  was
    sporadic and he did not keep in touch with any other diplomatic  staff.
    The majority of his information was obtained from the Internet. He  was
    therefore not an expert with proper knowledge of the situation  on  the
    ground. His assumption that the authorities always did the opposite  of
    what they said was not borne out by the contents of the report  of  the
    Special Rapporteur.  This appeal was concerned with the extent to which
    people involved in demonstrations in the  UK  were  identified  by  the
    Burmese authorities and Mr Morland's evidence had shed little light  on
    that matter.

58. Mr Blundell submitted that the policy position of  the  respondent  was
    correct in believing that there was a distinction between someone  like
    the appellant and others such as Mr Aung, who held a  more  significant
    role.  He submitted that the respondent was not seeking  to  contradict
    the findings in HM but was providing an update.  Mr Van  Tha  had  been
    released and the legislation used to imprison  him  was  under  reform.
    The  Special  Rapporteur's  report  showed  the  extent  to  which  the
    authorities had co-operated with the UN.  Although Mr  Morland  claimed
    the Burmese regime was very secretive, it had opened its doors  to  the
    UN. The Special Rapporteur had been permitted  to  visit  prisoners  of
    conscience and this was an indication of progress.  A further  sign  of
    progress was the fact that Aung San Suu Kyi had been permitted to  meet
    with her lawyers on several occasions. All these events showed positive
    steps towards democracy although it was accepted that there was still a
    long way to  go.  The  information  from  the  Canadian  Refugee  Board
    supported the stance taken in the OGN.   The  appellant  had  not  been
    denied permission to leave Burma.  Clearly her  family  background  was
    not of sufficient concern to the authorities to prohibit her departure.
     She had not claimed to have had to pay an agent significant amounts of
    money and she did not reach the level where she would be at risk.   The
    lack of documentary evidence to support the claim  that  protestors  in
    the UK would be targeted on  their  return  to  Burma  meant  that  the
    appellant's case should not succeed.

The submissions on behalf of the appellant

59. Mr Cox argued that the case of YB (Eritrea) painted a bleak picture  of
    the suppression of political opponents and that  was  even  more  aptly
    applicable to the Burmese regime.  He submitted  that  the  significant
    point arising from HM was that the appellant in that  case  was  not  a
    political activist but was married to one and it was the perception  of
    her involvement in politics that led to the adverse interest in her.

60. Mr Cox submitted that the Practice Directions  required  an  expert  to
    consider all material facts including those which  detracted  from  his
    own conclusions.  It had not been argued that Mr Morland had failed  to
    consider material facts.  An expert was not required to  reproduce  the
    opinions of others; his duty was to provide an evaluated  opinion.  The
    views expressed by the Democratic  Voice  of  Burma  (Norway)  and  the
    Canadian Research Board were not  expert  opinions  and  there  was  no
    breach by Mr Morland's failure to summarise them.  He submitted that Mr
    Morland was well placed to know the mind of the Burmese state given the
    number of years he spent there and his ongoing interest in the  country
    and its peoples.   He had put forward a harsh critique  of  the  regime
    but there was nothing to show it was an unfair or unbalanced opinion.

61. With regard to the article from the Democratic Voice of Burma (DVB), it
    was apparent that a category B activist could be someone simply holding
    a flag.  There was no safe level of activity.  The documentary evidence
    indicated the arbitrary nature of the regime's treatment of  opposition
    members and therefore the  Tribunal  needed  to  proceed  with  extreme
    caution.

62. The letter from the British embassy did not address the  situation  for
    those who did not "simply" participate in demonstrations  and  appeared
    to concentrate on whether protestors would be prosecuted.  Mr Cox noted
    that it failed to address the  issue  of  whether  they  would  be  ill
    treated.  The conclusions in the  OGN  were  simply  the  view  of  the
    author; no evidential source was cited  and  in  any  event  it  was  a
    partisan view.  The document was silent on the matter of informers.  Mr
    Morland could not be criticised for failing to  undertake  research  on
    the numbers of those returning or being  returned.   The  Secretary  of
    State should have provided such information but she had  failed  to  do
    so.

63. Mr Cox argued that the  respondent  was  wrong  to  rely  on  a  single
    document to support the submission that the Burmese  government  policy
    was changing. There was no  evidence  that  the  regime  had  made  any
    changes in how opposition members were viewed and treated. The evidence
    demonstrated that there was  extreme  animosity  towards  any  kind  of
    opposition. The Special Rapporteur had set out recommendations  in  his
    report and had made it clear that he did not intend  to  criticise  the
    regime (pp. 38-39). The fact that recommendations had been made did not
    mean  that  the  Attorney  General  had  agreed  to  review  and  amend
    legislation. The release of Mr Van Tha was not an indicator of changing
    policy as amnesties had been announced in the past and, as pointed  out
    by Mr Morland, were just "window  dressing".   The  regime  had  to  be
    judged by its actions and not its promises. It was at least as bleak as
    Eritrea and so the same reasoning as set out in YB had  to  be  applied
    here.  Whilst it was correct that much of the  evidence  was  historic,
    there was nothing to show that things had changed.  Mr Kyi's  statement
    about  photographs  could  not  be  limited  to  a  particular  period.
    Military attaches were at the embassy all along;  they  had  only  been
    formally attached following the 1988 uprising.  The evidence of  Mr  AB
    showed  that  photographs  were  still  being  taken  by  the   embassy
    officials;  what  was  the  purpose  of  that  if   not   to   identify
    participants. Their methods of identification were set out  on  p.  73.
    The regime did not care why people opposed them; they cared  only  that
    they did. It may be that such a finding would lead to protection  being
    given to individuals who were  undeserving  but  it  was  not  for  the
    tribunal to concern  itself  about  that.  This  jurisdiction  did  not
    distinguish  between  those  who  were  deserving  and  those  who  had
    deliberately brought persecution upon themselves; that was a matter for
    politicians.

64. Mr Cox urged us to find that the evidence of Mr Aung  could  be  relied
    on. He argued that Mr Aung had not amended his evidence as suggested by
    the respondent; he had merely clarified it. It was ludicrous  to  think
    that the Burmese regime did not make use of informers.

65. Mr Cox submitted that weight should be  given  to  the  fact  that  the
    appellant attended demonstrations, that she helped to make banners, she
    was a supporter of democracy and she named her daughter after Suu  Kyi.
    On her return the appellant would be seen as someone who had overstayed
    her visa in the UK and this  would  be  enough  to  bring  her  to  the
    attention of the authorities. Once that happened, checks  would  reveal
    her  background  and  would  show  that  she   had   been   active   in
    demonstrations in the UK. She would then be at risk of ill treatment in
    breach of article 3 and amounting to persecution.

66. Human rights grounds of appeal under article 8 of  the  ECHR  were  not
    advanced on behalf of the appellant. At the conclusion of  the  hearing
    we reserved our determination.

Our conclusions

67.   Our starting point must be the determination of  the  Tribunal  in  HM
    (Risk factors for Burmese citizens) Burma CG [2006] UKAIT  00012  which
    is the only country guidance determination of the  tribunal  on  Burma.
    In paragraph 93 of their determination the Tribunal said this:

      "On the basis of our assessment of the above evidence, we have come to
      the following generic conclusions:

      (1)   A Burmese citizen who has left Burma illegally is in general  at
        real risk on return to Burma of imprisonment  in  conditions  which
        are reasonably likely to violate his rights under Article 3 of  the
        ECHR.  Exit will be illegal where it is done without  authorisation
        from the Burmese authorities, however obtained,  and  will  include
        travel to a country to which the person concerned was not permitted
        to go by the terms of an authorised exit. We consider it is  proper
        to infer this conclusion from the effect in the Van Tha case of the
        employment of Article 5(j) of the Burma Emergency Act 1950,  either
        on the basis of the application of that Article  in  that  case  or
        also as a consequence of a breach of the exit requirements we  have
        set out in paragraph 83 above.

      (2)    A  Burmese  citizen  is  in  general  at  real  risk  of   such
        imprisonment if he is returned to Burma  from  the  United  Kingdom
        without being in possession of a valid Burmese passport.

      (3)   It is not reasonably likely that a Burmese citizen in the United
        Kingdom will be issued with a passport by the  Burmese  authorities
        in London, unless he is able to present to the Embassy  an  expired
        passport in his name.

     4) If it comes to the attention of  the  Burmese  authorities  that  a
        person falling within (1) or (2) is a failed asylum seeker, that is
        reasonably likely to have a significant effect upon the  length  of
        the prison sentence imposed for his illegal exit and/or  entry.  To
        return such a person from the United Kingdom would accordingly be a
        breach of Article 33 of the Refugee Convention.  Whether that  fact
        would come to the attention of the  authorities  will  need  to  be
        determined on the facts of the particular  case,  bearing  in  mind
        that the person is highly likely to be interrogated on return.


     5) It has not been shown that a person who does not fall within (1) or
        (2) above faces a real  risk  of  persecution  or  Article  3  ill-
        treatment on return to Burma by reason of having claimed asylum  in
        the United Kingdom, even if the Burmese authorities have reason  to
        believe that he has made such a claim, unless the authorities  have
        reason to regard him as a political opponent."

68.   The Tribunal allowed the appellant's appeal because they believed  her
    account that she had attracted the adverse interest of the  authorities
    on her return to Burma from  the  United  Kingdom  when  she  had  been
    detained and interrogated about contacts with  political  organisations
    in the United Kingdom.  She escaped detention by means of  bribery  and
    returned to the United Kingdom, her exit from Burma being  unlawful  on
    this occasion.  The Tribunal was satisfied that if she were returned to
    Burma the likelihood was that the Burmese  authorities  would  discover
    that she was a failed asylum seeker who had failed to comply  with  the
    conditions on which she had been allowed to leave  Burma  and  who  was
    returning  without  a  valid  passport.   In  those  circumstances  the
    Tribunal were satisfied that she  would  face  a  substantial  term  of
    imprisonment in conditions that would amount to a breach of her  rights
    under article 3 of the ECHR.  The appeal was allowed on both asylum and
    human rights grounds.

69. Neither representative invited us to depart from the  findings  of  the
    Tribunal in HM.  The determination of the  Tribunal  is  of  importance
    because in paragraph 93(5) of their determination  the  Tribunal  found
    that a person who is regarded by the Burmese authorities as a political
    opponent on return would be likely to face a real risk  of  persecution
    or article 3 ill-treatment.

70. Mr Morland gave evidence in HM which was accepted by the Tribunal.   We
    have to deal with the criticisms of his  evidence  before  us  made  by
    Mr Blundell, that his evidence is unreliable because he was in  breach
    of his duty to  the  Tribunal  by  failing  to  follow  the  Tribunal's
    Practice Directions in relation to expert  witnesses.  It  is  said  Mr
    Morland failed to have regard to the report of the  Special  Rapporteur
    to the UN General Assembly although we observe that the  date  of  that
    report is 5 September 2008, after the date of Mr Morland's  report.  It
    is said that Mr Morland erred by failing to mention that Mr Stanley Van
    Tha had been released and had returned to Switzerland. It is said  that
    Mr Morland did not have regard to paragraph  3.7.8  of  the  Burma  OGN
    dated 31 October 2007.  It is also said that  he  failed  to  draw  the
    attention of the Tribunal to the report  by  the  Democratic  Voice  of
    Burma (Norway) dated 9 October 2007,  which  reported  that  government
    officials had categorised detainees into four  groups  based  on  their
    level of involvement in recent anti-government demonstrations in Burma.
     Finally, it is said Mr Moreland failed to have regard  to  the  letter
    from the Deputy Head of Mission at the British embassy in Rangoon dated
    1 August 2008 stating that he was not aware of any cases of individuals
    who had faced persecution in Burma simply as a result of  participating
    in a demonstration overseas.  We will deal with these  matters  in  the
    course of our assessment of the background material since of course any
    material fact which might detract from Mr Morland's opinion is relevant
    to the weight which we should attach to his opinion.

71. Paragraph 8A of the Tribunal's Practice Directions  deals  with  expert
    evidence, its relevant provisions are as follows:

      "8A.1 A party who instructs an expert must provide clear and  precise
      instructions to the expert, together  with  all  relevant  information
      concerning  the  nature  of  the  appellant's  case,   including   the
      appellant's immigration history, the reasons why the appellant's claim
      or application has been refused by the respondent and  copies  of  any
      relevant previous reports prepared in respect of the appellant.

      8A.2 It is the duty of an expert to  help  the  Tribunal  on  matters
      within  the  expert's  own  expertise.  This  duty  is  paramount  and
      overrides any obligation to  the  person  from  whom  the  expert  has
      received instructions or by whom the expert is paid.

      8A.3 Expert evidence should be the independent product of the  expert
      uninfluenced by the pressures of litigation.

      8A.4 An expert should assist the  Tribunal  by  providing  objective,
      unbiased opinion on matters within his or her  expertise,  and  should
      not assume the role of an advocate.

      8A.5 An expert should consider all material  facts,  including  those
      which might detract from his or her opinion.

            8A.6 An expert should make it clear:-
             (a)  when  a  question  or  issue  falls  outside  his  or  her
    expertise; and
      (b) when the expert is not able to  reach  a  definite  opinion,  for
      example because of insufficient information.

      8A.7 If, after producing a report, an expert changes his or her  view
      on any material matter, that change of view should be communicated  to
      the parties without delay, and when appropriate to the Tribunal.

      8A.8 An expert's report should be addressed to the Tribunal  and  not
      to the party from whom the expert has received instructions.

            8A.9 An expert's report must:-
            (a) give details of the expert's qualifications;
      (b) give details of any literature or other material which the expert
      has relied on in making the report;
      (c) contain a statement setting out the substance of  all  facts  and
      instructions given to the expert which are material  to  the  opinions
      expressed in the report or upon which those opinions are based;
      (d) make clear which of the facts stated in the report are within the
      expert's own knowledge;
       (e)  say  who  carried   out   any   examination,   measurement   or
      qualifications of that person, and say whether or  not  the  procedure
      has been carried out under the expert's supervision;
            (f) where there is a range of opinion on the matters dealt  with
    in the report -
            (i) summarise  the  range  of  opinion,  so  far  as  reasonably
    practicable, and
            (ii) give reasons for the expert's own opinion;
            (g) contain a summary of the conclusions reached;
       (h)  if  the  expert  is  not  able  to  give  an  opinion   without
      qualification, state the qualification; and
      (j) contain a statement that the expert understands his or  her  duty
      to the Tribunal, and has complied and will  continue  to  comply  with
      that duty."

72. The particular part of the Practice Directions upon which  Mr  Blundell
    based his criticism of Mr  Morland's  evidence  was  paragraph  8A.9(f)
    which states that an expert's report must, where there is  a  range  of
    opinion on the matters dealt with in the report, summarise the range of
    opinion, so far as reasonably practicable  and  give  reasons  for  the
    expert's own opinion.  We accept  Mr  Blundell's  submission  that  the
    Practice Directions are based on the CPR.   In  the  context  of  civil
    proceedings they are clearly intended to deal with,  for  example,  the
    opinions of medical experts in relation to matters where there might be
    a range of medical opinion about a particular diagnosis  or  prognosis.
    The position is that, with one exception, Mr Blundell has not drawn our
    attention to any other expert opinion which it is suggested Mr  Morland
    failed to draw to the attention of the Tribunal.  The exception is  the
    report of the opinion  of  an  unnamed  analyst  in  the  Responses  to
    Information Requests paper of the  Immigration  and  Refugee  Board  of
    Canada dated 7 August 2007.  In effect Mr Blundell's criticism  amounts
    to a criticism based on paragraph 8A.5 that an expert  should  consider
    all material factors including those which might detract  from  his  or
    her opinion.

73. Paragraph 2.2 of the Burma OGN dated 31 October 2007 states that  since
    1962 Burma has been ruled  by  a  succession  of  highly  authoritarian
    military regimes dominated by the majority  Burma  ethnic  group.   The
    current controlling military regime, the State  Peace  and  Development
    Council (SPDC), led by Senior General Than Shwe, is  the  country's  de
    facto government,  with  subordinate  Peace  and  Development  Councils
    ruling by decree at the  division,  state,  city,  township,  ward  and
    village levels.  On 30 August 2003 the government  announced  a  seven-
    step road map to build a "modern, democratic, prosperous  state".   The
    National Convention, the first step of the road map, was reconvened  in
    2004, after a recess of eight years, to draw up  the  basic  principles
    for a new constitution for Burma.  The National  League  for  Democracy
    (NLD) decided not to participate because the SPDC refused to meet their
    conditions.  There had been four sessions  of  the  Convention  and  it
    completed its final session on 3 September 2007.  The road map has come
    under criticism for being un-inclusive and lacking in credibility.

74. Paragraph 2.3 of the OGN states:

      "The government's human rights record worsened  during  2006  and  the
      government continued to commit numerous serous abuses including  extra
      judicial killings, deaths in custody, disappearances,  rape,  torture,
      abuse of prisoners and detainees,  arbitrary  arrest  without  appeal,
      politically motivated arrests and detentions, restriction  of  freedom
      of speech, press, assembly, association and movement,  restriction  of
      freedom of religion and forced labour  (including  against  children).
      The military government totally controlled the country's armed forces,
      excluding a few active insurgent groups."

75. Paragraph 2.4 of the OGN  states  that  the  Foreign  and  Commonwealth
    Office corroborated reports  of  the  deterioration  of  Burma's  human
    rights record in 2006 and  stated  that  Burma's  human  rights  record
    remained a cause of grave concern.  Paragraph 2.5 states  that  despite
    laws prohibiting torture, members of  the  security  forces  reportedly
    tortured, beat, and otherwise abused prisoners,  detainees,  and  other
    citizens   including   routinely   subjecting   detainees   to    harsh
    interrogation  techniques  designed  to  intimidate  and  disorientate.
    Paragraph 2.7 states that the International Committee of the Red  Cross
    (ICRC)  had  faced  increasing  difficulties  in  conducting  detention
    visits.  It took the radical step of publicly denouncing the government
    for violations of international humanitarian  law  affecting  civilians
    and detainees and of imposing increasingly severe restrictions on ICR's
    work.  Paragraph 2.9 states that  Amnesty  International  has  recently
    expressed concerns to the SPDC that  articles  of  Burma's  legislation
    excessively restrict the right of freedom  of  expression,  association
    and assembly.  The authorities continue to use  these  laws  to  obtain
    peace for government critics.  Since July 2005,  the  authorities  have
    penalised senior political figures  with  extraordinarily  long  prison
    sentences  in  secret  trials;  held  individuals  incommunicado,   and
    prosecuted persons attempting to report on human rights violations.

76. In relation to the mass protest that took place towards the end of 2007
    the Special Rapporteur in his report dated 7 December 2007 stated  that
    during the crackdowns of 26 to 29 September 2007 the  security  forces,
    comprising police and army or riot police as well  as  members  of  the
    Union Solidarity and Development Association  and  the  Swan  Rah  Shin
    militia, use excessive force against civilians,  including  unnecessary
    and disproportionate  lethal  force.   He  stated  that  following  the
    crackdown, several reports of killings,  severe  beatings  and  arrests
    were received as well as allegations of  torture,  deaths  in  custody,
    relatives of people in hiding being taken hostage and lack of access to
    medical treatment for the wounded.  Allegations were also received that
    the bodies  of  some  of  the  people  purportedly  killed  during  the
    crackdown had been burned.  He was informed that 10,000 prisoners  were
    detained in Insein prison.  He noted that most political prisoners from
    the NLD and the 88  Generation  Group,  as  well  as  the  monks,  were
    labelled as terrorists by the authorities and then  prosecuted  on  the
    basis of the security law.

77. In relation  to  the  implicit  suggestion  by  Mr  Blundell  that  the
    situation in Burma had changed for the better as  demonstrated  by  the
    Special  Rapporteur's  report  dated  5  September  2008  we  have  the
    following observations.  In our view Mr Moreland cannot  be  criticised
    for failing to refer to this report since his report  to  the  Tribunal
    was dated 27 May 2008.  We also take the view that the  report  of  the
    Secretary General should be viewed with a degree of caution since it is
    aspirational rather than a reflection of any real and lasting change to
    the  situation  in  Burma.   We  observe  that  following  the  Special
    Rapporteur's visit in November 2007, after his call for the release  of
    all political prisoners in accordance with his proposed plan of  action
    in his last report to the General Assembly, 58 prisoners were  released
    on humanitarian grounds according to a  statement  by  the  government.
    Nine men over the age of 65  and  49  women  either  pregnant  or  with
    children were set free.  In paragraph 51 of his report dated 7 December
    2007, however, the Special Rapporteur stated that he condemned the  new
    arrest of political activists, despite the commitment by Prime Minister
    Thein Sein to the special advisor to the Secretary  General  on  Burma,
    Ibrahim Gambari, in early  November  that  no  more  arrests  would  be
    carried out.  That, in our view, is clear  evidence  that  the  Burmese
    government in the past have only partially acted upon assurances  given
    to officials of the United Nations.  Although it is the case  that  the
    Special Rapporteur in his visit from 3 to 7 August 2008  was  permitted
    to visit prisoners in prison, in paragraph 45 of  his  report  he  said
    that the continuing detention of political leaders such as U Win W  Tin
    and Hkun Hutunoo put in great jeopardy the participatory  aims  of  the
    democratic process as expressed by the  government  in  its  seven-step
    road map to democracy.  In paragraph 25  of  his  report  he  said  the
    prospect of the country becoming a democratic  state  would  depend  on
    each of the remaining steps of  the  road  map  being  conducted  in  a
    democratic and inclusive manner.  He recommended to the  government  of
    Burma four core human rights element that were indispensable for paving
    the road to democracy, to be implemented before the elections of  2010.
    In paragraph 24 of his report, however, he said he was informed by  the
    Commission for Holding  Referendum  that  free  campaigning  either  in
    favour or against the approval of the new State  Constitution  was  not
    permitted.  Asked about the possibility of  the  government  issuing  a
    comprehensive report on how the referendum had been held  the  response
    was that all information concerning the  referendum  had  already  been
    released.  In paragraph 26 he said that his meeting with  the  National
    Convention  discussed  the   provisions   of   the   new   Constitution
    guaranteeing fundamental rights for the people of Burma.  In  paragraph
    27 he noted with concern that a number of existing  domestic  laws  did
    not comply with those constitutional provisions  and  recommended  that
    the government initiate the revision of laws to ensure compliance  with
    the constitutional provisions and international human rights standards

78. In the section of his  report  dealing  with  his  recommendations  the
    Special Rapporteur set out the four core human right elements  that  he
    had said were indispensable.  It is perfectly plain from  paragraph  87
    of his report that these were recommendations rather than  undertakings
    by the Burmese government.  The first of the core human rights elements
    was a review of national legislation.  He recommended the government to
    start reviewing and amending domestic laws  which  limited  fundamental
    rights and were in contravention with the new Constitution  and  within
    international human rights standards.  In paragraph 93 he set out  what
    those laws were and said that according  to  information  received  the
    Office of the Attorney General was tasked with  analysing  legislation.
    As Mr Cox pointed out the statement that the  Office  of  the  Attorney
    General was tasked with analysing legislation was an indication of  the
    functions of the Attorney General but it did not state explicitly  that
    he had undertaken  a  review  of  the  legislation  which  the  Special
    Rapporteur thought needed to be amended.  In the  case  of  the  second
    core human rights element, namely the progressive release of  prisoners
    of conscience in paragraph 98 of  his  report  the  Special  Rapporteur
    stated that the government of Burma had  in  the  past  issued  several
    amnesty laws for the release of prisoners of  conscience  in  order  to
    restore human rights and to seek national  reconciliation.   He  stated
    that such mechanisms and others such as pardons, reduction of  sentence
    or conditional release could now be implemented.  He listed a number of
    categories of prisoners that  should  be  taken  into  account  and  in
    paragraph 99 of his report he stated that additional criteria  included
    the release of prisoners connected to specific  events  such  as  those
    arrested in August 1988, May 2003,  September  2007  and  May  2008  in
    connection with the referendum and the aftermath of cyclone Nargis.  We
    accept Mr Cox's submission  that  the  Special  Rapporteur  wished  to
    encourage the government of Burma to take steps that would lead to  the
    recognition of human rights and  did  not  wish  to  say  anything  too
    critical of the government.  We, ourselves, cannot read  anything  into
    the report that indicates that any substantial change was taking  place
    or was about take place in the human rights  situation  in  Burma.   In
    paragraph 77 of  his  report  the  Special  Rapporteur  said  that  the
    promotion of protection of human rights in the country continued to  be
    among the main challenges ahead.

79. It is the case, as subsequent reports have shown, particularly those of
    Refworld dated 24 September  2008  and  29  September  2008,  that  the
    Burmese government  have released seven political prisoners,  including
    Mr Win Tin, among  a  larger  number  of  ordinary  prisoners  released
    following an amnesty, but as the  reports  show  there  are  many  more
    political prisoners still detained.

80. In relation to  the  release  of  Mr  Stanley  Van  Tha,  Mr  Morland's
    explanation as to why he had not mentioned this was  that  he  had  not
    been aware of his release at the time when he prepared  his  report  in
    May 2008 but even if he had been he  would  not  have  regarded  it  as
    particularly significant because there was a pattern over the years  of
    prisoners being released, particularly if they  were  well  known,  and
    then of further arrests. In our view this approach is borne out by  the
    report of the Special Rapporteur in 2007  referred  to  above.   It  is
    significant that according to the report  from  swissinfo.com  dated  5
    January 2008 upon his release he did not remain in Burma  but  rejoined
    his family in Switzerland.

81. Mr Blundell relied upon paragraphs 3.77 and 3.78 of the Burma OGN dated
    31 October 2007.  Paragraph 3.77 stated that the claimant's  level  in
    involvement in the pro-democracy movement in the UK would  be  relevant
    to whether or not a grant of asylum was appropriate.  Where it had been
    established that claimants were high profile activists  and  had  close
    links to the opposition movement either in Burma or the  UK  they  were
    likely to face difficulties if returned to Burma.  Therefore, prominent
    activists were likely to qualify for a grant of asylum.  Paragraph 3.78
    went on to say, however, simply protesting outside the Burmese  embassy
    and the mere existence of photographic evidence to this effect did  not
    necessarily indicate a high level of  political  involvement  in  anti-
    government activities or that the claimant would  face  persecution  or
    ill-treatment if returned to Burma.  The paragraph went on to say  that
    furthermore the Burmese authorities could  not,  from  the  photographs
    alone, know that the appellant was Burmese.  In our view the OGN  fails
    to acknowledge the real likelihood that the Burmese authorities at  the
    embassy would have copies of photographs of Burmese nationals  who  had
    come to the United Kingdom.  Furthermore the OGN is a  policy  document
    and only indirectly of evidential value.  The OGN gives no sources  for
    its conclusion that there is a distinction to  be  drawn  between  high
    level  and  low  level  involvement  in   anti-government   activities.
    Paragraph 3.7.3 states that the FCO believes that  any  photographs  of
    individuals they were targeting who protested abroad could be  used  as
    part of a case against them because the regime's military intelligence,
    a special branch in the  police  force  inside  Burma,  regularly  took
    photographs of individuals ranging from activists and their families to
    teachers, diplomats and NGO employees.  The FCO had not, however, heard
    of specific cases where this had happened.  On the other hand it has to
    be borne in mind that no information has been provided to the  Tribunal
    by the respondent, who should know, as to whether there have  been  any
    returns to Burma and it is plain that from the evidence that we do have
    that the British embassy in Rangoon does not monitor any returnees that
    there might be.

82. In relation to the report from the Democratic Voice of  Burma  (Norway)
    dated  9 October  2007  that  government  officials  had  categorised
    detainees into four groups based  on  their  level  of  involvement  in
    recent anti-government demonstrations in Burma it is important  in  our
    view to note that the categories  ranged  from  A  to  D.   Category  A
    included protest leaders of  organisers  and  politicians;  category  B
    denoted those who held flags or marched in the first row of protestors.
     There is no further description of category C.  Category  D  comprised
    people who were bystanders at the protests or clapped  their  hands  in
    support.  In our view this report in no way cast  any  doubt  upon  the
    validity of Mr Morland's conclusions that the  Burmese  government  did
    not distinguish between high and low  level  anti-government  activity.
    The fact that  persons  might  have  been  detained  for  being  merely
    bystanders at protests or clapping their hands in support in  our  view
    confirms that  the  Burmese  authorities  take  a  repressive  attitude
    towards even minor forms of political protest.

83. Insofar as the letter from  Deputy  Head  of  Mission  at  the  British
    embassy in Rangoon dated 1 August 2008 is concerned, Mr  Cox  drew  our
    attention to an e-mail from the said embassy in Rangoon dated 15 August
    2007 which was sent in reply to a request for information.  One of  the
    questions asked was whether a Burmese national who left  Burma  legally
    and who took part in demonstrations/events held in the UK  against  the
    detention of Suu Kyi and then came to  the  attention  of  the  Burmese
    military intelligence would face any  penalties  for  participating  in
    such events.  The answer was  that  it  was  possible  that  particular
    individuals who had come to  the  attention  of  the  Burmese  military
    intelligence could face penalties for  participating  in  such  events.
    They could, for example, have their  passports  revoked  on  return  to
    Burma.  They could be arrested and prosecuted for instigating unrest or
    inciting anger against the state (sedition).   This  could  lead  to  a
    prison sentence, possibly for life.  The e-mail then went on  in  terms
    which were  identical  save  for  one  significant  departure  and  one
    sentence which is not material, to the third paragraph  of  the  letter
    dated 1 August 2008.  The letter  dated  1  August  2008  said  it  was
    difficult  to  judge  how   the   authorities   react   in   individual
    circumstances, but the belief of the  writer  was  that  an  individual
    would only have a high risk of facing penalties if they had  been  seen
    to  lead/organise  the  demonstrations  or   be   responsible   for   a
    particularly extreme act of incitement.  The significant departure  was
    that in the letter dated 1 August 2008 the expression "a high risk  of
    facing penalties" was used.  The letter dated 1 August 2008 stated that
    the writer was not aware of any cases  of  individuals  who  had  faced
    persecution  in  Burma  simply  as  a  result  of  participating  in  a
    demonstration overseas, but as Mr Cox pointed out the FCO  acknowledged
    in a letter dated 28 September 2004 that they  did  not  systematically
    monitor returnees from the United Kingdom or elsewhere.   Moreover,  as
    was noted on behalf of the appellant, the writer of the letter dated  1
    August 2008 did not state the basis for his belief.

84. In relation to the suggestion that Mr Morland had not referred to other
    expert evidence, Mr Blundell relied upon a passage  in  response  to  a
    request for information contained in a Country of Origin Research Paper
    produced by the Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada dated 7  August
    2007.  In correspondence dated 27 July 2007 a country analyst for  Asia
    at  the  Internal  Displacement  Monitoring  Centre  stated  that   the
    government of Burma was not in a position to monitor the activities  of
    all of its citizens living in other countries as the number  of  people
    who had left Burma was huge.  In certain  cases  the  government  might
    monitor the activities of citizens living  overseas  who  were  already
    engaged in political activities while living in Burma and came onto the
    government's radar screen then.  The likelihood of such people  getting
    permission to leave the country,  however,  became  pretty  small.   In
    relation to persons who were in a  category  of  being  more  educated,
    economically better off  and  had  official  permission  to  leave  the
    country for purposes such as studying abroad and who came to the United
    States as students, the analyst expressed the  opinion  that  if  their
    activities were largely of limited scope, such as marching in  a  peace
    rally at a  college  campus  or  writing  an  op-ed  in  their  college
    newspaper on Ang San Suu Kyi's birthday, then it  was  highly  unlikely
    that the government of Burma would be able to/would even be  interested
    in monitoring their activities.  It may very well  be,  as  Mr Morland
    said, that the opinion set in that passage  was  an  assertion  by  one
    person and the source of his information is unknown.  In our view it is
    clear, however, that the context in which the issue of monitoring arose
    was wholly different since the analyst was dealing with  the  situation
    on college campuses, of which there must be hundreds if  not  thousands
    in the United States.  In the instant appeal the Tribunal is  concerned
    with the issue of monitoring of protestors outside the Burmese  embassy
    in London.

85. The conclusion we have reached in relation to how  we  should  approach
    Mr Morland's evidence is that similar evidence from him was accepted by
    the Tribunal in HM, the respondent has not commissioned a  report  from
    an expert herself and, for the reasons which we have given, the matters
    which have been advanced by Mr Blundell do not detract from  the  value
    of Mr Morland's evidence as an expert witness.

86. In the report of the International Crisis Group  entitled  "Burma/Burma
    after Nargis: time to normalise aid relations" dated 20  October  2008,
    relied upon  by  the  respondent,  under  the  heading  "The  Political
    Context" it was stated that  some  international  observers  speculated
    that the shock from cyclone Nargis would lead to political reform -  as
    in Aceh following the 2004 Indian Ocean  Tsunami.   The  top  generals,
    however, made clear they had  no  intention  of  deviating  from  their
    "seven-step road map".  The report  said  that  going  ahead  with  the
    referendum  at  the  height  of  the  post-cyclone  emergency,  despite
    international and domestic outrage, clearly demonstrated the importance
    they attached to their plan.  The report said that although the bungled
    relief operation intensified  popular  resentment  against  the  ruling
    clique, few Burma citizens believed that it would prompt change.   Even
    democracy activists were pessimistic.  It is significant in our view to
    note that in the Human Rights Watch Report entitled  "Burma:  Crackdown
    Bloodier Than Government Admits" dated 7 December 2007 it was said that
    Human Rights Watch found that the crackdown was carried out in part  by
    the Union Solidarity and Development Association (USDA), a  "mass-based
    social welfare"  organisation  with  more  than  twenty  three  million
    members that the  Burmese  military  was  grooming  to  lead  a  future
    civilian government.  It operated alongside the Swan Arr Shin  (Masters
    of Force) militia, soldiers and riot police in  beating  and  detaining
    protestors.

87. In these circumstances we take the view that it cannot yet be said that
    there is a real likelihood of change  in  the  attitude  of  the  Burma
    government towards respecting human rights and the freedom of political
    dissent. We accept the view of Mr Morland that recent events upon which
    the respondent relies to assert that changes for the better are  taking
    place in Burma are no more than "window dressing" and that  it  remains
    to be seen whether any enduring changes are made.

88. In relation to the issue of monitoring of protests we bear in mind  the
    statement in paragraph 18 of his judgment in YB (Eritrea) by Sedley  LJ
    that:

      "Where, as here, the tribunal has objective evidence which  "paints  a
      bleak picture of the suppression of political opponents"  by  a  named
      government, it requires little or no evidence or speculation to arrive
      at a strong  possibility  -  and  perhaps  more  -  that  its  foreign
      legations not only film or photograph their nationals who  demonstrate
      in public against the  regime  but  have  informers  among  expatriate
      oppositionist organisations who can name the people who are filmed  or
      photographed. Similarly it does not require  affirmative  evidence  to
      establish a probability that the intelligence services of such  states
      monitor the internet for information about oppositionist groups."

      We bear in mind also that it is  stated  in  the  Human  Rights  Watch
    Report entitled "Crackdown: Repression of the 207 Popular  Protests  in
    Burma" dated 7 December 2007 that the security forces, relying  on  the
    photos and videotapes  collected  by  intelligence  agents  during  the
    protests immediately began arresting anyone suspected of being involved
    in the protests.  We have also had the evidence of Mr U Khin Maung Kyi,
    the former Burmese diplomat, who  worked  at  the  Burmese  embassy  in
    London  from  1985  until  he  defected  in  1989   relating   to   the
    photographing and identifying  of  demonstrators  outside  the  Burmese
    embassy in London which we accept as credible.

89.   The suggestion made to us by Mr Blundell was not that the evidence of
    Mr Kyi was not credible.  The criticism that was levelled against  this
    evidence was that it was outdated.  In our view having regard  to  what
    Sedley LJ said in YB (Eritrea) it is does not demand  much  stretch  of
    the imagination to suppose that the measures put in place  to  identify
    protestors by a regime as repressive as the Burmese regime  would  have
    remained in place and not lapsed due  to  the  passage  of  time.   The
    events of 2007 and 2008 only have served to enhance the regime's  fears
    about dissidents gaining influence.   We have also had the  benefit  of
    the evidence of Mr AB in relation to the practice of officials  in  the
    embassy as a matter of  routine  photographing  demonstrators  outside.
    The same criticism was levelled by Mr Blundell of him  as  of  Mr  Kyi
    regarding his failure to bring his report up to date.  Nonetheless  his
    evidence was not seriously in dispute and taking that together with the
    other evidence to the same effect we are  satisfied  that  any  Burmese
    demonstrator demonstrating outside the Burmese embassy would be  likely
    to be photographed and identified by officials within.

90.   In her report entitled "Scratching the Surface  -  My  Experiences  in
    Interrogation, Court and Insein Jail, Burma" dated 20 January 2000,  Ms
    Rachel Goldwyn described her arrest, detention  and  interrogation  and
    ultimate sentence to seven years' imprisonment  with  hard  labour  for
    undermining the stability of the state contrary to section  5J  of  the
    1950 Emergency Act on account of her solo protest in which she sang two
    Burmese pro-democracy songs, showed two banners and chanted several pro-
    democracy  slogans.   She  was  arrested  on  7  September   1999   and
    interrogated that day and the following day.  She  stated  that  during
    her interrogation she was shown a very recent photograph taken  through
    the windows of the Burmese embassy  in  Charles  Street  in  London  of
    demonstrators outside the embassy.  Those questioning her pointed to Ko
    Aung (the witness at the hearing before us) in the photograph and asked
    her to identify him.  She went on to say that she  was  also  asked  to
    identify other people in the photograph which was not more than a month
    old as the demonstrators had a flag that she had  made  shortly  before
    leaving the United Kingdom.  She refused to identify anyone.   She  was
    repeatedly asked if Ko Aung was her boyfriend.  We are satisfied  that
    limited though this evidence  is,  it  indicated  the  ability  of  the
    Burmese authorities in the United Kingdom to identify Mr  Aung  outside
    the  Burmese  embassy  and  communicate  his  identification   to   the
    authorities in Burma.

91.    We  have  not  found  the  evidence  of  Mr  Kyaw  Soe  Aung   wholly
    satisfactory.  We find the statement that the appellant was one of  the
    most active female members of the Burmese democratic community in exile
    in London to be misleading given the account that she herself  gave  of
    her activities.  We also take the view that the  juxtaposition  in  his
    statement of mention of Ms Rachel Goldwyn's report  called  "Scratching
    the Surface" with his statement that in 1999 she was shown  photographs
    of the crowd outside the Burmese embassy when she was  interrogated  in
    Burma and it was clear that the officials knew  the  names  of  people,
    knew about their activities and in some cases even knew where they were
    living was an attempt to suggest that this information  came  from  her
    report.  It is plain from reading her report that the only person  whom
    she described the authorities as knowing was Mr Aung himself.  We  also
    take the view that his evidence in relation to  whether  there  was  an
    informer within the BDMA who passed information to  the  embassy  about
    people in the Burmese community was unsatisfactory.  We take  the  view
    that what he said in paragraph 17 of his statement, namely

      "We also have established a secret contact in the Burmese  Embassy  in
      London.  This person has told us that there is an informer within  the
      BDMA who passes information to the Embassy  about  people  within  the
      Burmese community in the United Kingdom who are politically active"

    was designed to suggest that this informer was  currently  active.   In
    cross-examination he was put into a position where he had  to  indicate
    the date on which he was told about this informer  and  what  was  done
    about him.  This resulted in his saying that this  particular  informer
    had been dealt with.   This  provoked  a  departure  from  his  witness
    statement in suggesting that there were other  more  recent  informers.
    We find it difficult to accept Mr Aung's explanation that what he  said
    in his statement was an honest mistake.  Nonetheless having  regard  to
    the statement of Sedley LJ in YB (Eritrea), quoted above, it would have
    needed little evidence to persuade us that the officials at the Burmese
    embassy have spies in the Burmese community in the United  Kingdom  who
    are able to identify members of opposition groups.

92. The country guidance  given  by  the  Tribunal  in  HM  remains  valid.
    Despite the efforts of the Special Rapporteur we take the view that  no
    significant or reliable change has occurred  in  the  approach  of  the
    authorities in Burma to be able to say that the human rights  situation
    there is any better than  it  was  at  the  time  the  Tribunal  in  HM
    promulgated its determination.  We take the view that participation  in
    demonstrations outside the Burmese  embassy  by  Burmese  nationals  is
    likely to be recorded by the Burmese authorities  in  London  and  made
    known to the Burmese authorities in Burma; we  express  the  view  that
    those Burmese nationals participating on a regular basis are likely  to
    have been photographed by the Burmese authorities and  identified.   We
    are satisfied that if such a person is returned to Burma and  there  is
    an additional factor which would trigger the attention of  the  Burmese
    authorities such as the lack of a valid Burmese passport or the absence
    of permission to exit Burma or previously having come  to  the  adverse
    attention of the authorities as  an  opponent  of  the  authorities  or
    having a connection with known political opponents there is a real risk
    of persecution and article 3 ill-treatment on return to Burma.  It  may
    well be that a pro-democracy demonstrator outside the  Burmese  embassy
    known to the authorities to have a real commitment to the cause without
    an additional risk factor would equally be at risk but each  case  must
    be determined on its own facts.

93. Nevertheless despite Mr Morland's view  that  the  Burmese  authorities
    were unpredictable in their treatment of individuals and  would  regard
    demonstration outside the embassy  in  London  as  an  affront  to  the
    regime, we find it difficult to  accept  that  the  Burmese  government
    would persecute someone whom they knew to be a hanger-on with  no  real
    commitment to the oppositionist cause who was demonstrating  merely  in
    order to enhance a false claim for  asylum.   As  the  Tribunal  in  HM
    found, if the Burmese authorities had reason to believe that a returnee
    had made a claim for asylum in the United  Kingdom  which  had  failed,
    that in itself was unlikely to attract  the  adverse  interest  of  the
    Burmese authorities.  That suggests that the Burmese authorities  would
    be aware that the returnee had advanced some criticism of the regime in
    order to mount a claim for asylum yet even then would not  be  inclined
    to persecute him unless there were other evidence  of  opposition.   We
    think it reasonable to draw a  distinction  between  demonstrations  in
    Burma, where it is inconceivable that a person would demonstrate unless
    he opposed the regime and demonstrations  in  the  United  Kingdom,  in
    which a hanger on with no real commitment to  the  oppositionist  cause
    might participate in the  hope  of  creating  a  false  entitlement  to
    refugee status.  We  are  not  prepared  to  accept  that  the  Burmese
    government  with  their  spies  in  the  Burmese  community  would  not
    appreciate the difference between a genuine opponent and a  hanger  on.
    We therefore take the view that it is unlikely that a hanger  on  would
    be at a real risk of persecution on  return  to  Burma  on  account  of
    merely having participated in demonstrations  but  each  case  must  be
    decided on its own facts.

Summary of general conclusion

  94. Our general conclusions are as follows:

    (1)     The country guidance given by the Tribunal in HM (Risk  factors
        for Burmese  citizens) Burma CG [2006] UKAIT 00012  remains  valid.
        Despite the release of some long term detainees no  significant  or
        reliable change has occurred in the approach of the authorities  in
        Burma to be able to say that the human rights  situation  there  is
        any better than it was at the time the Tribunal in  HM  promulgated
        its determination.

    (2)     The identities and roles of activists in Burmese  pro-democracy
        organisations based in London are likely to be known to the Burmese
        authorities.

    (3)     Participation in demonstrations outside the Burmese embassy  in
        London by Burmese nationals is likely to be recorded by the Burmese
        authorities in London and made known to the Burmese authorities  in
        Burma.  Those Burmese nationals participating on  a  regular  basis
        are likely to have been photographed by the Burmese authorities and
        identified.

    (4)     If such a person  were  returned  to  Burma  and  there  is  an
        additional factor which would trigger the attention of the  Burmese
        authorities (e.g. lack of a  valid  Burmese  passport;  absence  of
        permission to exit Burma; previously having  come  to  the  adverse
        attention of the authorities as  an  opponent  of  the  regime;  or
        having a connection with known political opponents there is a  real
        risk of persecution and article 3 ill-treatment on return.

    (5)     It may be that a pro-democracy demonstrator outside the Burmese
        embassy known to the authorities to have a real commitment  to  the
        cause without an additional risk factor would equally  be  at  risk
        but each case must be determined on its own facts.

    (6)     It is unlikely that the  Burmese  authorities  would  persecute
        someone whom they knew to be a hanger-on with no real commitment to
        the oppositionist cause who was demonstrating merely  in  order  to
        enhance a false claim for asylum but each case must be  decided  on
        its own facts.

    (7)     In granting permission to leave Burma the authorities  are  not
        concerned with the places which the passport holder may  visit  nor
        the length of time during which they may be absent from Burma.  The
        Burmese authorities are not interested per se in the places visited
        by a returning Burmese national who had  had  permission  to  leave
        Burma nor how long they stayed away.

The appellant's circumstances

95. So far as the appellant herself is concerned  we  accept,  as  did  the
    immigration judge, that her father  was  a  pro-democracy  activist  in
    Burma.  The immigration judge described him as a thorn in the  side  of
    the Burmese government.  We  accept  the  account  of  the  appellant's
    brother that he was a leader of the Kawtoolay Muslim  Liberation  Front
    and that he was named as  such  in  a  book  entitled  "Burma's  Golden
    Triangle on the Trail  of  the  Opium  Warlords"  by  Andre  and  Louis
    Boucaud.  We are  prepared  to  accept  the  following:  that  he,  the
    appellant's mother,  the  appellant's  brother  and  two  sisters  were
    granted asylum in the United Kingdom; that the appellant's brother  was
    involved with the KMLF and also the All Burma Muslim Union (ABMU); that
    the appellant's brother is an executive committee  member  of  BDMA  as
    stated by Mr Aung and also chairman of BMA (UK) as  Mr  Aung  and  the
    appellant's brother himself say; that the appellant's husband qualified
    as a lawyer but his licence  was  withdrawn  in  1988  by  the  Burmese
    authorities because of his involvement in the  democracy  movement  and
    that the appellant has an older brother who lives in Thailand who  took
    part in the 1988 uprising against the Burmese regime.   None  of  these
    matters were explicitly challenged by the  respondent.  Notwithstanding
    these connections, however, it is also true that  the  appellant  never
    herself was  the  object  of  any  adverse  attention  by  the  Burmese
    government whilst she lived in Burma.  In our view this was undoubtedly
    because she herself never participated in any  pro-democracy  movement.
    We accept that she was illiterate.  She clearly did not  represent  any
    form of threat whatsoever to the Burmese government.  This is borne out
    by the fact that on her own account she was able  to  leave  Burma  for
    Thailand on a number of occasions and also leave Burma legally in order
    to come to the United Kingdom.  We take the view that had  the  Burmese
    authorities had any adverse interest in her then she would have had the
    greatest difficulty in obtaining a passport.   Although  the  appellant
    said that she obtained a passport through an agent, she did not  appear
    to have paid anything other than the ordinary  amount  that  one  would
    have to pay in order to obtain a passport.  It seems that  this  was  a
    common practice in Burma and no  doubt  the  appellant  did  have  good
    reason to keep at arms length from the Burmese authorities in case  her
    family relationships did cause her problems  when  face  to  face  with
    Burmese officials.

96. Mr Morland was anxious to emphasise  that  in  granting  permission  to
    leave Burma the authorities were not concerned with  the  places  which
    the passport holder might visit nor the length  of  time  during  which
    they might be absent from  Burma.   We  regard  his  statement  in  re-
    examination that he believed the fact that the appellant had overstayed
    her visa in the United Kingdom might cause her problems on  return  and
    trigger questioning as apparently not altogether consistent his earlier
    evidence in which he  was  at  pain  to  point  out  that  the  Burmese
    authorities were not interested in the places visited  by  persons  who
    had had permission to leave Burma, nor how long they  stayed  away.  We
    interpret  his  evidence  as  meaning  that  the  combination  of   the
    appellant's family connections together with  her  expired  visa  might
    attract the Burmese authorities' adverse attention.   We take the  view
    that the fact  that  a  failed  asylum  seeker  on  return  would  have
    overstayed his leave would not in itself provoke the adverse  attention
    of the Burmese authorities.  Moreover, our attention has not been drawn
    to any item of background material which suggests that a failed  asylum
    seeker per se, if returned on  a  valid  passport,  would  attract  the
    adverse attention of the Burmese authorities.

97.  We  are  satisfied  that  the  appellant   took   part   in   numerous
    demonstrations outside the Burmese embassy during the  course  of  2007
    and also a number of demonstrations there during 2008.  We accept  that
    her attendance was less frequent in 2008 due to the birth of her  child
    on 22 December 2007, as a result of which it appears that she developed
    post natal depression.  She had travelled to the United  Kingdom  on  a
    valid Burmese passport carrying a valid exit stamp and a valid  British
    visa so that her arrival in the United Kingdom would be  known  to  the
    Burmese authorities.  We are satisfied it is likely that the  appellant
    has been photographed protesting outside the Burmese embassy  and  that
    officials  there  would  have  been  able  to  identify  her  from  her
    photograph.

98. We also take the view that effectively the appellant's activities  with
    the pro-democracy movement have been limited to  demonstrating  outside
    the Burmese Embassy and on occasions outside the Chinese embassy.   She
    was given the opportunity by the Tribunal  during  the  course  of  her
    evidence to elucidate upon her activities.  She said  that  apart  from
    preparing cakes and snacks for meetings in  2007,  making  banners  and
    stitching headbands, making a wreath, helping to make a mock coffin and
    allowing  her  daughter  to  lay  a  wreath  outside  the  embassy  her
    activities were limited to attending demonstrations.

99. So far as this appellant is concerned we are satisfied  that  the  fact
    that she had been demonstrating outside  the  Burmese  embassy  over  a
    relatively prolonged period and is a member of the BMA  in  the  United
    Kingdom would be known to the Burmese authorities.  Mr Blundell did not
    suggest that, to use the words of Sedley LJ in YB (Eritrea), she  would
    be a "hanger-on with no real commitment to  the  oppositionist  cause".
    We are satisfied that the appellant would be identified as someone  who
    had family links to pro-democracy and  anti-government  activists.   We
    are satisfied that although these family  links  did  not  attract  the
    adverse interest of the authorities while she was in Burma  nonetheless
    her activities in participating in demonstrations against  the  Burmese
    authorities in the United  Kingdom  would  put  her  into  a  different
    category and  she  would  be  seen  as  a  political  opponent  of  the
    authorities.  We are also satisfied that her  demonstration  activities
    were not attempts to manufacture an asylum claim, but  arose  from  her
    genuine family-based involvement in anti-regime activities.   In  these
    circumstances we are satisfied there is a real risk that  if  she  were
    returned to Burma she would be detained, interrogated and subjected  to
    ill-treatment which would breach her rights under article 3 of the ECHR
    and amount to persecution for a Refugee Convention reason.

100. For the reasons given, the immigration judge made a material  error  of
    law in his determination of  the  appeal.   Accordingly  the  following
    decision is substituted.

      The appeal is allowed on asylum grounds and on  human  rights  grounds
    under article 3 of ECHR.





Signed


Senior Immigration Judge Spencer










         APPENDIX I: LIST OF BACKGROUND MATERIAL BEFORE THE TRIBUNAL


|    |1998              |  |Human Rights Watch World Report 1998: Burma       |
|    |1 March 1998      |  |Extracts from Jane's Intelligence Review          |
|    |20 January 2000   |  |Report by Rachel Goldwyn: Scratching the Surface  |
|    |2003              |  |Burma Lawyers' Council: Suppressive Law           |
|    |30 July 2003      |  |Amnesty International: Burma: Justice on Trial    |
|    |28 September 2004 |  |Letter from Foreign & Commonwealth Office         |
|    |6 March 2005      |  |Reuters News: Burma releases veteran pro-democracy|
|    |                  |  |activist                                          |
|    |7 March 2005      |  |BBC Monitoring Asia Pacific: Burma frees two      |
|    |                  |  |detained over State Day meeting                   |
|    |16 June 2005      |  |Amnesty International: Burma's Political          |
|    |                  |  |Prisoners: A Growing Legacy of Injustice          |
|    |2 December 2005   |  |Assistance Association for Political prisoners (  |
|    |                  |  |Burma): The Darkness We See: Torture in Burma's   |
|    |                  |  |Interrogation Centers and Prisons (Excerpt)       |
|    |27 March 2006     |  |Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for|
|    |                  |  |Human Rights (OHCHR): Report of the Special       |
|    |                  |  |Rapporteur on the right to freedom of opinion and |
|    |                  |  |expression: Summary of cases transmitted to       |
|    |                  |  |Governments and replies received(Burma excerpt)   |
|    |April 2006        |  |Kyaw Zwar Tun v United States Immigration and     |
|    |                  |  |Naturalization Service: US Court of Appeals,      |
|    |                  |  |Second Circuit                                    |
|    |6 March 2007      |  |US Department of  State: Country Reports on Human |
|    |                  |  |Rights Practices 2006: Burma (excerpt)            |
|    |30 April 2007     |  |US Department of  State: Country Reports on       |
|    |                  |  |Terrorism 2006; Burma (excerpt)                   |
|    |9 May 2007        |  |Freedom House: The Worst of the Worst: The World's|
|    |                  |  |Most Repressive Societies 2007 (Freedom in the    |
|    |                  |  |World) - Burma (Burma)                            |
|    |16 May 2007       |  |Voice of America News: Burma Detains Activists    |
|    |                  |  |praying for Aung San Suu Kyi's Release            |
|    |23 May 2007       |  |Amnesty International: Amnesty International      |
|    |                  |  |Report 2007: Burma                                |
|    |25 May 2007       |  |Amnesty International: Burma: Aung San Suu Kyi's  |
|    |                  |  |detention extended                                |
|    |7 August 2007     |  |Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada: Response |
|    |                  |  |to information request "Whether the government    |
|    |                  |  |monitors the activities of its citizens who travel|
|    |                  |  |to, or live in, Canada or other countries,        |
|    |                  |  |especially if those citizens are engaging in      |
|    |                  |  |political activities abroad in which they         |
|    |                  |  |criticise the government"                         |
|    |7 August 2007     |  |Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada: Response |
|    |                  |  |to information request "Burma: treatment of failed|
|    |                  |  |refugee claimants who return to Burma,            |
|    |                  |  |particularly those who engaged in political       |
|    |                  |  |activities while outside Burma"                   |
|    |7 August 2007     |  |Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada: Treatment|
|    |                  |  |of failed refugee claimants who return to Burma,  |
|    |                  |  |particularly those who engage in political        |
|    |                  |  |activities while outside Burma (2005-August 2007) |
|    |15 August 2007    |  |Asian Human Rights Commission: Burma: Public      |
|    |                  |  |assaults and deaths in custody                    |
|    |15 August 2007    |  |Email from British Embassy, Rangoon               |
|    |22 August 2007    |  |Amnesty International: Urgent Action 219/07 -     |
|    |                  |  |Burma: Fear of torture or ill-treatment (at least |
|    |                  |  |18 people detained after participating in         |
|    |                  |  |demonstrations against fuel price rises)          |
|    |5 September 2007  |  |United Nations General Assembly: Report of the    |
|    |                  |  |Special Rapporteur on the situation of human      |
|    |                  |  |rights in Burma                                   |
|    |22 September 2007 |  |BBC News: Profile Aung San Suu Kyi                |
|    |23 September 2007 |  |Voice of America News: Protests by monks, Nuns    |
|    |                  |  |and Civilians Escalate in Rangoon                 |
|    |24 September 2007 |  |The Guardian: Record numbers join Burmese protests|
|    |9 October 2007    |  |Democratic voice of Burma (Norway): Detainees     |
|    |                  |  |categorised according to protest involvement      |
|    |10 October 2007   |  |Assistance Association for Political Prisoners    |
|    |                  |  |(Thailand): One Activist Killed as a Result of    |
|    |                  |  |Torture during Interrogation                      |
|    |18 October 2007   |  |Democratic Voice of Burma (Norway): Burmese       |
|    |                  |  |overseas protesters arrested on return to Burma   |
|    |22 October 2007   |  |HJT Research: British diplomat says up to 2,500   |
|    |                  |  |still being detained by Burmese junta             |
|    |29 October 2007   |  |Radio Free Asia: Burmese Detainees Describe Abuses|
|    |31 October 2007   |  |UKBIA Operational Guidance Note: Burma            |
|    |9 November 2007   |  |Amnesty International: Burma: Briefing paper: No  |
|    |                  |  |Return to "Normal"                                |
|    |14 November 2007  |  |Asian Human Rights Commission: Burma: A country   |
|    |                  |  |not in accordance with law - the case of Naw Ohn  |
|    |                  |  |Hla                                               |
|    |22 November 2007  |  |Voice of America News: British PM Stops           |
|    |                  |  |Deportation of Burmese Asylum Seekers             |
|    |27 November 2007  |  |Amnesty International:  Burma: arrests continue   |
|    |                  |  |two months on                                     |
|    |7 December 2007   |  |Human Rights Watch: Burma: Crackdown Bloodier Than|
|    |                  |  |Government Admits                                 |
|    |7 December 2007   |  |Human Rights Watch: Crackdown: Repression of the  |
|    |                  |  |2007 Popular Protests in Burma                    |
|    |7 December 2007   |  |Office of the United nations High Commissioner for|
|    |                  |  |Human Rights (OHCHR): Report of the Special       |
|    |                  |  |Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in    |
|    |                  |  |Burma                                             |
|    |7 December 2007   |  |United Nations News: Death toll in Burma crackdown|
|    |                  |  |higher than Government figures                    |
|    |10 December 2007  |  |Asian Human Rights Commission: The state of human |
|    |                  |  |rights in eleven Asian nations in 2007 - Burma    |
|    |5 January 2008    |  |swissinfo.ch: Asylum seeker from Burma returns to |
|    |                  |  |Switzerland                                       |
|    |24 January 2008   |  |Democratic Voice of Burma (Norway): Security      |
|    |                  |  |forces break up NLD group                         |
|    |25 January 2008   |  |Amnesty International:  Arrests of political      |
|    |                  |  |activists increase in Burma                       |
|    |25 January 2008   |  |Amnesty International: Arrests of political       |
|    |                  |  |activists increase in Burma                       |
|    |5 February 2008   |  |Office of the United Nations High Commissioner    |
|    |                  |  |(OHCHR): The United Nations Special Rapporteur on |
|    |                  |  |the situation of human right sin Burma expresses  |
|    |                  |  |dismay over the continued arrests, detentions and |
|    |                  |  |charges against political and human rights        |
|    |                  |  |activists                                         |
|    |11 March 2008     |  |US Department of State: Country Reports on Human  |
|    |                  |  |Rights Practices 2007: Burma                      |
|    |13 March 2008     |  |Asian Human Rights Commission: Burma: Young woman |
|    |                  |  |jailed for life without getting lawyer and in     |
|    |                  |  |violation of many procedures                      |
|    |13 March 2008     |  |Suedostasienportal.info: article on young Burmese |
|    |                  |  |woman jailed for life.                            |
|    |19 March 2008     |  |Asian Human Rights Commission: Burma: Young man   |
|    |                  |  |wrongly jailed on charge of inciting September    |
|    |                  |  |protests                                          |
|    |24 March 2008     |  |Asian Human Rights Commission: Burma: Closed      |
|    |                  |  |Courts and more mocking of justice                |
|    |25 March 2008     |  |UK Parliament House of Commons: Commons Hansard   |
|    |                  |  |Debates 25 March 2008 (Oral Answers to Questions):|
|    |                  |  |Burma                                             |
|    |28 March 2008     |  |Ko Ko Win v The Minister of Citizenship and       |
|    |                  |  |Immigration: Federal Court of Canada: Reasons for |
|    |                  |  |Order and Order                                   |
|    |2 April 2008      |  |US Department of State press statement: Burma     |
|    |                  |  |continues Pre-Referendum Arrests                  |
|    |17 April 2008     |  |Inter Press News Agency: Rights-Burma: New        |
|    |                  |  |Constitution Gives Impunity to Military           |
|    |1 August 2008     |  |Letter from British Embassy, Rangoon              |
|    |1 September 2008  |  |BBC Monitoring Service: Asia Pacific: Opposition  |
|    |                  |  |party calls for unconditional release of detained |
|    |                  |  |members                                           |
|    |24 September 2008 |  |UN News Service: Burma: Ban welcomes release of   |
|    |                  |  |political prisoners, looks forward to further     |
|    |                  |  |action                                            |
|    |29 September 2008 |  |International Federation for Human Rights: Burma: |
|    |                  |  |Time has come to release all political prisoners  |
|    |10 October 2008   |  |Ko Ko Win v The Minister of Citizenship and       |
|    |                  |  |Immigration: Federal Court of Canada: Reasons for |
|    |                  |  |Judgement and Judgement                           |
|    |20 October 2008   |  |Democratic Voice of Burma (Norway): NLD hopes to  |
|    |                  |  |reconcile with youth members                      |
|    |20 October 2008   |  |International Crisis Group: Burma/Burma After     |
|    |                  |  |Nagis: Time to normalise Aid Relations            |
|    |28 October 2008   |  |About Refugees: Europe                            |

