

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

BA (Returns to Baghdad) Iraq CG [2017] UKUT 00018 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 24-25 August 2016                          |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between


                                     B A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
We find that it is appropriate to make an anonymity  direction  because  the
case involves a protection claim. Unless  and  until  a  tribunal  or  court
directs otherwise, the appellant is granted anonymity. No  report  of  these
proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him or any member  of  his
family. This direction applies both to the appellant and to the  respondent.


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D. Lemer, Counsel instructed by Lawrence Lupin
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I. Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


(i)   The level of general violence in  Baghdad  city  remains  significant,
    but the current evidence does not justify departing from the conclusion
    of the Tribunal in AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 00544 (IAC).

(ii)  The evidence shows that those  who  worked  for  non-security  related
    Western or international companies, or any other categories  of  people
    who would be perceived as having collaborated  with  foreign  coalition
    forces, are still likely to be at risk in areas which  are  under  ISIL
    control or have high levels of insurgent activity. At the current  time
    the risk is likely to emanate from Sunni insurgent groups who  continue
    to target Western or international companies as well as those  who  are
    perceived to collaborate with the Government of Iraq.

(iii) The current evidence indicates that the risk in Baghdad to  those  who
    worked for non-security related Western or international  companies  is
    low although there is evidence to show that insurgent  groups  such  as
    ISIL are active and capable of carrying out attacks in the city. In  so
    far as there may be a low level of risk from such groups in Baghdad  it
    is  not  sufficient  to  show  a  real  risk  solely  as  a   perceived
    collaborator.

(iv)  Kidnapping  has  been,  and  remains,  a  significant  and  persistent
    problem contributing to  the  breakdown  of  law  and  order  in  Iraq.
    Incidents of kidnapping are likely  to  be  underreported.  Kidnappings
    might be linked to a political or sectarian motive;  other  kidnappings
    are rooted in criminal activity for a purely financial motive.  Whether
    a returnee from the West is likely  to  be  perceived  as  a  potential
    target for kidnapping in Baghdad may depend on how long he or  she  has
    been away  from  Iraq.  Each  case  will  be  fact  sensitive,  but  in
    principle, the longer a person has spent abroad the greater  the  risk.
    However, the evidence does not show  a  real  risk  to  a  returnee  in
    Baghdad on this ground alone.

(v)   Sectarian violence  has  increased  since  the  withdrawal  of  US-led
    coalition forces in 2012, but is not at the levels seen in 2006-2007. A
    Shia dominated government is supported by Shia militias in Baghdad. The
    evidence indicates that Sunni men are more likely  to  be  targeted  as
    suspected supporters of Sunni extremist groups such as  ISIL.  However,
    Sunni identity alone is not sufficient to give rise to a real  risk  of
    serious harm.

(vi)  Individual characteristics, which do not in themselves create  a  real
    risk of serious harm on return to Baghdad, might amount to a real  risk
    for the purpose  of  the  Refugee  Convention,  Article  15(c)  of  the
    Qualification Directive or Article 3 of  the  ECHR  if  assessed  on  a
    cumulative basis. The assessment will depend on the facts of each case.



(vii) In general, the authorities in Baghdad are unable, and in the case  of
    Sunni complainants, are likely to be unwilling  to  provide  sufficient
    protection.








                              TABLE OF CONTENTS

                                                   Paragraphs

Background to  the  protection  claim                                   1-11

Scope of country guidance                                           12-15

Relevant country guidance                                           16-28

The hearing                                              29-44

Assessment of the evidence

      Empirical limitations                                         45-50

      General situation                                             51-56

          Potential     risk     as      a      perceived      collaborator:
57-67
      Former employees of a non-security related
      Western/international company

          Kidnapping     (including     returnees     from     the     West)
68-83

      Sunni identity                                                84-101

      Sufficiency of protection                                     102-106

Country guidance                                              107

Assessment of the protection claim                                  108-126


Appendix - Schedule of evidence














                                  GLOSSARY



AHH   Asa'ib Ahl al-Haqq

CIG   Home Office Country Information and Guidance

CSID  Civil Status Identity Document

FIS   Finnish Immigration Service

GoI   Government of Iraq

IBC   Iraq Body Count

IED   Improvised Explosive Device

ISF   Iraqi Security Forces

ISIL  Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant
      (also referred to as Da'esh or ISIS)

OHCHR Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights

PMF   Popular Mobilisation Forces

UNAMI United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq

UNHCR United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
















                            DECISION AND REASONS


BACKGROUND TO THE PROTECTION CLAIM

1.    In November 2003 the appellant began work as an assistant auditor  for
      a large international auditing company in Baghdad. His  work  involved
      visiting various government ministries as well as companies  based  in
      the 'Green Zone'. In 2005 the  security  situation  deteriorated.  The
      company arranged for increased personal security measures following an
      attack on another international auditing company. In August  2005  the
      appellant's manager received a threatening letter. The letter was sent
      to his home. The letter warned him and his colleagues that they  would
      be killed if they did not stop working for  the  Americans  and  leave
      Iraq. The letter purported to be from the Al Sunni  Allies  Army.  The
      appellant and his colleagues met to discuss the threat but decided  to
      continue work with increased caution.

2.    In June 2006 the company decided to  transfer  the  appellant  to  the
      London office for a period of six months training. He entered  the  UK
      on 20 June 2006 with entry clearance as a work  permit  holder,  which
      was valid until 8 December 2006. The  company  decided  to  close  the
      Baghdad office at the  end  of  2006.  The  appellant  was  offered  a
      training contract in the London office. He was granted  further  leave
      to remain as a work permit holder until 27 November 2011.

3.    The appellant says that a threatening letter was sent to his  home  in
      Baghdad in January 2007. The letter contained a bullet. It  said  that
      he deserved to be killed for cooperating with the Americans and should
      leave Iraq. Aside from the written threat there were no  repercussions
      against his family. His mother received a threatening letter  in  mid-
      2008 telling her to stop helping Shia people. The letter was unrelated
      to the appellant's work and no action was taken  against  his  mother,
      because she stopped her activities.

4.    In September 2008 the appellant's  training  contract  was  terminated
      because he failed to pass an exam. When he explained why he could  not
      return to Iraq the company gave him a one-year  fixed  term  contract.
      However, when the contract expired in September 2009 he was unable  to
      find an alternative work permit  sponsor.  He  claimed  asylum  on  23
      November 2009.

5.    The Secretary of State refused the  claim  in  a  notice  of  decision
      dated 23 December 2009. The appellant's account was  rejected  on  the
      ground that he failed to produce  sufficient  corroborative  evidence.
      Even if the claim was taken at its highest he would  not  be  at  risk
      because he was no longer employed by the company.

6.    Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge Manuell dismissed the  appeal  in
      a decision  dated  2  March  2010.  Having  heard  evidence  from  the
      appellant the judge found that he was a reliable witness and  accepted
      his account of past events. However, he concluded that  the  appellant
      would not be at risk on return because he no  longer  worked  for  the
      company in question. The company no longer had an office in Iraq.

7.    In a decision promulgated on 29 November 2010,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
      Gleeson set aside  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision.  The  positive
      credibility findings were preserved. The Upper Tribunal found that the
      First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to   provide   sufficient   reasons   to
      distinguish the facts of this case from the  country  guidance  in  NS
      (Iraq: perceived collaborator: relocation) CG [2007]  UKAIT  00046  in
      assessing risk on return.

8.    The appeal was identified as a suitable case  to  update  the  country
      guidance on the issue of perceived collaborators.  As  will  be  noted
      from the date  of  the  error  of  law  decision,  there  has  been  a
      considerable delay in listing the case for hearing.  The  reasons  for
      the delay are somewhat unclear from the information before  the  panel
      but it seems that the case was  set  back  to  await  the  outcome  of
      previous country guidance decisions. Such a long delay is regrettable.
      Since  the  decision  in  2010  the  situation  in  Iraq  has  changed
      considerably; as has the focus of this case.

9.    The factual background of the case is not in dispute. The  main  issue
      is whether a person with the appellant's particular profile  would  be
      at real risk of serious harm if he  is  returned  to  Baghdad  at  the
      current time. We proceed on the basis that  the  following  facts  are
      accepted:

        i) The appellant is an Iraqi citizen who would be returned  to  his
           home area of Baghdad city. Although his wider family  originates
           from Mosul the appellant and his immediate family  members  have
           lived in the same house  in  the  Al-Ameriyah  area  of  Mansour
           district since 1980.
       ii) Internal relocation is not an issue. It  is  accepted  that  the
           appellant will be returned to his home area of Baghdad and  that
           there is no other safe or reasonable area of relocation  outside
           his home area.
      iii) The appellant is a Sunni Muslim.
       iv) He worked as an assistant auditor  for  a  Western/international
           auditing company in Baghdad from 2003 to 2006.
        v) In August 2005 the appellant's colleague, an operations manager,
           received a threatening letter.
       vi) As a result of the deteriorating security situation during  2006
           the company decided  to  transfer  staff  out  of  Baghdad.  The
           appellant entered the UK on a  genuine  Iraqi  passport  with  a
           valid visa. The Baghdad office was closed a few months later.
      vii) In January 2007 a threatening letter was left at the appellant's
           home in Baghdad warning him to stop work for the company.
     viii) The appellant worked for  the  same  company  in  the  UK  until
           September 2009.
       ix) The appellant's mother, sister and  brother-in-law  returned  to
           the family home in Baghdad in or around September 2015 after his
           brother-in-law completed a four year posting  to  Kuwait  as  an
           Iraqi official.

10.   The appellant's  current  fear  of  return  to  Iraq  is  based  on  a
      combination of factors. He fears that he would  be  at  real  risk  of
      serious  harm  on   return   because   (i)   having   worked   for   a
      Western/international company he might be perceived as a collaborator;
      (ii) as a Sunni Muslim he might be targeted by Shia militia; (iii)  as
      a person who has spent  time  living  in  the  West  he  might  be  at
      heightened risk of kidnapping; and (iv) these risks  are  enhanced  in
      the context of general insecurity  and  high  levels  of  violence  in
      Baghdad.

11.   The appellant has lived in the UK for a period of 10  years.  He  says
      that his personal situation has changed since the First-tier  Tribunal
      decision. He has been in a relationship with his partner for the  past
      four years. She originates from Poland but is now a  British  citizen.
      While these are matters that might engage a private  and  family  life
      claim under Article 8 of the European Convention we  do  not  need  to
      determine those issues.  Mr Lemer made clear that human rights  issues
      would be raised in a separate claim if necessary.


SCOPE OF COUNTRY GUIDANCE

12.   This case was initially identified as one that was  suitable  to  give
    guidance on  the  current  risk  to  perceived  collaborators.  Further
    discussion took place at  the  hearing  as  to  whether  the  case  was
    appropriate for giving country guidance.

13.   It became clear  from  the  expert  evidence  that  the  issue  became
    narrowly construed to the risk to  "former  employees  of  non-security
    related Western/international companies". Dr George said  that  he  had
    not been asked to consider a wider category of case but indicated that,
    without having had time to consider the matter in detail,  his  opinion
    as to the possible risk to other categories of perceived  collaborators
    might be somewhat different e.g. interpreters or those who worked in  a
    military context. The expert evidence concentrated mainly on  the  risk
    on return to Baghdad. The fact that the  category  was  so  narrow  was
    hardly surprising given the facts of this particular case.

14.   Mr Lemer acknowledged that the evidence produced  in  support  of  the
    appeal was insufficient to show that the appellant  would  be  at  real
    risk of serious harm solely on account  of  his  profile  as  a  former
    employee of a non-security related  Western/international  company.  He
    accepted that the evidence relating to the other risk factors was  also
    insufficient, if assessed individually, to found a claim. He made clear
    that he relied on a cumulative assessment  of  various  potential  risk
    factors in order to show a real risk on return.

15.   Despite the Tribunal having expressed some initial concerns about  our
    ability to provide clear guidance beyond the narrow scope  set  out  at
    [13] above, both parties suggested  that  the  case  was  suitable  for
    country guidance. We agree. The decision may assist a wider  readership
    in so far as the  Tribunal  sets  out  a  summary  of  recent  evidence
    relating to the situation in Baghdad regarding a  number  of  potential
    risk factors, albeit that it is accepted that none  of  those  factors,
    taken alone, are sufficient to found a claim at the current time.


RELEVANT COUNTRY GUIDANCE

NS (Iraq: perceived collaborator: relocation) CG [2007] UKAIT 00046

16.   In NS (Iraq:  perceived  collaborator:  relocation)  CG  [2007]  UKAIT
    00046 the Tribunal considered evidence as it stood at the date  of  the
    hearing in October 2006. A time when Iraq was in a  period  of  intense
    sectarian conflict. The  Tribunal  concluded  that  an  Iraqi  who  was
    perceived as a collaborator as a consequence of his work for the UN, an
    NGO, the Multi-national Force, the Coalition Provisional Authority or a
    foreign contractor, and who had attracted the  hostility  of  an  armed
    group, faced a real risk of persecution on return  to  his  home  area.
    Whether internal relocation was a reasonable option would depend on the
    individual circumstances of each case. The decision relied  heavily  on
    the fact that the respondent's Operational Guidance Note (January 2006)
    and the Country of Origin  Information  Report  on  Iraq  (April  2006)
    outlined evidence  to  show  that  perceived  collaborators  (including
    interpreters) were being targeted by armed insurgent groups.


AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 00544 (IAC)

17.   The most recent country guidance is AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG  [2015]
    UKUT 00544 (IAC). The Tribunal conducted a  comprehensive  analysis  of
    the situation in Iraq as the evidence stood at the date of the  hearing
    in May 2015. The focus of the decision  was  narrowed  to  Humanitarian
    Protection issues under Article 15(c) of  the  Qualification  Directive
    (2004/84/EC) (see [2] of AA).  It  did  not  purport  to  identify  any
    specific risk categories with reference to the  Refugee  Convention  or
    any enhanced risk categories for the purpose of Article 15(c). However,
    the Tribunal considered that the nature of the internal armed  conflict
    in Iraq had changed to such a  significant  extent  that  the  decision
    replaced all previous country guidance on Iraq [204(F)], including  the
    decision in NS (Iraq).

18.   Although the decision in AA (Iraq) was confined to a broad  assessment
    of Humanitarian Protection issues under Article  15(c)  the  underlying
    analysis of the situation in various areas of Iraq is  also  applicable
    to a proper assessment of protection claims within the context  of  the
    Refugee Convention.

19.   For the purpose of this appeal, which concentrates  solely  on  return
    to Baghdad,  it  is  sufficient  to  note  the  Tribunal's  conclusions
    relating to the levels of  indiscriminate  violence  in  Iraq  for  the
    purpose of Article 15(c) at [204]:

      "1.   There is at present  a  state  of  internal  armed  conflict  in
           certain parts of Iraq,  involving  government  security  forces,
           militias of various kinds, and the Islamic group known as  ISIL.
           The intensity of this armed conflict in the so-called "contested
           areas", comprising the governorates of  Anbar,  Diyala,  Kirkuk,
           (aka Ta'min), Ninewah and Salah  Al-din,  is  such  that,  as  a
           general matter, there are substantial grounds for believing that
           any civilian returned there, solely on account  of  his  or  her
           presence  there,  faces  a  real  risk  of  being  subjected  to
           indiscriminate violence amounting to  serious  harm  within  the
           scope of Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive.

      2.    The degree of armed conflict in certain parts  of  the  "Baghdad
           Belts" (the urban environs around Baghdad City) is also  of  the
           intensity described in paragraph 1 above, thereby giving rise to
           a generalised Article 15(c) risk. The parts of the Baghdad Belts
           concerned are those  forming  the  border  between  the  Baghdad
           Governorate and the contested areas described in paragraph 1.

       3.     The  degree  of  armed  conflict  in  the  remainder  of  Iraq
           (including Baghdad  City)  is  not  such  as  to  give  rise  to
           indiscriminate  violence  amounting  to  such  serious  harm  to
           civilians, irrespective of their individual characteristics,  so
           as to engage Article 15(c).

      4.    In accordance with  the  principles  set  out  in  Elgafaji  (C-
           465/07) and  QD  (Iraq)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
           Department [2009] EWCA Civ 620, decision-makers in  Iraqi  cases
           should assess  the  individual  characteristics  of  the  person
           claiming humanitarian protection, in order to ascertain  whether
           those characteristics are such as to put  that  person  at  real
           risk of Article 15(c) harm."

20.   We note that  the  Tribunal's  overarching  conclusion  regarding  the
      level of armed conflict  in  Baghdad  was  made  "irrespective"  of  a
      person's individual characteristics. In  other  words,  the  level  of
      armed conflict was not deemed sufficiently intense to show, solely  on
      account of a person's presence in Baghdad, that there was a real  risk
      of being subjected to indiscriminate  violence  amounting  to  serious
      harm for the purpose of Article  15(c).  The  Tribunal  took  care  to
      outline the relevant  legal  framework  [83-86]  and  highlighted  the
      principles set out by the Court  of  Justice  of  the  European  Union
      (CJEU) in Elgafaji v Staatsssecretaris van Justitie [2009] Imm AR 477.
      The Tribunal quoted from the review of the relevant ECJ  jurisprudence
      outlined in MOJ & Others (Return to Mogadishu) Somalia CG [2014]  UKUT
      00442 (IAC) [86].  In  considering  the  ECJ  decision  in  Diakit�  v
      Commissaire g�n�ral aux r�fugi�s et aux apatrides [2014] WLR  (D)  37,
      the Tribunal in MOJ (Somalia) observed [32]:

           "At [31] the Court reaffirmed the view it expressed in  Elgafaji
           at [39] that Article 15(c) also contains (what UNHCR has termed)
           a "sliding scale" such that "the more the applicant is  able  to
           show that he is  specifically  affected  by  reason  of  factors
           particular to his personal circumstances, the lower the level of
           indiscriminate violence required for  him  to  be  eligible  for
           subsidiary protection." The  court  thereby  recognised  that  a
           person may still be accorded protection even  when  the  general
           level of violence is not very high if they are able to show that
           there are specific reasons,  over  and  above  them  being  mere
           civilians, for being affected by the indiscriminate violence. In
           this way the Article 15(c) enquiry is two-pronged: (a)  it  asks
           whether the level of violence is so high that there is a general
           risk to all civilians; (b) it asks that even  if  there  is  not
           such a general risk, there is  a  specific  risk  based  on  the
           "sliding scale" notion."

21.   In AA (Iraq) the  Tribunal  made  clear  that  it  was  necessary  for
      decision  makers  in  Iraqi  cases  to  consider  whether   individual
      characteristics would place a person at real risk of serious harm  for
      the purpose of Article 15(c) but  did  not  purport  to  identify  any
      enhanced risk categories. We will  consider  the  Tribunal's  findings
      regarding the general situation in Baghdad  as  part  of  our  overall
      assessment of the evidence.

22.   On 21 July 2016 the Court of Appeal granted permission to appeal on  a
    single ground relating to whether failure  to  obtain  a  Civil  Status
    Identity Document (CSID), in the absence of any other means of support,
    was likely to give rise to a breach of  Article  3.  The  parties  were
    agreed that the grant of permission does not affect the issues that the
    Tribunal will have to consider in this case.


JK and Others v Sweden (Application no. 59166/12) (23 August 2016)

23.   The day before  the  hearing  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  the  Grand
    Chamber of the European  Court  of  Human  Rights  ("ECtHR")  issued  a
    judgment in the case of  JK  v  Sweden.  Although  it  is  not  country
    guidance within the context of UK law it is necessary to refer  to  the
    decision. Both parties submitted that  it  was  unlikely  to  have  any
    significant bearing on the outcome of this case  because  the  evidence
    considered by the ECtHR pre-dated much of the evidence currently before
    this Tribunal.

24.   The Court noted  that  the  most  recent  evidence  from  the  Swedish
    Migration Agency concluded that the intensity of  violence  in  Baghdad
    did not constitute a real risk of treatment contrary to  Article  3  of
    the Convention. The Government referred  to  the  United  Kingdom  Home
    Office's report from April 2015 and reports by the  Norwegian  Landinfo
    from 2014 and 2015. The Court recognised that the security situation in
    Baghdad City had deteriorated but concluded that  the  reports  it  had
    considered did not show that the intensity of violence  had  reached  a
    level which would constitute a  real  risk  of  treatment  contrary  to
    Article 3 of the Convention [110]. Having concluded  that  the  general
    security situation in Iraq did not prevent the applicants' removal, the
    Court went on to consider whether their  personal  circumstances  would
    place them at risk. The Court acknowledged that  the  family  had  been
    exposed to the most serious forms of abuses by Al Qaeda in  the  period
    from 2004 to 2008. Having regard to the fact that the  applicants  were
    subjected to ill-treatment by Al Qaeda the Court found that there was a
    strong indication that they would continue to be at risk from non-state
    actors in Iraq [114]. The Court considered the Home Office  Country  of
    Origin Information report dated 2009 and  the  subsequent  Home  Office
    report dated 2014, which indicated that "persons who were perceived  to
    collaborate or had collaborated with the current Iraqi  Government  and
    its institutions, the former US  or  multinational  forces  or  foreign
    companies were at risk of persecution in Iraq. The reports  single  out
    certain particularly  targeted  groups,  such  as  interpreters,  Iraqi
    nationals  employed  by  foreign  companies,  and  certain   affiliated
    professionals  such  as   judges,   academics,   teachers   and   legal
    professionals." [116]

25.   The Court found that the  first  applicant  belonged  to  a  group  of
    people systematically targeted for  their  relationship  with  American
    armed forces. It stated that it was mindful of the fact that the  level
    and forms of involvement in "collaboration"  with  foreign  troops  and
    authorities may vary, and as such, so may the level of risk. The  Court
    took into account the fact that the appellant suffered serious harm  in
    the past as well as the fact that his work on an American military base
    was "highly visible". A  majority  of  the  Court  concluded  that  the
    applicant  and  his  family  would  face  a  real  risk  of   continued
    persecution by non-state actors if returned to Iraq [117].

26.   The Court went on to consider whether the Iraqi authorities were  able
    to provide an effective system of protection in Baghdad. The Court made
    the following findings:

           "120. It appears from the most  recent  objective  international
           human rights  sources  that  there  are  deficits  in  both  the
           capacity and the integrity  of  the  Iraqi  security  and  legal
           system. The  system  still  works,  but  the  shortcomings  have
           increased since 2010 (see paragraph 43 above).
                 Moreover, the US Department of State [February  2015]  has
           noted that widespread corruption at all levels of government and
           society has exacerbated  the  lack  of  effective  human  rights
           protections and that  the  security  forces  have  made  limited
           efforts  to  prevent  or  respond  to  societal  violence   (see
           paragraph 44 above). The situation has thus clearly deteriorated
           since 2011 and 2012, when the Migration Agency and the Migration
           Court respectively assessed the situation and the  latter  found
           that, in the event that threat still existed, it appeared likely
           that the Iraqi law-enforcement authorities were both willing and
           able to offer  the  applicants  the  necessary  protection  (see
           paragraph 19 above). Lastly, this issue is to  be  seen  against
           the background of a generally deteriorating security  situation,
           marked by an increase in  sectarian  violence  and  attacks  and
           advances by ISIS, as a  result  of  which  large  areas  of  the
           territory are outside the Iraqi Government's  effective  control
           (see paragraph 44 above).
                 121.  The Court considers that, in the light of  the  above
           information  on  matters  including  the  complex  and  volatile
           general security situation, the Iraqi authorities'  capacity  to
           protect their people must be regarded  as  diminished.  Although
           the current level of protection may still be sufficient for  the
           general  public  in  Iraq,  the  situation  is   different   for
           individuals, such as  the  applicants,  who  are  members  of  a
           targeted group. The Court is therefore  not  convinced,  in  the
           particular circumstances of the applicants' case, that the Iraqi
           State would be able to provide them  with  effective  protection
           against threats by al-Qaeda  or  other  private  groups  in  the
           current situation. The  cumulative  effect  of  the  applicants'
           personal circumstances and  the  Iraqi  authorities'  diminished
           ability to protect them must therefore be considered to create a
           real risk of ill-treatment in the event of their return to Iraq.
           122.   As  the  Iraqi  authorities'  ability  to   protect   the
           applicants must be regarded as diminished throughout  Iraq,  the
           possibility of internal relocation is not a realistic option  in
           the applicants' case.
                 123.   The Court therefore finds that  substantial  grounds
           have been shown for believing that the applicants  would  run  a
           real risk of treatment contrary to  Article  3  if  returned  to
           Iraq. Accordingly, the Court considers that  the  implementation
           of the deportation order in  respect  of  the  applicants  would
           entail a violation of Article 3 of the Convention."

27.   The Court held by ten votes to seven that deportation would give  rise
    to a violation of Article 3. It should  be  noted  that  a  significant
    minority of the Court issued  a  dissenting  opinion.  Two  judges  who
    formed part of the majority also  issued  separate  opinions.  Much  of
    their concerns rested with the approach the majority judgment  took  to
    the legal principles applicable to a proper assessment of Article 3. In
    particular, concerns were expressed about the way in which the majority
    judgment dealt with the issue of what weight should be placed  on  past
    persecution  when  assessing  current  risk.  The  dissenting   opinion
    observed that there was little reasoning to explain  why  the  majority
    judgment applied an apparently more stringent test in [102] [114]  that
    past persecution provided a "strong indication" of current risk, rather
    than  the  usual  test  of  "serious   indication"   (echoed   in   the
    Qualification Directive). Concerns were also expressed about the  legal
    principles relating to the burden of proof  set  out  in  the  majority
    judgment. While the Court emphasised that, in principle, the burden  of
    proof lay on the applicant, it purported to shift  the  burden  to  the
    domestic immigration authorities to establish the general situation  in
    another country, including the ability of its public authorities  [98].
    It also appeared to suggest that the burden shifted to  the  Government
    to "dispel any doubts" about risk on return in circumstances where  the
    court found that there was a "strong indication" arising  out  of  past
    persecution that the applicants would be at risk from non-state  actors
    [115].

28.   We did not  hear  submissions  on  these  legal  issues.  However,  we
    observe that decisions of the ECtHR are to be taken  into  account  but
    are not binding. On the face of it the  Court's  position  on  the  two
    points outlined above appear  to  be  contrary  to  Article  4  of  the
    Qualification Directive and  the  legal  framework  that  is  currently
    applicable to protection claims in the UK.  Given  that  neither  party
    suggested that that this legal approach had any direct bearing  on  the
    country guidance issues with which we are concerned it is not necessary
    for us to say anything further about the approach taken by the ECtHR in
    that particular case.


THE HEARING

29.   Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Gleeson  set  aside  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    findings relating to risk on  return.  The  appeal  was  listed  for  a
    resumed hearing  in  order  to  remake  the  decision.  The  respondent
    published a number of reports on Iraq a few days  before  the  hearing.
    The Tribunal agreed to admit the evidence  under  rule  15(2A)  of  The
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008. We heard evidence  from
    the appellant and an expert witness.


The appellant

30.   The appellant gave evidence in English. He confirmed and  adopted  the
    contents of several witness statements prepared during  the  course  of
    his asylum claim. He  was  asked  whether  his  family  name  would  be
    recognisable as a Sunni name. He said that the name would indicate that
    his family came from Mosul, which would be identified as a Sunni  area.
    He explained that the name referred to a wider family group  of  around
    250 people but did not  denote  a  group  as  large  as  a  tribe.  The
    appellant told us that his first name was  an  unusual  name  that  was
    mainly given to Sunni people. When asked to explain  how  people  would
    know that his family originated from Mosul he said that it would become
    known through the "social habits" of people  who  would  ask  questions
    about where a person is from and accumulate knowledge about  them.  The
    appellant told us that his mother returned to Iraq last year after  his
    brother-in-law completed a four year posting  in  Kuwait.  She  had  to
    return to Iraq because she could not extend her residency in Kuwait.

31.   In cross-examination the appellant said that  he  thought  his  sister
    and her husband returned to Iraq in September 2015.  They  returned  to
    the family home in Al-Ameriyah, which remained empty while they were in
    Kuwait. He was asked why, if the situation in Baghdad was so dangerous,
    they had not sought to travel to a safe country rather than  return  to
    Baghdad. The appellant said that there was a general risk for everyone.
    Those living in Iraq just had to deal with it. His  brother-in-law  had
    to return because of his job. It was not easy to get asylum in  another
    country, especially in an Arabic country. He said that, if his  brother
    in law was still working in the same place, it  was  a  30  minute  car
    journey from their  house.  As  far  as  he  knew  they  had  not  been
    threatened since they returned to Iraq. The appellant said that he  did
    not know the exact percentage of Sunni and Shia in Baghdad but he would
    describe the  city  as  mixed.  He  confirmed  that  Al-Ameriyah  is  a
    neighbourhood in west Baghdad and is a predominantly Sunni area.


Dr Alan George

32.   It is not necessary for us to set out Dr George's  qualifications  and
    experience in detail. He is a  recognised  academic  expert  in  Middle
    Eastern affairs who has given expert evidence before the Tribunal in  a
    number of reported cases. His reports were  prepared  with  input  from
    both parties. His expertise to comment on the situation in Iraq is  not
    disputed. Nor was  the  substance  of  his  oral  or  written  evidence
    challenged by either party.

33.   Dr George has prepared a number of reports during the course  of  this
    appeal. We were only asked to consider the two most recent reports. His
    fourth report dated 10 June 2016 is a  comprehensive  report  outlining
    the recent historical background to the current situation  in  Iraq  as
    well as considering whether the individual circumstances of  this  case
    are likely to give rise to a risk on return. The fifth report is  dated
    8 July 2016. It responds to a number of questions from the  respondent,
    which Dr George was asked to answer. The report also amends some  minor
    reference errors in the fourth report. Dr George confirmed the contents
    of both reports and  adopted  them  as  part  of  his  evidence  before
    answering questions about the detail.

34.   We found Dr George's evidence to  be  well-balanced.  He  was  plainly
    well aware of his role as an expert. When necessary he acknowledged the
    difficulties in interpreting some  of  the  evidence  relating  to  the
    current situation in Iraq. When asked to give  an  opinion  as  to  the
    risks on return he made clear that  he  was  aware  that  the  ultimate
    assessment was a matter for the Tribunal. He explained how and  why  he
    gave weight to certain sources and how he came to  his  conclusions  on
    various different issues. He made it clear if he was unable to  give  a
    confident answer or had not been asked to research a  particular  point
    that was raised. We do not consider it necessary to set out every  part
    of his oral evidence. Instead, we incorporate Dr George's  written  and
    oral evidence in relation to various different issues into our  overall
    assessment of the evidence set out below.


Submissions

The respondent

35.   Mr Jarvis prepared comprehensive written submissions. He asked  us  to
    note that the  ECtHR  in  JK  v  Sweden  concluded  that  there  is  no
    generalised Article 3 risk in Baghdad although he recognised  that  the
    Court considered a narrower range of  evidence.  He  outlined  how  the
    facts of the case differed from  this  case.  The  applicant  had  more
    visible contacts with  the  US  army.  He  submitted  that  there  were
    limitations to the decision because it was not taken in the context  of
    the same levels of evidence usually considered in UK  country  guidance
    cases.

36.   He submitted that the evidence did not show  that  there  was  a  real
    risk on return in relation to any  of  the  potential  risk  categories
    identified in this case. The written submissions outlined the  evidence
    he relied upon, which referred largely to evidence relating to  numbers
    of Sunni Muslims living in Baghdad. Mr Jarvis argued that the  evidence
    showed that there are a large number of Sunnis living in Baghdad,  many
    of whom are able to live a normal life despite an "overarching threat".
    He asked us to note that the appellant's mother, sister and brother-in-
    law returned to Baghdad in September 2015. His brother-in-law works  in
    a government position. He submitted that there is  nothing  to  prevent
    the appellant from  resuming  a  relatively  normal  life  in  Baghdad.
    Internal movement around the city is possible. He submitted that  there
    is no reasonable degree of likelihood that the appellant  would  be  at
    real risk of serious harm if stopped at a checkpoint or when travelling
    around Baghdad.

37.   Mr Jarvis said that Dr George's evidence was  that  Al-Qaeda  in  Iraq
    had largely been assimilated into ISIL. In his view  the  threat  as  a
    perceived collaborator would mostly be confined to the areas under ISIL
    control. Mr Jarvis said that the ECtHR had limited evidence upon  which
    to make its findings regarding sufficiency of protection in Baghdad. He
    submitted that the evidence in this case showed that the government and
    security forces were Shia dominated, as was the capital.  He  submitted
    there was sufficient evidence before the Tribunal to draw  a  different
    conclusion. The ECtHR relied on a Home Office report dated 2009 but  we
    had up to date Home Office reports dated August 2016.

38.   Mr Jarvis concluded by saying that the cumulative  risk  did  not  add
    much to the case in circumstances  where  the  risk  relating  to  each
    element was identified as being  low.  The  appellant's  brother-in-law
    returned to Baghdad but there was nothing to suggest that  he  had  any
    particular difficulties.

 The appellant

39.   Mr Lemer  relied  on  his  skeleton  argument.  He  accepted  that  Dr
    George's evidence meant that the appellant's  prospects  of  showing  a
    real risk solely as a  perceived  collaborator  were  problematic.  The
    thrust of his case rested firmly on the  submission  that  there  is  a
    cumulative risk. The primary function of the Tribunal is to  conduct  a
    holistic assessment considering all relevant factors. The parties  were
    in agreement that there should be no  interference  with  the  findings
    made in AA  (Iraq)  regarding  the  risk  of  generalised  violence  in
    Baghdad. However, he submitted that the  Tribunal's  finding  that  the
    decision was intended to replace all country guidance  on  Iraq  should
    not be read to  include  country  guidance  on  issues  that  were  not
    considered in AA (Iraq) e.g. country guidance  cases  relating  to  the
    situation in KRG.

40.   With regard to the  legal  framework  he  submitted  that  persecutory
    conduct can have more than one motive. He pointed out that the ECtHR in
    JK v Sweden took into account the earlier decision in NA  v  UK  [2008]
    ECHR 616. He  argued  that  the  appellant  did  not  need  to  show  a
    consistent or systematic pattern of ill-treatment to show a  real  risk
    on return. He submitted that some of  Dr  George's  evidence  regarding
    what he meant by the level of risk came  close  to  meeting  the  legal
    test. He argued that AA (Iraq) focussed on generalised violence and did
    not deal with enhanced risk categories under Article 15(c).

41.   Mr Lemer referred us to evidence relating to each of  the  highlighted
    risk categories, which is considered as part of our overall  assessment
    of the evidence. He acknowledged that Dr George's evidence concentrated
    on the risk to former employees of non-military Western  companies  and
    did not deal with  other  categories  of  perceived  collaborators.  Dr
    George said that the risk was significantly lower than  previously.  He
    accepted that tens of thousands of people could have  worked  for  such
    companies and that there was limited evidence to show that such  people
    continue to be targeted. Dr George  identified  an  increased  risk  in
    areas controlled by ISIL or other anti-American  extremist  groups.  Mr
    Lemer noted that Dr George considered  any  risk  emanated  from  Sunni
    extremist groups and not from Shia militias. He acknowledged that  this
    factor, taken alone, was unlikely to place the appellant at  real  risk
    but submitted that it was not the only factor to be taken into account.



42.   Mr Lemer also acknowledged that the  evidence  did  not  show  that  a
    person would be at real risk in Baghdad solely on account of his or her
    Sunni religious identity. He argued that the evidence  relied  upon  by
    the respondent from 2014 was out of date. There was  more  up  to  date
    evidence to show increasing sectarian violence in Baghdad  albeit  that
    Dr George's opinion was that it had not yet reached the levels seen  in
    2006-2007. Mr Lemer argued that the fact that the appellant is a Sunni,
    who would return to an area of Baghdad likely  to  be  viewed  by  Shia
    militias as an  area  that  might  harbour  Sunni  extremists,  was  an
    aggravating factor cumulatively leading to a real risk  on  return.  It
    was not suggested that effective state  protection  is  available.  The
    evidence showed that Shia militias act with impunity.

43.    Mr  Lemer  acknowledged  that  Dr  George  considered  the  risk   of
    kidnapping was "quite low", but pointed  out  that,  when  pressed,  he
    referred to a spectrum of risk of about 10-15%. Mr Lemer submitted that
    this was likely to meet the legal test but he argued the point  on  the
    basis that it formed a further cumulative factor relating  to  risk  on
    return. He referred to various reports of kidnapping and submitted that
    there was a heightened risk for a person who had  spent  a  significant
    period of time living in the West. He  would  be  perceived  as  having
    wealth and may be targeted for kidnapping for  that  reason.  Mr  Lemer
    also noted that there was  evidence  to  show  that  Sunnis  have  been
    targeted for kidnapping although he acknowledged that the evidence  did
    not show a real risk solely on account of being Sunni.

44.   Mr Lemer concluded by arguing that if the risk  factors  are  assessed
    on a cumulative basis, in the proper context of the generalised  levels
    of violence in Baghdad, the appellant would be at real risk on  return.
    The Tribunal in AA (Iraq) found that the degree of  armed  conflict  in
    Baghdad was not, in  itself,  sufficiently  severe  to  engage  Article
    15(c). However, Dr George expressed real concerns about the high levels
    of  violence  in  Baghdad.  The  general  situation  in  Baghdad  still
    disclosed significant problems.






ASSESSMENT OF THE EVIDENCE

Empirical limitations

45.   Both parties acknowledge the empirical  limitations  of  some  of  the
    evidence relating to the situation in Iraq to varying  extents.  In  HM
    and others (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2012] UKUT 409 ("HM2") the Tribunal
    noted that any attempt to distinguish between a real risk  of  targeted
    and incidental killing of civilians may be difficult but observed  that
    the incidence and numbers of deaths are a helpful starting point to the
    assessment of whether the level of risk reaches the required  threshold
    [44].

46.   In AA (Iraq) the Tribunal made clear that its task was to  conduct  an
    analysis of the violence that was "both  qualitative  and  quantitative
    and is not to be restricted to a purely quantitative  analysis  of  the
    number of civilian deaths and injuries in Iraq" [89]. The Tribunal also
    took into account the likelihood of underreporting of incidents when it
    analysed the evidence relating to the levels  of  violence  in  Baghdad
    [126].

47.   Dr George emphasised the difficulty in  identifying  the  motives  for
    some of the killings reported in Baghdad. He also  considered  that  it
    was reasonable to infer that there was likely to be  underreporting  of
    some incidents such as kidnapping. Kidnapping  may  be  accompanied  by
    threats not to report the matter to the police.

48.   In his report, Dr George noted an email dated 30 May 2016  from  Hamit
    Dardagan, a co-founder of Iraq Body Count (IBC), who  made  clear  that
    demographic information is not available for deaths on  their  records.
    Coverage for certain occupations is more consistent and  complete  than
    for others. For example, the killing of  police,  security  forces  and
    certain other professions such as journalists  is  often  mentioned  in
    reports. In other cases it is harder  to  discover  the  reason  why  a
    person  might  have  been  targeted.  For  this   reason   IBC   "lacks
    occupational information for the vast majority of the dead". He went on
    to explain that, while the presence of a particular category of case in
    the IBC database "might be taken as indicative of targeting (especially
    when it is likely to be a very small demographic to  begin  with),  its
    absence cannot be taken as meaningful."

49.   We also take into account the difficulty  in  defining  the  scope  of
    some phrases used to define a potential risk category. Broadly speaking
    the term "collaborator" has been used in the past  to  refer  to  those
    working for coalition forces, international organisations or anyone who
    was perceived to be acting contrary to  the  agenda  of  various  armed
    groups. What seems clear is  that  the  term  "collaborator"  could  be
    applied to a range  of  different  circumstances.  The  risk  may  vary
    depending on the level of involvement of a  person  with  international
    forces or organisations and whether they worked in a  military/security
    context or in a non-security context. The  current  evidence  indicates
    that the term "collaborator" might also include those perceived by some
    insurgent groups to work for or assist the Government of  Iraq.  We  do
    not seek to define  the  term  more  specifically.  The  assessment  of
    whether a person is likely to  be  perceived  as  a  collaborator  will
    depend on the facts of each case.

50.   Similarly, the definition of broad terms such as  "Western  companies"
    might also need to be approached with some caution. In the  context  of
    this case the term "Western" is likely to relate to large international
    companies  whose  origins  or  headquarters  are  based  in   developed
    countries, or have particular connections to countries that formed part
    of the US-led coalition forces.


General situation

51.    In  AA  (Iraq)  the  Tribunal  summarised  developments   since   the
    withdrawal of US-led coalition forces in 2012  [91-100].  The  Tribunal
    noted the rise of ISIL as well as other anti-government  groups  active
    in Iraq. Various estimates of the number of deaths in Iraq during  2014
    ranged from around 10,000-26,000 [100]. While the  levels  of  civilian
    deaths and injuries in Baghdad city were  not  significantly  different
    from the statistics for some of the governorates  in  contested  areas,
    the Tribunal drew a distinction between the  asymmetrical  violence  in
    Baghdad city and all out fighting seen in the contested  areas,  before
    concluding that the levels of violence in Baghdad city did  not  amount
    to a generalised risk for the purpose of Article 15(c)  [127-132].  The
    Tribunal also considered the general conditions in Baghdad relating  to
    employment and living conditions [188-203].

52.   Dr George's fourth report provided a  history  of  the  political  and
    security situation in Iraq since the first Gulf war, which included  an
    outline of the rise of ISIL. Dr George highlighted  IBC's  analysis  of
    the levels of violence entitled 'Iraq 2015: A Catastrophic Normal'. The
    report stated that 16,115 civilians were recorded  killed  during  2015
    compared to 20,030 in 2014. Although the death toll was lower than 2014
    the report observed that, aside from the exceptionally high death tolls
    recorded in June and August of 2014, the level of deaths in 2015  "were
    very similar" to those in 2014. The greatest number of civilian  deaths
    in 2015 were  reported  for  the  governorates  of  Ninewa,  Anbar  and
    Baghdad, followed by Salah al-Din  and  Diyala.  Those  five  provinces
    accounted for 90% of civilians killed in Iraq in 2015.

53.   Dr George also referred to a report on the Musings on  Iraq  blog  run
    by Joel Wing entitled 'Violence in Iraq, April 2016' (09 May 2016).  In
    oral evidence Dr George said that he  considered  Joel  Wing  to  be  a
    reliable source  of  information.  With  reference  to  the  levels  of
    violence in Baghdad city during April 2016 alone the report stated:

           "The capital has become the main target of the Islamic State  as
           it loses territory in the  country.  There  were  273  incidents
           there leading to 413 dead and 1,006 wounded. IS  picked  up  its
           bombings in the governorate with 4 suicide  bombers  and  8  car
           bombs. In comparison there was just  1  suicide  bomber  and  no
           successful car bombs in Baghdad in March, 4 suicide bombers  and
           1 car bomb in February, and 3 suicide bombers and 3 car bombs in
           January. The 8 car bombs in April was the most the province  had
           seen since 11 went off in August 2015.


           Southern Baghdad continued to face the most violence. There were
           101 incidents there versus 55 in the east, 53 in the  north,  43
           in the west, 16 in the center, and 5 in unknown  locations.  The
           south witnessed a mortar attack, 2 car bombs, 2 grenade attacks,
           7 sticky bombs, 16 shootings, and 71 IEDs. In the east incidents
           were a mixture of IS attacks along  with  vigilantes,  criminals
           and  Hashd  elements,  which  was  shown  with  1  stabbing,   3
           kidnappings, 4 major  robberies,  and  13  bodies  being  dumped
           there. The capital like the rest  of  the  country  has  seen  a
           growth in crime with the insecurity. There were  10  kidnappings
           reported, 14 robberies of sizeable sums of money, and 34  bodies
           found in the streets during the month."

54.   The Home Office Country Information and Guidance report (CIG)  on  the
    security situation in Baghdad (August 2016) produces a number of graphs
    relating to levels of violence in Baghdad  between  February  2014  and
    July 2016 with reference to the underlying source  materials.  We  take
    into  account  the  difficulty  in  collating  and  analysing  evidence
    relating to violence in Iraq, and the fact that the report states  that
    some statistics are not included,  such  as  data  from  Joel  Wing  on
    civilian fatalities in Baghdad. The trends outlined in the most  recent
    CIG vary slightly but indicate similar  levels  of  violence  to  those
    considered by the Tribunal in AA (Iraq) in May 2015.

55.   The evidence contained in the CIG drawn from Joel  Wing's  Musings  on
    Iraq suggests an overall rise in security incidents in  Baghdad  during
    2016. The information relating to civilian casualties remained  broadly
    the same save for information from UN Iraq showing  a  sharp  spike  in
    civilian casualties in or around June 2016. The report does not include
    an analysis to explain why there might have been such a sharp spike  in
    casualties in Baghdad in mid-2016 but we note that serious bomb attacks
    occurred in Baghdad at  the  beginning  of  July  2016,  which  led  to
    hundreds of casualties. We are unable  to  discern  from  the  evidence
    currently before us whether this forms part of a  trend  of  increasing
    violence or whether this was an unusual spike in the general levels  of
    violence. While the levels of violence in Baghdad remain at  a  serious
    level we conclude  that  the  evidence  does  not  show  a  significant
    increase in the overall levels of violence that would lead us  to  come
    to a different conclusion from the Tribunal in AA (Iraq).

56.   This decision focusses on the situation in Baghdad city. Although  the
    evidence shows that there  have  been  some  changes  in  the  security
    situation in other areas of Iraq since the Tribunal heard AA (Iraq)  it
    is beyond the scope of this case to  give  guidance  on  the  situation
    outside Baghdad. The evidence shows  that  the  security  situation  in
    other areas of Iraq continues to be extremely fluid. The  parties  were
    in agreement that  the  Tribunal's  findings  in  AA  (Iraq)  regarding
    generalised violence continue to apply.


Potential risk as a perceived collaborator:
Former employees of a non-security related Western / international company

57.   In his fourth report dated 10 June 2016 Dr George said  that  when  he
    prepared his last report in this case in December 2012 there was  ample
    evidence to show that Iraqis who had worked with Western  companies  in
    Iraq would be at real risk. However, in light of the current  evidence,
    his opinion had changed. In 2012 the US and UK occupation had  recently
    ended. The previous insurgency in  Iraq  was  mainly  directed  against
    Western  military  presence  in  Iraq.  It  was  logical,  from   their
    perspective, for the insurgents to target Iraqis who were  actually  or
    perceived to be working with Western forces and companies that had come
    to Iraq after the invasion in 2003.

58.   Dr George outlined the evidence he reviewed and the enquiries that  he
    made with reliable sources such as Joel Wing and  IRC.  His  review  of
    publicly available information did not  reveal  a  single  instance  in
    which a person was recorded as having been targeted because they worked
    with a non-security related Western company. On 24 May 2016 he received
    a brief email from Joel Wing to say that he had not heard of any recent
    evidence to indicate  whether  former  interpreters  and  employees  of
    Western companies and the military were being targeted in Iraq  at  the
    current time. Hamit Dardogan was able to  identify  the  death  of  one
    individual from their records since  2012  of  a  person  who  formerly
    worked as an interpreter for US forces. Another interpreter who  worked
    for the Venezuelan Embassy was killed in Baghdad.

59.   Dr George also contacted UNHCR and  UNAMI  but  he  had  not  received
    replies to his enquiries. He concluded that a person who had worked for
    a non-security related Western company, especially a person such as the
    appellant who left Iraq 10 years ago, would not face the same level  of
    risk as before. There was little evidence to suggest  that  accountants
    and auditors are amongst certain  professions  that  are  known  to  be
    targeted, such as doctors and lawyers. He considered that a person such
    as the appellant might still be targeted by  "ultra-militant  factions"
    but there is no evidence to indicate that such persons  are  now  being
    "targeted systematically". In oral evidence he clarified that the  risk
    included ISIL and other extremist groups who continued to be opposed to
    Western countries and ideology. He assessed the risk to be  "relatively
    low". Any potential risk was likely to  emanate  from  Sunni  extremist
    groups and not from Shia militias in Baghdad.

60.   Dr George's reports are supplemented by a number of source  materials.
    An article from the International Business Times  dated  18  June  2014
    reported a number of incidents in which expatriate workers for  foreign
    companies were targeted  by  groups  such  as  ISIL  in  areas  outside
    Baghdad. The UNHCR position on  returns  to  Iraq  dated  October  2014
    stated  that  the  southern  governorates  continued  to  see  security
    incidents  including  car   bomb   attacks,   as   well   as   targeted
    killings/kidnappings   and   sectarian   reprisal    attacks    against
    individuals, including members  of  political  parties,  religious  and
    tribal figures, government employees and professionals [15].

61.   Both the US State Department Iraq travel  warning  dated  04  December
    2015, and the Foreign and Commonwealth Office Iraq travel advice  dated
    18 May 2016, warned that Western  interests  continue  to  be  targeted
    throughout Iraq.

62.   A Landinfo response dated 07 April 2016 considered the  situation  for
    persons who have worked for foreign companies. The response stated that
    there was no longer a risk of targeting by Shia militias following  the
    pull out of US-led coalition forces at the end of 2011. Although  UNHCR
    noted in 2012 that there were some attacks against persons who had been
    working for foreign forces  or  organisations  the  Shia  militias  are
    mainly focussed on combating the threat from ISIL. The  Shia  militias,
    the Iraqi authorities and the US military now have  a  common  goal  in
    fighting ISIL.

63.   The most recent US Department of State  report  dated  13  April  2016
    stated that ISIL forces targeted Sunni civilians  who  cooperated  with
    the Iraqi security forces. The evidence related largely to abuses  that
    occurred in areas outside Baghdad  city.  In  Baghdad  ISIL  reportedly
    carried  out  bomb  attacks  against   civilians   in   Shia   majority
    neighbourhoods.

64.   The Home Office CIG report  relating  to  the  security  situation  in
    Baghdad is dated August 2016.  Annex  B  contains  a  letter  from  the
    British Embassy in Baghdad dated 29 March 2016, which  reports  on  the
    levels of violence in various areas of Baghdad city. With reference  to
    the activities of Sunni insurgent groups  in  the  capital  the  letter
    said:

           "Sunni insurgents, most notably Da'esh, remain tactically  agile
           and continue to adapt and respond to the changing  situation  on
           the ground. Despite being constrained by logistical  limitations
           and a lack of freedom of movement in Baghdad, Da'esh retains the
           capability to maintain its operational tempo in the capital.  At
           present they are conducting  a  two-track  campaign  focused  on
           propagating sectarian  discord  through  attacks  targeting  the
           majority Shia community in Baghdad  whilst  also  attempting  to
           undermine the Shia-led government by maintaining the  perception
           of the Government of  Iraq's  (GoI)  inability  to  maintain  an
           effective security environment. On  a  tactical  level  this  is
           played out in two different ways. Firstly,  and  accounting  for
           the vast majority of their activity, their attacks are  directed
           towards ISF and GoI personnel and civilians and  comprise  small
           roadside Improvised Explosive Devices (IEDs) and  Under  Vehicle
           IEDs (UVIEDs) alongside Small Arms Fire (SAF) attacks, including
           assassinations. These attacks  can  be  targeted  or  random  in
           nature but have little practical risk of large-scale  collateral
           damage. Targeted  individuals  are  typically  singled  out  for
           attack due to a lack of security  awareness  -  driving  clearly
           marked  government  vehicles  or  wearing  uniform   off   duty.
           Secondly, Da'esh and associated Sunni insurgent groups  maintain
           the intent and capability to conduct standalone and  coordinated
           high-intensity attacks... These attacks are capable  of  causing
           numerous casualties; however their lethality is far reduced from
           the types of devices seen between  2004  to  2007.  Targets  for
           these high-intensity attacks tend to be  Shia  gathering  areas,
           including caf�s/restaurants, markets and mosques."

65.   In our assessment the evidence shows that those who  worked  for  non-
    security related Western  or  international  companies,  or  any  other
    categories of people who would be perceived as having collaborated with
    foreign coalition forces, are still likely to be at risk in areas which
    are under ISIL control or have high levels of  insurgent  activity.  At
    the current time the risk is likely to  emanate  from  Sunni  insurgent
    groups who continue to target Western  or  international  companies  as
    well as those who it is perceived collaborated with the  Government  of
    Iraq.

66.   The evidence shows that Shias control the Government of Iraq  and  are
    the dominant religious group in Baghdad city. The government is reliant
    on Shia militias to maintain its position but has little  control  over
    them. Perceived collaborators with foreign forces  and  companies  were
    targeted in the past but since the withdrawal of  coalition  forces  at
    the end of 2011 the Shia militias are focussed on combatting the threat
    from extremist groups such as ISIL. The  evidence  indicates  that  the
    risk  to  those  who  worked  for  non-security  related   Western   or
    international companies in  Baghdad  is  now  low.  However,  there  is
    evidence to show that insurgent groups such  as  ISIL  are  active  and
    capable of carrying out attacks in the city. We also take into  account
    the empirical limitations in assessing the motive for many killings  in
    Baghdad, which includes difficulty in ascertaining  the  background  of
    many victims. Despite not finding any direct reference to a person  who
    had worked  for  a  non-security  related  company  being  targeted  in
    Baghdad, and taking into account the empirical limitations, Dr George's
    opinion was that there is a relatively low level of risk emanating from
    ultra-militant groups operating in Baghdad  if  a  person's  background
    becomes known. In so far as there may still be a low level of risk from
    such groups our assessment of the evidence is that it is not sufficient
    to show a real risk of targeting  in  Baghdad  solely  as  a  perceived
    collaborator.

67.   We make clear that we have not considered  any  detailed  evidence  on
    the potential risk to perceived collaborators in other categories  such
    as those who worked  in  a  military  or  security  setting,  including
    interpreters. Dr George was not in a position to comment in any  detail
    without further research. However, the evidence  outlined  above  shows
    that such people are likely to be at risk in areas under  ISIL  control
    outside Baghdad. We bear in mind that the case was  not  prepared  with
    those potential risk categories in mind. Although there is likely to be
    the same low level of risk from ISIL in Baghdad,  Dr  George's  initial
    opinion was that there may be a slightly enhanced  risk  to  those  who
    worked in a military or security setting. Nothing in the evidence  that
    we have considered suggests that there are regular  reported  incidents
    of collaborators from a security  setting  being  targeted  in  Baghdad
    city. However, given the focus of this case we are unable to  give  any
    clear guidance relating to the  possibility  of  an  enhanced  risk  to
    perceived collaborators from a military  or  security  setting  without
    further evidence.


Kidnapping (including returnees from the West)

68.   Dr George's fourth report outlines a  number  of  pieces  of  evidence
    relating to high levels  of  crime  in  Iraq.  He  explained  that  the
    collapse of state structures following the  2003  invasion  and  Iraq's
    accompanying fragmentation resulted  in  an  unprecedented  crime  wave
    albeit that he recognised that there are no precise statistics  on  the
    phenomenon.

69.   The United States Overseas Security  Advisory  Council  (OASC)  is  an
    organisation that promotes security  co-operation  between  US  private
    sector business interests abroad and the US Department  of  State.  The
    OSAC Crime and Safety Report on Baghdad dated 09 February  2015  stated
    that crime statistics and/or crime reporting mechanisms are  incomplete
    and inconsistent.

70.   Dr George also referred to an article dated 21 October  2009  by  Joel
    Wing, a respected blogger on Iraq. In 'The Rising Crime Rate  in  Iraq'
    Joel Wing said that Iraqis were facing a new danger from rising  crime.
    One crime that was getting increasing press attention  was  kidnapping.
    Kidnappings occurred  before,  but  they  had  political  or  sectarian
    overtones  or  were  done  to  fund  militant  groups.  He  said   that
    kidnappings increasingly were carried out  for  profit.  Many  families
    were said to negotiate with the criminals rather than go to the police.
    In evidence Dr George said that kidnapping seemed to be  a  "widespread
    problem" that had gone on for a long time. While he  acknowledged  that
    there had been some incidents when the authorities intervened to free a
    victim,  the  general  position  in  relation  to  Iraqi   victims   of
    kidnapping, was that the kidnappers can act with impunity. Dr  George's
    evidence was that the overall risk of kidnapping was likely to be "low"
    but in his report he made clear that kidnapping has been, and  remains,
    a "significant dimension" in the breakdown in law and order  since  the
    2003 invasion. We  accept  that  the  evidence  shows  that  kidnapping
    remains a significant and persistent problem in Iraq.

71.   Dr George cited a UN High Commissioner for Human Rights  report  dated
    09 June 2004 called 'The Present Situation of Human  Rights  in  Iraq'.
    The report stated that Iraqis returning from  Western  countries  might
    well  be  exposed  to  kidnapping  because  they   are   perceived   as
    "financially privileged". He also referred to a Danish-Norwegian  fact-
    finding mission report published in July 2009  entitled  'Security  and
    Human Rights issues in  Kurdistan  Region  of  Iraq  and  South/Central
    Iraq',  which  referred  to  returnees   from   Europe   being   "self-
    illuminating" targets for kidnappers.

72.   The US State Department Report dated 13 April 2016 stated:

           "Disappearances and kidnappings were  regular  occurrences,  and
           some kidnappers who  did  not  receive  a  ransom  killed  their
           victims. There were also cases reported in  which  the  abductor
           killed  the  kidnapped  individual  despite   receiving   ransom
           payments. Most kidnappings appeared to be financially motivated.
           Da'esh forces and illegal armed  groups  engaged  in  widespread
           kidnapping  of  members  of  the  Iraq's  ethnic  and  religious
           communities. The Ministry of  Human  Rights  reported  that  the
           numbers of missing persons from  June  2014  to  June  2015  had
           reached 2,935. According to UNAMI estimates, there were numerous
           "execution style" killings of victims kidnapped  for  ransom  to
           intimidate members of their communities.


           Criminal groups  were  most  often  associated  with  abductions
           outside of Da'esh controlled areas. Kidnapping  cases  increased
           throughout the year, with criminals and some militias exploiting
           the security situation to  carry  out  kidnappings,  either  for
           personal gain or for sectarian reasons."

73.   Dr George considered that a person such  as  the  appellant  could  be
    regarded by armed criminals and insurgents in central and southern Iraq
    as "a prime target for kidnapping".  As  someone  who  had  spent  time
    abroad he might be perceived as  relatively  wealthy.  When  asked  how
    anyone would know that the appellant in this case had been in the  West
    Dr George explained that people do not live in isolation like  they  do
    in Europe. A person's background will become  known  within  the  local
    community. However, in his view the risk of kidnapping solely  on  this
    basis "would not be high". When asked to  clarify  this  assessment  in
    evidence at the hearing Dr George made clear that it was  difficult  to
    assess the level of risk given the  likelihood  of  underreporting.  He
    said that it was impossible to be precise but  sought  to  express  his
    assessment as something in the region of a 10-15% risk.

74.   Dr George referred to an Al  Jazeera  report  dated  29  January  2016
    entitled 'Which kidnap victim is more valuable  -  US  or  Iraqi'.  The
    report stated that accurate figures on kidnappings  are  impossible  to
    come by because the Iraqi government does not keep crime  figures.  The
    report mentioned that  abducted  Americans  represented  only  a  small
    fraction of the people who go missing in Iraq each day. Often  families
    of the victims get no help from the police and are left  to  deal  with
    the kidnappers themselves.

75.   Dr George's fifth report also cites a report published by the US  Army
    War College's Strategic Studies Institute called 'Criminals,  Militias,
    and Insurgents: Organized Crime in Iraq'. The report is dated June 2009
    but Dr George considered that, as  an  account  of  Iraq's  'kidnapping
    industry', the report remained valid today. He quoted this extract from
    the report to illustrate the difficulty in assessing the scale  of  the
    problem:

           "... criminal activities in  Iraq  related  to  oil  are  highly
           complex.  Kidnapping  in  Iraq,  if  anything,  is   even   more
           convoluted than oil and petroleum smuggling. Kidnapping is  both
           a highly profitable activity in the form of  asymmetric  warfare
           for the weak against the strong; it empowers the perpetrator and
           demeans  the  victims;  sometimes   it   garners   international
           attention but most often it occurs in relative obscurity; it can
           end in death and tragedy or relief and celebration. In  Iraq  it
           is often unclear who is responsible for particular  kidnappings,
           how and why specific  individuals  are  targeted,  or  why  some
           kidnap victims are killed while others  are  released  unharmed.
           Furthermore, obtaining an accurate assessment of the  scale  and
           scope of the kidnapping industry in  the  country  is  well-nigh
           impossible  since  most  kidnap  victims  are  Iraqis,  and  the
           reporting of these abductions-either to the  authorities  or  in
           the press-is fragmentary at best.


           Similarly, identifying trends in Iraqi kidnapping is complicated
           by underreporting, the absence of a  centralised  repository  of
           kidnapping incidents, and what, with a few  exceptions,  appears
           as the indifference of the Western  news  media.  Kidnapping  of
           Iraqis, unlike the kidnapping of foreigners, rarely  results  in
           much publicity, let alone the headlines and outrage generated by
           the  abduction  of  foreigners.  Consequently,   the   gaps   in
           information and knowledge are enormous. As one official  at  the
           US Embassy in Baghdad acknowledged, the most that can be done is
           a "tip-of-the-iceberg analysis.""

76.   We note that the  report  goes  on  to  outline  the  difficulties  in
    ascertaining the motive for many kidnappings:

           "Kidnapping in Iraq has several distinct  dimensions.  First  is
           motivation. Different kinds of kidnapping are determined largely
           by the motivations of the perpetrators. Although the main  focus
           in this chapter is economic or for-profit kidnapping rather than
           political kidnapping, the distinction between the two is not  as
           clear as it initially appears. Sometimes  it  is  impossible  to
           determine whether a kidnapping is primarily about money or about
           politics. Indeed, it is often apparent only in retrospect -  and
           sometimes not even then - as to which category of kidnapping  is
           a  particular  abduction  belongs.  As  one  commentary   noted,
           "abductions  are  sometimes  lucrative   criminal   enterprises,
           sometimes brutal aspects of sectarian violence, and sometimes  a
           tangled mix of the two.""

77.   In AA (Iraq) the  Tribunal  considered  expert  evidence  relating  to
    incidents of kidnapping and killings in Baghdad as part of its  overall
    assessment of the level of indiscriminate violence:

           "124. Dr Fatah explains that it is  Baghdad's  Shiite  districts
           that have borne the  brunt  of  the  bomb  attacks  -  with  the
           perpetrators generally believed to be either ISIL or other Sunni
           insurgents. Amnesty International reports  that  Shia  militias,
           backed by GoI, have been abducting and  killing  Sunni  civilian
           men in Baghdad, and around the country - indicating that it  has
           documented "dozens"  of  such  cases  in  Baghdad,  Samarra  and
           Kirkuk. Dr Fatah observes that Sunni districts experience  fewer
           incidents than Shia districts and that such incidents  as  there
           are largely take the form of kidnappings  and  killings.  Sunnis
           are targeted, amongst other reasons, as retribution for the acts
           of ISIL."

78.   Both parties referred to a report issued by  the  Finnish  Immigration
    Service (FIS) dated 29  April  2015  entitled  'Security  Situation  in
    Baghdad - The Shia Militias'. In  so  far  as  it  makes  reference  to
    kidnappings of Sunnis by Shia militias the report stated:

           "Shia militias and kidnapping gangs  kidnap  Sunnis  and  almost
           invariably demand a  ransom.  After  the  ransom  is  paid,  the
           victims are released, or in the  worst  cases  are  found  dead,
           killed in the manner of an execution. According  to  the  United
           Nations Assistance Mission  for  Iraq  (UNAMI),  the  number  of
           kidnappings after which the victims are found  shot  in  such  a
           manner is growing in Baghdad. In  November  2013,  there  was  a
           dramatic increase in the number of such incidents. In January  -
           February 2014, UNAMI recorded 245 execution style  killings,  at
           least 39 of which took place in Baghdad. In December  2014,  the
           command and  control  centre  of  the  Baghdad  security  forces
           confirmed   that   kidnappings   in   Baghdad   had    decreased
           considerably, by as much as 90%. Financial rewards are  used  as
           an incentive to encourage people to reveal  the  whereabouts  of
           kidnappers or gangs. Arrests have  been  made  in  various  Shia
           districts, such as Baladiyat and Shu'ala."

79.   We discuss the evidence  relating  to  the  potential  risk  to  Sunni
    Muslims elsewhere. For the purpose of this part of the decision  it  is
    necessary to note that Dr  George  expressed  some  concern  about  the
    source of the information relied upon  to  suggest  that  there  was  a
    considerable reduction in kidnappings in Baghdad by the end of 2014. He
    said that he would distrust a source from the Iraqi  security  services
    and would take such statements with a "pinch of salt". He  queried  how
    the authorities could claim such precise figures given the difficulties
    in ascertaining the scale of the problem as outlined above.

80.   Mr Jarvis referred  to  several  reports  relating  to  the  voluntary
    return of Iraqi asylum seekers from a number  of  countries  in  Europe
    including Belgium and Finland. Some reports refer to returns to Baghdad
    as well as Erbil. We take into account  the  fact  that  there  are  no
    specific reports of  returnees  being  targeted  on  return  solely  on
    account of having spent time in the West. An International Organisation
    for Migration (IOM) report dated 02 February 2016 stated that more than
    3,000 Iraqis received assistance to return to  Iraq  from  14  European
    countries during 2015. The reports appear to indicate that many of  the
    returnees had only been in Europe for a matter of months  after  having
    joined the overland migration into Europe.

81.   We do not  consider  that  this  evidence  takes  our  assessment  any
    further. While the voluntary return of a number of Iraqi citizens  from
    Europe is notable, in the context of the difficulties  in  ascertaining
    any precise figures regarding the level of kidnappings in  Baghdad,  or
    the motives for such kidnappings, we find that the fact that  there  is
    no specific evidence showing targeting of  recent  returnees  does  not
    necessarily indicate an absence of risk. Dr George said that  he  would
    be surprised if  no  returnees  from  Baghdad  had  ever  been  robbed,
    however, he was unable to give any specific examples.

82.   The evidence shows that incidents  of  kidnapping  are  likely  to  be
    significantly underreported. Even taking this  into  account  Mr  Lemer
    accepts that the evidence does not  show  that  there  are  substantial
    grounds for believing that a person would be at real  risk  of  serious
    harm on this basis alone. Our holistic assessment of the evidence shows
    that kidnapping is a significant and persistent problem contributing to
    the breakdown of law  and  order  in  Iraq.  On  a  purely  statistical
    analysis, which is in any event difficult to assess, it cannot be  said
    that there is in general a real risk of kidnapping to a  returnee  from
    abroad given the population  of  Baghdad.  However,  the  incidents  of
    kidnapping  are  sufficiently  widespread  that  the  risk  cannot   be
    discounted. In some cases kidnappings might be linked to a political or
    sectarian motive; other kidnappings are  rooted  in  criminal  activity
    with a purely financial motive.

83.   There is evidence  to  indicate  that  those  returning  from  Western
    countries might be at heightened risk of kidnapping. Whether a returnee
    from the West is likely to be  perceived  as  a  potential  target  for
    kidnapping in Baghdad may depend on how long he or she  has  been  away
    from Iraq. We find that it is reasonable to infer  that  the  longer  a
    person has been abroad the greater the perception might  be  that  they
    have benefited  from  opportunities  in  the  West  and  may  be  worth
    targeting. Conversely, those who have only spent short periods of  time
    away might not be perceived as having had time to accumulate sufficient
    wealth to render them a likely target. The evidence  does  not  show  a
    real risk on this ground alone but it may form one part of a cumulative
    assessment of risk on return depending on the  facts  of  a  particular
    case.


Sunni identity

84.   Dr George's fourth report explained that Iraqis  identify  principally
    with the  ethnic  and  religious  communities  to  which  they  belong.
    Membership of a particular religious community is not just a matter  of
    faith but also a matter of cultural and political  identity.  With  the
    breakdown of the Iraqi state after the 2003 invasion many Iraqis turned
    to their religious communities as sources of identity  and  protection.
    By 2006-2007 the country became engulfed in a ferocious sectarian civil
    war pitting Sunni against Shia. He cited an article from the  New  York
    Times dated 05 September 2006, which outlined incidents of targeting by
    Shia "death squads" at checkpoints during the height of  the  sectarian
    conflict. After 2007 there  was  a  sharp  decrease  in  so-called  'ID
    killings' based solely on religio-political identity,  but  since  2013
    sectarian tensions have escalated.

85.   He refers  to  a  number  of  pieces  of  evidence  including  the  US
    Commission on International Religious Freedom (USCIRF) Annual Report on
    Iraq dated 02 May  2016  and  the  US  State  Department  International
    Religious Freedom (USIRF) report for 2014  (issued  14  October  2015).
    Both reports state that there has been  a  deterioration  in  religious
    freedom in 2014 and 2015. While extremist  groups  such  as  ISIL  were
    responsible for a large proportion of abuses the reports  also  outline
    abuses by the Popular Mobilization Forces (PMF). The USCIRF reported:

           "While ISIL was the most egregious perpetrator of  human  rights
           and  religious  freedom  violations,  the  Popular  Mobilization
           Forces (PMF), recognized by Prime Minister al-Abadi in September
           2015 as officially part of the Iraqi state,  have  continued  to
           commit  systematic  attacks  against  Sunni  Muslim   civilians,
           exacerbating sectarian tensions. Although al-Abadi attempted  to
           bring the PMF  into  the  fold  of  government-sanctioned  armed
           groups through this maneuver so far it has remained  clear  that
           the group  -  which  technically  reports  to  the  Ministry  of
           Interior -  exercises  a  significant  amount  of  autonomy  and
           espouses strong, pro- Shi'a leanings, mostly to the exclusion of
           Iraq's Sunni population. However, because the PMF is one of  the
           most effective groups in fighting ISIL, the Iraqi government has
           not curtailed their activities  or  prosecuted  those  who  have
           perpetrated violent attacks."

86.   The USCIRF report said that Sunni Muslim groups stated that there  was
    an ongoing campaign of revenge by the Shia majority because there was a
    public perception that Sunnis sympathised with  the  regime  of  Saddam
    Hussein and with extremist groups such as ISIL. The  evidence  outlines
    reports of Shia militias carrying out abuses in areas retaken from ISIL
    control. In evidence at the hearing Dr  George  said  that  there  were
    areas in which Sunni identity might give rise to a potential  risk.  In
    areas liberated from ISIL there was a risk  that  Shia  militias  would
    target Sunnis as perceived collaborators with ISIL.  For  example,  his
    report outlines an  incident  in  Diyala  in  January  2015  when  Shia
    militiamen were reported to have killed more than 70 Sunnis.

87.   With reference to the situation in Baghdad, a BBC online news  article
    dated 09 July 2014 reported that Iraqi security forces found the bodies
    of 53 men in a mainly Shia area south of Baghdad. The article  went  on
    to state that Sunni militants had been carrying out attacks around  the
    southern outskirts of Baghdad. In response, Shia  militiamen  had  been
    rounding up Sunnis they suspected of being behind the violence, many of
    whom later turned up dead.  The  number  of  bodies  found  around  the
    capital reportedly had risen since the beginning of that year, sparking
    fears of a return to the peak of sectarian civil war in 2006 and 2007.

88.   The FIS report stated:

           "ISIS continues to  set  off  bombs  in  Baghdad  almost  daily,
           targeting Shia districts with the intention of demonstrating its
           ability to push into Baghdad. Together with the  Iraqi  security
           forces, Shia militias are inciting fear amongst Baghdad's  Sunni
           population. It is  feared  that  the  Shia  militias  will  take
           revenge for ISIS's actions on Sunnis who have nothing to do with
           ISIS.  Shia  militias  have  committed  serious   human   rights
           violations against the Sunnis.
           .....
           Shia militias are actively  recruiting  fighters,  not  only  to
           fight against ISIS on the front line but also to guard Baghdad's
           various  districts.  Militant  groups  in  Iraq   are   becoming
           increasingly  powerful  and  independent.  The   current   Prime
           Minister,  Haidar  al-Abadi,  is  unable  to  control  the  Shia
           militias, nor are they punished for the acts  of  violence  they
           are committing. Shia  militias  operate  independently  and  the
           government is unwilling or unable to  control  them.  Some  Shia
           politicians fear that the Shia militia will become as radical as
           the Sunni al-Qaeda.


           According to Amnesty International, Shia militias are  violating
           the human rights of  Sunni.  During  the  civil  war,  all  Shia
           militias were referred to as  the  Mahdi  Army,  a  habit  which
           appears to have persisted. Sunnis are harassed  at  checkpoints.
           They have been sent threatening letters  and  been  driven  from
           their  homes  by  the  militias.  Besides  engaging   in   Sunni
           persecution, Shia militias have also assumed the role  of  moral
           guardians. They have raided liquor stores and killed the owners.
           They also persecute people on the basis  of  their  occupations.
           Although Sunnis have reported falling victim to persecution  and
           discrimination by the Shia  militias,  they  also  report  being
           rescued from the militias by their Shia neighbours."

89.   Paragraph 5.3-5.4 of the FIS  report  highlighted  information  gained
    from  various  sources  in  2014  and  2015  regarding  the  number  of
    checkpoints  in  Baghdad.  Reportedly  there  were  approximately   200
    checkpoints. Sunnis are said  to  be  inspected  more  thoroughly  than
    Shias. Checkpoints are often adorned with Shia  religious  iconography.
    Militia members had been seen helping security forces check  identities
    and vehicles. It is difficult  to  make  a  distinction  between  armed
    militias and the security forces. There are several illegal checkpoints
    in  Baghdad  run  by  armed  militias.  People  are  stopped  at  these
    checkpoints, asked to show identification and are asked questions about
    their sectarian orientation.

90.   With reference to the identification of Sunnis as checkpoints the  FIS
    report stated [5.5]:

           "Sunnis have experienced  problems  at  checkpoints  because  of
           their names. Back in 2003-2005, during the  sectarian  conflict,
           many Iraqis acquired two identification documents,  one  with  a
           Sunni name and another with a Shia name. This  was  particularly
           the case with people who had to travel between  different  parts
           of the town for work-related reasons. The  same  holds  true  to
           this day: Sunnis acquire identity documents indicating they  are
           Shiites to  avoid  trouble.  In  a  Shia-dominated  district  in
           western Baghdad with a 20% Sunni population, Sunnis have to pose
           as Shiites to avoid being killed by the militias or being driven
           away from that part of town.


           However, it is difficult to know whether a person  is  Sunni  or
           Shiite simply on the basis of their  name.  In  Iraq  there  are
           Sunnis called Ali and Hussein and Shia called Omar, even  though
           some sources suggest that even secular Shia  parents  would  not
           name  their  children  Omar,  Abu  Bakri,   Othman   or   Aisha.
           Traditionally names such as Omar, Abu Bakr and Yazid  are  Sunni
           names while Ali, Hassan and Hussein are Shia names. Mohammed and
           Fatima are popular with both Sunnis and Shiites. Omar appears to
           be one of the names that causes trouble for Sunnis.


           There were already problems with the name Omar during the  Civil
           War in 2006. In July 2006, the police found 14 young men dead in
           Baghdad. They were all Sunnis who had been shot in the head. All
           of them have the  first  name,  Omar.  Meanwhile,  Shiites  have
           reportedly experienced problems at the hands of  Sunni  militant
           groups such as ISIS due to their names."

91.   Paragraph 5.6 of the FIS report  outlined  media  reports  of  victims
    being found in Baghdad who have been executed in "typical Shia  militia
    style" i.e. shot in the head with their arms tied behind  their  backs.
    Human Rights Watch (HRW) reported  in  July  2014  that,  according  to
    pathologists working in Baghdad, a growing number of Sunnis shot in the
    head were being brought into mortuaries, typically 9-10 bodies  a  day.
    They were mainly from the  districts  of  Saidiyya,  Dora,  Ghazaliyya,
    Shu'ala, Washashi and Mansour. These are said to  be  areas  under  the
    control of a Shia militia called the Asa'ib Ahl al-Haqq (AHH).

92.   Paragraphs 7-8 of the UNHCR Position on Returns to Iraq dated  October
    2014  also  refer  to  reports  of  extrajudicial  execution  of  Sunni
    prisoners in retaliation for military advances  by  ISIL,  as  well  as
    kidnappings and summary executions by security  forces  and  associated
    groups of Sunni civilians. Reports indicated a resurgence of  sectarian
    reprisals with bodies of Sunni men found  blindfolded,  handcuffed  and
    apparently executed in different parts of the country, but primarily in
    Baghdad. We note that the main source of  information,  a  report  from
    UNAMI/OHCHR on the Protection of Civilians in Armed  conflict  in  Iraq
    dated 02 October 2014, appeared to refer to a large number of  killings
    in Baghdad governorate rather than Baghdad City.

93.   The Home Office published a new CIG  report  on  'Iraq:  Sunni  (Arab)
    Muslims' shortly before the hearing. The report is dated  August  2016.
    The preface to the report makes clear that the guidance only applies to
    Home Office decision makers when they are handling particular types  of
    protection and human rights claims. The report  makes  reference  to  a
    number of sources that we have already  considered  including  the  FIS
    report and the most recent US State Department report.

94.   Paragraph  7.6.3  of  the  CIG  report  quotes  from  a  UNHCR  report
    'Relevant COI for Assessments on the Availability of an Internal Flight
    or Relocation Alternative (IFA/IRA) in Baghdad  for  Sunni  Arabs  from
    ISIS-Held Areas' (May 2016):

           "According to  reports,  there  has  been  a  renewed  surge  in
           targeted violence against Sunni Arabs in Baghdad  since  2014...
           There  has  reportedly  been  a  renewed  increase   in   bodies
           discovered, mostly of Sunni Arab men, who are found blindfolded,
           handcuffed and apparently executed on a daily basis,  mostly  in
           Baghdad. According to reports,  the  mode  of  killing  and  the
           geographic location where the bodies are found often  correspond
           with known patterns of Shi'ite militias killing for sectarian or
           political motivations. Families of those abducted or killed  are
           reportedly often apprehensive about reporting the  abduction  or
           killing to the police, or checking  the  morgue,  as  they  fear
           being subjected to reprisals."

95.   We note that the Home Office policy summary relating to  the  risk  to
    Sunnis states [3.1.1]:

           "Sunnis may face a real risk of persecution or serious harm from
           the Shia militia in Baghdad and  the  'contested'  governorates.
           However, there may be circumstances, including tribal, family or
           political links, which mean a person is  not  at  risk  and  can
           return or relocate to Baghdad."

96.   Mr Jarvis also referred us to a number of pieces of evidence  relating
    to statistical estimates of the number of Sunnis in Baghdad,  including
    large flows of internally displaced people who have  entered  the  city
    from surrounding areas. We  find  that  a  detailed  analysis  of  that
    evidence is unlikely to be helpful  save  to  note  that  if  a  purely
    statistical assessment of the numbers of Sunnis and  reported  killings
    is conducted, the number of killings only form a  small  percentage  of
    the overall population of Sunnis in Baghdad.

97.   We have exercised some caution in  assessing  the  evidence  and  have
    taken into account the empirical difficulties  outlined  above.  It  is
    unhelpful to enter into a detailed analysis of the ethnic and religious
    make-up of specific neighbourhoods in Baghdad. It would be inconsistent
    with the purpose of international protection  mechanisms  to  expect  a
    person to be confined to a small enclave as a  long  term  solution  to
    protection issues unless they  could  lead  a  relatively  normal  life
    without it being unduly harsh. This is not to say that, if a person has
    particular links with a specific neighbourhood, it will not be relevant
    to an overall assessment of risk on return.

98.   Both parties are in agreement that the evidence does not show  that  a
    person would be at real risk of serious harm solely on account  of  his
    or her religious identity if returned to Baghdad at the  current  time.
    This is consistent with the findings made by the Tribunal in AA  (Iraq)
    [136]. However, the evidence indicates that  the  number  of  sectarian
    attacks has increased since the withdrawal of US-led  coalition  forces
    in 2012. Dr George considered that there was  a  significant  level  of
    sectarian violence although, in his view, it had not  yet  reached  the
    heights seen in the period 2006-2007.

99.   The evidence shows that  ISIL  is  capable  of  launching  attacks  in
    public areas of Baghdad largely populated by  Shias.  In  response  the
    Shia militias which control the city are reported to carry out targeted
    killings of Sunnis. The balance of power in Baghdad is firmly with  the
    Shia controlled government; supported by militias.  A large  number  of
    checkpoints are set up throughout the city. A number of checkpoints are
    illegal and by definition may move to different areas of the city. Many
    are manned by Shia militias. There are reports  of  some  Sunnis  being
    identified and taken away from checkpoints.

100.  While it is difficult to ascertain the  reasons  behind  some  of  the
    killings in Baghdad there is evidence to suggest that young  Sunni  men
    are more likely to be targeted as perceived ISIL supporters. Although a
    purely statistical analysis does not give risk to a real risk solely on
    account of Sunni identity, the number of kidnappings and killings, even
    taking into account the likelihood of  underreporting,  is  a  concern.
    Although the majority of Sunnis  are  likely  to  be  able  to  lead  a
    relatively normal life in Baghdad it is not without risk. The level  of
    political and sectarian violence in Baghdad remains  high  even  if  it
    does not meet the threshold required to  show  a  generalised  risk  of
    indiscriminate violence.

101.  The respondent's most recent policy statement recognises  that  Sunnis
    may face a real risk of persecution or serious harm from Shia  militias
    in Baghdad. It goes on to state that tribal, family or political links,
    might mean a person is not at  risk  and  can  return  or  relocate  to
    Baghdad. We find that the significance of a person's  religio-political
    identity to risk on return will inevitably depend on the  circumstances
    of each case. The increasing levels of sectarian violence  in  Baghdad,
    albeit not sufficient if taken alone, are likely  to  be  an  important
    consideration in assessing whether a person can demonstrate  individual
    characteristics that would place him or her at  real  risk  of  serious
    harm.


Sufficiency of protection

102.   Dr  George's  "very  firm  opinion"  was  that  the   Baghdad   based
    authorities would not be in a position to provide sufficient protection
    to a person who is likely to be at  real  risk  of  serious  harm.  The
    authorities have limited capacity to enforce  law  and  order  and  are
    prone to corruption and infiltration. The Shia militias are so  closely
    associated with the Baghdad authorities that  there  is  no  meaningful
    distinction between them.

103.  The most recent  US  State  Department  report  stated  that  civilian
    authorities did not always maintain effective control of  the  security
    forces, regular  armed  forces  and  domestic  law  enforcement  bodies
    including the PMF. Information about abuses by government officials and
    members of the security forces was  not  publicly  available.  Impunity
    effectively  existed  for  government  officials  and  security  forces
    personnel. In many  cases  the  Shia  PMF  operated  independently  and
    without oversight or direction from  the  government.  Security  forces
    made limited efforts to prevent or respond to  societal  violence.  The
    government  did  not  effectively  implement  civil  or  administrative
    remedies for human rights violations.

104.  The FIS report stated that it was a commonly held  view  among  Sunnis
    that the authorities are unable  or  unwilling  to  help  them  because
    police officers are largely Shia. Police are unable to protect citizens
    against violent attacks. It is increasingly difficult for the police to
    perform their duties in densely populated areas such  as  Baghdad.  The
    police are the most corrupted part of the  Iraqi  security  force.  The
    report goes on to say that, given the links between Shia  militias  and
    the authorities, it is understandable that people,  especially  Sunnis,
    are unwilling to report a crime committed  by  the  militias.  In  some
    areas of Baghdad people have reported threats, assaults and kidnappings
    to the police but in most cases the police said that they  were  unable
    to help. One of the contributing factors is excessive workload and lack
    of resources, which prevent the police from investigating crimes.

105.  The respondent did not seek to argue that the authorities  in  Baghdad
    are able to provide sufficient protection. The CIG  guidance  on  Sunni
    Arab Muslims states the respondent's policy  position  in  relation  to
    Sunnis. In general, if a Sunni is at real risk of serious harm from the
    state and/or Shia militias, they will be unable to avail themselves  of
    the protection of the authorities [3.1.3].

106.  Inevitably there are some individual reports of  incidents  where  the
    security forces have intervened. For example, a report from Joel Wing's
    blog dated 17 May 2015 describes how police were called in to  Adhamiya
    neighbourhood to put down an incident of rioting. In our assessment the
    weight of the evidence shows  that,  in  general,  the  authorities  in
    Baghdad are unable, or in the case of Sunni complainants, are likely to
    be unwilling,  to  provide  sufficient  protection.  Our  findings  are
    broadly consistent with the conclusions of the European Court in  JK  v
    Sweden in so far as those who are at risk of being targeted  could  not
    seek effective protection.


COUNTRY GUIDANCE

107.  We are able to draw the following guidance from the evidence:

       i)  The  level  of  general  violence  in   Baghdad   city   remains
          significant, but the current evidence does not justify  departing
          from the conclusion of the Tribunal in AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG
          [2015] UKUT 00544.


      ii) The evidence shows that those who worked for non-security related
          Western or international companies, or any  other  categories  of
          people who would be perceived as having collaborated with foreign
          coalition forces, are still likely to be at risk in  areas  which
          are under ISIL control or have high levels of insurgent activity.
          At the current time the risk is  likely  to  emanate  from  Sunni
          insurgent groups who continue to target Western or  international
          companies as well as those who are perceived to collaborate  with
          the Government of Iraq.


     iii) The current evidence indicates that the risk in Baghdad to  those
          who worked for  non-security  related  Western  or  international
          companies  is  low  although  there  is  evidence  to  show  that
          insurgent groups such as ISIL are active and capable of  carrying
          out attacks in the city. In so far as there may be a low level of
          risk from such groups in Baghdad it is not sufficient to  show  a
          real risk solely as a perceived collaborator.

    (iv)   Kidnapping has been, and remains, a significant  and  persistent
          problem contributing to the breakdown of law and order  in  Iraq.
          Incidents  of  kidnapping  are  likely   to   be   underreported.
          Kidnappings might be linked to a political or  sectarian  motive;
          other kidnappings are rooted in criminal activity  for  a  purely
          financial motive. Whether a returnee from the West is  likely  to
          be perceived as a potential target for kidnapping in Baghdad  may
          depend on how long he or she has been away from Iraq.  Each  case
          will be fact sensitive, but in principle, the longer a person has
          spent abroad the greater the risk. However, the evidence does not
          show a real risk to a returnee in Baghdad on this ground alone.

   v) Sectarian violence  has  increased  since  the  withdrawal  of  US-led
      coalition forces in 2012, but is not at the levels seen in  2006-2007.
      A Shia dominated government is supported by Shia militias in  Baghdad.
      The evidence indicates that Sunni men are more likely to  be  targeted
      as suspected supporters  of  Sunni  extremist  groups  such  as  ISIL.
      However, Sunni identity alone is not sufficient to give rise to a real
      risk of serious harm.


      vi) Individual characteristics, which do not in themselves  create  a
          real risk of serious harm on return to Baghdad, might amount to a
          real risk for the purpose  of  the  Refugee  Convention,  Article
          15(c) of the Qualification Directive or Article 3 of the ECHR  if
          assessed on a cumulative basis. The assessment will depend on the
          facts of each case.


     vii) In general, the authorities in Baghdad are  unable,  and  in  the
          case of Sunni complainants, are likely to be unwilling to provide
          sufficient protection.




ASSESSMENT OF THE PROTECTION CLAIM

108.  The factual matrix of the appellant's protection  claim,  as  set  out
    above, is not in dispute.

109.  Article 4(4) of the Qualification  Directive  (2004/83/EC),  reflected
    in paragraph 339K of the immigration rules, makes clear that  the  fact
    that a person has already been subject to persecution or  serious  harm
    or to direct  threats  of  such  persecution  or  harm,  is  a  serious
    indication of his well-founded fear of  persecution  or  real  risk  of
    suffering serious harm, unless there are good reasons to consider  that
    such persecution  or  serious  harm  will  not  be  repeated.  Acts  of
    persecution must be sufficiently serious by their nature or  repetition
    to constitute a severe  violation  of  basic  human  rights  or  be  an
    accumulation of various measures, which are sufficiently severe  as  to
    affect the individual in a similar manner (Article 9(1)).

110.  In this case, the evidence shows that  the  level  of  potential  harm
    from the risks identified above [107]  is  likely  to  be  sufficiently
    serious to amount to persecution or serious  harm.  If  targeted  as  a
    perceived collaborator, a suspected Sunni insurgent, or for kidnapping,
    the risks include death or serious physical harm. The central issue for
    determination in this appeal is whether there is a  'reasonable  degree
    of likelihood' or 'substantial grounds for believing' that there  is  a
    real risk of such serious harm occurring. A low standard  of  proof  is
    applied in a protection claim precisely because of the  serious  nature
    of the potential risk on return. It is trite law that the  risk  should
    be considered holistically, which might  require  an  assessment  of  a
    number of cumulative factors.

111.  Mr Lemer argued  that  a  number  of  risk  factors  would  place  the
    appellant at real risk of serious harm if considered  on  a  cumulative
    basis although he accepted that none of the individual risk factors, if
    taken alone, would give rise to a real risk.

112.  The appellant worked for a non-security related  Western/international
    auditing company in Iraq from 2003 to 2006. He worked in a small  team.
    His manager received a threatening letter in August 2005. It seems that
    the company withdrew its operations from Baghdad at  the  end  of  2006
    precisely because of the deteriorating security situation and the  risk
    to employees. The company sponsored the appellant to  work  in  the  UK
    until 2009. Not long after  he  left  Iraq  a  threatening  letter  was
    received at his family's home in Baghdad.

113.  At the relevant time the country guidance showed  that  an  Iraqi  who
    was perceived as a collaborator as a consequence  of  his  work  for  a
    foreign contractor, and who had attracted the  hostility  of  an  armed
    group, faced a real risk of persecution on return to his home area: see
    NS (Iraq: perceived collaborator:  relocation)  Iraq  CG  [2007]  UKAIT
    00046. We are satisfied that  this  is  sufficient  to  show  that  the
    appellant left Iraq with a well-founded fear of persecution for reasons
    of attributed political opinion  or  his  membership  of  a  particular
    social group of 'perceived collaborators'.

114.  The fact that the appellant was subject to direct threats  of  serious
    harm in the past is a 'serious indication' of a real risk of  suffering
    serious harm unless there are good reasons to consider that the serious
    harm will not be repeated. However, it is accepted that the evidence no
    longer shows a sufficiently high risk on this ground alone.  Since  the
    withdrawal of US-led coalition  forces  the  risk  is  only  likely  to
    emanate from Sunni extremist groups such as ISIL. Baghdad is controlled
    by a Shia dominated government supported by Shia militias.

115.  The evidence shows that ISIL has some presence in Baghdad in order  to
    launch asymmetric attacks. The recent CIG on the security situation  in
    Baghdad states that the appellant's home area of Al-Ameriyah in Mansour
    district is a predominantly Sunni area.  Al-Ameriyah  was  historically
    linked to Al-Qaeda in Iraq. The report states that ISIL  may  well  use
    these areas as safe-havens to house  insurgents  who  intend  to  mount
    operations in the city. In other words, there is some risk  that  Sunni
    insurgents could be operating in the area and may come to know  of  the
    appellant's background. As already indicated, Dr George's  evidence  is
    that people do not  live  anonymously  in  Iraq  and  that  a  person's
    background is likely to become known in a local  area.  However,  there
    are very  few  reported  incidents  of  perceived  collaborators  being
    targeted in recent years.  We take into  account  that  there  is  some
    level of risk on this ground albeit that it is not sufficient to  found
    a real risk taken alone.

116.  The appellant would return to Baghdad as someone who has  lived  in  a
    Western country for a period of  10  years.  He  is  educated  and  has
    experience  of  working  in  an  international  auditing  company.  The
    appellant's mother and sister are living in the family home in Baghdad.
    His brother-in-law is a government official who may be able  to  assist
    the appellant to find work. The appellant's profession is  not  amongst
    those that are reported to be targeted by armed groups.  We  take  into
    account  the  empirical  limitations  of  the  evidence   relating   to
    kidnappings and the likelihood of underreporting. Dr George  considered
    that the appellant's profile might lead armed  criminals  or  insurgent
    groups to view him as a potential  target  for  kidnapping  because  he
    would be perceived as "relatively wealthy" although  he  considers  the
    risk on this ground alone "would not  be  high".  We  agree  with  this
    assessment. While the risk of kidnapping remains a serious  problem  in
    Baghdad  and  cannot  be  discounted,  even  taking  into  account  the
    possibility of underreporting, the risk is  not  sufficiently  high  to
    reach the required level of a real risk.

117.  The appellant is of Sunni ethnicity. Although he gave evidence to  say
    that his name is likely to indicate that he is a Sunni,  and  that  his
    family would be known to originate from the predominantly Sunni area of
    Mosul, no evidence supported this aspect of his claim.  Dr  George  was
    unable to provide much assistance on this issue. There is some evidence
    to show that, in the past, some Sunnis felt the  need  to  carry  false
    identity cards to hide their religious identity. However,  we  have  to
    assess the risk on the basis that the appellant should not be  expected
    to lie about his identity if stopped and questioned.

118.  There is a significant minority  of  Sunnis  living  in  Baghdad.  The
    incidents of targeted violence against Sunnis, albeit of  concern,  are
    not of such a persistent or widespread nature to create a real risk  on
    return just by virtue  of  a  person's  Sunni  identity.  However,  the
    evidence indicates that young men are  more  likely  to  be  viewed  as
    suspected supporters  of  Sunni  insurgent  groups.  The  incidents  of
    kidnapping and killing of Sunnis largely appear to  involve  young  men
    targeted by Shia militias in revenge for ISIL attacks in the city.

119.   The  evidence  indicates  that  men  are  more  likely  to   be   the
    breadwinners in a family. The appellant is likely to be  able  to  find
    work and is more likely to be  travelling  across  the  city  for  that
    purpose. Dr George acknowledged that there are significant  numbers  of
    Sunnis living in Baghdad who are "living  adequately"  albeit  that  he
    qualified  his  evidence  by  saying:  "well,  they   are   not   being
    relentlessly targeted". There are a large number of legal  and  illegal
    checkpoints across the city. This gives rise to a reasonable degree  of
    likelihood that the appellant would be stopped at  a  checkpoint  on  a
    fairly regular basis. The background evidence  shows  that  checkpoints
    are largely manned by Shia militias. That  evidence  and  the  evidence
    given by Dr George  suggest  that  checkpoints  could  be  a  point  of
    potential risk. He said that it was not possible to  predict  the  risk
    but "if you are the wrong person, at the wrong checkpoint at the  wrong
    moment" checkpoints could involve a  risk.  He  said  that  checkpoints
    historically are where car bomb attacks  take  place.  Dr  George  made
    clear that freedom of movement  in  Baghdad  is  relative.  People  can
    travel from one area to another but would be well aware  of  the  risks
    involved.

120.  In addition to the evidence already outlined above, the  FIS  reported
    sectarian killings taking place in the appellant's home district of Al-
    Ameriyah in 2013. Before the killings flyers were  distributed  in  the
    area urging Sunnis to move out. In April 2013  a  bomb  exploded  in  a
    coffee shop in Al-Ameriyah. Shia militias were suspected to  be  behind
    the attack. They were seen driving through the streets  of  Al-Ameriyah
    during the night abducting Sunnis.

121.  The evidence shows that the appellant's profile  as  a  returnee  from
    the West who previously worked for a Western/international  company  is
    unlikely to attract the adverse  attention  of  Shia  militias  at  the
    current time. For the reasons outlined above, his profile  as  a  young
    Sunni man who is more likely to be travelling  across  the  city  on  a
    regular basis does enhance the risk over and above the mere fact of his
    Sunni identity. This factor is not  sufficient  on  its  own,  but  the
    evidence shows that there is some level  of  risk  albeit  that  it  is
    relatively low.

122.  As part of our holistic assessment of risk  on  return  we  also  take
    into account the general security situation in Baghdad.  In  AA  (Iraq)
    the Tribunal made clear that the nature and the level of  the  conflict
    in Baghdad was not such as to give  rise  to  substantial  grounds  for
    believing that there is a serious and individual threat to a civilian's
    life or person by reason of indiscriminate violence. This  finding  was
    made  "irrespective   of   their   individual   characteristics".   The
    respondent's latest CIG report on the  security  situation  in  Baghdad
    recognises that decision makers should consider whether there  are  any
    particular factors relevant  to  a  person's  individual  circumstances
    which might nevertheless place them at enhanced risk [3.1.3].

123.  We have also taken into account the fact that the appellant's  mother,
    sister and brother-in-law returned to Baghdad  in  September  2015.  No
    serious incidents appear to have been reported. We have  been  provided
    with very little information about their circumstances. We do not  know
    his brother-in-law's religious identity, his background  or  the  exact
    nature of his job. The fact that he has not suffered any  serious  harm
    in the last year might indicate a low level of risk  but  equally  does
    not necessarily denote an absence  of  risk.  We  simply  do  not  have
    sufficient information to assess whether his situation is  relevant  to
    the risks that the appellant is reasonably likely to face. We  bear  in
    mind that the appellant does not need to prove his case with certainty.
    He only needs to show that there is a reasonable degree  of  likelihood
    that he would be at risk of serious harm. It is trite that  the  reason
    why there is a low standard of proof in asylum claims is because of the
    serious nature of the potential risks an appellant might face.

124.  After having considered all of the circumstances as  a  whole  we  are
    satisfied that the appellant's individual profile is such that it would
    give rise to a real risk of serious harm if the appellant  is  returned
    to Baghdad. Although none of the factors outlined above are  sufficient
    to give rise to a real risk if taken alone, there is some level of risk
    associated with each factor. If the risks are assessed on a  cumulative
    basis we are satisfied  that  they  are  sufficient  to  meet  the  low
    standard of proof required in a  protection  claim  given  the  serious
    nature of the potential harm involved. We have already found that there
    is no sufficiency of protection in Baghdad.

125.  The evidence indicates that it is  sometimes  difficult  to  ascertain
    the motives for some of the killings in Baghdad. The risk of  targeting
    as a perceived collaborator  or  as  a  suspected  supporter  of  Sunni
    extremist  groups  clearly  engage  the  operation   of   the   Refugee
    Convention. The risk of targeting for kidnapping may be as a result  of
    mixed motives of a political or criminal  nature.  The  fact  that  his
    potential persecutors might have mixed motives does  not  detract  from
    the protection offered by the Refugee Convention: see Sivakumar v  SSHD
    [2003] INLR 457. Several Convention reasons could  be  engaged  on  the
    facts of this case. For this reason, we do not consider it necessary to
    identify one particular Convention reason.

126.  We conclude that the appellant has a well-founded fear of  persecution
    for one or more of the reasons outlined in the Refugee  Convention.  In
    the alternative, the same  factors  would  give  rise  to  an  enhanced
    individual risk  for  the  purpose  of  Humanitarian  Protection  under
    Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive  or  for  the  purpose  of
    Article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights.


DECISION

We re-make the decision and ALLOW the appeal.



Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan
17 January 2017











                                  APPENDIX
               DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE BEFORE THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                               Expert Reports

|Date           |Description                                               |
|8 July 2016    |Expert's Fifth Report of Dr Alan George                   |
|10 June 2016   |Expert's Fourth Report of Dr Alan George                  |

                     Documents before the Upper Tribunal

|Date           |Source                    |Description                    |
|                                                                          |
|Undated                                                                   |
|Undated        |Asylum Research           |Part 1 & 2 of Asylum Research  |
|               |Consultancy Report        |Consultancy Report             |
|Undated        |Alison Shipitofsky, KPMG  |The Danger Factor; How to      |
|               |LLP, New York             |Compensate Employees for       |
|               |                          |Risking their lives            |
|Undated        |Wikipedia                 |Foreign Hostages in Iraq       |
|Undated        |www.huffingtonpost.com    |Undercounting Contractor       |
|               |                          |Causalities in Iraq            |
|Undated        |Wikipedia                 |List of private contractor     |
|               |                          |details in Iraq                |
|Undated        |Deutsche Welle            |Next stop Erbil: Iraqi refugees|
|               |                          |line up to return Home         |
|                                                                          |
|2016                                                                      |
|3 August 2016  |Musings on Iraq - Iraq    |Violence in Iraq- posted by    |
|               |News, Politics, Economics,|Joel Wing                      |
|               |Society                   |                               |
|August 2016    |United Kingdom Visa and   |Security situation in Baghdad, |
|               |Immigration website:      |the South and the Kurdistan    |
|               |Country Information and   |region of Iraq (KRI)           |
|               |Guidance/Iraq 2016        |                               |
|August 2016    |United Kingdom Visa and   |Sunni (Arab) Muslims           |
|               |Immigration website:      |                               |
|               |Country Information and   |                               |
|               |Guidance/Iraq 2016        |                               |
|August 2016    |United Kingdom Visa and   |Security Situation in the      |
|               |Immigration website:      |'contested ' areas             |
|               |Country Information and   |                               |
|               |Guidance/Iraq 2016        |                               |
|August 2016    |United Kingdom Visa and   |Return/ Internal relocation    |
|               |Immigration website:      |                               |
|               |Country Information and   |                               |
|               |Guidance/Iraq 2016        |                               |
|June 2016      |International Organisation|Displacement Tracking Matrix-  |
|               |for Migration (IOM)       |DTM Round 48                   |
|13 April 2016  |US Department of State,   |Country reports on Human Rights|
|               |2015 Country reports      |Practices                      |
|11 April 2016  |Danish Immigration Service|The Kurdistan Region of Iraq   |
|               |                          |(KRI):                         |
|               |                          |Access, Possibility of         |
|               |                          |Protection, Security and       |
|               |                          |Humanitarian Situation         |
|5 April 2016   |The Guardian              |Iraqi Sunnis forced to abandon |
|               |                          |homes and identity in battle   |
|               |                          |for survival                   |
|7 April 2016   |LANDINFO                  |Iraq: The situation for persons|
|               |                          |who have worked for foreign    |
|               |                          |companies                      |
|April 2016     |United Kingdom Visa and   |Security situation in Baghdad, |
|               |Immigration website:      |the South and the Kurdistan    |
|               |Country Information and   |Region of Iraq (KRI)           |
|               |Guidance/Iraq 2016        |                               |
|10 March 2016  |US Overseas Security      |Iraq 2016 Crime & Safety       |
|               |Advisory Council (OSAC)   |Report: Basrah                 |
|15 March 2016  |International Organisation|IOM Surveys Iraqi Migrants to  |
|               |for Migration (IOM)       |Europe                         |
|24 February    |Amnesty International     |Amnesty International Report   |
|2016           |                          |2015/16: Iraq                  |
|12 February    |Reuters                   |Thousands of Iraqi refugees    |
|2016           |                          |leave Finland voluntarily      |
|2 February 2016|International Organisation|IOM helps Iraqi migrants       |
|               |for Migration(IOM)        |voluntarily return home from   |
|               |                          |Belgium                        |
|27 January 2016|Human Rights Watch        |World Report 2016: Iraq        |
|18 January 2016|Al Jazeera                |Americans' Abduction raises    |
|               |                          |concerns about security in     |
|               |                          |Iraq.                          |
|2016           |US State Department       |Iraq 2015 Human Rights Report  |
|                                                                          |
|2015                                                                      |
|December 2015  |NGO Coordination Committee|Baghdad Governorate Profile    |
|               |for Iraq (NCCI)           |                               |
|November 2015  |Refugees International    |Field report                   |
|October 2015   |International Organisation|Displacement Tracking Matrix - |
|               |for Migration - Iraq (IOM)|DTM Round 30                   |
|August 2015    |International Organisation|Baghdad: Governorate Profile   |
|               |for Migration (IOM)       |May - August 2015)             |
|11 - 17 June   |UNICEF                    |Anbar Crisis - Iraq            |
|2015           |                          |(Humanitarian Situation Report)|
|17 May 2015    |Musings on Iraq: Iraq     |Disaster in Iraq's Ahmadiya    |
|               |news, Policies, Economics |Neighbourhood Averted - posted |
|               |and Society               |by Joel Wing                   |
|29 April 2015  |Finnish Immigration       |Security Situation in Baghdad -|
|               |Service - Country         |The Shia Militas               |
|               |Information Service -     |                               |
|               |Public theme Report       |                               |
|1 March 2015   |Office of the United      |Report on the judicial response|
|               |Nations High Commissioner |to allegations of torture in   |
|               |for Human Rights (OHCHR)  |Iraq                           |
|22 January 2015|Musings on Iraq: Iraq     |Dead Bodies dumped in Iraq's   |
|               |news, Policies, Economics |capital did not turn out as    |
|               |and Society               |feared - posted by Joel Wing   |
|2015           |Columbia University       |BAGHDAD: Ethnic composition in |
|               |                          |2015                           |
|2015           |International Organisation|Assisted Voluntary Return and  |
|               |for Migration (IOM)       |Reintegration at a glance      |
|                                                                          |
|2014                                                                      |
|2014           |International Organisation|Governorate Profile: Baghdad   |
|               |for Migration (IOM)- Iraq |                               |
|2014           |Columbia University       |IRAQ: Ethnic composition in    |
|               |                          |2014 (summary)                 |
|                                                                          |
|2013                                                                      |
|2013           |thelistproject.org-2013   |The List (project to resettle  |
|               |                          |Iraqi allies) "End Game in     |
|               |                          |Iraq"                          |
|                                                                          |
|2012                                                                      |
|15 March 2012  |UKBA/Danish Immigration   |Fact finding mission report -  |
|               |Service                   |March 2012                     |
|                                                                          |
|2011                                                                      |
|22 December    |Al Jazeera                |Iraqis who aided US left behind|
|2011           |                          |and fearful                    |
|                                                                          |
|2009                                                                      |
|April 2009     |UNHCR                     |UNHCR Eligibility Guidelines   |
|               |                          |for Assessing the International|
|               |                          |Protection Needs of Iraqi      |
|               |                          |Asylum Seekers                 |
|2009           |Columbia University       |BAGHDAD: Ethnic composition at |
|               |                          |end of 2009                    |
|                                                                          |
|2007                                                                      |
|2007           |Columbia University       |BAGHDAD: Ethnic composition in |
|               |                          |late 2007                      |

