


|                                                                            |
|      |MA (Palestinian Arabs - Occupied Territories - Risk) Palestinian    |
|      |Territories CG [2007] UKAIT 00017                                   |
|asylum and immigration Tribunal                                             |
|                  |                      |                |                  |
|                  |                      |                |                  |
|the immigration Acts                                                        |
|         |                       |                      |                  |
|Heard at:|Hatton Cross                   |Date of        |15 November 2006  |
|         |                               |hearing:       |                  |
|         |                      |Determination           |20 February 2007  |
|         |                      |Promulgated:            |                  |
|         |                                                                  |
|                                                                            |
|Before                                                                      |
|                                                                            |
|Senior Immigration Judge Gill                                               |
|Immigration Judge Dineen                                                    |
|                                                                            |
|                                                                            |
|Between                                                                     |
|           |                                                   |           |
|           |                                                   |Appellant  |
|                                                                            |
|and                                                                         |
|           |                                                   |           |
|           |                                                   |           |
|           |The Secretary of State for the Home Department     |Respondent |
|           |                                                   |           |
|           |                                                   |           |
|                                                                          |

Merely being a Palestinian Arab in the Occupied Territories , even  if  male
aged between 16-35 from the northern part of the West Bank,  does  not  mean
that a person would face on return a real risk of persecution, serious  harm
under paragraph 339C of  the  amended  Immigration  Rules  or  ill-treatment
contrary to Article 3 of  the  ECHR.   This  Determination,  made  with  the
benefit  of  up-to-date  and  detailed  background  evidence,  updates   and
replaces AB & others as country guidance.

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. A. Bandegani, of the Refugee Legal Centre  (RLC).


For  the  Respondent:     Mr.  K.  Norton,  Senior  Home  Office  Presenting
                 Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    This is a second-stage reconsideration of the appeal of the  Appellant
      (now about 24 years old)  who  is  a  Palestinian  Arab  from  Tulkarm
      (sometimes also spelt as Tulkaram) in the northern part  of  the  West
      Bank. The Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 29 June 2003  and
      claimed asylum on arrival. In the Respondent's Notice  of  refusal  of
      leave to enter dated 4 December 2003, it is stated that he proposes to
      give directions  for  the  Appellant's  removal  to  the  "Palestinian
      Occupied Territories". This appears to supersede a Notice  of  refusal
      of leave to enter which is signed but not dated and which states  that
      the Respondent proposes to remove  the  Appellant  to  "the  Palestine
      Authority". At the hearing on 15 November 2006, Mr. Norton informed us
      that the Respondent proposes to remove the Appellant to  the  Occupied
      Territories via Jordan and the King Hussein Bridge (also known as  the
      Allenby Bridge). It was the agreed position of both parties before  us
      that the Appellant would have to pass through  checkpoints  manned  by
      the  Israeli  authorities  at  the  King  Hussein  Bridge  and   that,
      thereafter, he would have to pass through  checkpoints  ("several"  in
      Mr. Norton's submission and "numerous" in Mr. Bandegani's  submission)
      in order to travel back to Tulkarm, the Appellant's hometown.

2.    The West Bank is populated by 2.5  million  Palestinians.  It  borders
      Jordan to the east and Israel to the south, north and west. There  are
      about 420,000 Israeli settlers living in the West Bank.

3.    The parties agreed that the issue before us  is  whether  there  is  a
      real risk that the Appellant would be persecuted or subjected to  ill-
      treatment in breach of his rights under Article 3 of the 1950 European
      Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms
      (ECHR) by the Israeli authorities on seeking entry  through  the  King
      Hussein Bridge, and thereafter. The  Refugee  or  Person  in  Need  of
      International Protection (Qualification) Regulations  2006  came  into
      force on 9 October 2006 ("Protection  Regulations"),  as  did  command
      paper 6918 (Cmnd 6918) which amended the Immigration  Rules.  Pursuant
      to the President's Practice Direction of 9 October 2006, we also  need
      to  consider  whether  the  Appellant  is  entitled  to   humanitarian
      protection if he is not entitled to refugee status.

4.     As  stated  above,  this  is  a  second-stage  reconsideration.   The
      Appellant's appeal was originally heard on  2  December  2003  and  29
      March 2004 by Mr. G. Jamieson, then an Adjudicator. The Appellant  had
      claimed that he was a member of Fatah and that, whilst  at  university
      in Tulkarm, he was critical of the  then  leader  of  the  Palestinian
      Authority  and  in  particular  Yasser  Arafat.  He  claimed  that  he
      subsequently experienced problems from two of  his  friends  who  took
      exception to his criticisms, that he was attacked by these two friends
      on 7 May 2003 and that he subsequently received telephone threats from
      them. He says he complained to the local Fatah branch, but was  abused
      by the officer in change. He says he then had no choice but to escape.



5.     The  following  is  a  summary  of  the  Adjudicator's  findings  and
      conclusions:

      (a)   The Adjudicator did not find the Appellant credible and rejected
           his  entire  account  of  these  events  (paragraph  17  of  the
           Determination).

      (b)   The Adjudicator did not consider that there was a real  risk  of
           any ill-treatment at the hands of the Palestinian authorities or
           Fatah, because he did not believe that the Appellant had been  a
           credible witness (paragraphs 17 and 26 of the Determination).

      (c)   The Adjudicator then went on to consider whether  the  Appellant
           would be at real risk of persecution or Article 3  ill-treatment
           at the hands of the Israeli authorities who are in occupation of
           Tulkarm.  In  this  regard,  the  argument   advanced   to   the
           Adjudicator  was  that  the  Israeli  authorities  have  imposed
           restrictions on the movement of  Palestinians  within  the  West
           Bank, that the Appellant would therefore be liable to be stopped
           at Israeli checkpoints and that this would amount to persecution
           or, failing that, to treatment  in  breach  of  Article  3.  The
           Adjudicator found that such restrictions would not be so  severe
           as to amount to persecution (paragraph 20 of the Determination).
           He found that the Appellant would not suffer treatment amounting
           to torture or inhuman treatment at  the  hands  of  the  Israeli
           authorities on account of the restriction of his movements as  a
           Palestinian  in  the  West  Bank.  However,  he  concluded  that
           Israel's  treatment  of  the  Palestinian  people   amounts   to
           degrading treatment of  the  Palestinian  people  in  their  own
           territory. He therefore accepted the submission advanced on  the
           Appellant's behalf that there is a real risk of the Appellant as
           a Palestinian, and especially as a young Palestinian male, being
           subjected to degrading treatment by the Israeli  authorities  if
           returned to the West Bank. Accordingly, he allowed the appeal on
           human rights grounds, Article  3.  He  did  not  find  that  the
           Appellant's removal would be disproportionate to  his  right  to
           family life with his sister who was then in the  United  Kingdom
           (she has since returned to  the  West  Bank).  Accordingly,  the
           Adjudicator did not find that Article 8 would be breached by the
           Appellant's removal.

6.    The Respondent's grounds of application for permission  to  appeal  to
      the Immigration Appeal Tribunal (IAT) contend as follows:

      (a)   that, although the  background evidence before  the  Adjudicator
           details incidents of harsh  treatment  of  Palestinians  by  the
           Israeli  authorities,  the  evidence  was  not  such  that   all
           Palestinians are  subjected  to  such  treatment,  nor  did  the
           evidence show that the Appellant faced a real risk of  treatment
           reaching the level of severity required to engage Article 3;

      (b)   the fact that the Appellant had not had any  problems  from  any
           of the authorities in the past is a relevant factor which should
           have been considered  by  the  Adjudicator  when  assessing  the
           likelihood of ill-treatment in the future.  In this regard,  the
           grounds contend that the Appellant had not given any history  of
           having faced any problems from any of  the  authorities  in  the
           past and that, at his asylum interview and in cross-examination,
           he was asked if he had ever had problems with anyone other  than
           the Al-Fateh group and, on both occasions, he confirmed that  he
           had not.

      (c)   the comparison  which  the  Adjudicator  made  at  paragraph  25
           between Somali minority clans and returning Palestinians is  not
           relevant and that the Adjudicator's opinion that  all  returning
           Palestinians are at  real  risk  of  ill-treatment  contrary  to
           Article 3 is purely speculative.

7.    On 13 May 2004, a Vice President of  the  IAT  granted  permission  to
      appeal. The appeal was not heard by the IAT before 4 April 2005,  when
      the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of  Claimants,  etc.)  Act  2004
      ("the 2004 Act")  came  into  effect.  Pursuant  to  the  transitional
      provisions relating to  the  2004  Act,  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
      Tribunal had to deal with the appeal as if it had  originally  decided
      the appeal and was reconsidering its decision. The first-stage of  the
      reconsideration took place on 17 March 2006.  The  panel  (chaired  by
      Immigration Judge Widdup) gave the following reasons for its  decision
      that there was an error of law in the Adjudicator's Determination:

      1.    In paragraph [sic] the Adjudicator found that there  was  not  a
           real risk that the Appellant would  suffer  torture  or  inhuman
           treatment at the hands of Israeli forces on the West Bank.   The
           Adjudicator went on to find  in  the  next  paragraph  that  the
           restrictions on Palestinians amounted to degrading treatment and
           that returning the Appellant to the West Bank would  expose  him
           to a real risk of degrading treatment contrary to Article  3  of
           the ECHR.


      2.    It is arguable that the treatment relied upon by the Adjudicator
           does not reach the level of ill  treatment  required  to  engage
           Article 3.


      3.    The Adjudicator had found in paragraph 20 that the  restrictions
           imposed on the Appellant did not amount  to  persecution  within
           the meaning of the Refugee Convention.


      4.    The Appellant had not put in a Reply seeking to  challenge  that
           finding.  The Appellant submitted that if  the  restrictions  on
           the Appellant engaged Article  3  the  Adjudicator  should  have
           found that the Appellant was also at risk  of  persecution.   It
           was submitted that this  was  a  Robinson  obvious  issue  which
           should be pursued even though not specifically taken  thus  far.
           The Respondent did not oppose that course.


      5.    We therefore concluded that the Adjudicator  had  erred  in  his
           assessment of Article 3 or that he had erred in  his  assessment
           of the risk of persecution.

8.    That panel identified the following issues for  consideration  at  the
      second-stage:

      1.    whether there is a real risk that the  treatment  likely  to  be
           experienced by the Appellant on his  return  to  the  West  Bank
           engages Article 3 or is sufficient to amount to persecution;

      2.    whether the Appellant is a member of a particular  social  group
           likely to be subjected to  persecution  on  account  of  imputed
           political opinions.

9.    Before us, it was agreed that the Appellant was free  to  argue  that,
      if  removed,  he  would  receive  ill-treatment   which   amounts   to
      persecution. Mr. Bandegani informed us that the Appellant also  wished
      to give oral evidence  and  that  he  wished  to  rely  on  a  witness
      statement dated 29 May 2006. Both parties requested us to consider the
      witness statement and hear oral evidence.  We  pointed  out  that  the
      Appellant's credibility had been rejected by the  Adjudicator  and  we
      also pointed out that we would have to assess the credibility  of  the
      Appellant's fresh evidence.

10.   At the commencement of the hearing, Mr.  Bandegani  informed  us  that
      the expert (Dr. A. George) was not available to give oral evidence. No
      request was made for an adjournment in order to enable him  to  attend
      and give oral evidence.

11.   Mr. Bandegani and Mr. Norton confirmed receipt of the document  giving
      the Tribunal's reasons for finding an error of law and were content to
      proceed with the second-stage reconsideration.  The  documents  relied
      upon by the parties are set out in  greater  detail  in  the  appendix
      attached to this Determination. Briefly, the following documents  were
      served on the Respondent's behalf:

      (a)   a bundle entitled "Respondent's Supplementary Bundle" with a 10-
           page  skeleton  argument   followed  by  146  pages  of  various
           documents;
      (b)   a black-and-while copy of a A-3  size  map  of  Israel  and  the
           Occupied Territories.

      We also have before us a copy of  the  Respondent's  statutory  appeal
           bundle.

      The following documents were served on the Appellant's behalf:

      (a)   Bundle A entitled "Index of  Documents",  containing  a  witness
           statement from the Appellant dated 29 May 2006 (pages 1 to 8), a
           report of Dr. A. George dated 15 May 2006 (pages 9  to  25)  and
           background evidence (pages 26 to 476);
      (b)   Bundle B entitled "Index of Legal Materials" (pages 1 to 271);
      (c)   Bundle C entitled "Index of Case law" (pages 1 to 140);
      (d)   a skeleton argument dated 15 November 2006.

      We agreed to give Mr. Bandegani some time (until Friday,  17  November
      2006) to provide a better copy of the document at pages 327 and 328 of
      the Appellant's Bundle A. At the end of  the  hearing,  Mr.  Bandegani
      kindly agreed to send us a colour copy of a  map  of  Israel  and  the
      Occupied Territories by the following Friday. We confirm that we  have
      received compete copies of pages 327 and 328 of the Appellant's bundle
      A and two colour copies of the large map (not three, as stated on  the
      protective tube in which the maps arrived).

      Also relevant is the current country guidance case a copy of which  we
      found on file - i.e. AB & Ors (Risk - Return  -  Israeli  Checkpoints)
      Palestine [2005] UKIAT 00046.

      The Appellant's statement dated 29 May 2006:

12.   In  his  written  statement,  the  Appellant  says  that  the  Israeli
      government's policy is  to  make  life  for  Palestinians  unbearable,
      placing them under unbearable pressure and stress.  He  says  that  he
      fears that he will suffer more than most other Palestinians because he
      is young and male. He would be targeted if he tried to  go  about  his
      affairs - for example, if he tried to secure work to  support  himself
      or if he tried to visit family in other parts of  Tulkarm  or  outside
      Tulkarm. He says that the way in which the Israeli  occupation  forces
      treat Palestinians - in particular,  the  targeting  of  young  men  -
      amounts to persecution. The Appellant  goes  on  to  describe  various
      checkpoints around his home area and in and around his town.   He also
      described the separation wall which has been built  along  the  border
      with Israel and which he says cuts into the Tulkarm area. The wall and
      the checkpoints  are  used  by  the  Israeli  authorities  to  prevent
      Palestinians from moving within their own cities or  villages  and  to
      control or ruin the lives of  the  Palestinians.  The  Appellant  says
      that, when Palestinians are allowed to pass through checkpoints,  they
      are made to feel like animals.

13.   The Appellant's parents are both alive and still living  in  Tulkaram.
      They live in the centre of the town. There are  many  villages  around
      the city centre and many checkpoints around this area.  The  Appellant
      has two brothers and four sisters. He describes their circumstances as
      follows:

      (a)   His eldest sister  (aged  32  years)  has  a  doctorate  in  DNA
            research. In January 2006, she returned to Tulkaram in the West
            Bank from the United Kingdom. She had  to  travel  through  the
            Jordanian border, over the bridge and through many  checkpoints
            into Tulkarm. She had to wait many times. She was only able  to
            get through with an identity card.

      (b)   An older sister (aged thirty  years)  previously  studied  at  a
            local university in Tulkaram and is  unemployed.  Her  husband,
            who is a nurse, is not being paid his salary.  They  live  with
            their children in one of the camps next to Tulkarm. The camp is
            run by the Palestinian Authority and has been severely affected
            by the Israeli forces.  This  sister  has  experienced  regular
            periods during which she and her  family  are  not  allowed  to
            leave their home; the Israeli forces move through  the  streets
            telling people with the aid of loudspeakers that they  are  not
            allowed to leave their homes.

      (c)   One brother is studying in the  Czech  Republic.  The  remaining
            three brothers are in the Occupied Territories.

       (d)    The  oldest  of  the  Appellant's  brothers  in  the  Occupied
            Territories (aged 26  years)  is  a  teacher  in  a  school  in
            Tulkarm.

      (e)    The  Appellant's  younger  brother  (aged  nineteen  years)  is
            studying in  a  university  in  Nablus.  He  experiences  great
            travelling difficulties nearly every day because he has to stay
            at checkpoints for hours. Sometimes he is  told  to  return  to
            Nablus and sometimes "they" will not allow  him  to  return  to
            Tulkarm.

      (f)   The Appellant's youngest brother (aged  sixteen  years)  studies
            at a school near the family  home.  He  has  not  suffered  any
            specific targeting because (the Appellant  says)  he  is  still
            quite young.

14.   In his witness statement,  the  Appellant  goes  on  to  describe  one
      particular incident which occurred in or around spring 2003, after the
      Intifada. On this occasion, the Israeli Defence Forces surrounded  the
      entire area and picked out any one of up to a specific age. Anyone who
      was male and over sixteen was picked up. In this  way,  the  Appellant
      and the older of his two younger brothers (i.e. the one  described  in
      paragraph 13(e) above, who was then 16  years  old)  were  picked  up.
      Other neighbours under the age of forty but over the  age  of  sixteen
      were also picked up. The circumstances leading to this detention  were
      that the Appellant and his father were sitting at their  balcony  when
      the Israeli Defence  Forces  arrived  and  surrounded  the  area.  The
      Appellant and his father tried to get into  their  house  by  crawling
      along the floor to avoid being seen but,  when  the  Israeli  soldiers
      noticed a door moving,  they  started  to  shoot  at  the  house.  The
      following day, the Israeli Defence  Forces  went  to  the  Appellant's
      home. All night they had been moving from house to house taking people
      from their homes. The Appellant's family  were  told  to  leave  their
      house and, when they were outside, they were asked for their  identity
      cards. When they saw the ages of the Appellant and his  brother,  they
      detained them. Their hands were tied behind their backs and they  were
      forced  to  kneel.  The  Appellant  and  his  brother  were   publicly
      humiliated. After about six hours, they were separated and  questioned
      individually. The Appellant was slapped, sworn at and pushed. When  he
      asked for water to drink, he was first given hot water  and  later  he
      was given water to drink whilst his hands were still tied  behind  his
      back. After he was released, he was informed by  his  neighbours  that
      the Israeli Defence Forces had told them that they knew  which  mosque
      the Appellant and his family were praying at and were  watching  them.
      The Appellant says that he felt he  was  targeted  because  he  was  a
      Palestinian and because of his age. He says that the  Israeli  Defence
      Forces knew that he had not done anything and that he could  not  help
      them with any information. They  simply  wanted  to  punish  him,  his
      brother, his family and all Palestinians.

15.   The Appellant fears returning  to  the  Occupied  Territories  and  in
      particular to Tulkarm. The Israeli Defence Forces have segregated  the
      West Bank into different areas and do not allow movement in or between
      them.  When  they  do,  Palestinians  are  intimidated  and  degraded.
      Sometimes they are shot or arrested never to be seen again.

      Oral evidence

16.   The Appellant gave oral evidence through an interpreter in the  Arabic
      language. After the first interpreter had been assisting the Appellant
      in the giving of his oral evidence in examination-in-chief  for  about
      twenty  minutes,  Mr.  Bandegani  expressed  his  concern   that   the
      interpreter was not fully translating the Appellant's answers. As  the
      Appellant appeared able to speak English to a fair standard,  he  told
      us directly that, although he understood the interpreter, he  did  not
      feel that his answers were being  translated  fully.  We  successfully
      arranged for another  interpreter  to  assist,  with  whose  help  the
      Appellant's evidence-in-chief was taken again. The second  interpreter
      confirmed both at the commencement  and  end  of  examination-in-chief
      (which lasted for about half an hour),that he was  satisfied  that  he
      had understood the Appellant and that  the  Appellant  had  understood
      him. The Appellant told us directly that there  were  no  problems  in
      communication with the second interpreter  up  until  that  point.  No
      further problems were drawn to our attention by the  Appellant  and/or
      Mr. Bandegani by the end of the hearing.

17.   In examination-in-chief, the Appellant said that, in order to  get  to
      the West Bank, he would have to travel through  the  Jordanian  bridge
      and then through the Israeli side of the bridge. He does not know what
      would happen to him at that point.  There  is  a  possibility  of  his
      detention at this point; the Israeli Defence Forces may also allow him
      to pass through. If he is allowed to pass through, he  would  have  to
      cross the barrier, after which there  would  be  checkpoints.  At  the
      checkpoints, he would be asked where he comes from and he may, at that
      point, be returned. There is also a possibility that,  by  approaching
      the barriers, he may be shot.

18.   The Appellant said that there are many travel restrictions.  A  person
      who carries an identity card showing that s/he lives in Nablus is  not
      permitted to travel anywhere other than Nablus itself. If s/he  wishes
      to travel to a different town, s/he has to obtain permission  to  move
      from one area to another. Permission is issued by  the  Israelis.  The
      Appellant felt that, as a human being, he should  have  the  right  to
      move from one town to another town in order to visit his family.

19.   Asked whether every single Palestinian Arab is at risk of  harm  every
      time they attempt to move through a checkpoint, the Appellant  replied
      "that is something certain. Yes". Furthermore,  every  Palestinian  is
      treated inhumanely and in an insulting way  at  the  checkpoints.  The
      treatment received by Palestinians at Israeli checkpoints  depends  on
      the person's age. A young person is subjected to more insults and even
      beatings. People are tortured at the checkpoint.  Scars  are  left  on
      their bodies - for example, marks representing the star of David -  so
      that  they  can  be  recognised  by  the  Israeli  forces   at   other
      checkpoints.  Many  people  have  lost  their  lives  passing  through
      checkpoints. Even pregnant women have been harmed. From time to  time,
      the Israeli forces will announce that certain  age  categories  -  for
      example, people between the age of sixteen and forty years  of  age  -
      have restrictions imposed upon their movement.

20.   In order to travel to the West Bank, the Appellant would have to  pass
      through Jericho. If he were to live in Jericho, he would not  be  able
      to support himself because there are no jobs. He would not be able  to
      rent a place to live in in  Jericho  because  no  one  in  Jericho  is
      prepared to let a place to someone like him who is considered to be  a
      stranger there.

21.   In cross-examination, the Appellant told us that the document at  page
      12 of  the  Respondent's  supplementary  bundle  ("Jordanian  crossing
      card") is a card which  is  considered  necessary  in  order  to  pass
      through the King Hussein Bridge. The document at page 14A is a copy of
      his passport.

22.   Asked whether the incident he had  described  in  his  recent  witness
      statement which occurred in Spring of 2003 would put  him  at  greater
      risk than any other Palestinian who has not been  previously  detained
      by the Israeli forces, the Appellant said that he  had  no  idea.  The
      Israeli forces arrested him and took all the information from him.  He
      does not know whether this particular detention would  put  him  in  a
      serious position. At the time of the incident, he  asked  the  Israeli
      forces why he was being taken but he was not given  any  answers.  The
      reason why he had not previously mentioned this  incident  is  because
      his asylum claim was based on the troubles he had experienced from the
      Al-Fateh organisation and had nothing to do with this incident.

23.   The Appellant was referred  to  paragraph  9  of  his  recent  witness
      statement at which he referred to his eldest sister  having  travelled
      from the Jordanian border,  over  the  bridge  and  through  the  many
      checkpoints back to Tulkarm in January 2006. The Appellant  said  that
      he was not sure about the exact date when his sister went to  Tulkarm.
      He  thought  that  it  was  January  2005,  and  not   January   2006.
      Furthermore, her journey should have taken no more  than  three  hours
      but it in fact took six to seven hours.  She  was  mistreated  at  the
      checkpoints and she was delayed. She was threatened with arms. If  she
      succeeded in completing her journey, this was partly because she is  a
      Doctor and she carries a doctor's identity card as well as a passport.
      The reason why his sister travelled to the West Bank on that  occasion
      was because she wished to visit the Appellants'  paternal  uncle,  who
      was suffering from the terminal stages of cancer and was going to die.

24.   There were no questions by way of re-examination, nor  did  the  panel
      have any questions.

      Submissions

25.   On the Respondent's behalf, Mr Norton relied on his  written  skeleton
      argument and the refusal letter. He then  addressed  us  briefly.  The
      Respondent does not accept that there is any specific adverse interest
      from any Palestinian group  or  the  Palestinian  authorities  or  the
      Israeli Defence Forces in the Appellant. The Appellant now  claims  to
      be at real risk of persecution at the hands  of  the  Israeli  Defence
      Forces because he is a Palestinian Arab male from the  West  Bank  who
      falls  within  the  sixteen  to  forty  age  group.  In  Mr   Norton's
      submission, the Appellant is a  member  of  a  group  which  comprises
      hundreds of thousands of other  Palestinians.  The  Geneva  Convention
      reason which is relied upon is that all Palestinian Arabs form a group
      which face persecution in breach of either the  Geneva  Convention  or
      Article 3 of the ECHR. In Mr Norton's submission, the evidence  before
      us does not show that the current situation in the West Bank  is  such
      that there is a real risk of  persecution  to  the  groups  described.
      Almost all the   background  evidence  presented  on  the  Appellant's
      behalf comes from partisan sources, namely either the Israelis or  the
      Palestinians. This is a political debate which the Respondent does not
      wish to be drawn into. Mr Norton reminded us that  the  threshold  for
      persecution or for Article 3 ill-treatment is high. In his submission,
      the threshold was not met.  The  first  document  in  the  Appellant's
      bundle B was a decision of the International Court  of  Justice  (ICJ)
      dated  9  July  2004  concerning  "the  legal  consequences   of   the
      construction of a wall in the occupied  Palestinian  Territory".  With
      regard to this document, Mr Norton submitted that the findings of  the
      ICJ do not show that the high threshold for persecution or  Article  3
      ill-treatment is breached.

26.   On the question of returnability, Mr Norton informed us  that  it  was
      previously the Respondent's position that returns  to  the  West  Bank
      were impracticable and it was therefore accepted that there  would  be
      no returns. The position has  since  changed,  as  recorded  in  AK  v
      Secretary of State for the Home Department [2006] EWCA  Civ  1117.  Mr
      Norton asked us to note that the Appellant  has  a  valid  Palestinian
      passport, that he said at his interview that he  holds  a  Palestinian
      green card or identity card which was issued after the  Oslo  Accords.
      The Appellant  was  previously  able  to  exit  the  Palestinian  area
      lawfully and he was able to enter Jordan lawfully. Mr Norton expressed
      the hope that it was now the agreed position that the Appellant  would
      be able to reach the border crossing from Jordan. The issue is whether
      he would be able to pass through the checkpoints without  experiencing
      Article 3 ill-treatment or whether he would be ill-treated  or  denied
      entry. Mr Norton asked us to note that, in January 2006  according  to
      the Appellant's witness statement dated 29 May 2006 or in January 2005
      according to the Appellant's oral evidence, the Appellant's sister was
      able to enter from Jordan and travel through the many  checkpoints  to
      Tulkarm in the West Bank although her  journey  took  longer  than  it
      should have. In Mr Norton's submission, the Appellant would be able to
      make the journey, although he would be inconvenienced.

27.   On the question of returnability, we informed  the  parties  that,  in
      our view, pursuant to the recent judgment of the Court  of  Appeal  in
      Gedow and Others v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2006]
      EWCA Civ 1342, the precise method of return  is  not  a  matter  which
      needs concern us; it was sufficient that Mr Norton had made clear that
      the Respondent's intention was to return the Appellant via Jordan  and
      the King Hussein Bridge. Both Mr Norton and Mr Bandegani  agreed  that
      the method of return did not concern us.

28.   On the Appellant's  behalf,  Mr.  Bandegani  relied  on  his  skeleton
      argument. The objective material relied upon was either referred to by
      way of extracts in the skeleton argument or would be referred to us in
      oral submissions. Mr Bandegani submitted that there were two  possible
      groups the Appellant could be a member of:

      (a)   "Arab male Palestinian between the ages of  fourteen  and  forty
            who comes from Tulkarm";

      (b)   by the end of the hearing, Mr Bandegani had  refined  the  group
            and described it  as  follows:  "Palestinian  Arab  males  from
            Tulkarm or Jenin aged between fourteen to forty".

      Other possible Geneva Convention reasons would be perceived  political
      opinion, race or ethnicity.

29.   In Mr Bandegani's submission, the northern part of the  West  Bank  is
      targeted. It is completely divided from the other areas because of the
      perception on  the  part  of  the  Israeli  Defence  Forces  that  the
      Palestinian Arabs in the northern part  of  the  West  Bank  are  more
      likely to be involved in anti-Israeli armed activities. With regard to
      Mr Norton's submission that there was no evidence  to  show  that  the
      high threshold required for persecution  or  Article  3  ill-treatment
      would be breached, Mr. Bandegani submitted that there was no  evidence
      to show that there was no clear breach. Every case has to  be  decided
      on its own facts.

30.   A particular risk factor in this case  is  that  the  Appellant  comes
      from Tulkarm. Accordingly, it  is  not  the  case  that  hundreds  and
      thousands of people would belong to the groups  mentioned  above.  The
      mere fact that this is a political issue upon which opinions have been
      given does not mean that the probative value of the  reports  tendered
      on the Appellant's behalf is reduced. The Appellant also  relies  upon
      the report of an expert, Dr A George. In any event, it is not  correct
      to say that all the evidence tendered on  the  Appellant's  behalf  is
      partisan. The reports are from many different sources from around  the
      world. The fact that all of the evidence points one way does not  make
      it partisan.

31.   Although the decision of the ICJ is not binding on  us,  Mr  Bandegani
      submitted that what the court says  is  important  because  it  is  an
      independent body. In this regard, Mr  Bandegani  referred  us  to  the
      following paragraphs of the report of the ICJ in bundle B:

      Para 65 (page 28):      the  ICJ  rejected  the  contention  that  the
      question of the wall was outside its jurisdiction. In any  event,  the
      court stated that there is no compelling reason  for  it  to  use  its
      discretion not to give its opinion;

      Para 137 (page 55): the court stated that it  is  not  convinced  that
      the specific course Israel has chosen for the wall  was  necessary  to
      attain its security objectives. It stated that  the  wall,  along  the
      route chosen and its associated regime, greatly infringed a number  of
      rights of Palestinian Arabs residing  in  the  territory  occupied  by
      Israel, and the infringements resulting  from  that  route  cannot  be
      justified by military insurgences or by the requirements  of  national
      requirements of public order;

      Para 113 (page 44): the court rejected  another  argument,  i.e.  that
      human rights law does not apply to the Occupied Territories;

      Para 101 (page 40): the court rejected the argument  that  the  fourth
      Geneva Convention is not applicable in any occupied territory  in  the
      event of an armed conflict arising between two more  high  contracting
      parties. The court held that  the  Convention  is  applicable  in  the
      Palestinian territories which before the conflict lay to the  east  of
      the green line and which,  during  that  conflict,  were  occupied  by
      Israel;

      Para 120 (page 46): the court noted that the fourth Geneva  Convention
      required the occupying power not to deport or transfer  parts  of  its
      own civilian population into the  territory  it  occupies.  The  court
      considered that the information provided  to  the  court  shows  that,
      since 1977, Israel has conducted  a  policy  and  developed  practices
      involving the establishment of settlements in the occupied Palestinian
      territory, contrary to the  fourth  Geneva  Convention.  The  Security
      Council has thus taken the view that such policy and  practices  "have
      no legal validity". It has called upon Israel as the  occupying  power
      to abide scrupulously by the fourth Geneva Convention;

      Para 134 (page 54): the court concluded that the construction  of  the
      wall by Israel and its associated  regime  inhibited  the  liberty  of
      movement of the inhabitants of the  occupied  Palestinian  territories
      with the exception of Israeli citizens and those assimilated thereto;

      Para 142 (page 57): the court concluded that Israel could not rely  on
      a right of self defence or  on  a  state  of  necessity  in  order  to
      preclude the wrongfulness of the construction of  the  wall  resulting
      from its previous considerations. The court accordingly found that the
      construction of the wall and its associated  regime  are  contrary  to
      international law.

32.   In Mr Bandegani's submission, the findings  of  the  ICJ  were  not  a
      light set of findings. Although Mr Bandegani accepted that  the  ICJ's
      findings do not mean that the Appellant is a refugee, he asked  us  to
      bear in mind that the ICJ found that the package of measures mentioned
      at paragraph 3 of his skeleton argument are in breach of international
      law because the Israeli authorities have annexed land  and  they  have
      induced the transfer of the Arab population. Paragraph  4  onwards  of
      the skeleton argument describes how the Israeli authorities manage the
      Arab population, the cornerstone of their tactics  being  the  use  of
      administrative  measures  which  make  life  extremely  difficult  for
      Palestinian Arabs. The cumulative effect is that  the  West  Bank  has
      become a social model with real parallels to apartheid  South  Africa,
      managed and overseen by occupying state agents.

33.   Mr. Bandegani referred us to Article 9 of the Qualification  Directive
      (Council Directive 2004/83/EC of 28  April  2004)  (the  Qualification
      Directive) which states:

      (1)   Acts of persecution within the meaning of Article  1  A  of  the
            Geneva Convention must:

            (a)  be sufficiently serious by their nature  or  repetition  as
                 to constitute a severe violation of basic human rights,  in
                 particular the rights from which derogation cannot be  made
                 under Article 15(2) of  the  European  Convention  for  the
                 Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms; or

             (b)   be  an  accumulation  of  various   measures,   including
                 violations of human rights which is sufficiently severe  as
                 to affect an individual in a similar manner as mentioned in
                 (a).

      (2)   Acts of persecution as qualified  in  paragraph  2,  can,  inter
            alia, take the form of:

            (a)  acts of physical or  mental  violence;  including  acts  of
      sexual violence,

            (b)  legal, administrative,  police,  and/or  judicial  measures
                 which  are  in  themselves  discriminatory  or  which   are
                 implemented in a discriminatory manner;

            (c)  prosecution or punishment,  which  is  disproportionate  or
                 discriminatory;

            (d)  denial of judicial redress resulting in a  disproportionate
                 or discriminatory punishment;

            (e)  prosecution or punishment for refusal to  perform  military
                 service in a conflict, where  performing  military  service
                 would include crimes or acts falling  under  the  exclusion
                 clauses as set out in Article 12(2);

            (f)  acts of a gender-specific or child-specific nature.

34.   The West Bank has been externally closed and  Arab  residents  of  the
      West Bank are unable to travel to Jerusalem or to  Gaza  or  from  one
      city to another.  In  Mr.  Bandegani's  submission,  there  are  gross
      impediments imposed by the  Israeli  authorities  on  the  ability  of
      Palestinian Arabs to move. Israel has denied  a  right  of  return  to
      those Palestinian Arabs who were (displaced) in 1948 and  1967.   None
      of these measures have been applied to Israeli settlers. The  policies
      which Israel follows are  intended  to  induce  a  transfer  from  the
      territory. This is implemented in a discriminatory manner. Israel  has
      adopted or pursued the denial of the ability of Palestinian  Arabs  to
      return to the West Bank. Dr Alan George states,  at  paragraph  32  on
      page 19 of his report, that hundreds of checkpoints have  been  placed
      at the entrances of Palestinian communities in the West Bank in  order
      to restrict the movement of Palestinian citizens from one community to
      another. The report of Al-Haq of April to June 2006 states that Israel
      has revoked the residency rights of  thousands  of  Palestinian  Arabs
      living in the West Bank on the pretext of their  having  lived  abroad
      for prolonged periods. These individuals now find themselves separated
      from their families and livelihoods.

35.   In Mr Bandegani's submission, the Appellant would be  denied  re-entry
      into the West Bank. In Mr. Bandegani's submission, if the Appellant is
      refused permission to enter  the  West  Bank,  this  would  amount  to
      persecution. Although this does not amount to  torture,  Mr  Bandegani
      submitted that, cumulatively, the Appellant would be subjected to ill-
      treatment amounting to persecution. He referred us  to  the  Court  of
      Appeal's judgment in AK.

36.   The Appellant's case is that whether he is allowed to  re-enter  would
      depend on the discretion of the Israeli Defence Forces. There  are  no
      rules; verbal orders are handed down. The Appellant says he  would  be
      ill-treated. In the event that the Appellant is allowed re-entry,  the
      issue then arises as to what would happen to him. Even if  his  sister
      was able to travel to the West Bank in January 2005 or  January  2006,
      the Appellant's evidence was that this was because she was  a  doctor.
      Mr Bandegani submitted that it may also be that she was able  to  make
      the journey because she is female and not as young as  the  Appellant.
      Furthermore, the Appellant's sister travelled prior to May 2006,  when
      there was a serious worsening of the situation.

37.   At this point, Mr Bandegani showed us the large map of Israel and  the
      Occupied Territories and this is when it was agreed that the Appellant
      would have to pass through checkpoints - "numerous"  according  to  Mr
      Bandegani and "several" according to  Mr  Norton.  In  Mr  Bandegani's
      submission, the  background evidence shows that the number of physical
      obstacles have increased even since last year. There are an average of
      121  flying  checkpoints.  The  number  and  location  of  checkpoints
      fluctuates but is always high. One is never  certain  when  one  might
      encounter a checkpoint. It would be impossible for  the  Appellant  to
      pass through the closed areas. It is a possibility that the  Appellant
      may have to pass through 80 or so checkpoints to navigate through  the
      central area. He would only be able  to  travel  through  the  central
      area. The restrictions on movement have become  more  and  more  of  a
      concern in recent times. The fact that a person has been able to  pass
      through previously does not mean that he or she would be able to do so
      now. In Mr Bandegani's submission, there is a real risk  that  someone
      in the Appellant's category would be at risk  although  it  cannot  be
      said that all are.

38.    Mr  Bandegani  then  referred  us  to  the  CAABU  (Council  for  the
      Advancement of Arab-British Understanding) Report dated 18  May  2006,
      at pages 223 to 267 of the Appellant's bundle A, as follows:

      Page 236:  the report states that the "forbidden roads  regime"  is  a
      slippery policy, in part because its rules and regulations have  never
      been set in writing;

      Page 238:  the report states that the "roads regime", which  is  based
      on separation through discrimination, bears clear similarities to  the
      racist apartheid regime which existed in South Africa until  1994.  An
      individual's national origin determines their rights  to  use  various
      roads. This policy is based on a racist premise: that all  Palestinian
      Arabs are security risks, and that  it  is  therefore  justifiable  to
      restrict their movement. Thus the policy  indiscriminately  harms  the
      entire Palestinian population, in violation of their human rights  and
      of international law.

      Page 239:  the CAABU Report states that the routes  set  for  most  of
      the new roads ran across privately-owned Palestinian land.  To  enable
      this,  Israel  used  illegal  "requisition  for  military  needs"  and
      "expropriation for public use" measures.

39.   We were then referred to the extract of a  book  entitled  "Checkpoint
      Watch - Testimonies  from  Occupied  Palestine"  by  Yehudit  Kirstein
      Keshet with a foreword by Amira Hass, at  pages  268  to  299  of  the
      Appellant's bundle A. This is a book  written  by  Israeli  women  who
      monitor human rights abuses.  In  Mr  Bandegani's  submission,  it  is
      therefore worthy of considerable weight being given to it because  the
      authors are Israelis who monitor what happens to Palestinians. The key
      issues they raise are extortion at  checkpoints  and  confiscation  of
      identity cards.

40.   The book makes the point that  an  individual  may  be  able  to  pass
      through  checkpoints  once,  twice,  or  three  times,  but  they  may
      subsequently be stopped and  arrested.  According  to  the  book,  the
      standard applied by the Israeli Defence Forces or the border police to
      men from the north is low. No benefit of the doubt is given. The  book
      states that  checkpoints  make  it  difficult  for  people  to  obtain
      employment. There are references to racial  abuse  and  physical  ill-
      treatment. Any normal rhythm to life is denied to the Palestinians.

41.   In Mr Bandegani's submission, even if  the  Appellant  passes  through
      King Hussein Bridge, he would suffer persecution at checkpoints or  he
      would be made destitute.

42.   Mr Bandegani then referred us to the humanitarian reports on food  and
      security. The CAABU Report at page 256 of  the  Appellant's  bundle  A
      refers to an incredibly high number of people living below the poverty
      line. The family is very important as a social  safety  net.  On  page
      257, the CAABU Report shows that food insecurity in Jericho  increased
      by 30% since 2005. In Mr Bandegani's submission, the reason is because
      of the restrictions on movement.

43.   Accordingly, Mr Bandegani submitted that the Appellant would  be  very
      vulnerable if he were to find himself in an area outside of  his  home
      area of Tulkarm with no social safety net  and  with  Tulkarm  clearly
      identified as his place of origin on his identity card.

44.   We reserved our determination.

      Consideration of the issues

45.   Under Regulation  2  of  the  Protection  Regulations,  a  refugee  is
      defined by reference to Article  1A  of  the  Geneva  Convention  (the
      United Nations' Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees). It  is
      for the  Appellant  to  show  that  he  has  a  well-founded  fear  of
      persecution for one of the qualifying reasons (Regulation  5  (3)  and
      Regulation 6). If (and only if) the Appellant is  not  a  refugee,  we
      would need to consider whether he would be at  real  risk  of  serious
      harm as defined in paragraph 339C of  the  Immigration  Rules.  If  he
      would be at real  risk  of  serious  harm,  then  he  is  entitled  to
      humanitarian protection under the Immigration Rules.  With  regard  to
      his appeal on human rights grounds, the Appellant relies on Article  3
      of the ECHR. In this regard, we have to decide whether there is a real
      risk that he would be subjected to inhuman or degrading  treatment  or
      punishment if removed.

46.   In our view, the standard of proof with regard to  the  asylum  claim,
      the claim for humanitarian protection and the Article 3 claim  is  the
      same - i.e. that of a reasonable degree of likelihood or a real risk.

       The  Qualification  Directive  as  compared   with   the   Protection
      Regulations and the amended Immigration Rules:

46.   Mr. Bandegani referred us to the definition of persecution in  Article
      9 of the Qualification Directive. However, he informed us that he  was
      not aware that the Protection Regulations and  the  Immigration  Rules
      (as amended by Cmnd 6918)  have  transposed  the  obligations  in  the
      Qualification Directive incorrectly. Nevertheless, it is useful to set
      out the way in which the United Kingdom legislation transposes Article
      9 of the Qualifications Directive. We have set out Article  9  of  the
      Qualification Directive at paragraph 33 above. Regulations 2 and 5  of
      the Protection Regulations state:

      Regulation 2:    "persecution" means an act of persecution within  the
                 meaning of Article 1 (A) of the Geneva Convention;

      Regulation 5     (1)   In deciding whether a person is  a  refugee  an
                     act of persecution must be:

                 (a)   sufficiently severe by its nature  or  repetition  as
                         to constitute a severe violation of a basic  human
                         right, in particular a right from which derogation
                         cannot be made under Article 15 of the  Convention
                         for the protection of Human Rights and Fundamental
                         Freedoms; or

                 (b)   an accumulation  of  various  measures,  including  a
                         violation of a human right which  is  sufficiently
                         severe as to affect an  individual  in  a  similar
                         manner as specified in (a).

            (2)  An act of persecution may, for example, take the form of:

                 (a)   an act of physical or mental violence,  including  an
                         act of sexual violence;

                 (b)   a legal, administrative, police or  judicial  measure
                         which in itself  is  discriminatory  or  which  is
                         implemented in a discriminatory manner;

                 (c)   prosecution or punishment, which is  disproportionate
                         or discriminatory;

                 (d)   denial of judicial redress in a  disproportionate  or
                         discriminatory punishment;

                 (e)   prosecution or  punishment  for  refusal  to  perform
                         military service in a  conflict  where  performing
                         military service  would  include  crimes  or  acts
                         falling under regulation 7.

48.   Article 9(1) and (2) of the Qualification Directive refer to  acts  in
      the plural whereas Regulations 2, 5(1) and 5(2) refer to an act in the
      singular. We do not think that this results in any real difference  in
      transposition, because persecution can result from a  single  act,  as
      well as from an accumulation of acts. The  only  other  difference  in
      wording  is  that  Article  9(2)(f)  of  the  Qualification  Directive
      provides one further example of an act of persecution - namely,  "acts
      of a gender-specific or child-specific nature" which is not  mentioned
      in Regulation 5(2) of the Protection Regulations. However, we  do  not
      think that this leads to  any  real  error  of  transposition  because
      Regulation 5(2) only sets out examples of acts of persecution  and  we
      are therefore able to take account of the  further  example  given  in
      Article  9(2)(f)  of  the  Qualification  Directive  if  that  becomes
      relevant in any particular case. It was not raised as an issue in this
      case.

49.   With regard to the meaning  of  serious  harm,  Regulation  2  of  the
      Protection Regulations states that "serious harm" means  serious  harm
      as defined in the Immigration Rules. Paragraph 339C of the Immigration
      Rules states:

      Paragraph 339C:  Serious harm consists of:

                       (i)   the death penalty or execution;

                       (ii)  unlawful killing;

             (iii)       torture  or  inhuman  or  degrading  treatment   or
                            punishment  of  a  person  in  the  country  of
                            return; or

            (iv) serious and individual  threat  to  a  civilian's  life  or
                            person by reason of indiscriminate violence  in
                            situations of international or  internal  armed
                            conflict.

50.   "Serious harm " is defined in the Qualification Directive  in  Article
      15. We note that Article 15 of the Qualification  Directive  does  not
      make any reference to "unlawful killing". However, Article 15  of  the
      Qualification Directive refers to "torture  or  inhuman  or  degrading
      treatment or punishment" which, in our view, is wide enough to include
      "unlawful killing".

51.   Given that the Protection  Regulations  and  the  amended  Immigration
      Rules correctly transpose the meaning of persecution and serious harm,
      we see no reason to refer to the Qualification Directive  directly  in
      deciding the issues in this appeal. We refer instead to the Protection
      Regulations and the amended Immigration Rules which are  part  of  our
      domestic legislation.

      The minimum level of severity

52.   In order for an act, or for a  series  of  acts,  to  be  regarded  as
      persecution, the act or acts must be such  that,  taken  cumulatively,
      they reach a minimum level of severity. It is also clear from  decided
      cases with regard to Article 3 (which continue  to  apply)  that  ill-
      treatment must reach a minimum level of severity before Article 3 will
      be engaged and that the level of severity  which  must  be  shown  is,
      effectively, the same as must be shown for persecution to  result.  In
      our view, the position remains the same. Furthermore, in our view, the
      minimum level of severity or the threshold which the feared harm  must
      reach before it can be regarded as "serious harm" under paragraph 339C
      is the same as for persecution and for Article 3. This means that  the
      minimum  level  of  severity  for  treatment   to   be   regarded   as
      "persecution" under the Protection Regulations, "serious  harm"  under
      paragraph 339C and ill-treatment contrary to Article 3 of the ECHR  is
      the same. Neither Mr. Bandegani  nor  Mr.  Norton  sought  to  suggest
      otherwise.

      Country guidance cases

53.   Mr. Bandegani relied on the Tribunal's Determination in WK (Article  8
      - expulsion cases - review of case-law) Palestinian Territories [2006]
      UKAIT 00070. Mr. Norton also referred to this  case  in  his  skeleton
      argument (see paragraph 10 of the Respondent's skeleton  argument).  A
      copy of this determination is included in the Respondent's bundle.

54.   However, the WK case was primarily concerned  with  a  review  of  the
      case-law  on  Article  8.  Insofar  as  reference  was  made  to   the
      background evidence, the Tribunal did  not  embark  upon  an  in-depth
      analysis of it. Indeed, the Tribunal appeared content  to  accept  the
      observations of the Adjudicator in that case stating, at paragraph 80,
      that the Occupied Territories were in an area of the world  which  was
      'in the Adjudicator's words "effectively a war zone"'. Whilst we would
      not take issue with the Tribunal's own description of the situation in
      the Occupied Territories at paragraph 74 of its Determination  in  the
      following terms:

            "... the very unusual set of country  conditions  prevailing  in
           the destination country, namely, that the  Occupied  Territories
           is afflicted by significant levels of violence in the context of
           an ongoing armed struggle being conducted by various Palestinian
           organisations against the Israeli authorities and there is  also
           a   very   significant   presence   of   fundamentalist   Muslim
           organisations.......

      we have to bear in mind, firstly, that the Tribunal  in  the  WK  case
      did not conduct  an  in-depth  analysis  of  the  general   background
      evidence relating to the situation in the  Occupied  Territories  and,
      secondly, that the Tribunal's brief all-embracing observation  in  the
      quote above does not help us to decide the  specific  questions  which
      have been raised in the instant case, which include whether denial  of
      re-entry per se amounts to persecution, whether there is a  real  risk
      of ill-treatment if the Appellant travels from the point  of  re-entry
      to his hometown in Tulkarm, whether the cumulative difficulties  which
      Palestinian Arabs face in the Occupied Territories is such that it can
      be said that Palestinian Arabs are a persecuted ethnic group,  whether
      the Appellant would be at real risk on account of being a  young  male
      Palestinian Arab from Tulkarm or the northern part of  the  West  Bank
      and whether (if he had to stay in Jericho) he would face a  real  risk
      of persecution and/or of  suffering  general  conditions  sufficiently
      severe as to amount to serious harm or treatment in breach of  Article
      3. Thirdly, this case was not a country  guidance  case  and  was  not
      reported for what it said about country conditions.

55.   We are surprised that  the  parties  did  not  instead  refer  at  the
      hearing to the current country guidance case,  AB  &  others  (Risk  -
      Return - Israel Check Points) Palestine CG [2005] UKIAT 00046, a  copy
      of which we found  in  the  Appellant's  bundle  C.  As  the  Practice
      Directions (paragraph 18) makes clear, country guidance cases must  be
      followed unless there is (compelling)  fresh  evidence.  AB  &  others
      involved three failed asylum seekers  of  Palestinian  Arab  ethnicity
      from the Occupied Territories. The first and  second  appellants  were
      formerly resident in  the  West  Bank  and  the  third  appellant  was
      formerly resident in the Gaza Strip. The respondent proposed to remove
      the first appellant to "Palestinian authority (West Bank)", the second
      appellant to "the West Bank (Palestine)" and the removal directions in
      the case of the third appellant were formally amended to "Gaza in  the
      Occupied Territories". In  the  case  of  all  three  appellants,  the
      Adjudicators  had  found  that  there  was  nothing  in  the  personal
      histories of the appellants which indicated  that  they  would  be  of
      adverse interest to the Israeli authorities.  Accordingly,  all  three
      appellants relied on a risk of persecution or treatment in  breach  of
      their human rights on account of their Palestinian Arab ethnicity. The
      question before the Tribunal was whether there  was  a  real  risk  of
      persecution  of  a  returned  failed  asylum  seeker  of   Palestinian
      ethnicity from the Occupied Territories at the point of return when he
      will  have  to  pass  through  a  checkpoint  manned  by  the  Israeli
      authorities in order to regain the West Bank or the Gaza Strip as  the
      case may be (paragraph 1 of the Determination). There  are  four  main
      points which emerge from this Determination, which we would  summarise
      as follows:

      (a)   that there is no evidence before the Tribunal  that  anyone  has
           ever been successfully removed  to  any  part  of  the  Occupied
           Territories or that the Respondent would seek the procurement of
           any Emergency Travel Documents  other  than  such  as  might  be
           issued via the Palestine  General  Delegates  Office  in  London
           (paragraph 24 of the Determination);

      (b)   if there were any prospect of  a  successful  return,  it  would
           inevitably follow that each appellant would  be  placed  in  the
           control of the Israeli authorities at the point of entry to  the
           Occupied Territories. The Tribunal did  not  consider  that  the
           background evidence supported the  contention  that  this  would
           expose any of the appellants to a real risk of persecution or  a
           breach of  their  protected  human  rights.  The  only  relevant
           evidence is that the Israeli  security  forces  will  not  allow
           ethnic Palestinian Arabs being forcibly returned from abroad  to
           re-enter  the  Occupied  Territories  (paragraph   33   of   the
           Determination);

      (c)   the Tribunal concluded that the general evidence  does  not,  in
           its judgment, justify the conclusion that all ethnic Palestinian
           Arabs  from  the  Occupied  Territories  are  at  real  risk  of
           arbitrary detention and ill-treatment by the Israeli authorities
           (paragraph 32 of the Determination);

      (d)    the  mere  fact  of  being  stateless,  whilst  this  may  pose
           difficulties for each of the appellants,  could  not  of  itself
           amount to persecution or  a  breach  of  the  appellants'  human
           rights because there is no country which is excluding them  from
           a nationality to which they would otherwise be  entitled.  There
           is no state of Palestine to offer them citizenship  and  neither
           is there any international obligation on the State of Israel who
           retain a large measure of control over the Occupied  Territories
           to offer them citizenship (paragraph 35 of the Determination).

56.   Proposition (a) in the AB & others case should now be  read  in  light
      of the judgment of the Court of Appeal in the Gedow case (supra).  The
      Court of Appeal's judgment in the AK case (supra) is also relevant. It
      is clear from these cases that we are not concerned with the method of
      removal up  until  the  point  when  the  Appellant  will  be  seeking
      permission to cross from Jordan across the King  Hussein  Bridge  into
      the Occupied Territories. It is clear from the AK case  that  we  must
      consider what would happen to the Appellant at the border as  well  as
      whether after entry, if  he  is  permitted  re-entry  at  the  Israeli
      checkpoint at this bridge. Before we consider the  background evidence
      relating to treatment at  the  border  and  after  re-entry,  we  will
      consider the argument advanced on the Appellant's behalf that, if  the
      Appellant is refused re-entry,  such  refusal  in  itself  amounts  to
      persecution.

      Whether refusal of re-entry into the Occupied Territories  amounts  to
      persecution

57.   At paragraph 5.3 of his skeleton argument,  Mr.  Bandegani  relies  on
      paragraph 28 of the judgment in the AK case in order  to  support  his
      argument that the refusal of re-entry at  the  border  is  capable  of
      amounting to persecution or serious harm. However, paragraph 28 of the
      Court of Appeal's judgment in the  AK  case  should  not  be  read  in
      isolation from the remainder of the judgment. Albeit by way of obiter,
      Lord Justice Richards said:

      (a)   that the argument of the appellant in that case that  denial  of
           re-entry by the Israeli authorities to the place of  his  former
           habitual residence would amount to persecution  was  a  line  of
           argument which was beset with difficulties (paragraphs 44 to  47
           of the judgment). His lordship said:

                 I am far from  satisfied  that  there  is  a  true  analogy
                 between a state's  denial  of  entry  to  one  of  its  own
                 citizens and denial of entry to a  stateless  person  (who,
                 unlike a citizen, has no right of entry into the  country),
                 or that denial of entry to a stateless person can  be  said
                 to constitute a denial of  his  third  category  rights  of
                 sufficient severity to amount  to  persecution  (especially
                 given  the  possibility  of  his  exercising  those  rights
                 elsewhere).

      (b)   that  it  was  unnecessary  to  deal  in  any  detail  with  the
           submission on behalf of the appellant that  the  denial  of  re-
           entry to the Occupied Territories by reason of  the  appellant's
           Palestinian  identity  was  capable  of  constituting  degrading
           treatment contrary to Article 3 of the ECHR.

58.   In our judgment, in the event that a Palestinian Arab  is  denied  re-
      entry to the Occupied Territories at the Israeli end of  the  crossing
      at  King  Hussein  Bridge,  this  would  not  amount  to  persecution.
      Palestinian Arabs from the Occupied Territories are stateless and have
      no right of re-entry into the Occupied Territories unlike  a  citizen.
      For the same reason, we do not consider that the  denial  of  re-entry
      would in itself amount to degrading or inhuman treatment  contrary  to
      Article 3. Although the judgment in the AK case was  delivered  before
      the Protection Regulations and cmnd 6918 came into force,  we  see  no
      reason to take a different view in  relation  to  serious  harm  under
      paragraph 339C.

      The re-entry route and the documents needed to seek re-entry:

59.   There is some useful information in  the  Respondent's  bundle  (which
      does not appear to be disputed) concerning the route by which (if  the
      Appellant is removed) he would be approaching the West Bank  in  order
      to seek re-entry, and the documents which he would need to  have.  The
      relevant information is as follows:

      (a)   According to the Respondent's supplementary statement  at  pages
           9  and  10  of  the  Respondent's  supplementary   bundle,   the
           Respondent has confirmed  the  following  with  the  Palestinian
           General Delegates Authority (PGDA) in London:

            (i)  removals of Palestinian Arabs to the West Bank  via  Israel
                 using Ben Gurion Airport is not effective unless the person
                 in question exited via  that  route  with  the  appropriate
                 permission and documentation;

            (ii) removals of Palestinian Arabs to the West Bank  via  Jordan
                 is currently the only effective  route  for  those  holding
                 Palestinian documentation and the PGDA have confirmed  that
                 the Jordanian authorities are content to let those  with  a
                 valid passport pass through their territory.

      (b)   The bridge which crosses the Jordan River and  connects  Jericho
           in the West Bank to the country  of  Jordan  is  known  by  many
           names. It is known to the Israelis as the  Allenby  Bridge,  the
           Jordanians as the King Hussein Bridge and the Palestinian  Arabs
           as  the  Al-Karemeh   Bridge   (according   to   the   Wikipedia
           encyclopaedia on page 19 of the  Respondent's  bundle).  Another
           name for this bridge is  the  Malik  Hussein  Bridge  (paragraph
           numbered 3 of the "Travel Information and tips"  issued  by  the
           International Solidarity Movement (ISM) (undated but  downloaded
           on 13 November 2006);

      (c)   The Wikipedia article on page  19  of  the  Respondent's  bundle
           also states that the West Bank side of the bridge is  considered
           a border entry point by Israel and is controlled exclusively  by
           the Israelis but the Jordanian authorities do not recognise this
           as  an  international  border  entry  point  and  therefore  (in
           contrast to other border crossings with  Israel)  do  not  grant
           entry visas  to  foreign  passport  holders  at  this  crossing.
           Although we recognise that  the  Jordanian  authorities  do  not
           recognise this as an  international  border  crossing,  we  have
           referred to it as a border crossing in  this  Determination  for
           convenience in order to mark the point when a returnee  will  be
           requesting the Israeli security forces  for  permission  to  re-
           enter the West Bank;

      (d)   Documents: The article  by  the  Forced  Migration  Organisation
           (FMO) entitled "Palestinian Refugees  in  Jordan"  (undated  but
           downloaded on 13 November  2006  (at  pages  90  to  98  of  the
           Respondent's supplementary bundle) states (at pages 93 and 94 of
           the Respondent's supplementary bundle) that "Cards of  Crossing"
           issued by the Jordanian authorities are of three types:

            (i)  a Yellow card (family reunification  card)  indicates  that
                 the holder is a permanent resident in Jordan and is able to
                 go to the West Bank because  of  the  family  reunification
                 card s/he holds;

            (ii) a Green card indicates that the holder lives  in  the  West
                 Bank and that his/her visit to Jordan is temporary;

            (iii)      a Blue card is issued to "Gazans" who  live  in  Gaza
                 or Jordan and it indicates that the holders  were  included
                 in family reunification cards as  being  able  to  live  in
                 Gaza.

      The likelihood of re-entry being permitted

60.   In AB and others, the Tribunal had evidence before it which  indicated
      that the Israeli security forces will not  allow  ethnic  Palestinians
      being  forcibly  returned  from  abroad  to  re-enter   the   Occupied
      Territories. In the Respondent's supplementary bundle which is  before
      us, there is evidence that the King Hussein  Bridge  is  a  very  busy
      crossing between Jordan and the West Bank - for example, we have noted
      that the "Travel Information and Tips" issued by ISM (pages 20  to  24
      of the Respondent's Supplementary bundle) refers to this bridge in the
      following terms:

            This is where Palestinians cross back and forth into Jordan  and
           it's usually crowded.

61.   However, there is no indication in this document or  elsewhere  as  to
      whether Palestinian Arabs being forcibly returned from abroad would be
      successful in gaining re-entry into the West  Bank  via  King  Hussein
      Bridge. Mr. Norton did not  draw  our  attention  to  any   background
      evidence to persuade us to take a different view from  that  taken  by
      the Tribunal in the AB and others. Mr. Bandegani drew our attention to
      the report of Al Haq for the period between April and  June  2006.  We
      found an extract of this in the CAABU  report,  on  page  230  of  the
      Appellant's bundle A. The extract reads:

             Israel  has  revoked  the  residency  rights  of  thousands  of
           Palestinians living in the West Bank on  the  pretext  of  their
           having lived abroad for prolonged periods. These individuals now
           find   themselves   separated   from    their    families    and
           livelihoods.......... Today, a number of  them  are  trapped  in
           Jordan after repeated attempts to return to their homes  in  the
           West Bank.

      The Appellant's sister was able to re-enter the West Bank  in  January
      2005 or January 2006. However,  the  evidence  is  that  she  returned
      voluntarily. Furthermore, the evidence from Al Haq is more recent.  On
      the whole of the evidence, we conclude that  the  Tribunal's  view  on
      this point in AB and others holds good.

62.   If a Palestinian Arab formerly resident in the West Bank who is  being
      removed to the  West  Bank  is  refused  re-entry  into  the  Occupied
      Territories at the Israeli checkpoint on the King Hussein Bridge, then
      he would simply have to turn back into Jordan.  The  country  guidance
      case on the situation of Palestinians in Jordan is NA (Palestinians  -
      Not at general risk) Jordan CG [2005] UKIAT 00094. That  case  decided
      that ethnic Palestinians, whether or not  recognised  as  citizens  of
      Jordan, are not persecuted or treated in  breach  of  their  protected
      human rights by reason  of  their  ethnicity,  although  they  may  be
      subject there to discrimination in certain respects  in  their  social
      lives  in  a  manner  which  does  not  cross   the   threshold   from
      discrimination to persecution or breach of protected human rights.  No
      fresh evidence has  been  adduced  to  suggest  otherwise.  Given  our
      decision that refusal  of  re-entry  does  not  of  itself  amount  to
      persecution or serious harm or degrading or inhuman treatment, we must
      determine the appeal on asylum grounds and in relation to humanitarian
      protection (both of which  require  determination  of  an  appellant's
      status as a refugee or someone entitled to humanitarian protection) on
      the hypothetical assumption that he would be permitted to re-enter the
      Occupied Territories and decide whether he  would  thereafter  receive
      ill-treatment amounting  to  persecution  or  serious  harm.  In  this
      regard, we make the point that the  background evidence before us does
      not distinguish between the situation of Palestinian Arabs who are not
      being forcibly returned and those who are,  nor  does  it  distinguish
      between those Palestinian Arabs who have never been abroad  and  those
      who have lived abroad for some time. Although Dr.  George  deals  with
      "the practicality of forced return" at paragraphs  41  to  46  of  his
      report, he does not describe any specific instances of  the  treatment
      at the Israeli checkpoint on the King Hussein Bridge  (or  thereafter)
      of Palestinian Arabs who are being forcibly returned or who have lived
      abroad. It may be that the lack of specific evidence in this regard is
      because forced removals may not be taking place. We cannot say whether
      that is the case.

63.   We therefore consider the  background evidence which is before  us  to
      decide what general conclusions can be drawn from it as  to  the  risk
      facing Palestinian Arabs in general, and young Palestinian Arabs males
      from the  West  Bank  or  the  northern  part  of  the  West  Bank  in
      particular. We then consider whether we are able properly to draw  any
      inferences from the evidence before us that the risk for a Palestinian
      Arab who is forcibly returned or who has lived abroad for some time is
      increased such that there is a real risk  of  persecution  or  serious
      harm. Similarly, our  attention  was  not  drawn  to  any   background
      evidence which describes instances of  the  treatment  of  Palestinian
      Arabs at the border crossing on the King Hussein Bridge.  Accordingly,
      we have considered the evidence as to  the  situation  of  Palestinian
      Arabs inside the West Bank and then considered whether any  inferences
      can properly be drawn that the risk at the border crossing on the King
      Hussein Bridge for someone in the Appellant's situation - i.e. a young
      male Palestinian Arab from the northern part of the West Bank  who  is
      being forcibly returned and/or who has lived abroad for some time - is
      increased such that there is a real risk  of  persecution  or  serious
      harm.

64.   Before us, the parties' submissions were made on the  assumption  that
      the Tribunal was obliged to decide whether the Appellant would  be  at
      real risk of treatment in  breach  of  Article  3  in  the  West  Bank
      regardless of our answer to the question as to  whether  he  would  be
      able to re-enter the West Bank. We  are  prepared  to  determine  this
      appeal on the basis of that assumption. Accordingly,  we  will  decide
      whether, if the Appellant regains re-entry into the West Bank,  it  is
      reasonably likely that he would be subjected to persecution or serious
      harm or Article 3 ill-treatment.

      The report of Dr. A. George - our general observations

65.   We have before us a report from an expert, Dr A. George.  With  regard
      to his background, we have  noted  that  he  states,  inter  alia,  as
      follows: From 1984 until the present time, Dr George has worked on his
      own account as a writer, journalist,  consultant  and  researcher.  He
      says  he  has  written  regularly  for  a  wide  range  of  specialist
      publications and national  publications  in  the  United  Kingdom  and
      Europe. Since May 1996 he has been a consultant on Middle East matters
      to Kroll Associates,  the  world's  leading  investigations  and  risk
      management company. From 1984 until 1992, he was  the  Lebanon  author
      for the Economist  Intelligence  Unit,  the  consultancy  arm  of  the
      Economist organisation.  In that capacity, he produced, inter alia, an
      annual review on political and economic developments in Lebanon during
      years in which the country's civil war was at its height. Dr George is
      a Senior Associate Member of St. Anthony's College, Oxford University.
      St. Anthony's has one of the world's leading Middle East centres.  Dr.
      George states that, since the late  1970s,  he  has  studied,  written
      about and commentated very extensively on the Palestine question,  "in
      all its ramifications", and he says  he  is  very  familiar  with  the
      history and present situation of the Palestinians. During the last  35
      years, Dr George has travelled  throughout  the  Middle  East,  having
      visited Turkey, Syria, Lebanon, Jordan, Israel,  the  Israeli-occupied
      West Bank, and other countries. He says he has considerable experience
      as an expert witness in asylum cases  involving  applicants  from  the
      Middle East, including the occupied Palestinian Territories.

66.   Dr. George refers to his  expertise  on  the  region  as  having  been
      accepted by the courts. By way of example, he cites the case of  Jasim
      [2006] EWCA Civ 342. He states that, in that case, Lord Justice Sedley
      said of him (Dr.  George)  that  he  is  "an  experienced  writer  and
      consultant upon and analyst of Middle Eastern political  and  economic
      affairs". This is to be found at paragraph 15 of the judgment. We bear
      this in mind, as we do the final two sentences of paragraph 22 of  the
      judgment. We also bear in mind that, at paragraph 44 of the  judgment,
      Lord Justice Pill referred  to  Dr.  George  in  the  following  terms
      (paragraph 44):

            That Dr Alan George was qualified to provide the report on  Iraq
                 he did is not  in  doubt  and  the  report  was  a  helpful
                 contribution to the in-county information available to  the
                 immigration judge......

67.   However, Sir Peter Gibson and Lord  Justice  Pill  gave  the  majority
      judgments in  that  case,  holding  that  the  Immigration  Judge  was
      entitled not to accept the opinion of Dr. George as  to  the  risk  on
      relocation. Accordingly, we considered that the fact that  Dr.  George
      was referred to in complimentary terms in the judgment does not oblige
      us to accept his opinion. Indeed,  we  are  obliged  to  evaluate  his
      opinion, which we do below.

68.   Dr. George's reports have been  considered  by  the  Tribunal  in  the
      following reported cases:

            KK IH HE (Palestinians - Lebanon - camps)  Palestine  CG  [2004]
           UKIAT 00293;
            AR (Kurd: not risk per se) Syria CG [2006] UKAIT 00048; and
            LM (Educated women - Chaldo- Assyrians - risk)  Iraq  CG  [2006]
           UKAIT 00060.

      (a)   In the LM case, Dr. George is referred to at  paragraphs  9,  53
           and 54 of the Determination. We cannot see any in-depth analysis
           in that case of the general expertise of Dr. George.

      (b)   In the KK IH HE case, the Tribunal heard oral evidence from  Dr.
           George,  whose  written  and  oral  evidence  is  summarised  at
           paragraphs 18 to 43 of  the  Determination  in  that  case.  The
           Tribunal assessed the evidence of Dr. Joffe (from whom  it  also
           heard evidence and  Dr.  George  at  paragraph  85  onwards.  At
           paragraph 86, the Tribunal expressed concern about the fact that
           Dr. George had only visited Lebanon once in 1996.  The  Tribunal
           found surprising Dr.  George's  statement  that  he  can  better
           monitor the Middle East from London than on the ground as people
           speak more freely in London.  The  Tribunal  considered  that  a
           person would be far more likely to be able to  get  a  realistic
           feel for the conditions in the camps if  (in  the  case  of  Dr.
           George) he had visited the camps more recently than in 1996. The
           Tribunal  found  itself  in  agreement  with  the   Respondent's
           representative concerning the occasional sweeping generalisation
           to be found in the evidence of Dr. George. The Tribunal did  not
           consider that it can properly  be  said,  as  contended  by  Dr.
           George, that  conditions  in  the  camps  are  life  threatening
           generally. Otherwise and, in general,  the  Tribunal  found  the
           evidence of  Dr.  George  was  essentially  consonant  with  the
           various country reports of specialist bodies.

      (c)   We note that the AR case  concerned  Syrian  Kurds.  In  the  AR
           case, the Tribunal also heard oral  evidence  from  Dr.  George,
           whose written and oral evidence is summarised at  paragraphs  27
           to 59 of  the  Determination  in  that  case.  At  paragraph  77
           onwards,  the  Tribunal  commented  on  Dr.  George's   evidence
           referring to him as "clearly a knowledgeable witness..... [with]
           a lengthy history of commentating  on  Middle  Eastern  matters"
           (paragraph 77). However, at paragraph 78, the Tribunal expressed
           concern with the efforts Dr. George made as to the truth or lack
           of it concerning the suggestions  that  significant  numbers  of
           Syrian Kurds  were  to  be  granted  citizenship.  The  Tribunal
           considered that Dr. George seemed to have gone to a source  from
           which the answer given could be expected and that  the  Tribunal
           would  have  expected  Dr.  George  to  have  carried  out  more
           extensive research than he did. At paragraph  79,  the  Tribunal
           stated that, with that caveat in mind, the  Tribunal  considered
           that Dr. George's evidence is in  general  consistent  with  the
           background evidence and deserving of weight being attached to it
           as a consequence.

69.   Dr. George's report, which is dated 15 May 2006,  pre-dates  the  date
      of promulgation of the AR case and the date on which it was  added  to
      the publicly-available country guidance list on 8 June  2006.  We  can
      therefore understand why he made no mention of the AR  case.  However,
      it is unfortunate that, whilst he referred to the  Jasim  case  as  an
      example, he overlooked mentioning the KK IH HE case in which  he  gave
      oral evidence to the Tribunal and in which the Tribunal  commented  in
      more specific terms on his evidence than the generalised  comments  in
      the Jasim case. Whilst we note that Dr. George makes clear that he was
      referring to the Jasim case only by way of example, we do not consider
      that he was entitled to state that his "expertise has been accepted by
      the Courts" without also drawing the attention of the  reader  to  the
      reservations expressed on his evidence in the KK IH HE case.

70.   The KK IH HE case is included in the Appellant's bundle B  (pages  160
      to 177 of bundle B). We consider that we are  also  entitled  to  have
      regard to the AR case; it is  a  reported  case  and  deals  with  Dr.
      George's evidence on part of the Middle East. We consider that we  are
      entitled to have regard not only to the general observations about Dr.
      George in the Jasim case but also  to  the  Tribunal's  more  specific
      observations in the KK IH HE and AR cases. We are not aware  that  the
      observations of the Tribunal in those cases to which we have  referred
      have been disapproved of by the Court of  Appeal.  It  may  be  argued
      that, for example, the fact that the Tribunal in the  KK  IH  HE  case
      considered that Dr. George made occasional sweeping comments does  not
      mean that Dr. George has done so in the report before us. That  is  of
      course entirely correct. Similarly, it would be  entirely  correct  to
      say that the KK IH HE and the AR cases concern different countries and
      that accordingly they have no bearing on the question  as  to  whether
      Dr. George's opinion in the  report  which  is  before  us  should  be
      accepted  or  rejected.  An  individual's  expertise  concerning   the
      situation in different countries may not be the same  and  it  may  be
      argued that he has greater expertise to opine  on  the  situation  for
      Palestinians in the Occupied Territories than in Syria or the camps in
      Lebanon.  We  bear  that  in  mind.  However,  just  as  it  would  be
      appropriate to bear in mind the complimentary observations  about  Dr.
      George in the Jasim case, so too is it relevant to bear  in  mind  the
      reservations of the Tribunal in the KK IH HE and in AR cases. However,
      we should make clear that, even if  we  had  not  been  aware  of  the
      Tribunal's  reservations,  we  would  nevertheless  have  reached  the
      conclusions we have reached in the instant appeal (see below).

71.   As far as we can see, Dr. George last visited Israel and the  Occupied
      Territories in 1971 (paragraph 9 of his report). That  is  a  relevant
      matter and we bear it in mind although it does not disqualify him from
      giving an opinion. Of more concern is the use by  Dr.  George  of  the
      word "colonisation" in paragraph  25,  the  first  sentence  of  which
      reads:

            "As well as persisting with its colonisation of the  West  Bank,
           Israel is persisting with its human  rights  violations  in  the
           territory."

72.   The use of the word "colonisation" is unfortunate. It may be that  Dr.
      George was merely referring to the creation of Israeli settlements  in
      the Occupied Territories. However, the word is often  generally  taken
      to portray the idea of a more powerful country placing another country
      under its power and taking over its legislative and security functions
      and infrastructure. It is a term which is  redolent  of  old  imperial
      colonial powers. The international  community  does  not  recognise  a
      "State of Palestine". There is therefore no question of Israel placing
      another country under its power.  We  prefer  the  more  neutral  word
      "occupation" which does no more than convey the  fact  that  the  West
      Bank and the Gaza Strip are occupied.

73.   There were therefore features of Dr. George's report which led  us  to
      attach less weight to it than we would otherwise have. We  also  found
      that his opinion that the northern part of the West Bank has become  a
      particular focus of attention by the Israeli security  forces  is  not
      consistent with the rest of the  background evidence (see paragraph 88
      below).

74.   Nevertheless, we are of the view that, in general  terms,  his  report
      gave useful information, in particular with regard to  the  historical
      background at paragraphs 13 to 23 of  the  report.  We  will  consider
      other aspects of his report below, although we make it clear  that  we
      do not intend to embark upon a precise paragraph-by-paragraph analysis
      of Dr. George's report or the other  background evidence to  which  we
      have  been  referred.  Such  an  approach  would  not  be   realistic,
      especially given that the Appellant's bundle A alone comprises of  476
      pages. However, we stress that our assessment is based on the whole of
      the evidence before us.

      The separation wall and the advisory opinion of the ICJ

75.   At paragraph 24 of his report, Dr.  George  describes  the  separation
      wall and makes the point that its route does  not  coincide  with  the
      "Green Line" marking Israel's 1967 frontier and that the area  between
      the wall and the Green Line constitutes about 10 per cent of the  area
      of the West Bank. This is the subject of the advisory opinion  of  the
      ICJ on the question posed to it which the ICJ sets out at paragraph  1
      on page 7 of its report and according to which the ICJ  was  asked  to
      give  its  opinion  on  the  legal  consequences  arising   from   the
      construction of the separation wall in the Occupied Territories. It is
      important, in our view, to bear in mind the terms  of  the  resolution
      adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations and which led to
      its decision to submit this question to the ICJ for  an  opinion.  The
      full text of this resolution, which is quoted at paragraph  1  of  the
      opinion of the ICJ, refers to the principles of  the  Charter  of  the
      United Nations and the fact that the development of friendly relations
      among nations is amongst the purposes and principles of this  Charter.
      It states that the General Assembly affirms the  necessity  of  ending
      the conflict on the basis  of  a  two-state  solution  of  Israel  and
      Palestine living side by side in  peace  and  security  based  on  the
      Armistice Line of 1949. When seen in the context of the terms  of  the
      resolution adopted by the General Assembly of the United  Nations  and
      the reasons for its decision to submit the question to  the  ICJ,  the
      opinion of the ICJ (that the construction of the separation wall,  and
      its associated regime, is contrary to international  law)  is  clearly
      important.

76.   However, the Tribunal is concerned with the reality of  the  situation
      as it applies to individual appellants. We have to decide  whether  it
      can be said  that  the  individual  returnee  faces  a  real  risk  of
      persecution or serious harm or treatment in breach of  Article  3.  In
      our view, the lawfulness or otherwise of the separation wall  and  the
      occupation by the Israeli authorities of land outside the  Green  Line
      does not affect the outcome of an appeal if the  individual  appellant
      does not claim to have suffered from any loss of any land due  to  the
      building of the separation  wall  or  to  have  to  pass  between  the
      separation wall  and  the  Green  Line  -  for  example,  because  the
      individual in question  has  land  between  the  Green  Line  and  the
      separation wall which he needs to look after and which would therefore
      necessitate  his  having  to  endure,  on  a  more   frequent   basis,
      restrictions in travel or  movement  across  the  separation  wall  by
      having to pass through the additional checkpoints along the separation
      wall.

77.   If the personal history of an  individual  Palestinian  Arab  is  such
      that it is reasonably likely that he/she would  be  suspected  by  the
      Israeli security forces of being involved in suicide bombing  missions
      or terrorist activities against Israel or Israeli settlements,  it  is
      reasonably likely that he/she would be arrested and detained and  held
      in "administrative detention". This is so whether  the  individual  is
      picked up in military incursions,  round  ups  or  at  checkpoints.  A
      returnee who is reasonably likely to  fall  under  such  suspicion  is
      reasonably likely to  be  persecuted  or  subjected  to  ill-treatment
      amounting to serious harm (or in breach of their rights under  Article
      3) although questions as to their possible exclusion under Article  1F
      of the Geneva Convention or paragraph 339C of  the  Immigration  Rules
      may then arise.

78.   We have been asked to examine  whether  a  Palestinian  Arab  who  has
      nothing in his personal history which would draw the adverse attention
      of the Israeli security forces would nevertheless fall under suspicion
      by the Israeli security  forces  of  involvement  in  suicide  bombing
      missions or terrorist activities against Israel or Israeli settlements
      by virtue solely of being a Palestinian Arab male aged between 4 years
      and 40 years who is from Tulkarm in the West Bank or another  part  of
      the northern West Bank. Given the extensive nature of the   background
      evidence before us, we have extended our enquiry to Palestinian  Arabs
      males of this age who are from other parts of the West  Bank  or  from
      the Gaza Strip.

       Israeli  military  incursions  and   operations   in   the   Occupied
           Territories

79.   At paragraph 33 of his report, Dr. George  states  that  the  northern
      part of the West Bank, including Tulkarm (the Appellant's home  area),
      has become a particular focus for "Israeli  oppression".  The  reasons
      given at paragraph 33 of his report are that the  northern  West  Bank
      contains several major Palestinian population centres "which have been
      important centres of  militancy,  and  whence  a  high  proportion  of
      Palestinian suicide bombers have emanated". In this  regard,  we  note
      and take into account the fact that Dr. George refers  to  an  article
      from the Guardian newspaper issue of 28 April 2006 which refers  to  a
      single cell of the Islamic Jihad from the northern  West  Bank  having
      been responsibility for six of the  last  seven  suicide  bombings  in
      Israel since February 2005. This evidence would tend  to  support  Dr.
      George's  opinion  that  the  northern  West   Bank   includes   major
      Palestinian population centres which ""have been important centres  of
      militancy". However, we have also analysed other  background  evidence
      before us to examine the validity of Dr.  George's  opinion  that  the
      northern part of the West Bank has become a particular focus.

80.   Our analysis of the other  background evidence before  us  is  as  set
      out below. In this analysis, we have divided the West  Bank  into  two
      geographical areas as follows:

            the northern part, which includes:      Nablus,  Jenin,  Tulkarm
           and Qalqilya
            the southern, which  includes:     Ramallah,  Jerusalem  (east),
                                       Jericho, Bethlehem and Hebron.

      We have also considered the  background evidence relating to the  Gaza
           Strip.

81.   We have noted the evidence below which describes particular  incidents
      in particular locations on the dates specified below (the page numbers
      relate to the Appellant's bundle A):

            Page
            No:  Date: Report by: Area / location
             157   28.05.06     Ma'an  News  Agency      Quaffin,  north  of
       Tulkarm
            158  26.05.06    Ma'an News Agency     Tulkarm
            159  19.05.06    Ma'an News Agency     Tulkarm
            161  15.05.06    Ma'an News Agency     Tulkarm
            162  10.05.06    Ma'an News Agency     Tulkarm
            163  07.05.06    Ma'an News Agency     Attil, north of Tulkarm
            164  07.05.06    Ma'an News Agency     Hebron and Tulkarm
            303  03.09.06    Reuters Foundation    Tulkarm
            304  31.08.06    Reuters Foundation    Nablus
            310  06.08.06    Reuters Foundation    Nablus
            315, 318 -  320    19.07.06    Reuters  Foundation     Nablus  +
       central Gaza Strip

82.   We take into account the fact that the article at page 303  refers  to
      the proximity of Tulkarm to the Israeli coastal town of Netanya which,
      according to the article, is a frequent target of Palestinian  suicide
      bombers since the uprising in 2000. However, we  considered  that  the
      evidence which we have set out in the table above does not  enable  us
      to decide whether the areas mentioned in the articles in question were
      targets  of  particular  focus,  because  there  was  little   or   no
      information about what was happening in other areas of the  West  Bank
      and  in  the  Gaza  Strip.  We  were  therefore  unable  to  make  any
      comparisons.

83.   In this regard, we found the following reports/press releases were  of
      greater  help,  because  sufficient  information  is  given   in   the
      reports/press releases about incursions/military operations during the
      periods covered by the reports/press releases to  enable  us  to  make
      comparisons and assess whether it is correct to say that the  northern
      part of the West Bank is a particular focus. We have conducted both  a
      quantitative  analysis  as  well  as  a   qualitative   analysis.   By
      "quantitative" analysis, we mean a simple comparison of numbers - that
      is to say, a comparison  between  the  numbers  of  incidents  in  the
      northern part of the West Bank with the numbers of incidents elsewhere
      i.e. in the southern part of the West Bank and in the Gaza  Strip.  By
      "qualitative analysis", we mean a comparison of the seriousness of the
      incursions/operations which are  reported  in  one  area  compared  to
      another.

84.    Our  quantitative  analysis  shows  that  the  numbers  of  incidents
      described  in  the  reports/press  releases  mentioned  below  in  the
      geographical areas are as follows:


            (NUMBER OF INCIDENTS REPORTED)
      Report (a) for the period   northern   southern    Gaza
      from 11.05.06 to 17.05.06:  West Bank  West Bank   Strip
      In or around Nablus    14
      In or around Jenin       7
      In or around Tulkarm     3
      In or around Hebron         11
      In or around Bethlehem        5
      In the Gaza Strip                 5
            ---- ----  ----
      TOTAL 24   16    5

      Press release (b) dated 07.07.06
      from the PCHR concerning Israeli
      operations on 06.07.06:
      In and around Nablus   1
      In and around Jenin    1
      In the Gaza Strip           (major operation)
            ---- ----  ----
      TOTAL 2    0     (major operation)

      Report (c) for the period   northern   southern    Gaza
      from 03.08.06 to 09.08.06:  West Bank  West Bank   Strip
      In or around Nablus    6
      In or around Jenin     8
      In or around Tulkarm   1
      In and around Qalqilya 3
      In and around Al-Bireh 1
      In or around Hebron         12
      In or around Bethlehem        4
      In and around Ramallah        2
      In and around Jericho         1
      In the Gaza Strip                 (major operation)
            ---- ----  ----
      TOTAL 19   19    (major operation)

      Report (d) for the period   northern   southern    Gaza
      from 10.08.06 to 16.08.06:  West Bank  West Bank   Strip
      In or around Nablus    5
      In or around Jenin     12
      In or around Tulkarm   2
      In and around Qalqilya 2
      In or around Hebron         13
      In or around Bethlehem        3
      In and around Ramallah        1
      In and around Jericho         1
      In and around Jerusalem             1
      In the Gaza Strip                 14
            ---- ----  ----
      TOTAL 21   19    14

            Report (a) is the report pages 195 to  218  of  the  Appellant's
           bundle A entitled: "Israeli  Violations  documented  during  the
           reporting period 11 to 17 May 2006" issued by the General  Union
           of Palestine Students (GUPS) (the details of the incursions  are
           at pages 199 to 211);
             Press  Release  (b)  is  the  press  release  from   the   PCHR
           (Palestinian Centre for Human Rights) dated 7 July 2006 at pages
           321 to 323 of the Appellant's bundle A;
            Report (c) is the weekly report from the  PCHR  for  the  period
           from 3 August to 9 August 2006 435 to  456  of  the  Appellant's
           bundle A (the details of the incursions  are  at  pages  440  to
           450); and
            Report (d) is the weekly report of the PCHR for the period  from
           10 to 16 August 2006 of the Appellant's bundle A (the details of
           the incursions are at pages 461 to 470; these include incursions
           into the Gaza strip, despite the title of this section  on  page
           461).

85.   Whilst reports (a) and (d) indicate that  the  northern  part  of  the
      West Bank experienced  a  greater  number  of  incursions  during  the
      periods concerned than the southern part of the West Bank or the  Gaza
      Strip (although only marginally greater than the southern part of  the
      West Bank for the period covered by report (d)), report (c) shows that
      the southern part of the West Bank  experienced  the  same  number  of
      incursions/operations as the northern part of  the  West  Bank  during
      that particular period. However, it is also clear  that,  during  this
      period, there was a major operation in the Gaza Strip in early  August
      2006 (see press report (c), at pages 440 to  445  of  the  Appellant's
      bundle A) which commenced on 2 August 2006 by land and air  and  which
      continued until 6 August 2006. There was further Israeli action by air
      and land in the Gaza Strip on 7, 8 and  9  August  2006.  Overall,  we
      considered that the seriousness of the  Israeli  action  in  the  Gaza
      Strip over the period covered by report (c)  was  such  that,  in  our
      view, the Gaza Strip was the main focus of attention  by  the  Israeli
      security forces during  this  period.  Similarly,  press  release  (b)
      indicates that there was a major operation in the Gaza Strip on 7 July
      2006. In the light of these materials, we are of the view that, in the
      period covered by reports (b) and (c), the Gaza strip received greater
      attention from the Israeli security  forces  than  the  West  Bank  in
      general or the northern part of the West Bank in particular.

86.   On the other hand, there is evidence indicating that,  in  April  2006
      to early May 2006, the northern part of the West Bank bore  the  brunt
      of Israeli incursions. In this regard, we noted that:

      (i)   the weekly report from the PCHR from 27.04.06 to 03.05.06  (page
           135 of the Appellant's bundle A)  refers  to  an  extra-judicial
           execution of a Palestinian activist in the  Gaza  Strip  and  37
           incursions  into  Palestinian  communities  in  the  West   Bank
           particularly Nablus;

      (ii)  the weekly report from the PCHR from period for 04  to  01.05.06
           (page 140 of the Appellant's  bundle  A)  refers  to  an  extra-
           judicial execution in the Gaza  Strip  and  38  incursions  into
           Palestinian communities in the West  Bank  particularly  Nablus;
           and

      (iii) the figures from the 2005 Annual Report by the  PCHR  which  are
           mentioned at paragraph 34 of Dr. George's report and which  show
           that, in 2005, a total of  123  civilians  were  killed  by  the
           Israeli security forces in the Occupied Territories as a  whole,
           27 of whom died in the Gaza Strip and 96 in the  West  Bank.  Of
           those who died in the West  Bank,  83  deaths  occurred  in  the
           northern part of the West Bank, with 28 in Nablus, 24  in  Jenin
           and 17 in Tulkarm.

87.   Viewing the evidence as a whole (including  the   background  evidence
      in the Appellant's bundles which we  have  not  specifically  referred
      to), we do not consider that any generalised conclusions can be  drawn
      that the West Bank is of greater  interest  to  the  Israeli  security
      forces than the Gaza Strip, or that the northern part of the West Bank
      is of greater interest than the southern part or the  Gaza  Strip.  We
      conclude that the situation fluctuates from time to time.

88.   We therefore reject Dr. George's opinion that the evidence shows  that
      the northern part of the West Bank has become a  particular  focus  of
      attention  by  the  Israeli  security  forces.  His  opinion  is   not
      consistent with the rest of the  background evidence before us. In our
      view, the reality is that the whole of the Occupied Territories is  an
      area of conflict where tension is extremely  high  due  to  the  armed
      struggle between Palestinians and the Israeli authorities.  Whilst  we
      have  every  sympathy  for  individuals  who  are  caught   in   these
      difficulties because they happen to  live  in  an  area  which,  at  a
      particular time, becomes a focus of attention by the Israeli  security
      forces in their pursuit of individuals  involved  in  suicide  bombing
      missions and terrorism, the evidence as a whole does not show that  it
      is reasonably likely that an individual who hails  from  the  northern
      part of the West Bank would be of  adverse  interest  to  the  Israeli
      security forces simply because of his place of origin.

89.    On  the  narrow  question  as  to  the  significance  of  Tulkarm  in
      comparison with the other regions in the northern  part  of  the  West
      Bank, we  consider  that,  whatever  the  perception  of  the  Israeli
      security forces at any particular time as to whether the northern part
      of the West Bank poses a greater threat than the southern part or  the
      Gaza Strip, Tulkarm on the whole  attracts  far  less  attention  than
      other areas in the northern West Bank such as, for example, Nablus and
      Jenin. However, we stress that the mere fact that an individual  comes
      from Nablus or Jenin or the Gaza Strip will not of itself give rise to
      a  real  risk  of  treatment  sufficiently  severe  as  to  amount  to
      persecution or serious harm (or treatment in breach of Article 3).  It
      is a factor which, in combination with other factors relating  to  the
      individual's personal history, may increase  the  risk  to  the  point
      where it can properly  be  said  that  there  is  real  risk  of  such
      treatment.

90.   Mr. Bandegani submitted that Palestinian Arab males  aged  between  14
      years and 40 years are at  real  risk.  From  the  reports  and  other
      background evidence which we have considered above, we can  see  that,
      when Israeli incursions / military operations into the West  Bank  and
      the Gaza Strip take place,  a  large  proportion  of  the  individuals
      arrested by the Israeli security forces fit the profile of being  male
      Palestinian Arabs within the age group of 16 to 35 although we  accept
      that there are some instances of individuals  below  16  or  above  35
      being included. We therefore accept that, during any  such  incursions
      or military operations in any region, Palestinian Arab  males  between
      16 and 35 years of age are more likely to be picked up by the  Israeli
      security forces than others but we do not accept that the range of age
      of those who are more likely to be picked up is as wide as the  14  to
      40 age group as suggested by Mr. Bandegani.

91.   However, there is an absence  of  information  before  us  as  to  the
      proportion of those arrested who fit this profile as compared  to  the
      size and overall composition of the community which is the subject  of
      the incursion or military operation. If it  were  the  case  that  all
      Palestinian Arabs males between 16 and 35 years  old  are  (for  those
      reasons alone) suspected by  the  Israeli  security  forces  of  being
      involved in suicide bombing missions or terrorist activities, we would
      expect to see reports of large scale arrests of  all  individuals  who
      fit this profile and who are discovered by the Israeli security forces
      during any incursions or military operations. That is clearly not  the
      evidence before us. To the contrary, the reports are  of  limited  and
      small numbers (in single figures) being picked  up  on  any  occasion,
      albeit that those who are arrested do in general fit  the  profile  we
      have described i.e. of being Palestinian Arab males between  16  years
      and 35 years of age. The overwhelming  impression  we  gain  from  the
      background evidence is that the Israeli  security  forces  search  for
      those  engaged  in  suicide  bombing  missions  and  other   terrorist
      activities. Whilst the fact that a Palestinian Arab male aged  between
      16 to 35 is  likely  to  lead  that  individual  to  be  more  closely
      examined, it is not reasonably likely that he would for those  reasons
      alone fall under  suspicion.  The  same  applies  in  the  case  of  a
      Palestinian Arab male aged between 16 and 35 who is from the  northern
      part of the West Bank. There must be something more to give rise to  a
      real risk of suspicion.

92.   In his report, Dr. George refers to evidence  as  to  the  numbers  of
      Palestinians killed or injured during Israeli military  incursions  or
      operations including shelling and extra-judicial execution  operations
      (see, for example, the final quote on page 8 and paragraph 29  of  the
      report). At paragraph 28 of Dr.  George's  report,  it  is  said,  for
      example, that 207 Palestinians  were  killed,  including  187  unarmed
      civilians. These figures are quoted from the 2005 Annual Report of the
      PCHR. This shows that  civilians  get  caught  up  in  incursions  and
      military operations by the Israeli security forces. It is not evidence
      that Palestinian Arabs are targeted simply  because  of  their  ethnic
      origin.

      Travel restrictions

93.   As a result of the 1993 Oslo Accord, the West Bank  was  divided  into
      three types of areas - areas A, B and C - denoting different levels of
      control by the Palestinian Authority and by  Israel.  The  Palestinian
      Authority had civilian and security  control  over  area  A  but  only
      civilian control in area B. After the Palestinian  uprising  in  2000,
      the Israeli forces resumed control over a number of areas within areas
      A, B and C, citing the failure of the Palestinian Authority  to  abide
      by its security responsibilities. The large colour map  we  have  been
      provided with shows that large  parts  of  areas  A  and  B  are  non-
      contiguous. Certain towns in areas A and B are almost wholly encircled
      by land denoted as area C - for example, Tulkarm and Qalqilya. On  the
      other hand, other parts of areas A and B appear to be contiguous - for
      example, there is a large area of contiguous areas  A  and  B  between
      Jenin and Nablus. The CAABU report states (page 224  and  225  of  the
      Appellant's bundle A):

            Since 1967, in various forms, Israel has monitored  and  limited
           the movement of Palestinians within and between the  West  Bank,
           East Jerusalem and  the  Gaza  Strip.  Since  1991,  Israel  has
           imposed a system by  which  Palestinians  need  individual  exit
           permits to travel to and from three areas: the West  Bank,  East
           Jerusalem, and the Gaza Strip. Since the roads between the north
           and south of the  West  Bank  pass  through  Jerusalem  movement
           within the West Bank itself became severely limited.

94.   It is common ground that the Israeli security forces  man  checkpoints
      throughout the West Bank which  impede  the  movement  of  Palestinian
      Arabs. Although we have not been supplied with a  map  which  includes
      the Gaza Strip, it is clear from  the  background  evidence  that  the
      Israeli security forces operate checkpoints in the  Gaza  Strip  which
      restrict the movement of  Palestinian  Arabs  within  the  Gaza  Strip
      itself as well as between  the  Gaza  Strip  and  the  West  Bank,  by
      whatever route.

95.   It is not disputed that the Israeli security forces operate  permanent
      checkpoints and "flying checkpoints" throughout  the  West  Bank,  and
      also in the Gaza  Strip.  "Flying  checkpoints"  appear  suddenly  and
      without warning. They are operated for unpredictable lengths of  time.
      At paragraph 38 of his report, Dr. George makes the point (and we  see
      no reason to take issue with this) that the use of temporary or flying
      checkpoints  makes  it  very  difficult  to  predict  restrictions  on
      movement. Earth mounds and concrete road blocks  are  used  on  lesser
      used roads to obstruct vehicular access; ditches are used  to  prevent
      vehicles  crossing.  Travel  permits  are  issued   by   the   Israeli
      authorities but the permit system is said to be  complex  and  applied
      differently from region to region. A permit eases travel  and  reduces
      the risk of being turned back at a checkpoint. Permits  are  necessary
      for crossing specific checkpoints, in accessing the Jordan valley, the
      closed area between the Green Line and the  separation  wall  and  for
      entering Jerusalem.

96.   It is said in the article entitled "Checkpoint  Witnesses"  by  Amelia
      Thomas dated 8 June 2006 (at page 424 of  the  Appellant's  bundle  A)
      that:

            The purpose of such interior checkpoints is solely  "to  prevent
           free passage of Palestinian residents between their villages and
           towns,"  says  group  spokeswoman   [of   Machsom   Watch]   Adi
           Dagan..........

            The Israeli Defence Force disputes this.  "If  the  Army's  sole
           purpose would  be  to  prevent  freedom  of  moment  for  normal
           Palestinians, "says IDF spokesman,  Captain.  Jacob  Demal,  "it
           would be a waste of our  time.  But  checkpoints  are  there  to
           impair the transportation efforts of potential suicide  bombers,
           who use the routes time and time again".

97.    Elsewhere  in  the  Appellant's  background  evidence,  opinions  are
      expressed that the severity of the travel restrictions imposed by  the
      Israeli security forces and the unpredictable way in  which  they  are
      applied are together a form of "collective punishment" by the  Israeli
      government against Palestinians, and that the  measures  used  by  the
      Israeli authorities are not proportionate to the  security  situation.
      All these writers  are,  of  course,  entitled  to  hold  and  express
      opinions on this subject. Indeed, this is  not  the  least  surprising
      given the seriousness of the  conflict  particularly  since  September
      2000. Mr. Norton requested us not to place weight  on  the  background
      evidence submitted on the Appellant's behalf because, he said, it  was
      from organisations or people who were partisan. We  do  not,  however,
      consider that the mere fact that the evidence is from a party  holding
      a particular opinion means that we should disregard that evidence. Our
      task is to look at the reality of  the  situation  which  Palestinians
      Arabs would face. We have therefore considered all  the  documents  in
      order to discern the situation on the ground,  and  make  findings  of
      fact. We  will  mention  here  that  we  found  several  instances  of
      overstatement in the  background evidence  -  see,  for  example,  our
      paragraphs 101 and 103 below - which  explains  why  we  have  had  to
      examine, and refer to, the evidence with particular care  and  in  the
      detail we have.

98.   We turn now the consider the evidence as to  the  travel  restrictions
      imposed by the Israeli security forces on travel  by  Palestinians  in
      the West Bank.

99.   We commence by considering the evidence in order to decide whether  it
      is true to say that greater restrictions are imposed on  the  movement
      of Palestinian Arab males who originate from the northern part of  the
      West Bank. The following are brief summaries  of,  or  extracts  from,
      some of the objective material before us, although we stress  that  we
      have considered all of the evidence:

      (i)   Page 142   (PCHR weekly report dated "04 -  01.05.06")  evidence
                    that the Israeli security forces separate the north  and
                    south of the  West  Bank.  The  Za'tara  checkpoint  was
                    closed. The presence of Israeli security forces  at  the
                    'Attara  checkpoint,  north   of   Ramallah,   was   re-
                    established. Two  new  checkpoints  near  Ramallah  were
                    erected.

      (ii)  Page 148   (PCHR press release dated  23  April  2006)  evidence
                    that the Za'tara checkpoint is being developed  into  an
                    "international"   crossing    similar    to    Qalandiya
                    checkpoint. The PCHR contend that the Za'tara checkpoint
                    is part of the Israeli plan of dividing  the  West  Bank
                    into 3 "Bantustans".

      (iii) Pages 198, 214 to 216
                  (GUPS  report  entitled:  "Israeli  Violations  documented
                    during the reporting period 11 to 17 May  2006")  refers
                    to  "abuse"  by  Israeli  security  forces  at   various
                    checkpoints against a number of  Palestinian  civilians.
                    It also states that two Palestinians  were  arrested  at
                    checkpoints in the West Bank during this period.  On  12
                    May 2006, a checkpoint was erected to the west of Nablus
                    through which all Palestinians civilians aged  under  30
                    were prevented from crossing. The following day,  dozens
                    of young men were detained for several hours  at  Hawara
                    checkpoint, south of Nablus. On 14 May 2006, a number of
                    civilians were beaten and humiliated at a checkpoint  to
                    the west of Nablus. On 11 May 2006, severe  restrictions
                    imposed  on  the  movement  of  residents  of   Tulkarm.
                    Prolonged and "humiliating" checks. Civilians who  tried
                    to use alternative dirt roads were  chased,  and  dozens
                    held for several hours.  On  13  May  2006  restrictions
                    prohibited the movement  of  Palestinians  to  and  from
                    Tulkarm. Dozens of  young  men  who  resorted  to  using
                    alternative dirt roads were held.

      (iv)  Page 254   (report of CAABU dated 18 May 2006) states:
                 Palestinians of all ages, no matter the  gender  or  social
                    status or affiliation with a certain group,  are  likely
                    to be subject to limits and/or mistreatment. However, it
                    is far more likely for young men,  usually  between  the
                    age of 16-35 (at least) to be stopped or denied entry to
                    a certain area more than any other. In this case, it has
                    nothing to do with the proven track record or history of
                    the young man in question. Simply by being of a  certain
                    age singles him out for harsher  restrictions.  Overall,
                    the very young (up until the  age  of  10-12),  and  the
                    elderly (70 and older) are  most  likely  to  have  less
                    problems of movement than any other age group.

                 (     All Palestinian males from Nablus, Jenin and  Tulkarm
                       between the ages of 16-35 are prevented from  heading
                       south  through  all  permanent,  semi-permanent   and
                       flying checkpoints in the northern West Bank,  unless
                       they have special permits [attributed to  the  weekly
                       briefly notes 9-15 August [year unspecified]  of  the
                       United  Nations  Office  for  the  Co-ordination   of
                       Humanitarian Affairs in the Occupied Territories].

                 (     ..... The gender of applicants [for a travel  permit]
                       has a statistically significant effect on probability
                       of refusal - being male increases the probability  of
                       refusal by 20 %.

      (v)   Pages 305, 306, 308 & 309
                 Reuters Foundation press report of  20  August  2006:  that
                    Palestinians under the age of 35 are generally prevented
                    from passing through Israeli military checkpoints in the
                    West Bank  as  part  of  security  restrictions  against
                    potential bombers. At a checkpoint  in  the  West  Bank,
                    Israeli soldiers shot dead one Palestinian  and  wounded
                    two others at Hawara checkpoint near Nablus.

      (vi)  Pages 451 to 453
                 (PCHR weekly report from 03.08.06 to 09.08.06) reports  the
                    imposition of severe restrictions  on  the  movement  of
                    Palestinian civilians in the Gaza  Strip  and  the  West
                    Bank. In the West Bank, severe restrictions are reported
                    in Ramallah,  Hebron,  Tulkarm,  Nablus  and  Jenin.  In
                    Tulkarm, Palestinians aged below 35 were prevented  from
                    passing two checkpoints. Palestinians  who  resorted  to
                    alternative dirt roads were chased and held for  several
                    hours under the sun.

      (vii) Pages 471 to 473
                 (PCHR weekly report from 10.08.06 to 16.08.06) reports  the
                    imposition of additional  restrictions  on  movement  of
                    Palestinians in east Jerusalem, Ramallah and Hebron  and
                    severe  restrictions  on  the  movement  of  Palestinian
                    civilians in  Nablus,  Tulkarm  and  Jenin.  In  Nablus,
                    Palestinians below the age of  30  were  prevented  from
                    crossing various checkpoints. In  Tulkarm,  Palestinians
                    below the age of 35 were  prevented  from  crossing  all
                    checkpoints around Tulkarm.

      (viii)     Para 32 of Dr. George's report
                 Quoting from  the  PCHR  2005  Annual  Report,  Dr.  George
                    refers to the Israeli security  forces  having  "imposed
                    restrictions at border crossings between  the  [Occupied
                    Territories]  and  Israel;  limiting  the  movement   of
                    Palestinian civilians between the West Bank and the Gaza
                    Strip; preventing students  from  the  Gaza  Strip  from
                    attending  their  universities   in   the   West   Bank;
                    preventing family  visitations;  depriving  hundreds  of
                    patients from  the  Gaza  Strip  of  access  to  medical
                    treatment in  hospitals  in  the  West  Bank,  including
                    occupied  East  Jerusalem;  and  depriving   Palestinian
                    civilians of access to Islamic and  Christian  sites  in
                    Jerusalem, Bethlehem and Hebron.............The [Israeli
                    security forces]  have  also  imposed  more  complicated
                    restrictions on internal movement in the West  Bank  and
                    the Gaza Strip. Hundreds of checkpoints have been placed
                    at the entrances of Palestinian communities in the  West
                    Bank in order to restrict the movement  of  Palestinians
                    civilians from one community to another.


100.  Notwithstanding the fact that  certain  reports  specifically  mention
      restrictions on movement in particular areas  in  northern  West  Bank
      (such as Nablus, Tulkarm and Jenin - see, for example, the GUPS report
      at sub-paragraph (iii) and  the  CAABU  report  at  (iv)  above),  the
      evidence as a whole shows that stringent restrictions are  imposed  on
      the movement of Palestinian Arabs throughout the Occupied  Territories
      including the Gaza Strip (see, for example, the PCHR weekly report  at
      pages 451, 452, 470 and 471 of the Appellant's bundle A) and areas  in
      the southern parts of the West Bank such as Hebron as well as  towards
      the centre of the West Bank such as East Jerusalem and Bethlehem (see,
      for example, (vi), (vii) and (viii) above  as  well  the  PCHR  weekly
      reports at pages 452 and 472 and the GUPS report at pages 197, 198 and
      214 of the Appellant's bundle A).

101.  Although there are some suggestions in the background evidence  before
      us that restrictions, once imposed, are permanent and  should  not  be
      regarded as temporary, we have concluded  that  the  severity  of  the
      restrictions imposed varies  from  time  to  time.  For  example,  the
      article from "Al Mubadara Palestinian  National  Initiative"  (undated
      but which appears to have been written in January  2006  according  to
      the first line on page 327 of the Appellant's bundle A)  states  that,
      from the second week of December 2005,  the  Israeli  security  forces
      "severed" the northern part of the West Bank from other  sections  and
      prohibited residents  from  travelling  towards  Ramallah  and  points
      southward. This "severance" (if it is  not  overstatement)  must  have
      been temporary, because the press release by the PCHR dated  23  April
      2006 (page 326 of the Appellant's bundle A) states that, on  22  April
      2006, the Israeli security  forces  began  to  implement  a  "complete
      separation" of the northern West Bank from the south  "by  restricting
      the movement of Palestinians in a way not previously  seen  since  the
      uprising in 2000". If the restrictions imposed from the second week of
      December 2005 led  to  the  northern  part  of  the  West  Bank  being
      "severed" from the other  sections  and  if  those  restrictions  were
      permanent, there would have been no need for further  restrictions  to
      be implemented on 22 April 2006. Indeed, it appears  from  the  3-page
      article by "Al Mubadara  Palestinian  National  Initiative"  dated  16
      January 2006 (beginning at page 327 of the Appellant's bundle A)  that
      increases in restrictions  tend  to  be  temporary,  as  this  article
      states:

            At various hours, there is also an age  restriction  on  leaving
           through various  checkpoints.  The  restrictions  affect  people
           between the ages of 16 and 30.

            ....... It was implemented several times last year, for  varying
           durations. Sometimes, the separation is in both directions.

102.  On the whole of the  evidence  before  us  (including  the  background
      evidence in the Appellant's bundles which  we  have  not  specifically
      referred  to),  we  conclude  that,  whilst  the   severity   of   the
      restrictions varies from time to time, it is  reasonably  likely  that
      Palestinian Arab males aged between 16-35 face greater restrictions in
      their ability to travel south from the northern part of the West Bank.
      However, the restrictions are not such that they are reasonably likely
      to be unable to make the journey, although the  possibility  that  the
      Israeli security forces may, at any moment, restrict all  movement  by
      this group southwards cannot be excluded. Palestinian  Arab  males  in
      this age group who originate from the northern part of the  West  Bank
      face less difficulties in travelling from  a  point  at  or  near  the
      centre (such as Ramallah or East Jerusalem) to the  northern  part  of
      the West Bank. Even then, however, the journey is likely to take  much
      longer than a journey without such restrictions would.

103.  This conclusion is supported by  the  example  of  a  journey  between
      Tulkarm and Ramallah by a Palestinian male  (Mr.  Abdel-Karim  Dalbah)
      and his fellow travellers - all of whom were over 40 years old - which
      Dr. George gives on pages 13 to 15 of his report.  This  journey  took
      place on 23 April 2006 - that is, the day  after  the  day  on  which,
      according to the PCHR press release dated 23 April 2006 (page  326  of
      the Appellant's bundle A), began to implement a "complete  separation"
      of the northern West Bank from the south "in a way not previously seen
      since the uprising in 2000". It is evident that there was in  fact  no
      "complete separation" because Mr. Dalbah  and  his  fellow  travellers
      made the journey from Tulkarm to  Ramallah,  and  back.  Mr.  Dalbah's
      account of his  journey  does  show  that  greater  restrictions  were
      applied in April 2006 in the West Bank.  We note from his  description
      of his journey that the 90-kilometre  journey  which  should  normally
      have taken 90 minutes to travel directly by car, in fact took 5  hours
      30 minutes covering a distance of 300 kilometres by car and  on  foot.
      Instead of costing 15 to 25 shekels, the journey cost 65  shekels.  We
      noted that it is said that, on the return  journey  from  Ramallah  to
      Tulkarm, Mr. Dalbah and his  fellow  travellers  were  able  to  drive
      directly from Ramallah to Tulkarm, passing through  roads  which  were
      forbidden to them to pass on the south-ward journey  from  Tulkarm  to
      Ramallah. They were not stopped at any checkpoints, leading one of the
      travellers to remark that "it is very easy to get into the prison".

104.  Palestinian Arabs who do not fit the profile we have considered  above
      - i.e. Palestinian women and males younger than 16 or older than 35  -
      are not in general subjected  to  the  additional  restrictions  which
      Palestinian Arab males between 16 and 35 are. Nevertheless, they  have
      to pass through the  checkpoints  and  endure  the  situation  at  the
      checkpoints. We deal with that issue below.

105.  Mr. Bandegani submitted that the Appellant would have to pass  through
      "numerous" checkpoints between Jericho and Tulkarm, whereas Mr. Norton
      submitted that he would have to pass through "several" checkpoints. It
      is unnecessary for us to decide this fine point. There is  some  force
      in the argument that the greater the number of  checkpoints  which  an
      individual returnee has to pass through, the  greater  the  likelihood
      that he would arbitrarily be picked up or  stopped  and  subjected  to
      persecutory ill-treatment. Nevertheless, we  have  concluded,  on  the
      basis of the whole of the evidence before us, that  the  risk  remains
      speculative, although it cannot be excluded entirely. We are satisfied
      that it is not reasonably likely to happen.

      Treatment at checkpoints

106.  Mr Bandegani relied heavily  on  the  extract  from  the  book  called
      "Checkpoint Watch" and the report the CAABU report dated 18 May  2006.
      Although the CAABU report was prepared specifically for the Appellant,
      it does not  appear  to  rely  on  any  specific  evidence  about  the
      Appellant other than that he is a young  Palestinian  Arab  male  from
      Tulkarm. The extract of "Checkpoint Watch" is at pages 269 to  299  of
      the Appellant's bundle A. The foreword,  which  is  written  by  Amira
      Hass, describes Yehudit Kirstein Keshet, a co-founder of the group, as
      someone who "critically reviews the organisation's transformation from
      a feminist, radical protest movement to one  both  reclaimed  by,  and
      reclaiming, the consensus".  Checkpoint  Watch  is  described  in  the
      foreword as an organisation of Israeli women monitoring  human  rights
      abuses. It is said (on page 271 of the Appellant's bundle A) that  the
      book gives an account of daily reports from the checkpoints and  along
      the separation wall. The book contains a general narrative  about  the
      organisation's experience of and view about the  situation  pertaining
      at checkpoints between  February  2001  and  February  2005.  This  is
      mainly, but not exclusively, set out at pages 56 to  66  of  the  book
      (pages 273 to  289  of  the  Appellant's  bundle  A).  The  book  also
      describes  specific  "watches"  carried  out  by   its   members   (or
      "watchers") which took place between  September  2001  and  May  2004.
      About 20 or so "watches" are described in the extract mainly - but not
      exclusively - at page 66 onwards  of  the  extract.  Given  the  heavy
      reliance of Mr. Bandegani on this piece  of  background  evidence,  we
      will refer in some detail to the contents of the extract.

      The main points which  are  made  in  the  general  narrative  are  as
      follows:


      (i)   Palestinians have to wait for long periods of  time,  often  for
           hours,  in  the  scorching  heat,  in  order  to  pass   through
           checkpoints;


      (ii)  Page 57 of the book describes several  checkpoints  as  well  as
           flying or mobile checkpoints.


      (iii) "At checkpoints there is only the rule  of  the  moment,  always
           shifting, always changing,  sometimes  responsive  to  pleading,
           sometimes not. There is scant shelter, no seating,  no  toilets,
           no facilities fit for human beings." (page 57)


      (iv)  The procedure at the checkpoints is described at  page  58.  One
           would  arrive  at  a  checkpoint  to  face  a  line  of  waiting
           pedestrians. If the crowd gets impatient and begins to surge  or
           struggle forwards, it is herded back with shouts and  curses  to
           some arbitrary point. If soldiers feel provoked  or  threatened,
           they may respond with live fire,  not  infrequently  with  fatal
           results. Documents are checked at the examination point.  Checks
           may be cursory or thorough.  The  transitee  may  stand  ten  to
           twenty metres from the soldiers, or  suffer  close  examination.
           Men may or may not be asked to bare their chests and bellies and
           execute a piroti to prove the absence of weapons or  explosives.
           Women may or may not be required to undergo a more discreet body
           check. Children and women may be passed ahead of the  crowd,  or
           forced to wait in line. The  variations  are  unpredictable  and
           endless. Petty extortion and blackmail have their place here.


      (v)   A common sight  is  a  group  of  detainees,  held  while  their
           documents are checked by radio with a computer. "Officially,  it
           is illegal to detain people as punishment for longer than  three
           hours, but actual waiting periods may last a whole day, or  even
           overnight, in blazing heat or freezing cold, with little  or  no
           shelter. Detainees may be forced to stand facing a  wall,  hands
           above head, or be allowed to stand or sit at ease, at  the  whim
           of their captors or on the intervention  of  the  Watchers.  The
           majority are  released  sooner  or  later,  but  young  men  are
           particularly vulnerable to a detention." (pages 58 and 59)


      (vi)  An individual lucky enough to pass a checkpoint may  be  stopped
           on the other side by the civil police (page 59).


      (vii) At page 60 of the book, a reference is made to the  problems  of
           language and culture at checkpoints.


      (viii)      The majority of Israelis do  not  speak  Arabic  and  many
           Palestinians, especially women and older children, do  not  know
           Hebrew.


      (ix)  Page 61 of the book refers to the  disruption  which  occurs  at
           checkpoints when there is an alert. An alert is a signal for the
           checkpoint to close, whether  for  minutes  or  for  hours.  The
           author of the report likens rumours to a "hot alert", which  can
           bring about the so-called "stop all life" procedure -  i.e.  the
           sudden  closing  of  the  checkpoint  to  all  movement  for  an
           indefinite period.


      (x)   "Orders from the senior echelons  are  vague  and  inconsistent.
           Conscripts must rely on their own interpretation of  the  rules,
           every man and woman a king." (page 64)


      (xi)  There is a  reference  to  illegal  labourers  being  vulnerable
           targets for kicks, blows and curses, even death (page 74 of  the
           book).


      (xii) "Violence is endemic at checkpoints, never far from the  surface
           of the routine and inevitable in the encounter between  military
           and civilian" (page 84 of the book).


      With regard to the descriptions of  events  at  specific  watches,  we
      noted that:


      (xiii)      There  are  references  to  "checkpoint  watchers"  having
           witnessed a soldier being "particular  rude  and  foul"  to  the
           Palestinians and another  soldier  reportedly  saying  that  the
           Palestinians "are animals and do not deserve any  human  rights"
           (page 68 of the book).


      (xiv) There is a description of an account by Dr Ilana Hammerman of  a
           journey on the edge of route 60 (page  75  of  the  book).  This
           account demonstrates the existence of internal  checkpoints.  Dr
           Hammerman states (page 77 of the book)  that  he  witnessed  "no
           abuse, and no atrocities but the routine of military and  police
           activity so that anyone coming here, just  forty  minutes'  ride
           from Jerusalem, will find themselves more  concerned  for  their
           security than they were before."


      (xv)  There is an account of an incident involving children  who  were
           throwing stones at a few soldiers  who  retaliated  by  shooting
           live ammunition at the  fleeing  children  whilst  chasing  them
           (page 80 of the book).


      (xvi) There is an account of a "watch"  during  which  the  "watchers"
           heard shouts and screams and sounds of beating at  a  checkpoint
           which went on for about half an hour (page 81 of the book).


      (xvii)      In one  incident  (see  page  82),  a  sick  man  who  had
           requested permission to be allowed to pass  on  account  of  his
           health was ordered by the soldiers to the end of the line. A row
           then erupted in the course of which the man  was  dragged  to  a
           small sentry post and "probably beaten" - he suddenly  lost  his
           consciousness, fell and remained unconscious."


      (xviii)     On page 83, the author states that the incidents described
           in  that  section  were  often  regarded  by  the  military   as
           operational and  that  soldiers  are  therefore  not  called  to
           account. Page 83 records one case where  the  perpetrators  were
           actually punished due to the testimony of "watchers". On page 84
           of the book, the author states that the soldier who  perpetrated
           an attack on a Palestinian doctor and his commander were charged
           and sentenced, respectively, to 35 and 21 days imprisonment.

      The CAABU report states:

      (xix) (Page 230 of the  Appellant's  bundle  A)  Closely  linked  with
           movement restrictions is ill-treatment at checkpoints and  gates
           in the [separation wall].  Delays,  harassment  and  humiliation
           continued to be  endured  by  Palestinians  attempting  to  pass
           through the checkpoints.

      (xx)  (Page 247) Both verbal  and  physical  assaults  take  place  at
           checkpoints/within  villages  .......  At  times  the  abuse  is
           aggravated by racism, humiliation, anger or amusement...........
           Palestinians are routinely subjected to harassment and abuse  at
           checkpoints.

107.  One point which emerges clearly not only from the  evidence  which  we
      have described at paragraph 106  above  but  from  the  whole  of  the
      background evidence is  the  absence  of  evidence  which  shows  that
      Palestinian Arab males within the 16-35 age group or Palestinian  Arab
      males between 16 and 35 years old who are from the  northern  part  of
      the West Bank receive any different treatment at checkpoints -  apart,
      that is, from the fact that they  have  greater  restrictions  imposed
      upon them on their ability to travel and are therefore more likely  to
      be more closely examined for this reason. The evidence does  not  show
      that they are at greater risk of ill-treatment  such  as  physical  or
      verbal abuse than Palestinian Arabs who do not fit this profile. If  a
      Palestinian Arab travels southwards from the northern part of the West
      Bank, he would be travelling towards East Jerusalem  which  has  large
      Israeli settlements. Nablus is surrounded by Israeli  settlements.  On
      the whole of the background  evidence,  we  conclude  that,  whilst  a
      Palestinian Arab male aged between 16 to 35 or a Palestinian Arab male
      within this age group who is from the northern part of the  West  Bank
      is more likely to be more closely  examined  if  travelling  from  the
      northern part of the West Bank southwards towards  East  Jerusalem  or
      Nablus, it is not reasonably likely that he would  for  those  reasons
      alone be of adverse interest to the  Israeli  security  forces.  There
      must be something more to give rise to a real risk of adverse interest
      on the part of the Israeli security forces.

108.  We note that the total number of incidents of physical abuse  reported
      by "Checkpoint Watch" is small (about 5 in total,  see  paragraph  106
      sub-paragraphs (xv) to (xviii) above) when  compared  to  the  overall
      period covered by the book (from February 2001 to February  2005)  and
      the total number of  "watches"  reported  (about  20).  We  take  into
      account other background evidence we have before  us  -  for  example,
      that the GUPS  described  a  number  of  civilians  being  beaten  and
      humiliated on 14 May 2006 (see paragraph 99(iii) above). However,  the
      background evidence we have considered  describe  a  large  number  of
      events at checkpoints over lengthy periods. In  our  view,  the  total
      number of incidents which involve  physical  abuse  represent  a  very
      small proportion of  the  overall  total  reported  in  the  objective
      material before us. We concluded that the evidence before us does  not
      show a reasonable likelihood of physical ill-treatment of Palestinians
      at checkpoints,  although  we  accept  that  there  is  evidence  that
      incidents of violence do occur. They appear to be due to unpredictable
      matters, such as sudden movements on  the  part  of  a  traveller  and
      tempers  getting  short  in  the  poor  conditions.  We  accept   that
      overreaction on  the  part  of  the  Israeli  soldiers  has  sometimes
      resulted in violent and even fatal consequences - see, for example the
      two separate incidents at Hawara checkpoint on 20 August 2006 reported
      by the PCHR in its press release dated 20 August 2006 (page 316 of the
      Appellant's bundle A), the incidents at pages 82 and 83 of "Checkpoint
      Watch" and the incident described by Reuters Foundation at pages  305,
      306, 308 and 309 of the Appellant's  bundle  A.  However,  we  do  not
      accept the opinion expressed in "Checkpoint Watch" that  "violence  is
      endemic at checkpoints". This opinion is not borne  out  even  by  the
      extract of the book we have before us because (as we have said  above)
      the extract only mentions a very small number of incidents of violence
      compared to the total number of "watches" reported in the extract.  We
      do not accept  that  this  is  reasonably  likely  to  happen  to  the
      generality of Palestinian Arabs who pass  through  checkpoints  or  to
      Palestinian Arab males aged between 16 and 35 or to  Palestinian  Arab
      males aged between 16 and 35 who are from the  northern  part  of  the
      West Bank.

109.  We accept that Palestinian Arab travellers have to endure long  queues
      and a lack of facilities. There is  some  evidence  of  extortion  and
      confiscation of identity cards. They often face verbal abuse. However,
      as we have said in paragraph 52 above, an act or series of  acts  will
      not be regarded as  amounting  to  persecution  or  serious  harm  (or
      treatment in breach of Article 3) unless the  act  or  acts  are  such
      that, taken cumulatively, they reach a minimum level of  severity.  In
      our judgment which we make on the whole  of  the  evidence  before  us
      (including the background evidence in the Appellant's bundles which we
      have not specifically referred to), the  treatment  which  Palestinian
      Arab travellers are subjected to at checkpoints in the West  Bank  and
      the Gaza Strip (whether fixed or flying checkpoints)  does  not  reach
      that minimum level of severity. In reaching  this  decision,  we  have
      taken into account not only the nature of  the  restrictions  and  the
      general situation at the checkpoints  but  also  the  very  fact  that
      restrictions exist which impede the freedom of movement of Palestinian
      Arabs.

      Risk to returnees

110.  We will now consider  whether  returning  Palestinian  Arabs  who  are
      forcibly removed and/or who have lived abroad for  some  time  are  at
      greater risk of ill-treatment  at  the  border  on  the  King  Hussein
      Bridge, or after gaining re-entry. As we have said above, there is  no
      evidence before us of any specific instances of the  returns  of  such
      persons. However, Dr. George has commented on the risk at  the  border
      in the following terms:

            46.   Whether [MA] were to attempt to travel to  the  West  Bank
           via Jordan and the King Hussain Bridge  crossing  point  or  via
           Israel's Ben Gurion international airport in Tel Aviv, or if  he
           was to attempt to travel to the Gaza Strip via Egypt,  he  would
           come to the notice of the Israeli security authorities. In  each
           case, he might attract adverse Israeli attention at the  border.
           In my opinion,  the  Israelis  could  view  with  suspicion  the
           extended period that he has been outside the West Bank.

            (our emphasis)

111.  Dr. George's opinion as to the likelihood of the Appellant  attracting
      adverse attention is based the Appellant having the characteristics of
      being a young Palestinian Arab male within the 16 to 35 age group  who
      is from Tulkarm in the northern part of the West  Bank.  It  is  clear
      from paragraph 42 of the report that Dr. George  was  considering  the
      situation of an individual being forcibly returned. We note  that  Dr.
      George expressed his opinion at paragraph 46 in moderate terms. In our
      view, his opinion in this regard is in line with the generality of the
       background evidence we have considered. It is a  possibility  that  a
      young Palestinian Arab male between 16  and  35  years  old  from  the
      northern part of the West Bank who is being returned  or  who  returns
      after having lived abroad may attract the  adverse  attention  of  the
      Israeli security forces at the  border  and  thereafter  but,  in  our
      judgment, the risk is not such as to make this  reasonably  likely  to
      happen. The same is true in the case of any Palestinian Arab who  does
      not have  this  profile.  There  is  no  evidence  to  show  that  the
      possession of valid travel documents would ensure re-entry.

112.  The Appellant's sister was able to gain re-entry into  the  West  Bank
      from Jordan in either February 2005 or January 2006. After gaining re-
      entry, she was able to  travel  to  Tulkarm.  Given  that  she  was  a
      voluntary returnee and that she returned some time  ago,  we  did  not
      take into account the evidence of her return in  order  to  reach  our
      conclusions above.

      The economic condition in the West Bank, and the general situation

113.  Mr Bandegani referred us to  the  humanitarian  reports  on  food  and
      security and submitted that, if  the  Appellant  is  unable  to  reach
      Tulkarm, he would be forced to live in Jericho without family support.
      In his submission, the family is very important as a social safety net
      given that the CAABU report at pages 256 and 257 of the Appellant's  A
      shows an incredibly high number of people  living  below  the  poverty
      line and that food insecurity in Jericho has increased  by  30%  since
      2005. In Mr Bandegani's submission, the  economic  condition  is  poor
      because of the restrictions in movement.

114.  Mr. Bandegani did not seek to suggest that the economic situation  and
      general humanitarian condition in  the  West  Bank  is  such  that  it
      reaches the minimum level of severity. His submissions  were  made  on
      the basis that the general situation combined with a  lack  of  family
      support would result in an individual's situation being such that  the
      minimum level of severity would be reached.  The  background  evidence
      before us relates not only to the West  Bank  but  also  to  the  Gaza
      Strip. We propose to consider the background evidence on a wider basis
      and to decide whether the situation which any returnee to the Occupied
      Territories would face is reasonably likely to amount to serious  harm
      (or treatment in breach of his rights under Article 3).

115.  We acknowledge that the general situation in the  West  Bank  and  the
      Gaza Strip is very bad. For example, we noted that  the  CAABU  report
      states (page 240 of the Appellant's bundle A):

                 .......... Severe and frequently arbitrary restrictions  on
                 freedom of movement in the West Bank, Gaza Strip, and  East
                 Jerusalem, contributing to a  serious  humanitarian  crisis
                 marked  by  extreme   poverty,   unemployment,   and   food
                 insecurity. The movement restrictions  also  have  severely
                 compromised Palestinian residents' access to  health  care,
                 education, and other services.

116.  The maps in the CAABU report (at pages 256 and 257 of the  Appellant's
      bundle A) portray a dismal picture. In the central part  of  the  West
      Bank, 49% of Palestinians live under the poverty line. The  proportion
      in the northern part of the West Bank is higher. The worst area is the
      southern part of the West Bank and the Gaza Strip, where 75 % or  more
      Palestinians live under the poverty line. The map on  page  257  shows
      that there are high levels of food insecurity. The situation  even  in
      the central part of the West Bank - which appears to  fare  better  in
      this regard than the rest of the West Bank and the  Gaza  Strip  -  is
      very bad, with 39 to 40 % food insecurity.  The worst  areas  are  the
      Gaza Strip, the southern part of the West Bank and the greater part of
      the northern West Bank (where food insecurity is in excess of 40%  and
      which includes Jericho) although  the  area  surrounding  Tulkarm  and
      Qalqilya appears to fare better than the other areas in  the  northern
      West Bank.

117.  We appreciate fully that the situation is  very  bad.  The  conditions
      under which Palestinians have to live  in  the  West  Bank  are  truly
      difficult. They have to try and eke out a living and provide food  and
      shelter  for  themselves  and  their  families   in   very   difficult
      circumstances.  The  exigencies  of  the  conflict  and  the  security
      situation  place  enormous   strains   on   the   transportation   and
      availability of food supplies and  medicines  and  access  to  medical
      treatment. We consider the difficulties faced on a  cumulative  basis.
      In the case of travel restrictions, we take into account not only  the
      nature of the restrictions and the fact  that  their  severity  varies
      from time to time but also the very existence  of  restrictions  which
      impede freedom of movement. Whilst we  have  every  sympathy  for  the
      plight  of  Palestinians  caught  up  in  this  situation,   we   have
      nevertheless concluded that, considering all the factors  cumulatively
      (that is, travel  restrictions,  treatment  at  checkpoints,  economic
      situation, food insecurity, access to healthcare  etc.),  the  minimum
      level of severity for serious harm (or treatment in breach of  Article
      3) is not reached.

118.  Given our conclusions, it is not necessary for us to decide whether  a
      Palestinian Arab male between 16 and 35 years old and who  comes  from
      the northern part of the West Bank is a member of a particular  social
      group. That will have to await determination on another occasion  when
      the outcome of an appeal on asylum grounds will depend on  a  decision
      on the Geneva Convention ground issue. Given that  there  is  no  real
      risk of persecution, it is not necessary  for  us  to  decide  whether
      there is a sufficiency of protection for Palestinians in the West Bank
      or the Occupied Territories.

119.  The CAABU  report  states  (page  223)  that  the  Appellant  will  be
      subjected  to  inhuman  or  degrading  treatment  or  punishment.  The
      relevant paragraph reads:

                 CAABU is of the firm view that to understand the  facts  on
           the ground in the [Occupied Territories], and in  particular  in
           the West Bank, the full reality has to be considered as a whole.
           This means considering the cumulative effect of  'closure',  the
           separation barrier, the treatment  of  Palestinians,  especially
           young male  Palestinians,  at  checkpoints  and  generally,  the
           denial  of  self-determination,  the  annexation  of  land,  the
           restricted use of roads, and the myth of security reasons  as  a
           means to further inhibit movement and  to  break  up  the  daily
           rhythm of life, access to permits necessary to  move  within  de
           facto 'cantons' in the west bank [sic]  and  the  discriminatory
           policy that pervades the  Israeli  Defence  Force  thinking  and
           action throughout all these  practices  and  polices  and  which
           manifests itself in the collective punishment of Palestinians to
           one degree or another because they are  Arab.  There  are  other
           considerations  as  well  and  other  harsh  realities   to   be
           considered, but we have tried to touch on as many  as  possible.
           That clearly does not mean there is more evidence to add to this
           picture. From what we know and honestly believe, it is our  view
           that  [the  Appellant],  because  he  is  a  young   Arab   male
           Palestinian national from Tulkarm, will be subject  to  inhumane
           and degrading treatment if returned to the West Bank.

120.  We reject the opinion of CAABU that the Appellant would  be  subjected
      to inhuman and degrading treatment for the following reasons:

      (a)   The organisation has taken into account  irrelevant  matters  in
        reaching its opinion on the Appellant's case.  We  agree  that  the
        cumulative  difficulties  which  each  individual  faces  must   be
        considered as a whole but we do not agree that that means that  the
        existence of the separation wall is relevant in  all  cases.  CAABU
        assumes that it is relevant in the Appellant's case notwithstanding
        the fact that he has not given any evidence to suggest that it  has
        any bearing on the reality of his situation. He has  not  suggested
        that he has suffered from any loss of any land due to the  building
        of the separation wall or that (if  returned)  he  would  regularly
        need to pass through checkpoints along the separation wall in order
        to access land between the wall and the Green Line.  For  the  same
        reasons, the fact that the Israeli authorities have not  built  the
        separation wall along the Green  Line  (referred  to  by  CAABU  as
        "annexation") will not be relevant unless the individual  can  show
        that it is relevant to the reality of  the  situation  he/she  will
        face on return.  The  Appellant  has  not  given  any  evidence  to
        indicate that this is relevant to the reality of his  situation  in
        the West Bank.

      (b)   The general tone of the language in  which  CAABU's  opinion  is
        expressed shows that  the  subjective  and  partisan  view  of  the
        organisation  on  the  political  situation  has  been  allowed  to
        influence  their  decision  concerning   their   opinion   on   the
        Appellant's case. Of  course,  they  are  fully  entitled  to  hold
        opinions on the political situation. It is another matter, however,
        when those opinions are allowed  to  influence  their  decision  on
        their opinion as to whether  the  Appellant  is  reasonably  to  be
        subjected to inhuman or degrading  treatment.  CAABU's  opinion  is
        partly based on their opinion that  there  are  no  valid  security
        reasons for the action of the Israeli security forces  which  CAABU
        contends are directed towards all Palestinians simply because  they
        are Arabs.

      (c)   The opinion of CAABU that  the  Appellant  will  be  subject  to
        inhuman and degrading treatment is based on general  factors  which
        apply to all young Palestinian Arab males from the  West  Bank.  We
        have considered the background evidence carefully to decide whether
        it can be said that Palestinians are at real risk of persecution or
        serious harm simply on account of their ethnicity  and  whether  it
        can be said that young Palestinian Arab males are reasonably likely
        to face  persecution  or  serious  harm.  We  have  answered  those
        questions in the negative. We have concluded that  the  opinion  of
        CAABU is not consistent with the background evidence.

      Summary of our conclusions

121.   Palestinian  Arabs  who  would  be  at  real  risk  in  the  Occupied
      Territories: If the personal history of an individual Palestinian Arab
      is such that it is reasonably likely that he/she would be suspected by
      the Israeli security forces  of  being  involved  in  suicide  bombing
      missions  or  terrorist   activities   against   Israel   or   Israeli
      settlements, it is reasonably likely that he/she would be arrested and
      detained and held in "administrative detention". This  is  so  whether
      the individual is picked up in military incursions, round  ups  or  at
      checkpoints. A returnee who is reasonably likely to  fall  under  such
      suspicion is reasonably likely to be persecuted or subjected  to  ill-
      treatment amounting to serious harm (or  in  breach  of  their  rights
      under Article  3)  although  questions  as  to  whether  there  is  an
      applicable Geneva Convention reason and as to the  possible  exclusion
      of an applicant under Article 1F of the Geneva Convention or paragraph
      339C of the Immigration Rules may then arise.

122.   Likelihood  of  re-gaining  entry  into  the  West  Bank,   and   its
      significance: In AB and Others, the Tribunal considered that there  is
      no evidence that anyone has been successfully removed to any  part  of
      the Occupied Territories. This view holds good. There is  no  evidence
      to show that the possession of valid travel documents would ensure re-
      entry to the West Bank. However, if a Palestinian Arab who comes  from
      the West Bank is refused re-entry by the Israeli security forces, this
      would not, of itself, amount to persecution or serious harm or Article
      3 ill-treatment. Palestinian Arabs from the West  Bank  are  stateless
      and have no right of re-entry into the Occupied Territories  unlike  a
      citizen. If a Palestinian Arab returnee is refused re-entry  into  the
      West Bank at the Israeli checkpoint on the King Hussein  Bridge,  then
      he would simply have to turn  back  to  Jordan.  The  guidance  in  NA
      (Palestinians - Not at general risk) Jordan CG [2005] UKIAT 00094 that
      ethnic Palestinians, whether or not recognised as citizens of  Jordan,
      are not persecuted or treated  in  breach  of  their  protected  human
      rights by reason of their ethnicity although  they  may  be  subjected
      there to discrimination holds good. . Appeals on  asylum  grounds  and
      humanitarian protection grounds must be determined on the hypothetical
      assumption that a returnee will be successful in re-gaining entry into
      the West Bank.

123.  Relevance of the separation wall:  The   lawfulness  or  otherwise  of
      the separation wall and the occupation by the Israeli  authorities  of
      land between the Green Line and the separation wall do not affect  the
      outcome of an appeal if the appellant does not claim to have  suffered
      from any loss of any land due to the building of the  separation  wall
      or to have to travel on a  regular  basis  to  the  land  between  the
      separation wall and the Green Line in order to  gain  access  to  land
      lying between the two. Where  an  appellant  gives  evidence  to  this
      effect, the question as to whether he or she would face persecution or
      serious harm is a question of fact in all  the  circumstances  of  the
      case which would involve considerations such as the necessity of  such
      travel and the reasons for  it  and  the  frequency  with  which  such
      journeys would have to be made.

124.  At checkpoints and in general round-ups, the fact that  an  individual
      is a Palestinian Arab male aged between 16 and 35 from the  West  Bank
      or the Gaza Strip is reasonably likely to lead that  individual  being
      more closely examined by the Israeli security forces  but  it  is  not
      reasonably likely that he would fall under suspicion for those reasons
      alone. There must be something more to attract the  adverse  attention
      of the Israeli security forces.

125.  Travel restrictions: It is reasonably  likely  that  Palestinian  Arab
      males aged between 16-35 face greater restrictions in their ability to
      travel from the northern part of the  West  Bank  south  towards  East
      Jerusalem or towards Nablus. However, the restrictions  are  not  such
      that they are reasonably likely to be  unable  to  make  the  journey,
      although the possibility that the Israeli security forces may, at  any
      moment, restrict all movement  by  this  group  southwards  cannot  be
      excluded. Palestinian Arab males in this age group who originate  from
      the northern  part  of  the  West  Bank  face  fewer  difficulties  in
      travelling away from Israeli settlement areas in or  near  the  centre
      (such as Ramallah or East Jerusalem) or Nablus.  Even  then,  however,
      the journey is likely to take  longer  than  a  journey  without  such
      restrictions would.

126.  Palestinian Arabs who do not fit the profile we have considered  above
      - i.e. Palestinian women and males younger than 16 or older than 35  -
      are not in general subjected  to  the  additional  restrictions  which
      Palestinian Arab males between 16 and 35 are. Nevertheless, they  have
      to pass through the  checkpoints  and  endure  the  situation  at  the
      checkpoints.

127.  The evidence before us  does  not  show  a  reasonable  likelihood  of
      physical ill-treatment of Palestinians  at  checkpoints,  although  we
      accept that there is evidence that incidents of  violence  can  occur.
      They appear to  be  due  to  unpredictable  matters,  such  as  sudden
      movements on the part of a traveller and tempers getting short in  the
      poor conditions. We accept that it is a possibility  that  Palestinian
      Arabs seeking permission to pass through checkpoints may face violence
      but this is not reasonably  likely  to  happen.  We  accept  that  the
      treatment which Palestinian Arab travellers face at checkpoints in the
      West Bank and the Gaza Strip (whether fixed or flying checkpoints) and
      the conditions they endure  are  very   unpleasant  but  this  is  not
      reasonably  likely  to  reach  the  minimum  level  of  severity   for
      persecution or serious harm (or treatment in breach of Article 3).  In
      reaching this decision, we have taken into account not only the nature
      of the restrictions and the general situation at the  checkpoints  but
      also the very fact that restrictions exist which impede the freedom of
      movement of Palestinian Arabs.

128.  There is no evidence to suggest  that  individuals  who  are  forcibly
      returned and/or who have lived abroad for some time would  be  treated
      any differently from  other  Palestinians,  whether  at  the  time  of
      seeking re-entry into the West Bank via the King  Hussein  Bridge,  or
      thereafter.

129.  The difficulties faced by Palestinians  in  the  Occupied  Territories
      (economic situation, food insecurity travel  restrictions  etc)  taken
      cumulatively are not such that  the  minimum  level  of  severity  for
      persecution or serious harm is reached, nor is the  minimum  threshold
      for a breach of a returnee's rights  under  Article  3  reached.  This
      applies even in the case of a Palestinian male within the 16 to 35 age
      group who is from the northern part of the West Bank who would have to
      endure greater restrictions on his ability to  move  in  the  Occupied
      Territories.

130.  Notwithstanding the  deterioration  in  the  situation  since  AB  and
      Others was decided, the conclusion of the Tribunal in that  case  that
      the general situation is not  such  that  it  can  be  said  that  all
      Palestinian Arabs are at real risk of persecution holds good, as  does
      its conclusion that young Palestinian Arab males are not at real  risk
      of persecution. In our view, these conclusions hold good  with  regard
      to an individual's claim to humanitarian protection or Article 3.

131.  Although the conclusions in AB & others  summarised  at  paragraph  55
      above remain valid, this Determination replaces it as country guidance
      because we have had the benefit of  considering  more  up-to-date  and
      detailed background evidence.

                 Our assessment of the Appellant's individual case

132.  We turn now to assess the Appellant's case.

133.  The only aspects of the Determination of the  Adjudicator  which  have
      been  challenged  concern  his  assessment  of  the  risk  facing  the
      Appellant of ill-treatment amounting to persecution or  in  breach  of
      his rights under Article 3 of the ECHR at the  hands  of  the  Israeli
      authorities, including the Israeli security forces.  Accordingly,  and
      pursuant to paragraph 26 of the Tribunal's Determination in AH  (Scope
      of s103A reconsideration) Sudan  [2006]  UKAIT  00038,  we  adopt  the
      Adjudicator's assessment at paragraph 17 of the Determination  of  the
      credibility of the Appellant's claim as advanced to him.  The  general
      guidance in AH Sudan was approved  by  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  its
      judgment in DK (Serbia) and others v. The Secretary of State  for  the
      Home Department [2006] EWCA Civ 1747. We also adopt the  Adjudicator's
      assessment of the risk to the Appellant of ill-treatment by  Fatah  or
      the Palestine authority at paragraphs 17 and 26 of the  Determination.
      Finally, we adopt his assessment of the Appellant's Article 8 claim at
      paragraphs 27 to 30 of the Determination.

134.  In his witness  statement  dated  29  May  2006,  the  Appellant  gave
      evidence of matters which he did not previously mention at the hearing
      before the Adjudicator. The only credibility issue which is  taken  on
      the Respondent's behalf concerns the alleged event in or around spring
      2003 at which time the Appellant  says  the  Israeli  security  forces
      surrounded his area and picked out anyone up to a  specific  age  i.e.
      anyone who was male and over 16. The Appellant says that  he  and  the
      older of his two younger brothers (i.e. the  brother  referred  to  in
      paragraph 13 (e) above, who was then 16 years old) were picked up.  In
      his statement, the  Appellant  says  that,  as  soon  as  the  Israeli
      soldiers saw their ages on their identity  cards,  bags  were  put  on
      their heads and they were sworn at and pushed. Their hands  were  tied
      behind their backs and they were forced to kneel outside their  house.
      They were forced to stay like  this  for  about  6  hours.  They  were
      questioned individually and separately. After they were allowed to go,
      their neighbours told them that the  Israeli  soldiers  had  told  the
      neighbours that they (the Israeli soldiers) knew which mosque he  (the
      Appellant) prayed at and would be watching him. In his statement,  the
      Appellant says that he was targeted simply because he is a Palestinian
      Arab and because of his age and that the Israeli soldiers knew that he
      had not done anything. At the hearing, he added that  his  information
      had been taken by the soldiers and that he did not know  whether  this
      would cause a problem for him on return.

135.  When asked at the  hearing  to  explain  why  he  had  not  previously
      mentioned this incident, the Appellant said that it  was  because  his
      claim was previously based on  his  ill-treatment  by  Fatah.  In  his
      written  submissions  (paragraph  6  of  the   Respondent's   skeleton
      argument), Mr. Norton argues that the Appellant's evidence about  this
      alleged incident should not be accepted as a fresh claim and, in  this
      regard, he relied on the Court of Appeal's judgment in WM (DRC) v. The
      Secretary of State for the Home Department and The Secretary of  State
      for the Home Department v. AR (Afghanistan) [2006] EWCA Civ  1495.  We
      are of the view that Mr. Norton's reliance on  the  WM  (DRC)  and  AR
      (Afghanistan) case in this regard is  misconceived.  The  judgment  in
      that case relates to a fresh asylum  claim  made  to  the  Respondent,
      whereas we are here considering new evidence  being  introduced  at  a
      late-stage in the same  proceedings.  The  proceedings  are  the  same
      because we are reconsidering the same appeal as was considered by  the
      Adjudicator. Pursuant to the Tribunal's guidance in the  AH  case,  it
      would  be  wrong  for  us  to  refuse  to   consider   this   evidence
      notwithstanding the fact that it is introduced at a late  stage.  That
      is not to say that we are precluded from assessing the credibility  of
      the Appellant's claim. Indeed, we must assess the credibility  of  his
      evidence including the fact  that  it  was  introduced  late  and  his
      explanation for the delay in mentioning this evidence.

136.  We turn  therefore  to  assess  the  credibility  of  the  Appellant's
      evidence  with  regard  to  this  alleged  incident.  The  Appellant's
      explanation for not mentioning this alleged incident  sooner  must  be
      assessed within the context of  the  background  evidence.  Whilst  we
      accept that this shows that the security situation in  the  West  Bank
      has deteriorated significantly since the Appellant's asylum  claim  in
      June 2003, it is also clear that "search and arrest" operations by the
      Israeli security forces of the type described by  the  Appellant  were
      taking place at that time - indeed, to that  extent,  the  Appellant's
      evidence about the alleged incident is consistent with the  background
      evidence. The mere fact that the Appellant's  evidence  is  consistent
      with the background evidence does not  means  that  it  is  reasonably
      likely to be true, although such consistency goes in his  favour.  The
      Appellant's explanation for the delay in mentioning this  incident  is
      that his asylum claim before the Adjudicator was based on the problems
      he had experienced from the Al-Fatah organisation and had  nothing  to
      do with this with this incident.  We  do  not  find  this  explanation
      credible. If the Appellant had been rounded up  and  had  his  details
      taken (as he claimed at the hearing) and if he had been  told  by  his
      neighbours that the Israeli soldiers had  told  them  that  they  knew
      which mosque he prayed in  and  would  be  watching  him,  it  is  not
      reasonably likely that he would have omitted to mention these facts at
      the hearing before the Adjudicator. It is not reasonably  likely  that
      he would have based his asylum claim solely on  his  alleged  problems
      with Al-Fateh and considered that the alleged incident in spring  2003
      had no relevance to an assessment of the risk he faced. We  also  bear
      in mind that the  Adjudicator  rejected  the  Appellant's  credibility
      concerning his alleged problems  with  Fatah.  On  the  whole  of  the
      evidence before us and bearing in mind the burden and low standard  of
      proof, we reject the Appellant's evidence about the  alleged  incident
      in spring 2003.  It  is  not  reasonably  likely  that  that  incident
      occurred. It is not reasonably likely that the  Appellant  and/or  his
      brother were detained.

137.  On our findings and those of the Adjudicator, there is nothing in  the
      personal history of the Appellant which  makes  it  reasonably  likely
      that he would be of adverse interest to the Israeli  security  forces.
      We have rejected the credibility of his evidence concerning  the  only
      incident he has claimed to have brought him and  his  brother  to  the
      attention of the Israeli security forces. He has not claimed that  his
      family members in Tulkarm have come to the adverse  attention  of  the
      Israeli authorities on any other occasion. Accordingly, any  potential
      risk to the Appellant would be on account of general  matters  -  i.e.
      his age, gender, ethnic origin and place of origin.  In  other  words,
      any risk which he faces is the same as the  risk  which  is  faced  by
      young Palestinian Arab males (the Appellant is  aged  24  years)  from
      Tulkarm in the northern part of the West Bank.

138.  The Appellant arrived in the United  Kingdom  with  a  Green  crossing
      card (the original of which was shown to us at the hearing and is  now
      with the Respondent, a copy of which is at page 12 of the Respondent's
      supplementary bundle). He also arrived with a travel  document  issued
      by the Palestinian Authority with a stated expiry date of 27 July 2004
      (pages 14A to 14E of  the  Respondent's  supplementary  bundle).  This
      travel document has expired. These  are  the  documents  he  would  be
      returning with. We have said above that the possession of valid travel
      documents does not ensure re-entry into  the  West  Bank  through  the
      Israeli checkpoint at the King Hussein Bridge.  If  the  Appellant  is
      refused re-entry, this would not in itself amount to  persecution.  He
      would have to return to Jordan where it is not  reasonably  likely  he
      would be subjected to persecution or serious harm or  Article  3  ill-
      treatment.

139.  The Appellant is not reasonably likely to subjected to such  treatment
      at the border - i.e. at the Israeli checkpoint  on  the  King  Hussein
      Bridge. We have already given our reasons above for concluding that  a
      Palestinian male aged between 16 and 35 from Tulkarm in  the  northern
      part of the West Bank who is being forcibly returned and who has lived
      abroad for some time is not reasonably  likely  to  be  persecuted  of
      subjected to serious harm (or treatment in breach of Article  3)  when
      seeking re-entry to the West Bank at the border  with  Jordan  on  the
      King Hussein Bridge, or thereafter. The Appellant's circumstances  are
      no different.

140.  Accordingly, we find that, if he is successful in re-gaining  re-entry
       into the West Bank when he presents himself at the border on the King
      Hussein Bridge, he would be able to travel  to  Tulkarm  in   northern
      West Bank albeit that he would have to pass through a large number  of
      checkpoints. Whether the number of checkpoints are several or  whether
      they are numerous, the risk  of  the  Appellant  being  picked  up  or
      stopped   and   subjected   to   persecutory   ill-treatment   remains
      speculative, although we cannot exclude it altogether.

141.  Once the Appellant reaches Tulkarm, the risk to him  is  of  being  an
      arbitrary victim in the conflict between the Israeli  authorities  and
      the Palestinians. He does not face  a  real  risk  of  persecution  or
      serious harm as a Palestinian or as a young Palestinian male.  He  has
      not claimed to  have  lost  any  land  due  to  the  building  of  the
      separation wall, nor has he given evidence to suggest  that  he  would
      need to pass through the restrictions in crossing the separation wall.
      Furthermore, we can see from our colour copy of the map  of  the  West
      Bank that, for a large part of the  Tulkarm's  western  frontier  with
      Israel, the Green Line actually coincides with  the  separation  wall.
      This fact further underlines the necessity of  examining  whether  the
      separation wall has any real significance to the  situation  which  an
      individual would face. We concluded that the separation  wall  is  not
      relevant to the outcome of this appeal.

142.  In the very unlikely event of the Appellant being unable to travel  to
      Tulkarm and having to remain in Jericho, the general  situation  there
      is not such that the minimum level of severity for serious harm  would
      be reached, albeit that we recognise that he  would  not  have  family
      support in Jericho and that Jericho is in one of the  worst  areas  in
      terms of food insecurity (see paragraph 116 above). In oral  evidence,
      the Appellant said that he would not be able to rent accommodation  in
      Jericho because no one in Jericho  is  prepared  to  let  a  place  to
      someone like him who is considered to be a stranger there. We did  not
      find the Appellant  credible  and  are  not  prepared  to  accept  his
      evidence without supporting evidence. In any event,  any  difficulties
      in obtaining accommodation would not lead us to take a different view.



143.  The  Adjudicator  allowed  the  Appellant's  appeal  on  human  rights
      grounds because he found  that  travel  restrictions  which  would  be
      imposed on the Appellant and  which  would  restrict  his  freedom  of
      movement are degrading. His reasons for reaching this finding are  set
      out in paragraph 25 of the Determination. In  essence,  he  considered
      that Israel has no  right  to  occupy  the  West  Bank  and  that  her
      treatment  of  Palestinians  generally  -  whether  or  not  they  are
      terrorists or suspected terrorists -  is treatment which is  degrading
      to the Palestinian people within their own territory. Whether  or  not
      Israel is in  lawful  occupation,  our  focus  must  be  on  the  real
      consequences for the individual before us. The fact that an individual
      Palestinian Arab will face  severe  restrictions  on  his  freedom  of
      movement is not, per se, degrading. The Appellant gave  oral  evidence
      to the effect that he  has  a  right  to  visit  his  family  members.
      However, his own evidence is that his family members live  in,  around
      or near Tulkarm. Furthermore, there is no evidence of  any  dependency
      on any family members. At any  rate,  there  is  no  evidence  of  any
      dependency on any family members that would suggest that any  lack  of
      personal contact between the Appellant and his  family  members  would
      add to his difficulties in Tulkarm.


      DECISION


      The original Tribunal made a material  error  of  law.  The  following
      decision is substituted.

            The appeal is dismissed on asylum grounds.

      The  Appellant  is  not  entitled  to  humanitarian  protection  under
      paragraph 339C of the Immigration Rules.

            The appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds.






            Ms. D. K. Gill                               Date:  8 February
2007
           Senior Immigration Judge


     Approved for electronic distribution



|                                                       |         |
|                                                       |         |
|Background materials considered by the Tribunal        |         |
|(In chronological order)                               |         |
|                                                       |         |
|BBC News:  "The Palestinians under closure."           |20/01/02 |
|Palestinian Centre for Human Rights: Press release:    |28/01/02 |
|"Palestinian prisoner deprived attorney visit by Israel|         |
|authorities".                                          |         |
|The Israeli Centre for Human Rights in the occupied    |02/02    |
|Territories; "Israel's Policy of House Demolitions and |         |
|Destruction of Agricultural Land in the Gaza Strip."   |         |
|Palestinian Centre for Human Rights: Fact Sheet:       |18/03/02 |
|"Siege and Closure."                                   |         |
|Palestinian Centre for Human Rights: Press release:    |24/03/02 |
|"Israeli occupying forces place Gazan in administrative|         |
|detention."                                            |         |
|Palestinian Centre for Human Rights: Press release:    |09/04/02 |
|"Fear of Torture and Ill-Treatment of Thousands of     |         |
|Palestinians detained by Israeli Occupying Forces."    |         |
|Palestinian Prisoners Day Announcement: "International |17/04/02 |
|community must ensure Israel's respect for rights of   |         |
|detainees"                                             |         |
|Journal of Palestine Studies Vol XXXI No3: "Israel's   |Spring   |
|Closure policy: An Ineffective Strategy of Containment |2002     |
|and Repression."                                       |         |
|Palestinian Centre for Human Rights; "Fact Sheet:      |02/06/02 |
|Crimes against Housing and Agriculture."               |         |
|Ha'Aretz: "Long-term sieges."                          |13/06/02 |
|Palestinian Centre for Human Rights: Statistics:       |28/06/02 |
|"Settlements"                                          |         |
|Palestinian Centre for Human Rights: Statistics:       |28/06/02 |
|"Closures, Unemployment and Poverty."                  |         |
|Palestinian Centre for Human Rights: Statistics:       |28/06/02 |
|"General Statistics on the Occupied Palestinian        |         |
|Territory."                                            |         |
|Palestinian Centre for Human Rights: Statistics:       |28/06/02 |
|"Settlements"                                          |         |
|Ha'Aretz: "A million people under curfew."             |01/07/02 |
|Ha'Aretz;  "The IDF shuts away the sea at Rafah."      |15/07/02 |
|Palestinian Centre for Human Rights: Statistics:       |04/10/02 |
|"Arrests, imprisonment and torture."                   |         |
|Ha'Aretz: "Every soldier's a chief of staff."          |03/11/02 |
|Ha' Aretz: "A land of roadblocks and barriers."        |03/11/02 |
|Palestinian Centre for Human Rights: Statistics:       |12/03/03 |
|"Attacks and restrictions on medical personnel and the |         |
|right to health care."                                 |         |
|Legal Consequences of the Construction of a Wall in the|09/07/04 |
|Occupied Palestinian Territory, International Court of |         |
|Justice, General List No 131                           |         |
|Palestinian Centre for Human Rights: Statistics:       |31/01/05 |
|"Destruction of Land and Property."                    |         |
|Palestinian Centre for Human Rights: Statistics:       |31/01/05 |
|"Killings and Injuries."                               |         |
|Palestinian Centre for Human Rights: Statistics:       |31/01/05 |
|"Destruction of Land property"                         |         |
|Palestinian Red Crescent Society: Photograph gallery,  |14/08/03-|
|separation wall.  79 Images dated 14/08/03-10/05/05,   |10/05/05 |
|date of download 29/05/06.                             |         |
|Human Rights Watch:  "Promoting Impunity.  The Israeli |06/05    |
|Military's failure to Investigate Wrongdoing."         |         |
|International Crisis Group:  "The Jerusalem Powder Keg"|02/08/05 |
|Al Mubadara Palestinian National Institute:  "IDF      |16/01/06 |
|Cantonises West Bank, sealing in Palestinians."        |         |
|US Department of State:  Israel and the Occupied       |08/03/06 |
|Territories - Country Report on Human Rights Practices |         |
|2005                                                   |         |
|Palestinian Centre for Human Rights:  "Israeli         |23/04/06 |
|Occupation Forces (IOF) Completely isolate the Northern|         |
|West Bank from the South."                             |         |
|Palestinian Centre for Human Rights: "Security Chaos   |24/04/06 |
|and Proliferation of Small Arms.  Use of Weapons in    |         |
|Clan and Personal Disputes."                           |         |
|Palestinian Centre for Human Rights: Statistics:       |01/05/06 |
|"Statistics related to Al Aqsa Intifada 29 September   |         |
|2000-updated 01 May 2006."                             |         |
|Palestinian Centre for Human Rights: "Weekly Report:   |01/05/06 |
|On Israeli Human Rights Violations in the Occupied     |         |
|Palestinian Territory" for period from 04 - 01/05/06   |         |
|(No. 18/2006)                                          |         |
|Palestinian Centre for Human Rights: "As a Form of     |02/05/06 |
|Collective Punishment, IOF Continued to Harass and     |         |
|Arrest Mothers of Allegedly Wanted Palestinians."      |         |
|Palestinian Centre for Human Rights: "Weekly Report:   |03/05/06 |
|On Israeli Human Rights Violations in the Occupied     |         |
|Palestinian Territory" for period from 27/04/06 to     |         |
|03/05/06 (No. 17/2006)                                 |         |
|Ma'an News Agency: "Barriers in Tulakrem area blocking |06/05/06 |
|the citizens from going to their work and              |         |
|universities."                                         |         |
|Ma'an News Agency: "Israeli soldiers close Beit Iba    |06/05/06 |
|Barrier, stop residents."                              |         |
|Ma'an News Agency: "Three Palestinian citizens arrested|07/05/06 |
|in At'til."                                            |         |
|Ma'an News Agency: "Yet more arrests in Tulkarem."     |07/05/06 |
|Ma'an News Agency: "Three Palestinians arrested in     |10/05/06 |
|Tulkarem area."                                        |         |
|Expert report of Dr A George.                          |15/05/06 |
|Ma'an News Agency: "3 arrested in Tulkarem (19, 20 and |15/05/06 |
|24 years old)"                                         |         |
|Ma'an News Agency: "Families of prisoners demand their |16/05/06 |
|release."                                              |         |
|General Union of Palestinian Students: "Israeli        |17/05/06 |
|Occupation Forces Escalate Attacks on Palestinian      |         |
|Civilians and Property in the Occupied Palestinian     |         |
|Territory" for period 11/05/06 to 17/05/06             |         |
|CAABU (Council for the Advancement of British-Arab     |18/05/06 |
|Understanding): Report.                                |         |
|Ma'an News Agency: "One prisoner from Tulkarem         |19/05/06 |
|released; another three receive arrest warrants."      |         |
|IMEMC news article: "Settlers attack schoolchildren".  |21/05/06 |
|IMEMC news article: "Israeli forces fire tear gas at   |21/05/06 |
|Nablus market."                                        |         |
|Internet posting by J Matthew: "Palestinians, Israelis,|21/05/06 |
|horrified at Hebron "jungle."                          |         |
|Palestinian Centre for Human Rights: "British Human    |26/05/06 |
|Rights Lawyer Denied Entry to Israel."                 |         |
|Ma'an News Agency: "Sport and Social Club in Tulkarem  |26/05/06 |
|raided by Israeli forces, its contents destroyed and   |         |
|computers confiscated."                                |         |
|Ma'an News Agency: "Countdown to Apartheid" by Jeff    |28/05/06 |
|Harper.                                                |         |
|Ma'an News Agency: "Israeli Forces shoot 21 year-old   |28/05/06 |
|walking in town"                                       |         |
|Bitterlemons.org edition 21:  "Palestinian-Israeli     |29/05/06 |
|Crossfire."                                            |         |
|Introduction on Ma'an Images                           |30/05/06 |
|New York Times: "At Checkpoint in Gaza, Travellers wait|05/06/06 |
|and Wait."                                             |         |
|MIFTAH: Palestinian public opinion poll - Living       |07/06/06 |
|Conditions / National Dialogue and the Referendum /    |         |
|Evaluation of Institutions.                            |         |
|MIFTAH: "Checkpoint witnesses."                        |08/06/06 |
|MIFTAH: Interview with PLC member Dr Hanan Ashrawi.    |10/06/06 |
|Reuters Foundation: Palestinian shot dead in West Bank |11/06/06 |
|car."                                                  |         |
|Reuters Foundation Alert Net: "Palestinians on verge of|13/06/06 |
|total chaos-report."                                   |         |
|Reuters Foundation Alert Net: "Fatah gunmen torch Hamas|13/06/06 |
|offices in the West Bank."                             |         |
|Palestinian Centre for Human Rights: press release:    |29/06/06 |
|"Israeli Occupation Forces (IOF) Carry Out Reprisals   |         |
|against Palestinian Civilians in the West Bank."       |         |
|Wikipedia; "Allenby Bridge."                           |07/07/06 |
|Palestinian Centre for Human Rights: press release:    |07/07/06 |
|"Bloody Day of Violence: 24 Palestinians killed by     |         |
|Israeli Occupation Forces in the Gaza Strip and 2      |         |
|killed in the West Bank, 115 others injured."          |         |
|Palestinian Centre for Human Rights: press release:    |19/07/06 |
|"IOF Attack El-Maghazi Refugee Camp in Gaza and Nablus |         |
|in the West Bank."                                     |         |
|Reuters Foundation Alert Net: "Israel kills 3 gunmen in|19/07/06 |
|West Bank raid-medics."                                |         |
|Il pane e le Rose: "  Denied the approval of return to |30/07/06 |
|Gaza to the Palestinian musical group."                |         |
|Reuters Foundation Alert Net: "Record Hizbollah rocket |02/08/06 |
|barrage kills 1; West Bank hit."                       |         |
|Reuters Foundation Alert Net: "Palestinian killed in   |06/08/06 |
|West Bank shooting."                                   |         |
|Palestinian Centre for Human Rights: weekly report for |09/08/06 |
|period from 03/08/06 to 09/08/06.                      |         |
|Palestinian Centre for Human Rights: weekly report  for|16/08/06 |
|period from 10/08/06 to 16/08/06                       |         |
|Palestinian Centre for Human Rights: press release: "3 |20/08/06 |
|Palestinian Civilians Killed by IOF in the West Bank." |         |
|Reuters Foundation Alert Net: "Israeli troops kill     |20/08/06 |
|Palestinian in West Bank-radio."                       |         |
|Reuters Foundation Alert Net: "Israeli troops detain   |20/08/06 |
|Hamas lawmaker in West Bank."                          |         |
|Reuters Foundation Alert Net: "Israeli troops kill West|31/08/06 |
|Bank militant-security."                               |         |
|Reuters Foundation Alert Net: "Israelis arrest         |03/09/06 |
|suspected West Bank rocket squad."                     |         |
|United Nations: OCHA Humanitarian Update: "Access and  |09/06    |
|Protection"                                            |         |
|International Solidarity Movement: Archive for the     |03/11/06 |
|"Tulkarem Region" Category.                            |         |
|International Solidarity Movement: "Travel Information |13/11/06 |
|and Tips."                                             |         |
|www.kinghussein.gov.jo: "Getting to Jordan"            |13/11/06 |
|www.kinghussein.gov.jo: "Entry and visa requirements." |13/11/06 |
|www.forcedmigration.org: "Palestinian refugees in      |13/11/06 |
|Jordan"                                                |         |
|Checkpoint Watch: "Testimonies from Occupied Palestine"|2006     |
|by Yehudit Kirstein Keshet                             |         |
|Palestinian Centre for Human Rights: "Destruction of   |Undated  |
|Land and Property." (downloaded 13/06/06)              |         |
|Palestinian Centre for Human Rights: "Violations of    |Undated  |
|Children's Rights." (downloaded 13/06/06)              |         |
|Palestinian centre for Human Rights: "Closures."       |Undated  |
|(downloaded 13/06/06)                                  |         |
|Palestinian Centre for Human Rights: "Arbitrary        |Undated  |
|detention, Ill-treatment and Torture." (downloaded     |         |
|13/06/06)                                              |         |
|Palestinian Centre for Human Rights: "Fact Sheet:      |Undated  |
|Prisoners and Torture." (downloaded 13/06/06)          |         |
|Palestinian Centre for Human Rights: Closure Convention|Undated  |
|Palestinian Centre for Human Rights: "International    |Undated  |
|Covenant on Civil and political Rights" (downloaded    |         |
|13/06/06)                                              |         |
|12 Various photographs.                                |Undated  |
|Large coloured map of Israel and Occupied Territories. |Undated  |
|Christian Aid maps: "Facts on the Ground.  The end of  |Undated  |
|the two-state solution?"                               |         |
|Palestinian Economic Council for Development and       |Undated  |
|Reconstruction; Map.                                   |         |


