
EA (EEA: 3 months residence) Bulgaria [2008] UKAIT 00017

                       ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at:  Field House                                   Date of Hearing: 5
February 2008


                                   Before:


 Mr C M G Ockelton, Deputy President of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
                       Senior Immigration Judge Latter

                                   Between

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation
The Appellant:         in person
For the Respondent:          Mr. L. Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer

   1) The Citizens right to be admitted to the UK  for  a  period  of  three
      months under the Citizens Directive and the EEA Regulations  does  not
      entitle an EEA national to add three months to the end of a period  of
      lawful presence in the UK.  (2) A Bulgarian or Romanian  national  has
      to comply strictly with the provisions  of  the  2006  Regulations  in
      order to obtain the benefits derived from them.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Bulgaria.  He appealed to  the  Tribunal
      against the decision of the respondent on  14  May  2007  refusing  to
      issue him a registration certificate as confirmation  of  a  right  of
      residence in the United Kingdom under  European  Community  Law.   The
      Immigration Judge dismissed his appeal.  The appellant applied for and
      obtained an order for reconsideration.  Thus the matter  comes  before
      us.

   2. A number of facts are beyond dispute in this  appeal.   The  appellant
      came to the United Kingdom on 14 April 2006.  He  did  so  relying  on
      entry clearance as a work permit holder that had been issued to him on
      12 April and on its face expired on  12  April  2007.   He  worked  in
      virtue  of  a  work  permit  which  expresses  the  period  for  which
      permission to work is given as twelve months  from  the  date  of  the
      grant of leave to enter the United Kingdom.

   3. It is right to say that the appellant left the United  Kingdom  for  a
      holiday in  late  November  or  December  2006.   He  returned  during
      December 2006 in reliance (and we should emphasise,  perfectly  lawful
      reliance) again on the entry clearance in his  passport.   On  the  30
      April 2007 the appellant made the application that gave  rise  to  the
      present refusal and appeal.

   4. The application is made on the basis that by that date he  had  worked
      legally in the United Kingdom for a period of twelve months  extending
      over the New Year 2007 when Bulgaria became a member of  the  European
      Union.

   5. The status of the appellant is governed in the United Kingdom  by  the
      Accession (Immigration and Worker Authorisation) Regulations 2006  (SI
      2006/3317) which govern matters relating to Bulgaria and Romania,  the
      countries which together became members of the Union of the 1  January
      2007.  Those regulations make provision for authorisation for  workers
      who are citizens  of  Bulgaria  and  Romania,  and  for  authorisation
      arrangements to cease under certain circumstances, when  nationals  of
      Bulgaria and Romania then become, for  all  United  Kingdom  purposes,
      equivalent to nationals of other Member States.

   6. The crucial provision is that a person who is a citizen of Bulgaria or
      Romania who has worked legally in the United Kingdom for a  period  of
      twelve months, that extends over the accession date,  becomes  at  the
      expiry of that period a  person  who  is  no  longer  subject  to  the
      authorisation arrangements.  The appellant says  that  he  is  such  a
      person.  The respondent says the appellant is not such a person.

   7. The appellant's argument is a simple one.  He  arrived  lawfully  with
      entry clearance as a work permit holder on the  14  April  2006.   His
      work permit extended for twelve months.  On the 14th  of  April  2007,
      still working in accordance with the work  permit,  he  had  therefore
      completed twelve months  lawful  work.   He  is  therefore,  he  says,
      entitled to be exempt from the authorisation provisions.

   8. The argument put  by  Mr.  Tarlow  on  behalf  of  the  respondent  is
      substantially more complex, but is not necessarily the worse for that.
       It is as follows.  The appellant had a work permit  which  authorised
      him to work for a period of twelve months from his date of  his  leave
      to enter.  Every  work  permit  holder,  and  the  appellant  has  not
      suggested that he is any different,  is  told  that  his  work  permit
      itself gives him no permission to be in the United Kingdom.  He  must,
      as well, obtain entry  clearance,  or,  if  he  is  already  here,  an
      extension of his existing leave.  The appellant  obtained  such  entry
      clearance and used it; as we have indicated, he used it twice.

   9. What period of leave to enter did his entry clearance give  him?   The
      answer is to be found in the provisions of the Immigration  (Leave  to
      Enter and Remain) Order 2000 (SI 2000/1161);  Article  4(3)  of  which
      provides that in the case of entry clearance to which  that  paragraph
      applies  (and  the  appellant's  entry  clearance  is  such  an  entry
      clearance) the period of leave is a period "being the period beginning
      on the date that the holder arrives in the United Kingdom  and  ending
      at the date  of  the  expiry  of  the  entry  clearance".   For  those
      purposes, therefore, the appellant's leave  to  enter  expired  on  12
      April 2007.

  10. Although his permission to work, if he otherwise met the  requirements
      of UK immigration law, expired two days later,  he  had  no  leave  to
      enter the United Kingdom after 12 April  2007.   It  would  appear  to
      follow from that, taken by itself, that the appellant's last two  days
      of his twelve months' work, upon which he relies,  were  not  days  on
      which he was working legally here: they were  days  on  which  he  was
      working here in accordance with a work permit,  but  contrary  to  the
      provisions of immigration law, because he had no extant leave.

  11. The appellant says that, under those circumstances, his  leave  should
      nevertheless be regarded as continuing.   He  gives  two  reasons  for
      that.  The first is that, given that he had  a  work  permit,  he  was
      entitled to assume that  he  had  continuing  leave  to  enter.   That
      argument, we are sorry to say, is simply not worthy of him.  He  knew,
      because the visa is in his passport, that the document upon  which  he
      had relied for admission to the United Kingdom expired  on  12  April,
      and he did nothing to regularise his position  until  over  two  weeks
      later.

  12. The second argument is substantially more subtle.  It  is  this:   The
      appellant's own country became a member of European  Union  on  the  1
      January 2007.  The appellant points out that a citizen of  a  European
      Union country is entitled to be in the United Kingdom, or  indeed  any
      other Member State, for a period of three months under the  provisions
      of the Citizens Directive 2004/38/EC.  He argues that, on  the  expiry
      of his leave to enter the United Kingdom, if it be said  that  it  did
      expire on 12 April 2007, he than began a period of three months lawful
      presence under the provisions of that Directive.

  13. We do not find the decision  in  this  case  easy,  not  only  because
      neither party has been able to give us a great deal of assistance with
      the detailed law, but also because it may seem hard  that  a  decision
      depends on two days.  There is no doubt, however, that  the  structure
      of immigration law does require that presence be lawful presence,  and
      unlawful presence (that is to say presence after  expiry  of  existing
      leave, or presence  without  leave)  has  the  character  of  unlawful
      presence however short it is.

  14. We ought to look first at the appellant's argument based on his  right
      as an EU citizen.  The  relevant  provisions  are  in  art  6  of  the
      Directive as follows.

           "Union citizens  shall  have  the  right  of  residence  on  the
           territory of another Member State for a period of  up  to  three
           months without any conditions or any formalities other than  the
           requirement to hold a valid identity card or passport".

      There is no doubt that the appellant has  a  valid  identity  card  or
      passport.  We have already referred to the entry clearance endorsed in
      it.

15.   But there is also, of course, no doubt that  that  the  appellant  had
    three months residence  in  the  United  Kingdom  from  the  moment  of
    Accession of Bulgaria until the end of March 2007.  He did not, at that
    time, seek to rely on his Bulgarian nationality as giving him  a  right
    to that residence.  Can he then claim that his right of  residence  for
    three months began when his leave to enter expired?  We see  no  reason
    to suppose that he can.  If he relies on the Directive,  he  has  three
    months from the moment when he first  became  an  EU  national  in  the
    United Kingdom; that was the first moment of the 1st January  2007  and
    expired, as we have said, at the end of March.  It  cannot  suffice  to
    render his presence here in April lawful.

16. If we look instead to the United Kingdom's regulations  which  are  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006  (SI  2006/1003),
    we find in reg 11(1) a provision that:


        "An EEA national must be admitted  to  the  United  Kingdom  if  he
        produces on arrival a valid  national  identity  card  or  passport
        issued by an EEA State.",

      and in reg 13(1):

        "An EEA national is entitled to reside in the United Kingdom for  a
        period not exceeding three months beginning on the date on which he
        is admitted to the United Kingdom provided that he  holds  a  valid
        national identity card or passport issued by an EEA State."

    We see nothing  in  those  Regulations  that  suggests  that  they  are
    inconsistent with the Directive  they purport to implement:  and  there
    is nothing in them that assists the appellant,  because  he  has  never
    sought admission to the United Kingdom, or been admitted to the  United
    Kingdom, on the strength of being a national of an EEA State.   On  the
    contrary, as we have indicated, on his last  admission  to  the  United
    Kingdom he was admitted by virtue of his  entry  clearance  as  a  work
    permit holder.  That was because the date of that admission was  before
    Bulgaria's accession to the Union.  That is sufficient to deal with the
    appellant's second argument based on his right as a  Union  citizen  to
    reside in the United Kingdom for a period of three months lawfully.

17. Can anything, therefore, be done with his claim that  the  work  permit
    gave him, or implied for him some leave which  is  sufficient  for  the
    purposes  of  the  Accession  Regulations,  because  it  is  on   those
    Regulations that he must depend for the relief  which  he  seeks?   The
    appellant cited to us a number of the provisions  of  the  Regulations,
    but unfortunately for him the answer in his case is provided  by  other
    provisions of the  Regulations  which  deal  very  precisely  with  his
    situation.  We need to set out the whole of  the  relevant  provisions,
    which are as follows.

18. In Regulation 2, headed "Accession State  national  subject  to  worker
    authorisation", we find the following para (4)


        "A national of Bulgaria or Romania who legally works in the  United
        Kingdom without interruption for a  period  of  12  months  falling
        partly or wholly after 31st December 2006  shall  cease  to  be  an
        accession State national subject to worker authorisation at the end
        of that period of 12 months".


      That is the provision on which the appellant relies.

19.   In para 12 of the same Regulation we find this at sub-paragraph (b):
        "(b) a person working in the United Kingdom on or after 1st January
        2007 is legally working during any period in which he-

               (i) [does not apply]

               (ii) holds an accession worker authorisation document and is
               working in accordance with the conditions set  out  in  that
               document;...."



20.   What then  is  an  'accession  worker  authorisation  document'?   The
    answer to that question is found first in reg 1(e) which provides  that
    the phase be interpreted in accordance with reg 9(2).  Regulation  9(2)
    needs to be read with reg 9(3) and the relevant parts are as follows.

           "9.- (2) For the purpose  of  these  Regulations,  an  accession
           worker authorisation document is-

              a) a passport or other travel  document  endorsed  before  1st
                 January 2007 to show that the holder has leave to enter  or
                 remain in the United Kingdom under the 1971 Act, subject to
                 a  condition  restricting  his  employment  in  the  United
                 Kingdom to a particular employer or category of employment;
              ...
            (3) But a document shall cease to be treated  as  an  accession
           worker authorisation document under paragraph (2)-

              (a)      in the case of a  document  mentioned  in  paragraph
                 (2)(a), at the end of the period for which leave  to  enter
                 or remain is given;...."

  21. Unfortunately for the appellant those Regulations exactly confirm  the
      position argued by Mr. Tarlow.  At the end of the period  of  validity
      of the visa the appellant ceased to have  leave  to  enter  under  the
      Leave to Enter and Remain Order.  On that date,  which  was  12  April
      2007, the document on  which  he  relied  for  the  purposes  for  the
      Accession Regulations ceased to be an accession  worker  authorisation
      document.  The last two days of the work, which he undertook under his
      work permit, were therefore days  on  which,  according  to  the  very
      Regulations on which he relies for the relief he seeks, his  work  was
      not legal work and he accordingly  cannot  bring  himself  within  the
      provisions of reg 2(4).


22.   For those reasons the Immigration Judge made no material error in  law
    because on the facts as agreed by both sides the appeal was bound to be
    dismissed.  We therefore order that his determination shall stand.














                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT
                                                             Date:
