
PS (prison conditions; military service) Ukraine CG [2006] UKAIT 00016

Asylum and Immigration Tribunal

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow (Eagle Building)       |Determination Promulgated|
|On   30 November 2005                   |On  22 February 2006     |
|Prepared                                |                         |


                                   Before

                 Mr N H Goldstein - Senior Immigration Judge
                   Mr M E Deans - Senior Immigration Judge

                                   Between


                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A J Bradley, Solicitor.
For the Respondent:    Mr R Pattison, Home Office Presenting Officer.


Prison conditions in the Ukraine are likely to breach Article 3 of the
ECHR.

This determination supersedes TV (Ukraine - Prison conditions) Ukraine
[2004] UKIAT 00222.

There is insufficient evidence to establish a real risk of Article 3 ill-
treatment to conscripts and new recruits from the practice of dedovshchina
(hazing) in the Ukrainian armed forces.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The Appellant is a citizen of the Ukraine.   He arrived in the  United
    Kingdom on 14 December 2001 having been issued with a work permit.   He
    was granted an extension of his work permit  until  16  December  2003.
    He went back to the Ukraine on 10 January  2004  and  returned  to  the
    United Kingdom on 31 January 2004.   He was granted entry clearance  to
    enter the United Kingdom on 21 January 2004.

2.    It was subsequently discovered that the Appellant had  lied  in  order
    to obtain further entry clearance and the  Immigration  Officer  served
    him with Home Office Form IS81 curtailing his leave to enter.

3.    The Appellant appealed against  this  decision  and  his  appeal  came
    before Mrs I A M Murray, Adjudicator,  on  6  September  2004  and  was
    dismissed.  Mrs Murray, however, on that  occasion  did  not  hear  the
    Appellant's asylum appeal.

4.    The  Appellant  appealed  that  decision  to  the  Immigration  Appeal
    Tribunal and on 30 December 2004,  Mr  D  J  Parkes  an  Acting  Vice-
    President, granted permission to appeal  on  the  basis  of  the  third
    ground that Mr Parkes referred  to  as  arising  "from  what  might  be
    described as a somewhat half-hearted asylum claim".

5.    Mr Parkes continued:

         "The Claimant had returned to the  Ukraine  when  his  work  permit
         expired.  On 31 January 2004 he signed to the effect that he had no
         other grounds but those  relating  to  the  refusal  of  entry  for
         deception. It was only in the Notice of Appeal to  the  Adjudicator
         on 10 February that the Claimant said that he wished to  apply  for
         asylum. Then on 5 April 2004 he signed a  statement  of  additional
         grounds pursuant to Section 120 of the Nationality, Immigration and
         Asylum Act 2002.   This was now treated as an  application  by  the
         Secretary of State upon which a decision was given,  appealable  to
         an Adjudicator prior to the hearing before  the  Adjudicator.   The
         2002 Act, however, had come into force on 1 April."


6.    Mr Parkes then described how the Claimant's representative before  the
    Adjudicator informed her that the Appellant had an  outstanding  asylum
    claim and he considered it arguable that the Adjudicator ought to  have
    dealt with the asylum claim.  Having expressed the view that  the  case
    was thus suitable for a remittal to Mrs I A M Murray and there being no
    objection to this proposal raised by either party  to  the  appeal,  an
    appropriate determination to that effect was then issued.

7.    It was in such circumstances, that on 17 March 2005, this matter  came
    back before Mrs I A M Murray, Adjudicator, in order for her to hear and
    determine the Appellant's asylum appeal.

8.    In a  determination  promulgated  on  7  April  2005  the  Adjudicator
    dismissed the Appellant's appeal on asylum and human rights grounds.

9.     Following  an  application  to  the  Tribunal  by  the  Appellant,  a
    reconsideration was ordered on the basis, as expressed  by  Mr  Richard
    Chalkley, Senior Immigration Judge, that:

         "The Adjudicator may have erred in law  in  failing  to  separately
         consider the Appellant's Article 3 claim and  failing  to  consider
         whether, if the  Appellant  chooses  to  refuse  to  serve  in  the
         Military, any term of imprisonment he might receive would amount to
         Article 3 mistreatment."


10.   A reconsideration  hearing  took  place  before  the  Tribunal  on  23
    September 2005, the Panel, comprising Miss B Mensah, Senior Immigration
    Judge, and Mr C J Hodgkinson, Immigration Judge.

11.   The Tribunal decided  there  was  a  material  error  of  law  and  it
    directed that the case be set down for a  second-stage  reconsideration
    hearing:
         ".. so that unequivocal and clear findings can be made with respect
         to the Appellant's military service and prison conditions claim."

12.   The Tribunal's reasons for the decision  that  there  was  a  material
    error of law in the determination were set out as follows:

         "This appeal has had a  long  history  having  first  begun  as  an
         immigration only appeal (paragraph 5 of  the  determination),  that
         was dismissed, as was an asylum claim.   In respect of  the  asylum
         claim the sole basis of the claim  was  the  question  of  military
         service and the Appellant's unwillingness to  undertake  it.    The
         Adjudicator dismissed the asylum claim.   This  was  an  appeal  in
         which the Article 3 claim did not necessarily stand  or  fall  with
         the asylum claim; the Article 3 claim  was  in  respect  of  prison
         conditions in the Ukraine.  The Adjudicator did not deal with  that
         aspect of the claim.   The first question  we  have  to  decide  is
         whether there was any error of law on the part of the  Adjudicator.




         Having considered the determination and heard submissions  from  Mr
         Mullen on behalf of the Appellant and Mr Matthews on behalf of  the
         Respondent, we are satisfied that  the  determination  contains  an
         error of law.  The Adjudicator rejected the Appellant's claim  that
         he is a conscientious objector and therefore that he will face  any
         period in prison (paragraph 37 and first 2 sentences  of  paragraph
         35).   However she also  states  that  if  he  does  not  undertake
         military service he will be imprisoned (last sentence of  paragraph
         35).  It is unfortunate that she does not then go  on  to  consider
         the consequences of imprisonment. The  reference  in  paragraph  35
         introduced a hint of uncertainty into  the  Adjudicator's  decision
         (that may be the danger of considering  matters  on  an  'even  if'
         basis).


         We are satisfied that the error of law  lay  in  the  Adjudicator's
         conclusion that the asylum  and  Article  3  claim  stood  or  fell
         together (when they clearly did not in this case) and  her  failure
         to give the Article 3 claim any consideration.   Had that been  the
         only matter we were satisfied that we  could  have  considered  the
         objective material ourselves. However, the  Adjudicator's  lack  of
         clarity as to the possibility of  the  Appellant  being  imprisoned
         meant that we were unable to decide a basis on  which  to  proceed.
         Her failure to consider the Article 3 prison claim in the light  of
         the lack of clarity as to the possibility of  the  Appellant  being
         imprisoned (paragraph 35) also amounted to an error of law."


13.   For the avoidance of any doubt, at  the  outset  of  the  hearing,  we
    sought and obtained the agreement of the  parties'  representatives  in
    light of the Tribunal's reasoning upon the First Stage  Reconsideration
    Hearing, as set  out  above,  that  the  Second  Stage  Reconsideration
    Hearing related solely to Article 3 ECHR, issues.

14.   The parties further agreed with us, that the  Tribunal  were  entitled
    in such circumstances to proceed on  the  basis  of  the  Adjudicator's
    findings of fact, as contained in her determination that related to the
    Appellant's asylum appeal.

      The Appellant's evidence relating to whether he would refuse to  carry
    out military service.
15.   The parties' representatives further agreed with us however,  that  it
    remained necessary for the Tribunal to make findings inter alia, as  to
    whether the Appellant would refuse to carry out military service, if he
    was called upon to do so by the Ukrainian authorities upon  return.  We
    were mindful that at paragraph 8 of her determination  the  Adjudicator
    had recorded:

         "The Appellant was asked why he did not want to do military service
         in the Ukraine.  He stated that he does not believe in war and that
         the army teaches you  to  kill  people  and  that  is  against  his
         principles.  He said life in the army is violent even if  there  is
         no conflict."


16.    At  paragraphs  9  and  10  of  her  determination  the   Adjudicator
continued:

    "9.    The Appellant was asked if he knew about dedovshchina.  He  said
         that he did and he was asked what it is.  He  said  that  when  new
         recruits are sent to the army, soldiers who have been in  the  army
         for one year are supposed to look after these  recruits,  but  what
         happens to the new recruits is that they get subjected to violence.
          He said that the new recruits are subjected to degrading treatment
         and violence. The Appellant was asked what effect this has  on  the
         new recruits and he said that it makes them believe in violence and
         when they have been in the army for a year they in turn  treat  the
         next batch of new recruits badly. He said that this treatment makes
         the new recruits to the army mentally unstable.


    10.    He told the story of a soldier who saw other soldiers  stealing.
         It was his duty to report this but when he did this  he  was  found
         hanged.  He said that this was not a suicide  as  the  soldier  had
         been beaten black and blue before he had died.  The Appellant  said
         that he did not wish this to happen to him and he did not  wish  to
         join the army in the Ukraine."


17.   Mr Bradley for the Appellant, agreed that the Adjudicator's  recording
    of this evidence could properly be taken into account by  the  Tribunal
    as their starting point and this meant that he did not  intend  to  ask
    the Appellant any questions about the practice of dedovshchina.

18.   There was before us a further signed statement of the Appellant  dated
    24 November 2005 in relation to which we gave  leave  at  Mr  Bradley's
    request for a further paragraph 7 to be added.

19.   For the sake of completeness, we set out below  the  details  of  that
    further statement (paragraphs 1 and 2 simply being formal and  relating
    to the Appellant's name, date of birth, place  of  origin  and  current
    address):

    "3.    I left the Ukraine  because  I  wished  to  avoid  carrying  out
         military service.  I do not believe in war and I do not  believe  I
         should be forced to join the army.  If I refuse to join the army  I
         will be arrested and taken to the army by the police.   Once  I  am
         there, if I refuse to follow orders I will be  imprisoned.  I  also
         believe that if I protest against and refuse to undertake  military
         service I will be subjected to violence.


    4.     My brother MS was forced to undertake military service  and  his
         hands were permanently damaged while undertaking military  service.
         He suffered from frostbite as a result of not being  provided  with
         adequate clothing equipment.  Many people who are forced to undergo
         military service return with their health badly affected.  I do not
         wish to be forced into the army where there are very poor standards
         and conditions and where the standards and conditions will  put  my
         life and my health at risk and in danger.  I believe that if  I  am
         returned to the Ukraine I will  be  called  to  undertake  military
         service,  arrested  by  the  police  and  taken  to  the  army  and
         imprisoned and ill-treated  if  I  refuse  to  carry  out  military
         duties.  The conditions in military service  itself  are  poor  and
         dangerous.


    5.     If I am returned I will refuse to carry out military service and
         I believe this will result in me being imprisoned, ill-treated  and
         kept in life threatening conditions.


    6.     I confirm that I have read through and signed this statement and
         I adopt it as my evidence for the court today.


    7.     I am scared about the practice of hazing, the  classmate  of  my
         friend was killed as a result of this practice".


20.   In relation to paragraph 7 of the Appellant's statement,  Mr  Pattison
    initially sought an adjournment on the basis that he had not been given
    notice of this further claim, but promptly withdrew it when we reminded
    him that these were matters in relation  to  which  the  Appellant  had
    given evidence before the Adjudicator as reflected in paragraphs  8,  9
    and 10 of her determination.

21.   Insofar as this second stage reconsideration  hearing  relates  solely
    to Article 3 ECHR issues, we  agreed  with  the  parties  that  it  was
    necessary for the Tribunal to  make  credibility  findings  as  to  the
    Appellant's intentions if  returned  to  the  Ukraine  as  regards  the
    undertaking of military service.   The  Appellant  having  adopted  his
    amended statement (to which we have  made  earlier  reference  in  this
    determination), and his evidence in chief, he was then subject to cross-
    examination by Mr Pattison.  There was a brief  re-examination  on  the
    part of Mr Bradley.  We have  given  that  evidence  our  most  careful
    consideration.

22.   The Appellant told us that he had decided that  he  did  not  wish  to
    undertake military service before returning to the United Kingdom.   He
    could not recall the date of his return but  thought  it  was  February
    2003.   In fact upon checking his immigration history  it  is  apparent
    that he returned to the United Kingdom in January 2004.  The  Appellant
    claimed that he had not given any thought to the matter of his call  up
    for military service prior to his first visit to the United Kingdom  in
    December 2001 because at that stage he was studying  at  a  college  in
    Ukraine. On 14 December 2001,  he  arrived  in  this  country  under  a
    programme of student exchange. He subsequently obtained an extension to
    his work permit that enabled him to remain in the  United  Kingdom  for
    two years.  The Appellant explained that when his extended  permit  was
    coming to its end, he realised that if he returned to the  Ukraine  and
    stayed there for any length of time he would be subjected  to  military
    service. It was for that reason that he decided to return to the United
    Kingdom.    The  Appellant  maintained  that  he  had  not   previously
    appreciated in the course of his first visit to this country,  that  he
    could apply for asylum.  The Appellant recalled being interviewed by an
    Immigration Officer at Gatwick Airport upon his return in January  2004
    and indeed being asked questions about his student visa.

23.   Significantly, the  Appellant  agreed,  that  he  was  also  asked  at
    interview if there was any other reason as to why he wished  to  be  in
    the United Kingdom and acknowledged that his answer as recorded in  his
    interview record was "No".   However, the Appellant  repeated  that  he
    had returned to the United Kingdom because he did not wish to undertake
    military service in the Ukraine and that he had  reached  his  decision
    prior to his departure.

24.   When asked to explain as to why in  such  circumstances,  he  had  not
    informed the Immigration Officer at Gatwick Airport as to this  matter,
    the Appellant maintained that he was unaware that he could discuss such
    matters at that stage, "as before when I arrived in the UK  I  did  not
    know I  could  apply  for  asylum  in  this  country".   The  Appellant
    confirmed that in such circumstances he did not inform the interviewing
    officer of his true intentions or seek to claim asylum.

25.   Mr Pattison drew to the Appellant's  attention,  that  in  an  earlier
    statement he had provided to the Tribunal, the Appellant had stated:

         "I told the interviewer that I did not want to  undertake  military
             service".


26.   The Appellant accepted that this was  distinctly  different  from  the
    oral evidence that he was now giving.   The Appellant was shown a  copy
    of his Statement of Additional Grounds (SAG) completed  on  31  January
    2004.  He accepted that it bore his signature.

27.   The Appellant was reminded that the evidence showed  that  he  claimed
    asylum on 12 February 2004.  In such circumstances, the Appellant  was
    asked as to why he had failed to record on the SAG that  he  wished  to
    claim asylum in the United Kingdom.   He responded:

    "What I believed this was - that it  was  just  an  additional  reason,
         additional question because I had already submitted the main asylum
         form.  I thought everything was in the main form and this  document
         was just additional grounds for claiming asylum."


Mr Pattison reminded the Appellant that the SAG form  was  completed  on  31
    January  2004  and  that  the  Home  Office  had  never  received   the
    Appellant's claim for asylum until 10 February 2004.   The  Appellant's
    noteworthy response was:

    "I am confused now.   I believe as I explained, that I thought  it  was
         just additional to the main claim for asylum.


28.   The Appellant continued,  that  his  brother  had  completed  military
    service in the Ukraine but he was uncertain whether that was  eight  or
    five years previously.

29.   When asked if he had had any contact  with  the  Ukraine  about  being
    called up to do military service, the Appellant told us that:

    "I have not contacted them as I know  because  everyone  knows  in  the
         Ukraine that every  man  aged  eighteen  to  twenty  five  must  do
         military service in Ukraine - that is compulsory".


When asked upon return to the Ukraine, whether he could delay  being  called
    up by reason of higher education studies, the Appellant responded  that
    he did not have a sufficient level of secondary  education  that  would
    enable him to go to a high education college in the  Ukraine  for  this
    purpose.

      The Background Evidence

30.   There  were  before  us  three  Inventories  of  Productions  that  we
    numbered bundles 1, 2, and 3 respectfully.  It was apparent  to  us  in
    the course of the hearing that  bundles  2  and  3  were  not  properly
    paginated, that accordingly created unnecessary difficulties for us  in
    the course of the hearing and in particular the  parties'  submissions,
    that could otherwise have been avoided.

31.   Bundle 1 largely comprised papers  that  were  previously  before  the
    Adjudicator and included CIPU Bulletins 1/2004 and 1/2005.

32.   Bundle 2 contained what were described as Home  Office  Key  Documents
    in relation to  the  Ukraine,  a  War  Resisters  International  Report
    entitled "Refusing to Bear Arms" of 2005 and a number of newspaper  and
    internet articles.

33.   Bundle 3 contained a US State Department Report of 2003 and report  of
    the Ukraine's first Ombudsman's visit to the Ukrainian Free  University
    dated 26 May 2004.

34.   The Appellant's representatives  had  provided  a  further  bundle  of
    objective  material  that  included  the  Annual  Report   of   Amnesty
    International of 2005 in relation to the Ukraine; a World  Report  2005
    and an Amnesty International Report of 2004.

35.   In addition the bundle included transcripts of the  decisions  of  the
    Tribunal in:

         VB (Desertion - Chechnya War  -  Hamilton)  Russia  CG  2003  UKIAT
         00020. (To which no reference was made by Mr Bradley in his closing
         submissions);and
                           TV (Ukraine - Prison Conditions)  Ukraine  [2004]
         UKIAT 00022.


36.    Before  turning  to  evaluate  the  Appellant's  case,  it  is  first
    necessary to  consider  the  background  evidence  relating  to  prison
    conditions and military service.

37.    Whether  this  particular  Appellant  will  be  at   real   risk   of
    imprisonment, is something we will have to decide. But before we do so,
    we need to examine whether for persons who  do  face  a  real  risk  of
    imprisonment, the conditions they will experience would be contrary  to
    Article 3.

38.   We also need to consider the conditions in military service, so as  to
    decide whether performing military service would place  this  Appellant
    at risk.

39.   Both these tasks,  require  us  to  look  at  general  categories  for
    persons in Ukrainian prisons and persons in Ukrainian military service.
       By virtue of the fact  that  we  had  before  us  as  much  relevant
    background evidence as seems to be available, we have decided that  our
    conclusions on these two issues can stand as country guidance.

40.   The Tribunal were mindful that the Appellant could succeed  under  the
    Human Rights Convention, were he able  to  establish  a  real  risk  of
    breach of his protected human  rights  in  Ukraine.   Indeed,  where  a
    prospective breach of Article 3 is alleged the standard of proof is the
    same as  in  asylum  appeals.   The  question  is,  has  the  Appellant
    established there is a real risk that his rights under Article  3  will
    be breached.

41.   We further remind ourselves that under Article 3:

         "No-one shall be subjected to torture or to  inhuman  or  degrading
         treatment or punishment".


42.   Such ill-treatment must attain a minimum level of severity  if  it  is
    to fall within the scope of Article 3.

43.   The Tribunal's examination of the existence of a  real  risk  of  ill-
    treatment must necessarily be a rigorous one in view  of  its  absolute
    character.

44.   As held in Soering [1989] 11EHRR 439:

         "The ill-treatment must attain a minimum level of severity if it is
         to fall within the scope of Article  3.   The  assessment  of  this
         minimum is, in the nature of things, relative: it  depends  on  all
         the circumstances of the case, such as the nature  and  context  of
         the  treatment  and  punishment,  the  manner  and  method  of  its
         execution, its duration, its physical or mental effects and in some
         instances the sex, age and state of health of the victim."


45.   It follows that the minimum level  of  severity  requirement  means  a
    high threshold to establish Article 3 jurisprudence.

46.   In this regard we are mindful of the guidance of the Court  of  Appeal
    in Krotov [2004] EWCA Civ 69 that, whilst  conscientious  objection  to
    military service, cannot ion general found a claim  under  the  Refugee
    Convention, it may do so when it leads to punishment  for  refusing  to
    participate in a type of military action condemned by the international
    community as contrary to the basic rules of human conduct.   This  does
    not require specific  condemnation  of  an  international  conflict  by
    United Nations or National Governments, but does  require  evidence  of
    gross and  systematic  violations  of  humanitarian  norms,  which  the
    Appellant would reasonably likely to find himself participating in.

47.   In Krotov Potter LJ who gave the leading judgment considered  that  if
    a Court or Tribunal was satisfied:


    "a.    That the level and nature of the conflict and  the  attitude  of
         the relevant governmental authority towards  it,  had  reached  the
         position  where  combatants  were  or  might  be  required   on   a
         sufficiently widespread basis to act in breach of the  basic  rules
         of  human  conduct  generally  recognised  by   the   international
         community;


    b.     that they would be punished for refusing to do so, and;


    c.     that disapproval of such methods and fear of such punishment was
         the genuine reason motivating the refusal of an  asylum  seeker  to
         serve in the relevant conflict;


    then it should find the Convention ground had been established".


48.   In TV, the Tribunal referred to the judgment of the  Court  of  Appeal
    in Hariri [2003] EWCA Civ 807, in which the Court drew extensively upon
    the decision of the Tribunal in Muzafar Iqbal [2002] UKIAT 02239, where
    the Tribunal stated in paragraph 57:


         "In cases which rested not on a personal risk of harm (for example,
         where the police or prison staff  would  have  cause  to  target  a
         claimant) but on a  risk  of  serious  harm  said  to  face  people
         generally, for example in this case all  persons  detained  pending
         trial, it cannot be said that  they  would  face  a  real  risk  of
         serious harm unless in that country there is a  consistent  pattern
         of gross and systematic violations of their human rights whilst  in
         detention."


49.   This passage was approved by Laws LJ in Hariri as reflecting  no  more
    or no less than the reality  of  the  situation;  the  fact  that  ill-
    treatment or misconduct might be  routine  or  frequent  would  not  be
    enough.  Laws LJ stated in paragraph 8:

         "At this stage the Appellant's argument before the IAT was that  he
         was at risk of ill-treatment if returned as a member  of  a  class,
         rather than on  account  of  facts  especially  put  to  him.   His
         essential  complaint  and  the  point  on  which  Ward  LJ  granted
         permission to appeal, is that the IAT in  paragraph  10  applied  a
         standard of proof for the establishment of a risk of persecution or
         treatment contrary to Article  3  which  is  higher  than,  and  at
         variance from, the standard established in the  jurisprudence.   In
         short it imposes greater burdens on an  applicant  than  should  be
         imposed having regard to the test set  out  in  Sivakumaran  [1988]
         1 AC 958, in their Lordship's House, namely: 'a reasonable  degree
         of likelihood' of relevant ill-treatment.  This requires proof of a
         real, that is, not a fanciful, risk; but  its  perceived  incidence
         may well  be  less,  perhaps  a  good  deal  less,  than  a  formal
         probability of 51 per cent or more.  It is common ground  that  the
         Sivakumaran standard applies as surely in appeals brought under the
         European Convention on Human Rights as it does in  refugee  appeals
         as  such.   The  Appellant's  target  in  this  argument   is   the
         requirement, adopted at paragraph 10 of the IAT determination which
         I have read, to show 'a consistent pattern of gross and  systematic
         violation of fundamental human rights' by  way  of  punishment  for
         draft evasion or unauthorised departure from the country, before  a
         case of persecution or Article 3 ill-treatment could be accepted...


         In my judgment however, the Appellant's arguments  all  forget  one
         simple but central fact  in  this  case.  It  is  that  the  points
         concerning the Appellant's individual circumstances had all  fallen
         away. When it came to paragraph 10 of the  IAT  determination,  his
         case depended entirely upon it being established that there  was  a
         real risk that he would suffer unlawful ill-treatment,  as  I  have
         said, as a member of a class or perhaps two classes: draft  evaders
         and those who had left the country  without  authority.   In  those
         circumstances,  as  it  seems  to  me,  the  'real  risk'   -   the
         conventional  Sivakumaran  standard  -  could  not  be  established
         without it being shown that the general situation was one in  which
         ill-treatment of the kind in question generally happened: hence the
         expression 'gross and systematic'.   The point  is  one  of  logic.
         Absent evidence to show the Appellant was at risk  because  of  his
         specific circumstances, there could be no real risk of relevant ill-
         treatment unless the situation to  which  the  Appellant  would  be
         returning  was  one  in  which  such  violence  was  generally   or
         consistently happening.  There was nothing else in  the  case  that
         could generate a real risk.  In this situation, then, a 'consistent
         pattern of gross and  systematic  violation  of  fundamental  human
         rights', far from being at variance with the real risk test is,  in
         my judgment, a function or application of it".


50.   The Tribunal in TV, considered  that  the  above  approach  should  be
    viewed in the light of the decision of the Court of Appeal  in  Batayav
    [2003] EWCA Civ 1489. This appeal had proceeded solely in  relation  to
    the Appellant's claim to the protection of Article 3  of  the  European
    Convention and the only issue was whether the return of  the  Appellant
    to the Russian Federation, would put the United Kingdom  in  breach  of
    Article 3 because of the conditions of detention in the  Russian  penal
    system in which the Appellant would be held in Russia. Sedley LJ said:

    "37.   I  want  to  add  a  word,  however,  about  the  evaluation  of
         conditions which are alleged to  create  a  real  risk  of  inhuman
         treatment.  The authority of this court has been lent, through  the
         decision in Hariri to the formulation that ill-treatment  which  is
         'frequent' or even 'routine' does not present a real  risk  to  the
         individual unless it is 'general' or 'systematic' or  'consistently
         happening': see paragraphs 9 to 10 in the previous judgment.


    38.    Great care needs to be  taken  with  such  epithets.   They  are
         intended to elucidate the jurisprudential concept of real risk, not
         to replace it.  If a type of car has  a  defect  which  causes  one
         vehicle in ten to crash, most people would say that it  presents  a
         real risk to anyone who drives it, albeit crashes are not generally
         or  consistently  happening.   The  exegetic  language  in   Hariri
         suggests a higher threshold than the IAT's more cautious phrase  in
         Iqbal, 'a consistent pattern', which the Court in Hariri sought  to
         endorse.


    39.    There is  a  danger,  if  Hariri  is  taken  too  literally,  of
         assimilating risk to probability.   A real risk is in  language  as
         in law something distinctly less than a probability, and it  cannot
         be elevated by lexicographic stages into  something  more  than  it
         is."


51.   It was no doubt with this, amongst other matters  in  mind,  that  the
    Tribunal  in  the  appeal  before  us  at  the  first  stage   of   its
    reconsideration, realised that the Adjudicator had not  approached  the
    case by considering whether there was inter alia, a consistent  pattern
    of violations of the human rights of those in detention in the  Ukraine
    sufficient to  engage  Article  3  and  indeed  this  reinforced  their
    conclusion that the Adjudicator's error of law related to  her  failure
    to appreciate in such circumstances, that the  Appellant's  asylum  and
    Article 3 claim did not stand or fall together,  as  a  consequence  of
    which, she failed to give the Article 3 claim any consideration.

52.   In considering whether the  Appellant  has  established  a  reasonable
    likelihood that upon return to the Ukraine he will face a violation  of
    his Article 3 rights, we begin by considering  the  objective  material
    before us.

53.   For this purpose it is  necessary  to  revisit  the  findings  of  the
    Tribunal in that regard in TV, (incidentally a case  not  mentioned  in
    the Adjudicator's determination) bearing in mind that it appears to  be
    the last reported case of the Tribunal relating to prison conditions in
    the Ukraine.

      Conditions in Ukraine Prisons

54.   In that regard, we are further mindful of  the  Tribunal's  concluding
    remarks at paragraph 23  of  their  determination,  that  the  material
    before them was "relatively out-of-date" and that "in  that  sense  the
    decision may be historical".

55.   The Tribunal continued:

         "For this reason we do not  consider  the  findings  we  have  made
         should necessarily be regarded as of continuing relevance in future
         cases.   Nevertheless,  the  material  before  us,  establishes   a
         reasonable likelihood that the Claimant faces a  violation  of  his
         Article 3 rights".


56.   The Tribunal in TV,  in  considering  the  background  material,  took
    account of the US State Department Reports for 2000 (published in March
    2001) and 2002 (released on 31 March 2003), which  they noted were "not
    substantially  different"  and  referred  to  the  following   passages
    beginning with the State Department Report for 2000 and continuing with
    the 2002 Report:

         "The Government's human rights  record  was  poor  in  some  areas;
         however, the Government continued to  respect  the  rights  of  its
         citizens in other areas.  In previous years,  police  and  military
         committed extrajudicial killings; however, there were no reports of
         such incidents  during  the  year.   Police  and  prison  officials
         regularly tortured and  beat  detainees  and  prisoners,  sometimes
         resulting  in  death.   Prison  conditions  are  harsh  and   life-
         threatening.   There  were  instances  of  arbitrary   arrest   and
         detention.  Lengthy pre-trial detention in very poor conditions was
         common and detainees often spent months in pre-trial detention  for
         violations that involved little or no  prison  time  if  convicted.
         Long delays  in  trials  are  a  problem.   The  government  rarely
         punishes  officials  who  commit  abuses.   The  SBU,  Police   and
         Prosecutor's Office have drawn domestic and international criticism
         for their failure to take adequate  action  to  curb  institutional
         corruption and abuse in the Government.


         There was no improvement during  the  year  in  prison  conditions,
         which  are  harsh,  life-threatening  and  do  not   meet   minimum
         international  standards.    Prison   officials   intimidated   and
         mistreated inmates.  Due in part to  the  severe  economic  crisis,
         prisons and detention centres were severely overcrowded and  lacked
         adequate sanitation and medical facilities.  According to  official
         statistics, funding for prisons decreased by  almost  14  per  cent
         over the last 3 years.  During the year, the Government announced a
         general  amnesty   for   34,800   inmates   intended   to   relieve
         overcrowding.  Because the country lacks a well-developed system of
         suspended sentences and the  law  does  not  differentiate  between
         misdemeanours and felonies, at  least  one-third  of  inmates  were
         convicted of only minor violations.


         Conditions in pre-trial detention facilities  routinely  failed  to
         meet minimum international standards.  Inmates sometimes were  held
         in investigative isolation for extended periods  and  subjected  to
         intimidation and mistreatment by jail  guards  and  other  inmates.
         Overcrowding is common in these centers.   For  example,  the  pre-
         trial detention centre in Kiev, houses 3,500; it was constructed to
         hold 2,850 persons.


         According to official sources, information on the physical state of
         prison walls and fences as well as pre-trial  detention  blocks  is
         considered to be a government secret. However, the  press  reported
         freely about harsh prison conditions.  In  1998  there  were  1,901
         deaths in prisons and detention facilities, which was more  than  3
         times the death rate of  the  general  population.   Poor  sanitary
         conditions resulted in deaths from diseases  such  as  tuberculosis
         and dysentery.   There are frequent incidents of murder  by  fellow
         inmates and suicide.  "


    The US State Department Report for 2002, released on 31 March  2003  is
    not substantially different:


         "According to complaints received from the Office of the  Ombudsman
         and Human Rights NGO's prison officials intimidated and  mistreated
         inmates... According to official statistics of the Penal Department
         in the first 6 months  of  2001,  there  were  865  deaths  in  the
         prisons.  Poor sanitary conditions  resulted  in  300  deaths  from
         diseases such as tuberculosis and  13  from  dysentery  during  the
         first half of 2001. There were frequent incidents  of  killings  by
         fellow inmates and in the first half of 2001, 13  individuals  were
         reported officially  to  have  committed  suicide,  although  human
         rights groups believe the official figure to be higher.


         Prisoners were permitted to file complaints to the Ombudsman  about
         the conditions of detention, but human rights groups reported  that
         inmates were punished for doing so.   In  January  2001,  the  Rada
         passed  amendments  to  the  Penal  Code  that  relaxed  Soviet-era
         restrictions in high-security prisons  and  removed  a  requirement
         that all prisoners' letters should be read.


         Conditions in  pre-trial  detention  facilities  also  were  harsh.
         Inmates sometimes were held in investigative isolation for extended
         periods and subjected to  intimidation  and  mistreatment  by  jail
         guards  and  other  inmates.   Overcrowding  was  common  in  these
         centers.   Although there were no official figures,  local  lawyers
         believed that the pre-detention center in Kiev housed  as  many  as
         6,000 persons, although its capacity was  estimated  to  be  3,500.
         The SBU still maintained its own pre-trial centers at  year's  end,
         although it had  announced  in  2001  that  it  would  close  them.
         According to Human Rights Ombudsman Nina Karpachova,  approximately
         one third of detainees were tortured."


57.   The Tribunal in TV noted that the source of some of this material  was
    found in the Country Assessment prepared by CIPU. The  Tribunal  in  TV
    did not specify the date of the CIPU report  under  consideration,  but
    proceeded to quote the relevant paragraphs as follows:

    "Prisons and Prison Conditions


    5.22    Prison  conditions  are  harsh  and   do   not   meet   minimum
         international  standards.   Due  in   part   to   severe   economic
         conditions, prisons and detention centres are severely  overcrowded
         and lack adequate sanitation and medical facilities. In June  1999,
         official statistics put the prison population at 223,900  including
         42,600 in pre-trial detention, twice  that  of  1992.  In  addition
         prison officials intimidate and mistreat inmates, who  are  subject
         to regular beatings as well as torture, which has sometimes led  to
         death.   According to official statistics of the Penal  Department,
         in the first 6 months  of  2001,  there  were  865  deaths  in  the
         prisons.   Poor sanitary conditions resulted  in  300  deaths  from
         diseases such as tuberculosis and  13  from  dysentery  during  the
         first half of  2001.    There  were  frequent  killings  by  fellow
         inmates, and in  the  first  half  of  2001,  13  individuals  were
         reported officially to have committed suicide.


    5.23   Because the country lacks a well-developed system  of  suspended
         sentences and the law does not differentiate between  misdemeanours
         and felonies, at least one third of inmates have been convicted  of
         only minor offences.  In  response  to  the  overcrowding,  a  mass
         amnesty in July 1999 released some 40,000 inmates.


    5.24    Diplomatic  representatives  and  human  rights  monitors  have
         reported that it has become more  difficult  to  obtain  access  to
         prisons.  In addition,  cases  were  reported  of  prisoners  being
         denied correspondence and limited to one  family  visit  per  year.
         Prisoners may complain to the  Human  Rights  Ombudsman  about  the
         conditions of detention, but human rights groups have reported that
         inmates were subsequently punished for initiating complaints."


58.   It was noted by CIPU that  the  1996  Constitution  provided  a  legal
    framework for protecting civil and  human  rights  that  reflected  the
    Ukraine's commitments  as  a  member  of  the  Council  of  Europe  and
    signatory to  a  number  of  international  human  rights  instruments,
    including the European Convention  on  Human  Rights.    However,  many
    constitutional  provisions  still  awaited  the  passage  of   enabling
    legislation while many areas of life were still regulated by Soviet law
    and practices, that meant that actual human rights practices often  did
    not conform to constitutional requirements.

59.   CIPU noted that during 1999 there was limited progress in  some  areas
    of Ukraine's human rights record although  serious  problems  persisted
    and the government had made little effort to punish officials  who  had
    committed or abetted human rights abuses or to end such abuses.  A wide
    variety of domestic and international human rights groups  operated  in
    the  Ukraine  without   government   restriction,   investigating   and
    publishing their findings on human rights cases.  Government  officials
    were generally co-operative and responsive to their views but  enquires
    into penal conditions, which were a significant human  rights  concern,
    were limited by their status as state secrets and human  rights  groups
    reported increased difficulties in investigating in this  area.    Over
    January  1998  the  President  signed  a  law  creating   Parliamentary
    Commissioner on Human Rights, which  was  a  constitutionally  mandated
    independent human rights Ombudsman and  Parliament  elected  the  first
    Ombudsman  in  April  1998.   However  the  law  did  not  provide  any
    significant enforcement authority or provide penalties for  obstructing
    the  Ombudsman's  enquiries.   However,  the  Office  of  Human  Rights
    Ombudsman  has  still  been  active  in  investigating   human   rights
    violations and stated that most  of  the  complaints  he  had  received
    involved abuses by law enforcement personnel.   Citizens had the  right
    to file appeals about alleged human rights violations with the European
    Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg.   According to  one  human  rights
    expert some 13,000 appeals had been made to the court in 1998 and  some
    200 cases were accepted for review.

60.   The Ukrainian  Constitution  prohibits  torture  but  there  had  been
    numerous reports of torture and ill-treatment  of  suspects  in  police
    custody and prisons throughout the Ukraine,  in  contravention  of  its
    commitments as a party to the  Convention  Against  Torture  and  Other
    Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment,  as  well  as  the
    International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.

61.   CIPU continued at paragraph 6.4 of their report as follows:

         "Police and prison officials regularly beat  detainees  in  prisons
         and there have been persistent reports that Berkut (special militia
         units or riot police) troops beat and torture inmates  as  part  of
         regular training exercises.   Two forms of torture reported are the
         'swallow' method, whereby the detainees placed on his  stomach  and
         his feet are tied to his hands behind  him,  forcing  his  back  to
         arch, and the 'baby elephant' method, whereby a gasmask  is  placed
         on the victims head and the  flow  of  oxygen  is  slowly  reduced.
         Another form of torture employed is called the  'monument'  method,
         whereby the detainee is suspended from his  hands  on  a  rope  and
         beaten.  Some detainees were beaten until they waived  their  right
         to a lawyer.   There is  no  effective  mechanism  for  registering
         complaints about mistreatment or for  obtaining  redress  for  such
         actions. Prisoners may  address  complaints  to  the  Human  Rights
         Ombudsman, who has received widespread reports of torture  in  pre-
         trail detention, but this avenue is limited by the Ombudsman's lack
         of enforcement  authority.   Prisoners'  fears  of  punishment  for
         initiating complaints, and insufficient effort on the part  of  the
         government to end such practice or  to  punish  those  responsible.
         One positive step is a new Criminal Code that came into effect on 1
         September 2001 mandating 40 to 10 years  imprisonment  for  torture
         and on 28 May 2002, in the first  case  brought  by  the  Ombudsman
         against law enforcement agencies, the Frankivskiy District Court in
         Lviv ordered the Lviv Prosecutor's Office and the Security  Service
         of Ukraine to pay damages to the parents of a man tortured to death
         in prison.


    6.5    Ukraine committed itself to a moratorium on the death penalty on
         joining  the  Council  of  Europe  in  November   1995.    However,
         subsequent reports indicated that at least 212 people were executed
         between then and March 1997, which led the  Council  of  Europe  to
         adopt  a  third  resolution,  in  January  1998,   condemning   the
         continuing executions in Ukraine and threatening it with  expulsion
         should more executions be carried out.  Reports  indicate  that  at
         least 345 prisoners remained under sentence of death at the end  of
         1998, which caused further international concern  and  doubts  over
         Ukraine's commitment to  ending  the  death  penalty.  However,  in
         February 2000 the ADA passed amendments to the Criminal Code  which
         abolished the death penalty in the Ukraine  and  signed  a  special
         Protocol of the European Convention on Human Rights to this  effect
         on 3 May 2002.  Crimes previously punished by the death penalty are
         now punishable by life imprisonment".


62.   The Tribunal in TV, took account of the Amnesty  International  Report
    of 15 October 2001 that stated that allegations  of  torture  and  ill-
    treatment of detainees by police officers persisted and appeared to  be
    widespread  and  that  prison  conditions  continued  to   fall   below
    international minimum standards and were frequently cruel, inhuman  and
    degrading.  Allegations of torture and ill-treatment by police officers
    continued  and  only  very  limited  progress  was  made  in  improving
    conditions in pre-trial detention centres and prisons that  fell  below
    international minimum standards.

63.   In that latter regard, Amnesty International noted inter alia that:

         "Endemic overcrowding  was  exacerbated  by  a  general  policy  of
         remanding criminal suspects in custody and the  infrequent  use  of
         non-custodial punishments.  Delays in the administration of justice
         resulted in prolonged period of pre-trial detention".


64.   Amnesty International had noted a visit to the Ukraine  in  2000  when
    the European Committee for the Prevention of  Torture  (CPT)  described
    conditions at a detention centre in  Simferopel  as  characteristic  of
    conditions often experienced by prisoners.  They reported:

         "[The majority]  of  the  prison  population...  was  subjected  to
         appalling material conditions.  Inmates were crammed into  severely
         overcrowded dormitories... with virtually no natural  light,  often
         poor artificial lighting and inefficient ventilation... Furthermore
         the establishment was unable to provide each prisoner with  a  bed;
         consequently, in many dormitories, many inmates had to  take  turns
         to sleep.  While some dormitories had been  freshly  painted,  many
         others were dirty and infested with cockroaches and other vermin."


65.   The Tribunal in TV concluded on the basis of the background  material,
    that they had considered it was established that prison  conditions  in
    Ukraine were:

         "... poor, with overcrowding and inadequate sanitation.  There is a
         risk of intimidation and ill-treatment by prison officials.   These
         conditions are  caused  in  part  by  the  huge  prison  population
         compared with the size of the population (224,000 in custody out of
         a population of 49 million - of which some 43,000 were in pre-trial
         detention in 1999).  The ECHR does not guarantee for this  claimant
         that prison conditions will be  of  a  particular  standard  or  in
         accordance with European or British norms.  Whatever the  reference
         in the material to  international  standards  may  mean,  Ukrainian
         prisons, like many others,  fall  below  the  European  and  United
         Kingdom standards.   Nevertheless,  the  claimant  is  required  to
         establish a consistent pattern of serious violations of  the  human
         rights of detainees of a severity to violate the threshold  set  by
         Article 3.   it is only by establishing such a  consistent  pattern
         that he will satisfy the 'real risk' test that triggers  the  right
         not to be returned.


    20.    The material to which we have referred is a catalogue of serious
         human rights abuses taking place in the  Ukrainian  prison  system.
         The difficulty with which a Tribunal  is  faced  is  in  making  an
         assessment of the scale and frequency  of  these  abuses.  In  that
         regard, we find it extremely difficult not  to  attach  significant
         weight to one of the assessments  that  attempts  to  quantify  the
         incidents of abuse.   According  to  Human  Rights  Ombudsman  Nina
         Karpacova, approximately one-third of detainees were tortured.  The
         Tribunal expresses some concern as  to  the  basis  on  which  this
         calculation is made.  It is not clear whether the information comes
         from inmates themselves, in spite of the suggestion that  many  are
         reticent to complain.  Its reliability  has  not  been  established
         beyond reasonable doubt.   If the  assessment  is  made  simply  on
         those cases that have been reported to her, it may  not  provide  a
         conclusive or reliable statistic for condition  across  the  entire
         penal system.  Nevertheless, particularly given  that  we  have  to
         decide only if there is a reasonable degree of likelihood that  the
         Appellant will  face  ill-treatment  in  pre-trial  detention,  the
         Tribunal cannot lightly disregard this evidence.


    21.     Against  this  evidence,  there  is  some  evidence  that   the
         government is taking steps to address some of the problems.  Steps,
         for example, have been taken to reduce overcrowding.   The  figures
         for the Kiev detention centre, for example, whilst demonstrating an
         occupancy significantly beyond its design capacity (6,000  although
         designed for 3,500) may not be  worse  than  overcrowding  in  some
         European facilities.   Overcrowding is not, in itself, a  violation
         of an inmate's human rights.  Similarly,  the  deaths  in  custody,
         although high, include deaths from natural causes and this may be a
         reflection of the poor state of the physical health of those  prior
         to detention.  It also appears that the government has taken  steps
         to address the problem of torture, albeit under pressure  from  the
         Council of Europe, by introducing an amendment to the Criminal Code
         specifically aimed at criminalising it.   In May 2002 a  successful
         prosecution was brought".


66.   As we referred to earlier, the Tribunal  in  TV  emphasised  that  the
    material they had used was relatively out of  date  and  that  in  that
    sense their decision which established on the material  before  them  a
    reasonable likelihood that  the  claimant  faced  a  violation  of  his
    Article 3 rights, might be historical and  should  not  necessarily  be
    regarded as of continuing relevance in future cases.

67.   Mindful of the cautionary concluding remarks of the Tribunal  in  this
    regard, we have  considered  the  further  and  more  recent  objective
    material before us.

68.   We begin by pointing out that Bundle 2 of the  Respondent's  Inventory
    of Productions includes what can only be described as a compilation  of
    various articles and  extracts  from  other  publications  authored  by
    individuals  whose  credentials  are  unknown  and  forwarded  to   War
    Resisters International by their supporters for collation. Indeed,  the
    parties' representatives  agreed  with  us  that  little  weight  could
    therefore  be  attached  to  them.   Further  many  of   the   articles
    demonstrated that their authors lacked the necessary  objectivity  such
    that the Tribunal could place reliance on their  content.   Indeed,  Mr
    Bradley accepted that they were "not reliably sound".


69.   The CIPU Bulletin 1/2004 (which we note was in fact issued on  2  July
    2004), deals with prisons and  prison  conditions  in  the  Ukraine  at
    paragraphs 5.33 to 5.44.

70.   Account is taken of the US State Department Report of 2003 (issued  in
    February 2004) that is  not  substantially  different  from  the  State
    Department Report for 2002 (released 31 March  2003),  in  that  it  is
    reported that:

         "Prison  conditions  remained  harsh  and  life   threatening   ...
         According to complaints received from the Office of  the  Ombudsman
         and Human Rights NGOs, prison officials intimidated and  mistreated
         inmates.  Due in part to severe economic  conditions,  prisons  and
         detention centres were severely  overcrowded  and  lacked  adequate
         sanitation  and  medical  facilities.   Almost  25,000  individuals
         reportedly were held in  prison  cells  with  neither  windows  nor
         toilets ...


         According to the State Department  for  Execution  of  Punishments,
         during the year [2003] There were 696  deaths  in  prison  and  130
         deaths in detention facilities (compared to  a  combined  total  of
         1,381  in  2001),  many  due  to  harsh   conditions.     Officials
         attributed this reduction in the  number  of  prison  deaths  to  a
         concerted effort to improve prison conditions, including healthcare
         and nutrition...


         According to human rights groups  a  reorganisation  of  the  Penal
         Department to ensure greater independence of the penal  system  did
         not affect the Department's practices, there  was  little  civilian
         oversight of its activities ... According to prison authorities, no
         criminal proceedings involving torture or mistreatment of prisoners
         were  open  during  the  year  [2003]  and  no  employee   of   the
         penitentiary system  was  disciplined  for  improper  treatment  of
         detainees...


         Prisoners were      permitted to file complaints with the Ombudsman
         about  the  conditions  of  detentions,  but  human  rights  groups
         reported they were punished for doing so... The Ombudsman continued
         to draw attention to  the  state  of  the  penitentiary  system  by
         visiting prisons  and  raising  prison-related  issues  in  public.
         Following a visit to a  detention  facility  in  Crimea,  officials
         built a courtyard to provide inmates, who previously were unable to
         exercise out of doors, with an area  where  they  could  engage  in
         physical activity...


         In 2001, the RADA ratified the first and second  protocols  of  the
         European Convention on Prevention of  Torture  which  mandates  the
         inspection of prisons by international observers.  While conditions
         remain  below  international  standards,  the  media  reported  the
         monitors  of  the  Council  of  Europe  (COE)  left  with  a  'good
         impression' after  their  visit  to  prisons  in  the  Zaporizhzhya
         Oblast.  Additionally, a new pre-trial facility has been  built  in
         Kharkiv, which reportedly  meets  European  standards  and  several
         cells with modern comforts were offered in a  detention  centre  in
         Dnipropetrovsk".


71.   The CIPU, noted that the May 2003  International  Helsinki  Federation
    Report had stated that:

         "There are a total of  180  regular  detention  facilities  in  the
         country, including forty three  pre-trial  isolators  (SIZOs),  131
         labour colonies  (VTKs)  eleven  juvenile  penal  institutions  for
         prisoners under the age of twenty (ten for boys and one for girls).
          All these  facilities  are  supervised  by  a  special  government
         department charged with monitoring detention conditions."


72.   CIPU noted the subsequent IHF Report of 2004 reported that:

         "Ukrainian detention  facilities  were  overcrowded.    There  were
         45,000 pre-trial detainees  while  the  official  capacity  of  the
         facilities was only 36,000  places.    Due  to  lack  of  beds  and
         overcrowded cells, detainees often had to sleep in turn."

73.   The IHF report continued:

         "It was estimated that 9,900 of the total of approximately  200,000
         prisoners in all  facilities  were  ill  with  tuberculosis.    All
         diseases spread fast, speeded up by the fact that  healthy  persons
         were sometimes kept together with infected inmates."


74.   The 2004  CIPU  Bulletin,  took  account  of  Amnesty  International's
    Annual Report on the Ukraine of May 2004 that reported:

         "In April [2003] the European Court of Human Rights ruled in favour
         of six men held on death row in various Ukrainian  prisons  in  the
         1990s who had  lodged  complaints  about  the  cruel,  inhuman  and
         degrading conditions of their detention."


75.   CIPU further noted a BBC report in October 2003:

         "... that one prisoner was beaten so badly by the guards  that  his
         feet had to be amputated.   The prisoner is believed to  have  been
         attacked after refusing to obey his  wardens'  instructions.    The
         attack is under investigation by  the  Prosecutor-General's  office
         and the guards are under investigation for abuse of authority".


76.   The CIPU Bulletin of January 2005 (released in  May  2005),  fails  to
    provide any further and more  recent  information  as  to  prisons  and
    prison conditions in the Ukraine.

77.   The most recent CIPU  Report  before  us,  states  that  it  was  last
    reviewed on 13 October 2005 and reflects the change of government  and
    the fact that the new President, Viktor Yushchenko "has made  stepping-
    up engagement with the EU a priority".    No  further  or  more  recent
    information is provided as to the current state of prisons  and  prison
    conditions in the Ukraine,  nor  indeed  as  they  relate  to  military
    prisons.

78.    The  most  recent  reports  placed  before  us,   were   an   Amnesty
    International Report 2005 (released  on  25  May  2005)  which  covered
    events from January to December 2004.   Within that report reference is
    made to the report of the European  Committee  for  the  Prevention  of
    Torture and Inhuman or  Degrading  Treatment  or  Punishment  published
    following its visit to the Ukraine in 2002.  The  report  repeated  the
    conclusion of previous reports of visits in 1998 and 2000, that  people
    deprived of their liberty by the Militia  ran  a  significant  risk  of
    being physically ill-treated at the time of their apprehension or while
    in custody.   Conditions in temporary holding facilitates (ITT) run  by
    the Ministry  of  the  Interior  were  described  as  "intolerable  and
    overcrowding remained a problem.  Access to fresh air was limited  with
    standards  of  hygiene  inadequate  high  rates   of   infection   with
    Tuberculosis were reported".

79.   We have taken account of the Human  Rights  Watch  World  Report  2005
    (issued on 13 January 2005) it reports that:

         "Ukraine has been plagued by numerous human  rights  problems  that
         require a structural approach on the part of the government.  While
         it  has  begun  to  act  on  some  of  these  issues,  many  remain
         unaddressed.


         Torture and ill-treatment continues to be a significant problem  in
         police detention and prisons in Ukraine.   Ukraine's  human  rights
         Ombudsman receives numerous complaints  of  torture  from  criminal
         suspects and estimates that thirty percent  of  all  detainees  may
         become victims of  torture  or  ill-treatment  by  law  enforcement
         agents.  Ill-treatment has resulted in permanent physical damage to
         many victims and in the most severe cases has  resulted  in  death.
         In the vast majority of cases the perpetrators of torture  are  not
         investigated or prosecuted for their crime.  Prison  conditions  in
         Ukraine continue to be poor.  Prisons are overcrowded and prisoners
         have insufficient access to food and health care.  As in many other
         former-Soviet nations, tuberculosis is widespread in prisons."


80.   It was noteworthy that  Mr  Pattison  for  the  Respondent  began  his
    submissions by properly recognising that the decision of  the  Tribunal
    in TV supported the proposition that prison conditions in  the  Ukraine
    crossed the Article 3 threshold.

81.   Mr Pattison further recognised  not  least  from  the  2004  US  State
    Department Report, that notwithstanding there being an indication  that
    the Ukrainian  authorities  were  taking  some  action  against  prison
    officials who committed abuses, "those may not be  sufficient  to  deal
    with  those  who  administer  ill-treatment".     Mr  Pattison  further
    recognised that  although  the  objective  material  notably  in  2004,
    revealed a reduction in the number of deaths in prison, that the figure
    concerned albeit reduced, remained unacceptable, but was, he submitted,
    nonetheless an indication of an improved situation.

82.   We found wholly unpersuasive Mr Pattison's  observation  that  as  the
    objective material did not disclose an increase in the earlier reported
    12,000  complaints  of  torture,  this  suggested  that  conditions  in
    Ukrainian prisons had improved.   It was indeed  significant,  that  Mr
    Pattison concluded his remarks in this regard, by  accepting  that  the
    only point that he could identify that demonstrated an  improvement  in
    such conditions, related to the reduction in the number of deaths.

83.   Mr Pattison most fairly accepted that he could not assist  us  by  way
    of any further or more recent objective  material  to  demonstrate  any
    significant overall improvement in Ukrainian prison conditions.

84.    Having  considered  the  limited  amount  of  more  recent  objective
    material to that considered by the Tribunal in TV,  we  have  concluded
    that it demonstrates  little  change  and  limited  evidence  that  the
    Ukrainian Government is taking positive steps in effectively addressing
    the problem.  Indeed, the Human Rights Watch World Report of 13 January
    2005 is  clear  that  torture  and  ill-treatment  continues  to  be  a
    significant problem in police detention and prisons in Ukraine and that
    prison conditions in the Ukraine continue to be poor.

85.   We are mindful that in the US State Department Report of 2004, it  was
    noted that the Ukrainian Constitution prohibited the use of torture and
    other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment.   However reports that the
    police regularly beat detainees and prisoners persisted.

86.   Reference was made to Nina  Karpachova,  the  Human  Rights  Ombudsman
    informing the media that:

         "...  during  her  nearly  seven  year  tenure  she  has   received
         approximately twelve thousand complaints from persons who  asserted
         they had been tortured in police custody.  In an August  2  special
         programme on the  opposition  -   owned  Fifth  Channel  Television
         Network, Karpachova acknowledged that torture of citizens by police
         officers remained a major problem."


    The report went on to exemplify such conduct.


87.   The US State Department Report further noted that:

         "Prison conditions improved somewhat as a result of reforms in  the
         penal system.   Prison official reported that, due in part  to  the
         decriminalisation of many offences there was  a  reduction  in  the
         number  of   inmates   in   prison,   which   eased   overcrowding.
         Nevertheless prisons were sometimes overcrowded or lacked  adequate
         sanitation and medical facilities.


         Although information on the physical  state  of  prison  walls  and
         fences, as well as on  pre-trial  detention  blocks  is  officially
         considered to be a government secret,  the  press  reported  freely
         about harsh prison conditions.


         Conditions in pre-trial detention facilities were harsher  than  in
         low and medium security prisons.   There were reports that  inmates
         in  pre-trial  facilities  were  sometimes  held  in  investigative
         isolation for extended period and  subjected  to  intimidation  and
         mistreatment by jail guards and other  inmates.   Overcrowding  was
         more common in these centres; their total capacity was 36,000  with
         39,021 detainees were held in them as of September 1  according  to
         the State Penal Department (SPD).


         Human  Rights  Ombudsman  Karpichova  expressed  indignation   over
         conditions in temporary detention centres, particularly Crimea  and
         in April it was reported that the Prosecutor General's  office  was
         concerned about poor conditions in pre-trial detention  facilitates
         nationwide.


         The SPD in co-operation with the  NGO  community  implemented  some
         programmes for the professional development of  prison  and  police
         officials.  According to the SDP, as of September  1,  no  criminal
         proceedings involving torture or mistreatment of prisoners had been
         opened against SPD employees;  however,  as  of  September  1,  six
         criminal cases had been opened against  employees  for  unspecified
         'non  human  rights  related'  offences.   No   employee   of   the
         penitentiary system  was  disciplined  for  improper  treatment  of
         detainees; however 420 employees  were  disciplined  in  the  first
         eight months of the year  for  'serious  flaws  in  their  work  in
         violation of work ethics' according to the SDP.


         The 2003 Criminal Penal Code was intended to regulate  prison  life
         and provide  safeguards  against  the  mistreatment  of  prisoners.
         Officials stated that it was still too early to evaluate the code's
         effectiveness, but maintained  that  NGO's  international  experts,
         prisoners, and prison employees have reacted favourably to it.   In
         accordance with the new code, all  new  inmates  were  required  to
         undergo psychological  screening  and  prison  administrators  were
         required to develop a plan  for  the  rehabilitation  and  eventual
         release of inmates. Correctional institutions for adults were  also
         sub-divided into three  categories:  minimum,  medium  and  maximum
         security.  Also in keeping with the new Code,  deprivation  of  the
         right to receive a parcel is no longer used against prisoners as  a
         punishment. Prisoners are permitted to receive much larger  parcels
         than in the past, which may include food  items,  medicine,  books,
         writing implements, clothing, shoes, and personal hygiene items.


         According to official statistics  from  the  SPD,  there  were  464
         deaths in prisons during the year: 438  were  due  to  illness,  20
         suicides, 2 homicides (one murder and one manslaughter),  and  four
         lethal traumatic injuries. In  addition  there  were  eighty  eight
         deaths in pre-trial facilities: eighty two due to illness  and  six
         to suicide.  Tuberculosis in prisons continues to  be  of  concern;
         however, officials stated  that  mandatory  screening  of  all  new
         inmates had reduced infection  rates.   Inmates  with  tuberculosis
         were isolated from the general population and treated at  one  main
         prison hospital complex in  Kharkiv  Obalst.   Almost  twenty  five
         thousand individuals reportedly were  held  in  prison  cells  with
         neither windows nor toilets. ...


      The Government continued to allow prison  visits  from  human  rights
         observers and generally granted full access to  prison  facilities;
         however, some monitors reported that at times it was  difficult  to
         obtain access to prisons to visit specific prisoners and there were
         instances in which they were not  allowed  full  access  to  prison
         facilities.   The SPD maintained however, that there  had  been  no
         instances of domestic of international human  rights  groups  being
         denied access to pre-trial detention  facilities.   Prisoners  were
         permitted to file complaints with the Human rights Ombudsman  about
         the conditions in detention, but human rights groups reported  that
         prisoners were sometimes punished for doing so. ...

      Legislation passed in July 2003 strengthened the role  of  the  Human
         Rights  Ombudsman  and  of  MPs  in  investigating   human   rights
         violations,  providing  for  the  imposition   of   fines   against
         individuals seeking to hinder there work."

88.   It is apparent from the objective material that  we  have  considered,
    (not least from that we have above quoted), that although the Ukrainian
    Constitution prohibits the use of torture and other cruel,  inhuman  or
    degrading treatment, adherence to this requirement is barely  reflected
    in practice insofar as prisons and  prison  conditions  are  concerned,
    where for example, despite evidence of some improvement,  reports  that
    the police regularly beat detainees and prisoners have persisted.

89.   The State Department Report referred  to  Nina  Karpachova  the  Human
    Rights Ombudsman, informing the media that:

         "...  during  her  nearly  seven  year  tenure  she  has   received
         approximately ten thousand complaints  from  persons  who  asserted
         they had been tortured in police custody.  In an August  2  special
         programme on the opposition owned Fifth Channel television network,
         Karpachova acknowledged that torture of citizens by police officers
         remained a major problem."


90.   We have borne in mind, not least upon a  careful  reading  of  the  US
    State Department  Report  of  2004,  that  the  Ukrainian  Constitution
    prohibits the use of torture and  other  cruel  inhuman  and  degrading
    treatment and that prison conditions have to some extent improved as  a
    result of reforms in the penal system. Further, that  the  State  Penal
    Department (SPD) were reported to  be  in  co-operation  with  the  NGO
    community  in  implementing  some  programmes  for   the   professional
    development of prison and police officials.

  91. We are not however,  persuaded  that  these  improvements  suffice  to
    outweigh the other evidence to the contrary to which we have  referred.
    In reaching this conclusion we have of course borne in  mind  that  the
    2003 Criminal Penal Code had  as  its  declared  intention  a  wish  to
    regulate prison life and provide safeguards against the mistreatment of
    prisoners but, as the report points out, officials stated that  it  was
    still too early to evaluate the code's effectiveness, although  on  the
    positive  side,  NGOs,  international  experts,  prisoners  and  prison
    employees had reacted favourably to it.

92.   Notwithstanding the positive improvements that we earlier  identified,
    the overall material before us continues to demonstrate the  'catalogue
    of serious human rights abuses taking place  in  the  Ukrainian  prison
    system' to which the Tribunal in TV referred.    It  is  also  apparent
    that the Human Rights Ombudsman herself  reported,  that  she  received
    numerous complaints of torture from  criminal  suspects  and  estimated
    that 30% of all detainees might  become  victims  of  torture  or  ill-
    treatment by enforcement agents.

      Strasbourg Cases

93.   Bearing in mind the CIPU reference  in  our  paragraph  59  above,  to
    cases being taken to Strasbourg against  the  Ukraine  in  relation  to
    their prison system, we have considered recent ECHR case law on  prison
    conditions in Ukraine.

94.   The most recent, Salov v Ukraine (2005)  Application  No:  00065518/01
    6/9/2005, a decision  promulgated  on  6  September  2005  was  a  case
    concerning violations of Article 5(3) and Article 6(1) of the  European
    Convention on Human Rights, where it  was  held  that  the  applicant's
    detention for over seven days without any judicial control fell outside
    the strict constraints of time laid down by the Convention and that the
    criminal proceedings instituted against him were unfair.

95.    In  Nevnerzhitsky  v  Ukraine  (2005)  Application  No:   00054825/00
    05/04/2005, promulgated on 12 October 2005, the Court found there to be
    violations of Article 3 and Article 5  of  the  ECHR  in  circumstances
    where the conditions of the applicant's  pre-trial  detention  and  his
    treatment whilst detained, that  included  force-feeding,  amounted  to
    torture and degrading treatment and that his  prolonged  detention  was
    unlawful and of an unreasonable duration.

96.   In  Poltoratskiy  v  Ukraine  (38812/97)  (2004)  39  EHRR43  2003  WL
    23508990, promulgated on 29 July  2003,  it  was  held,  upholding  the
    complaints, that there had been violations of Article 3, Article 8  and
    Article 9.   As Ukraine only became a signatory to  the  Convention  in
    September 1997, evidence relating to events before that date could only
    be considered by way of background.  With respect  to  Article  3,  the
    evidence of the alleged assault was weak and therefore no finding of  a
    violation was appropriate.  However, the Court found that there  was  a
    lack of a proper investigation by the Ukrainian  authorities  into  the
    applicant's complaint and that as such, it breached the requirement for
    an effective investigation in terms of Article 3.

97.   The Court found that the  conditions  of  the  applicant's  detention,
    along with the mental anguish  caused  by  being  held  on  death  row,
    amounted to inhuman  and  degrading  treatment.    There  had  been  an
    interference with the claimant's right to family life  and  to  respect
    for his correspondence, which had no basis in law. Although  there  was
    no direct evidence of the applicant asking to  see  a  Priest,  it  was
    clear that he had not been allowed access to one.

98.   In Dankevich v Ukraine (40679/98) (2004) 38 EHRR 25 2003 WL  23192423,
    promulgated on 29 July 2003, the Court held, upholding  the  complaint,
    that detention in cramped conditions  without  natural  light,  running
    water or adequate  heating,  constituted  a  violation  of  Article  3.
    Limiting the amount of parcels the  applicant  could  receive  violated
    Article 8(1) as  the  restriction  was  not  set  out  with  sufficient
    certainty, for him to know whether it applied to him for  part  of  his
    period on death row.   The  applicant  had  been  denied  an  effective
    remedy in violation of Article 13 as  he  had  not  been  given  proper
    access to the prison rules and it had not been shown as to how he could
    gain access.

  99.  Finally,  we  have  taken  account  of  Afanasyev  v  Ukraine  (2005)
      Application No: 00038722/02 5/4/2005, promulgated  on  5  April  2005.
      The Court held, that there  had  been  violations  of  Article  3  and
      Article 13 of the ECHR, in circumstances where the applicant had  been
      a victim of violence during his detention in police  custody  and  had
      not had effective recourse to a domestic remedy  in  the  form  of  an
      adequate investigation or compensatory remedies.


Conclusions as to prison conditions in the Ukraine

100.  We have thus concluded that imprisonment in the Ukraine is  likely  to
    expose a detainee to  the  real  risk  of  inhuman  or  degrading  ill-
    treatment that would cross the Article 3 threshold.  We recognise  that
    the background materials placed before us  contain  some  lacunae,  but
    equally that they are all that has  been  seen  to  be  relevant  after
    considerable efforts have been taken by the parties to gather evidence.
      Accordingly,  we  consider  that  on  the  general  issue  of  prison
    conditions in the Ukraine, the conclusion  we  have  just  reached  can
    stand as country guidance.

      Military Service in the Ukraine

101.  We could find no helpful reference  within  the  US  State  Department
    Report 2004 in relation  to  conditions  in  military  prisons  in  the
    Ukraine, nor was there any further reference to such matters within the
    most recent CIPU Bulletin 01/2005.   Further  the  Bulletin  of  1/2004
    under the sub-heading "Military Service" notes that military service in
    the Ukraine is compulsory for males over eighteen years of  age  for  a
    period of eighteen months in the ground forces and Air  force  and  two
    years in the Navy.  The upper age limit for  conscripts  is  25  years.
    The Armed forces were gradually reducing the number of  conscripts  and
    reduced the overall number of servicemen by one third by 2005.

102.  The situation as it relates to conscientious objectors  and  deserters
    is set out at paragraphs 5.48 and 5.49 of the report as follows:

    "5.48   A law on  alternative  service  was  adopted  by  the  RADA  in
         December 1991.   It allows people who object to military service on
         religious grounds to 'perform works for the public  good'  instead.
         At present, the percentage of males  allowed  to  take  alternative
         military service is low, at around the region of  between  1.2  and
         1.5 percent.  In March 1999 an amendment to the alternative service
         law reduced the period  of  alternative  service  from  thirty  six
         months (twenty four for those with  a  full  higher  education)  to
         twenty seven months (eighteen months for those with a  full  higher
         education and a  Masters  Degree,  or  specialists).    Alternative
         service  can  be  undertaken  only  when  the  authenticity  of  an
         individual's  religious  convictions  has  been  established  by  a
         military commission.

    5.49    Draft  evasion,  which  became  a  common  feature  in  Ukraine
         following independence in 1991, has since become widespread.   This
         reflects less fear of the consequences on the part of draft evaders
         in a country more democratic and aware of human  rights  and  their
         belief that the newly-formed Ukrainian  military  machine  is  less
         able than its Soviet predecessor to punish them.  In theory,  males
         avoiding military recruitment can be sentence to up to three  years
         imprisonment.  However, in July 1993, media reports cited a  study,
         commissioned by the Ukrainian Procurator General,  which  predicted
         only one-third of conscription aged men would actually serve in the
         Ukrainian armed services.  The study also revealed that evasion  of
         military service; failure to turn up for military registration  and
         absence without leave had become  'unprecedently  widespread'.   It
         stated that very rarely were officials and citizens of call-up  age
         punished for violating  the  law.  The  study  criticised  existing
         legislation and the Procurator General urged the Ukrainian Minister
         of Defence to take necessary measures."

103.  We found nothing in the most recent objective  material  to  which  we
    were referred, that dealt with  the  treatment  of  those  detained  in
    military prisons, such as to enable us to reach any  conclusion  as  to
    whether conditions in military prisons would  be  materially  different
    than or different from those  in  civilian  prisons.  Further  in  this
    regard, we are mindful that no evidence was brought to our attention as
    to where a draft evader/deserter,  would  upon  conviction,  serve  his
    sentence.

104.  We have however, noted a report of the Immigration and  Refugee  Board
    of Canada dated 13 October 2004 relating to military  service  in  the
    Ukraine.

105.  The subject of the report was to update a report of 4 October 2000  as
    to whether the hazing of the new recruits in the Ukrainian armed forces
    had caused serious injury or mental distress and if so whether measures
    had been taken by the victims  of  the  armed  forces  to  remedy  such
    occurrences.

106.  The report stated as follows:

         "Hazing is described as the  torture  and  ill-treatment  of  young
         conscripts at the hands of senior soldiers, including  humiliation,
         beatings and murder (AI 15 October 2001; Country Reports  2003  25
         February 2004, SEC. 1a, 1c; Country Reports 2002 31 March 2003, SEC
         1a 1c).  In November 2003 a Ukrainian serviceman was  convicted  of
         hazing  thirty  seven  junior  conscripts,  one  of  who  committed
         suicide...


         Human rights reports indicated violent hazing  of  young  recruits,
         also referred to  as  dedovshchina,  is  widely  practised  in  the
         Ukrainian Army (HRW 2003; Country Reports 2003 25  Feb.  2004.  SEC
         1a, 1c; Country Reports 2002 31 March 2003, SEC  1a,  1c;  Country
         Reports 2001 4 March  2002,  SEC  1a,  1c;  National  Security  and
         Defence 2002; UNHCR 25 Sept. 2002; ibid, 21  Nov.  2001;  AI  2002;
         ibid 2001) and that approximately 10 to  20  soldiers'  deaths  are
         attributed to hazing each year in the Ukraine (AP 11 Nov 2003)  and
         that 15 per cent of all cases brought to military courts deal  with
         alleged hazing (IHF 2002).


         In its analysis of the Ukrainian Armed Forces, the Razumkov  Centre
         for Economic and Political Studies in Kiev notes that in 2000, 20.7
         per cent of all military servant convictions in the Western Ukraine
         region were related to dodovshchina, and that this number  rose  to
         23 per cent in 2001  (National  Security  and  Defence  2002,  13).
         Further it is noted that  there  are  repeated  cases  of  violence
         against subordinates on the part of their commanders.  In 2001  and
         the first quarter of 2002, court marshals  of  the  Western  Region
         convicted twenty four officers and NCOs for  abuse  of  power  with
         respect to their subordinates.   Their criminal  actions  did  harm
         the twenty nine military servants, twelve of them  suffered  bodily
         injuries.


         Despite these reports, official data of the number of soldiers that
         are subjected to hazing or killed during violent hazing  events  is
         not systematically collected, reported or  published  (Defence  and
         Security 3 Sept. 2003; Country Reports 2003 25 Feb. 2004,  Sec  1a,
         1c; Country Reports 2002  31  March  2003,  Sec  1a,  1c;  National
         Security and Defence 2002), and military officials have reported no
         deaths due to physical violence during the same period  that  human
         rights groups such as the Ukrainian Association of Soldiers Mothers
         in Kiev have reported widespread violent  hazing  (Country  Reports
         2003 25 Feb. 2004. Sec 1c).   In a 3  September  2003  Defence  and
         Security  Article,   Major-General   Nikolai   Feshchuk,   Military
         Prosecutor in the Southern Ukrainian region, explains that:


             'The  quantity  of  crimes  connected  with  hazing  of  young
             recruits has increased by  a  third  in  2003...  As  a  rule,
             Commanders conceal crimes committed in military units: 93%  of
             criminal cases were started by military prosecutors'  offices,
             and only 7% by Commanders.  In  addition  many  incidents  are
             linked to beating of soldiers by  their  Commanders...  Senior
             Commanders  do  not  start  criminal  proceedings  when  their
             subordinates refuse to obey orders.


             According to [HRW] Country Reports  2003,  official  reporting
             and  accounting   of   hazing-related   deaths   are   further
             complicated by the tendency to label such events  as  suicide;
             ...


             With regard to the issue of mental distress experienced by the
             victims of hazing, Amnesty International (AI  2001;  ibid,  15
             Oct 2001), the United Nations International Covenant on  Civil
             and Political Rights (12 Nov.  2001),  and  the  International
             Helsinki Federation (2002) indicate that each year a number of
             recruits are driven to  suicidal  desertion  to  escape  their
             violent treatment by other soldiers and officers.  In  its  15
             October  2001  report  entitled  'Ukraine  Before  the  United
             National Human Rights Committee', Amnesty International  cites
             the case of a young recruit whose mental health problems  were
             confirmed by medical examination after he deserted his unit in
             Zhytomyr because he was 'subjected to various  forms  of  ill-
             treatment by other recruits'.


            Measures Taken to Remedy the Situation of Victims

      Notably, in 2001  and  2002,  the  United  Nations  Committee  Against
         Torture recommended that those who commit hazing in the Ukraine  be
         prosecuted and punished and that a more effective system be adopted
         in the Ukrainian Armed Forces to end hazing, through  training  and
         education (UNHCR 25 Sept. 2002; ibid 21 Nov  2001).    However,  no
         information could  be  found  among  the  sources  consulted  about
         practices, policies or measures currently in place  to  prevent  or
         remedy hazing  in  the  Ukrainian  Armed  Forces.  Rather,  Country
         Reports 2003 indicates that complaints of physical  harassment  are
         often  not  investigated  and  punishment  administered  to  senior
         officers  for  tolerating  or  participating  in  hazing  has  been
         insufficient to prevent continued practice (25 Feb. 2004, Sec  1c).



      According to Amnesty International, some  recruits  who  deserted  the
         Ukrainian Army to escape  hazing  were  subsequently  sentenced  to
         prison terms of five to seven years for  desertion  under  Articles
         240 and  241  of  the  Ukrainian  Criminal  Code  (15  Oct.  2001).
         Amnesty International cites the specific  case  of  a  recruit  who
         deserted his unit in Simferopol  and  subsequently  appealed  to  a
         Kharkiv Military Prosecutor claiming he  had  been  the  victim  of
         hazing:

             'Although  the  Military   Prosecutor's   Office   purportedly
             acknowledged that the recruit had voluntarily turned  to  them
             and there existed a medical report  supporting  the  recruit's
             allegations of  having  been  subjected  to  violent  physical
             abuse,  the  Military  Prosecutor's   Office   in   Simferopel
             reportedly refused to consider the evidence and  put  pressure
             on the recruit to withdraw the allegations.   In  desperation,
             the recruit reportedly deserted again shortly  afterwards  (15
             Oct 2001).


             This  Response  was  prepared   after   researching   publicly
             accessible information currently  available  to  the  Research
             Directorate within time constraints.  This Response is not and
             does not purport to be, conclusive as  to  the  merit  of  any
             particular claim for refugee protection'.


107.  We are mindful, that as the report reflects, no information  could  be
    found among the sources  consulted  by  the  Canadian  Immigration  and
    Refugee Board "about practices policies or measures currently in  place
    to prevent or remedy hazing in the Ukrainian Armed Forces".

108.  The Board concluded their Response, by pointing out that  it  did  not
    purport to be conclusive, in  relation  to  any  particular  claim  for
    refugee protection.

109.  Bearing in mind this material and the case law to which we have  above
    referred, we have concluded that although the  evidence  clearly  shows
    that there are problems in relation  to  the  practice  of  dedovschina
    (hazing of young recruits) in the Ukrainian Army, it is not such as  to
    satisfy us, that the practice can be properly described as constituting
    a consistent pattern so as to amount to a real risk for each conscript.
      We emphasise however that we make  this  finding  upon  the  evidence
    before us.

110.  We have further taken into  account  in  this  regard,  the  US  State
    Department Report of 2004 that notes that despite extensive legislation
    to  protect  the  rights  of  service  members  and  the  existence  of
    regulations governing relationships among military  personnel,  reports
    continued  during  2004  of  harsh  conditions  and  violence   against
    conscripts in the armed forces.  The report continues:

         "Senior conscripts often beat recruits, sometimes  into  death  and
         force them to give up money and gifts that they receive from  home.
         According to the human rights  associations,  garrison  prosecutors
         often  did  not  investigate  complaints  of  physical  harassment.
         Punishment administered for committing or condoning such activities
         was  insufficient  to  deter  further  abuses.   Although  military
         officials reported there were no deaths due to soldier  on  soldier
         physical violence, human rights groups, including  the  Association
         of Soldiers' Mothers, reported that violent hazing continued to  be
         widespread.    They  reported  in  2002  that  the  Office  of  the
         Prosecutor General opened one  hundred  and  twenty  nine  criminal
         cases pertaining to violent hazing.  It is  unlikely  that  further
         information will be available on the progress,  if  any,  in  these
         cases"


111.  The CIPU Bulletin reflects the  concern  expressed  in  the  US  State
    Department Report to which we earlier referred, as  to  conditions  for
    conscripts and other military personnel.

112.  Having examined the evidence  relating  to  military  service  in  the
    Ukraine, we consider the following conclusions can be drawn:


    1.     Firstly, there is no question of persons in the  military  being
         required currently to perform acts contrary to international law.


    2.     Secondly, the conditions of military service although  far  from
         ideal (with hazing remaining a serious problem) are  not  generally
         such as to themselves  give  rise  to  a  real  risk  of  treatment
         contrary to Article 3.


    3.     The material  to  which  we  have  referred  does  not  disclose
         evidence that those who refuse to perform military service  face  a
         real  risk  of  imprisonment.   That  is  because   of   two   main
         considerations.  One is, that persons who refuse  military  service
         on religious grounds are given  an  optional  alternative  service.
         The other is that only rarely do persons who seek to evade military
         service face punishment.   The theoretical punishment available  of
         up to three year's imprisonment, seems  rarely  to  be  applied  in
         practice. Thus what risk there is, must be regarded as  remote  and
         not a real risk.


113.   We  have  referred  earlier  to  the  situation  as  it  relates   to
    conscientious objectors and deserters by  reference  to  in  particular
    paragraph 5.48 and 5.49 of the CIPU Bulletin.  It is  further  apparent
    that  subject  to  the  authentication  of  an  individual's  religious
    convictions  before  a  military  commission,  alternative  service  is
    permitted to those who object to military service on religious  grounds
    who 'perform works to the public good' instead.   Although the evidence
    says  that  males  avoiding  military  recruitment  can  in  theory  be
    sentenced for up to three years  imprisonment  for  draft  evasion,  it
    would appear that in practice, only one third of conscription-aged  men
    actually serve in the  Ukrainian  armed  forces  and  that  evasion  of
    military  service  in  terms  of  failure  to   attend   for   military
    registration and  absence  without  leave,  had  become  'unprecedently
    widespread and that it was very rare for officials and citizens of call-
    up age to be punished for violating the law".

      Conclusions on the Appellant's particular circumstances

114.  We now turn to consider the Appellant's  particular  circumstances  in
    the light of these general conclusions.

115.  At the outset of the hearing before us we pointed out to  the  parties
    that the Tribunal were seized with an Article 3 case  based  on  actual
    findings.

116.  We were  mindful  that  at  paragraphs  35,  36,  37  and  39  of  her
    determination Mrs I A M Murray (then an Adjudicator) stated as follows:

    "35.   The Appellant has not said that he will not join the army if  he
         is returned to the Ukraine.  He has stated that he does not want to
         join  the  army.  The  evidence  does  not  show  that  he   is   a
         conscientious objector and I therefore find that if he  returns  to
         the Ukraine today and joins the army he will serve for  the  normal
         period. If he does not join the army he may well be imprisoned  for
         a longer period based on the background evidence but as  I  do  not
         find that this man is a true conscientious objector or even partial
         conscientious objector I do not find that conditions of the prisons
         in Ukraine applies in this case.


    36.    The Appellant has not shown  that  the  conditions  of  military
         service in Ukraine are so harsh as to amount to persecution on  the
         facts.


    37.    The Appellant has not shown that the military service  to  which
         he will be called would involve acts which  he  may  be  associated
         with which are contrary to basic rules of human conduct.  I do  not
         find that the punishment in question is disproportionately harsh or
         severe were he to refuse to join the army and I find that if he  is
         returned to the Ukraine and has to join the  army  he  will  do  so
         although he may not believe in violence.


    38.    I have also considered the fact there is an alternative  service
         to military service.  This Appellant does not appear  to  fit  into
         this category but it is something that could be explored by him  on
         return.


    39.    I do not find that this Appellant is a  conscientious  objector.
         I do not find that his claim meets the categories  brought  out  in
         [2003] UKIAT 00020 B (Russia)."


117.  The Tribunal at the first stage  reconsideration  hearing,  recognised
    upon a careful consideration, in particular  of  paragraph  35  of  the
    Adjudicator's determination, that the Appellant's claim that he did not
    want to join the army was not the same as stating  that  he  would  not
    join and the Appellant never stated in unequivocal terms that he  would
    not do so.   The Tribunal were, however, satisfied  that  the  material
    error of law lay in the Adjudicator's conclusion that  the  asylum  and
    Article 3 claim fell together when they clearly did not  in  this  case
    and her failure to give the Article 3 claim any consideration.

118.  We  have  concluded  with  little  difficulty,  that  so  far  as  the
    Appellant's credibility is concerned, we are not satisfied that any  of
    the account that he has given, as to his true intentions in relation to
    military service  in  the  Ukraine,  is  credible.   In  reaching  this
    conclusion we have borne in mind, the Adjudicator's findings of fact as
    contained in her determination insofar as they related  to  his  asylum
    appeal.

119.  We do not believe that the Appellant would have refused  to  undertake
    military service if conscripted, notwithstanding the attendant risk  of
    prosecution and imprisonment.  We do not believe the explanation he has
    given in evidence as to his reasons for so refusing.

120.  We are persuaded that the  Appellant  clearly  does  not  wish  to  do
    military service in the Ukraine and indeed does not wish to  return  to
    the Ukraine, but we are wholly unpersuaded that it is for  the  reasons
    he has given, which we find to have been conjured up by him in the hope
    that it will prevent his return.

121.  We now give our reasons in more detail.

122.  We are satisfied that if of the Appellant's own volition,  he  refused
    to join the Ukrainian Army and were he to be prosecuted  (although  the
    objective material to which we  have  earlier  referred  suggests  that
    'very rarely are officials and citizens of  call-up  age  punished  for
    violating the law'), he could be imprisoned. However we  consider  that
    he is clearly not a conscientious objector.  This  of  course  was  the
    finding of the Adjudicator, and we further note in  this  regard,  that
    the Appellant's statement  does  not  state  in  terms  that  he  is  a
    conscientious objector save that he claims not to believe  in  the  law
    and thus not to believe that he should be forced to join the army.   He
    also claimed that he hated killing.  It  is  thus  apparent,  that  his
    objection to military service is based on dislike rather  than  reasons
    of conscience.

123.  In this regard, we are mindful that  the  current  objective  material
    demonstrates that the Ukrainian Armed Forces are  not  engaged  in  any
    overseas  activities,  their  units  having  recently  been  completely
    withdrawn from Iraq  and  are  not  involved  in  any  armed  conflicts
    domestically.  Further, the Appellant gave no oral evidence  before  us
    that adequately indicated he had a conscientious objection  to  joining
    the Army.  Indeed, Mr Bradley in his closing submissions most  clearly
    and candidly recognised this  to  be  the  case  and  acknowledged  the
    observations of the Adjudicator at paragraph 35 of  her  determination,
    that the Appellant had not told her that he refused to join  the  Army.
    Mr Bradley summarised the Appellant's  reasons  for  refusing  military
    service to be essentially concerned with the practice of the Hazing  of
    new recruits, he was scared of violence and derision as a conscript.

124.  It was noteworthy, that when we asked Mr Bradley whether he took  that
    to mean that the Appellant was simply in the United  Kingdom  to  avoid
    military service,  Mr  Bradley  confirmed  that  this  was  indeed  the
    position.  Mr Bradley pointed to the observations of the Adjudicator at
    paragraph 35 of her determination that the Appellant had told her  that
    he would not join the army if he was returned to the Ukraine and stated
    that he did not want to join the army.  Further, at paragraph 5 of  his
    most recent statement, the Appellant had made it clear that if  he  was
    returned he would refuse to carry out  military  service  and  believed
    this would result in his being imprisoned, ill-treated and kept in life
    threatening conditions.  That was the Appellant's  case.   It  was  not
    disputed that the Appellant would be called up as he was within the age
    range for this purpose, but the real risk to  the  Appellant  would  be
    that he would be persecuted as a result of his refusal to join up.

125.  Mr Bradley maintained, that upon the Appellant's first  visit  to  the
    United Kingdom he was not subject  to  military  service  but  when  he
    returned to the United Kingdom in January 2004 and at the time  of  his
    interview, the Appellant had a visa and every reason to think  that  he
    would be  allowed  in.  There  was  therefore  no  need  to  raise  the
    Appellant's objection to military service at that stage.

126.  Significantly in this regard, Mr Bradley however  accepted,  that  the
    Appellant had lied to the Immigration Officer at Gatwick  Airport  when
    specifically asked (following questions about his student visa  in  the
    course of his interview) as to whether there were any other reasons  as
    to why the  Appellant  wished  to  be  in  the  United  Kingdom.    The
    Appellant had made it clear from his response that there were no  other
    reasons.

127.  In this regard, our adverse credibility findings in  relation  to  the
    Appellant's account have been  reinforced,  by  his  admission  in  the
    course of cross examination, that before he left the Ukraine to  return
    to the United Kingdom in January 2004, he had already made  a  decision
    that he did not want to return  to  the  Ukraine  to  perform  military
    service.

128.  We found his explanation that he did not know that  he  could  discuss
    these things here, to be  lacking  in  all  credibility.   This  is  an
    intelligent young man who  was  asked  a  straightforward  question  at
    interview on his arrival at Gatwick  Airport  in  January  2004  as  to
    whether there was any other reason why he wished to come to the  United
    Kingdom. On his own account, he was already aware  as  to  the  reason,
    namely that he did not  wish  to  undertake  military  service  in  the
    Ukraine, yet when asked a clear unequivocal question in that regard, he
    chose to give a false but unequivocal reply.    The Appellant was aware
    that this was the opportunity to make his  true  intentions  clear,  if
    indeed they were his true  intentions,  but  he  did  not  do  so.  The
    Appellant lied to the Immigration  Officer  and  he  has  lied  to  the
    Tribunal in terms of his explanation.

129.  We believe the truth of the matter is that this Appellant simply  does
    not like  the  idea  of  undertaking  military  service  with  all  its
    hardships, in the Ukraine.

130.   As  reflected  in  the  objective  material  and  described  as   the
    "unprecedentally widespread" reluctance of so many others to attend for
    military registration, this Appellant simply wants to avoid it and stay
    here.  The claims that he  has  conscientious  objections  to  military
    service  are  no  more  than  false  attempts  to  give  credence   and
    respectability to what is in reality, an attempt to stay here and  thus
    avoid, in common with so many others, military call-up in the Ukraine.

131.  We further note, as pointed out to the  Appellant  in  the  course  of
    cross-examination by Mr Pattison, that  in  an  earlier  statement  the
    Appellant provided to the Tribunal, he stated: "I told the  interviewer
    that I did not want to undertake  military  service".    Such  a  claim
    differed from the evidence that he gave before the Tribunal and was  at
    variance to his response at interview at  Gatwick  Airport  in  January
    2004 that there were no other reasons as to why he wished to be in  the
    United Kingdom.

132.  We found it further noteworthy, that as revealed  in  the  Explanatory
    Statement of the Immigration Officer, Mr Sutcliffe, on 14 February 2004
    at paragraph 17:

         "His other ground of appeal is that he wishes to claim for  asylum.
         This is another material fact he failed to  disclose  to  the  visa
         officer.  Furthermore he failed to disclose his asylum  application
         on the Home Office form IS76(One Stop Notice) and at the  interview
         despite having the opportunity to do so when I  had  asked  him  if
         there were any other reasons for him to stay in the UK".


133. The Appellant confirmed that he recalled being handed and completing  a
    Statement of Additional Grounds form on 31 January 2004.  He  confirmed
    that his signature appeared below it.   When asked as to why  he  would
    not have recorded in the form, that he wished to claim  asylum  in  the
    United Kingdom, the Appellant's response was weak and unimpressive.  He
    told us:


             'What I believed  -  this  was  just  an  additional  question
             because I had already  submitted  the  main  asylum  form.   I
             thought everything was in the main form and this document  was
             just additional grounds for claiming asylum.


             Q.  But this form was completed on 31 January 2004.  The  Home
                  Office never received  your  claim  for  asylum  until  10
                  February 2004.


             A.  I am confused now.   I  believe  as  I  explained  that  I
                  thought it was just  additional  to  the  main  claim  for
                  asylum.  My brother had completed military service in  the
                  Ukraine.  He completed  it  about  eight  years  ago.  No,
                  sorry, I think five years ago.'


134. It was apparent to us  from  the  Appellant's  responses  that  he  was
    struggling for a credible explanation on a matter about  which  he  had
    been caught out.


135.  We cannot ignore the fact that this is  an  Appellant  who  failed  to
    claim asylum on two occasions when he came to the  United  Kingdom  and
    even at interview at Gatwick Airport in January 2004 in response  to  a
    clear question as to whether there were any other  grounds,  failed  to
    give a truthful  response.   He  failed  to  take  the  opportunity  of
    declaring what he now claims were his true intentions, even  though  he
    was already aware of them when he left the Ukraine.  It is apparent  to
    us that the Appellant's concerns centred upon his obtaining  a  student
    visa and thus gaining  entry  clearance.  We  cannot  ignore  the  late
    disclosure of his asylum claim. As Mr Pattison  rightly  submitted  the
    Appellant in such circumstances could not be held to be a credible  and
    reliable witness.

136.  What are  the  implications  of  our  assessment  of  the  Appellant's
    evidence for the issue of risk to him on return?

137.  Firstly, we do not consider that he would in fact  refuse  to  perform
    military service if called upon to do so and as we  have  seen  in  the
    Ukraine, performing military service does not in itself place a  person
    at real risk of serious harm.

138.  We would add that in our view this is a situation where,  even  if  he
    did refuse to perform military service, it would be a matter of  choice
    on his part which would not impact upon his basic human  rights,  since
    he has no conscientious objections.

139.  As to those consequences, we have pointed out that whilst there  is  a
    remote risk of a punishment of imprisonment that it is not a real risk.



140.  If the Appellant upon return chooses to refuse to  undertake  military
    service, any harm that he would bring upon himself would be  less  than
    serious harm.

141.  It is  the  Appellant,  who  has  the  choice  of  either  undertaking
    military service or facing the consequences of not doing so.   It is  a
    balancing act for him as to which he might find the least bearable,  if
    indeed (which we do not believe) he refuses to enlist when required  to
    do so.

142.  Upon our factual findings, there is no real  risk  to  the  Appellant.
    Indeed on his own account, he is not a wanted man in  the  Ukraine.  He
    has not been called up so far for military service.  If  he  is  called
    up, he has the option to answer the call up or  refuse.    As  we  have
    made clear, we do not believe the Appellant would refuse  to  join  the
    military if required to do so.  This is an Appellant who was willing to
    lie to a visa officer about his course of study before re-entry and one
    who did not immediately claim asylum after he returned  to  the  United
    Kingdom.  Indeed, in evidence he sought to mislead us as to the  timing
    of his claim.

143.  A reluctance to perform military service  is  not  necessarily  to  be
    equated with a refusal to do it.

144.  It was  noteworthy,  that  when  we  asked  Mr  Bradley  to  draw  our
    attention to any objective material as to the number of people avoiding
    the draft in the Ukraine, who were prosecuted as a consequence, he  was
    unable to do so and recognised that  there  was  a  "dearth  of  recent
    objective material" in this regard.  We find there to be no cogent  and
    recent evidence to suggest that those  avoiding  military  service  are
    subject to prosecution.

145.  Given our findings on the facts in this particular case the  Appellant
    is not at such risk in any event.

      Decision

146.  The appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds.








Signed                                             Date

N H Goldstein
Senior Immigration Judge

                                  APPENDIX

             Cases and Background Materials Before the Tribunal


Soering [1989] 11 EHRR 439

Muzafar Iqbal [2002] UKIAT 02239

Batayav [2003] EWCA Civ 1489

Hariri [2003] EWCA Civ 807

Dankevich v Ukraine (40679/98) (2004) 38 EHRR 25 2003 WL 23192423

Krotov [2004] EWCA Civ 69

Poltoratskiy v Ukraine (38812/97) (2004) 39 EHRR43 2003 WL 23508990

TV (Ukraine - Prison Conditions) Ukraine [2004] UKIAT 00222

Afanasyev v Ukraine (2005) Application No: 00038722/02 5/4/2005

Nevnerzhitsky v Ukraine (2005) Application No: 00054825/00 05/04/2005

Salov v Ukraine (2005) Application No: 00065518/01 6/9/2005

US State Department Report on Ukraine, March 2001.

Reports of the United Nations Committee Against Torture - Ukraine,  November
    2001.

Reports  of  the  United  Nations  Committee  Against  Torture  -   Ukraine,
    September 2002.

European Committee for the Prevention of Torture and  Inhuman  or  Degrading
    Treatment or Punishment - 2002

US State Department Report on Ukraine, March 2003.

US State department Report on Ukraine 2004

Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada relating to Military Service in  the
    Ukraine, October 2004

CIPU Bulletins 1/2004 issued 2 July 2004 and 1/2005  released  May  2005  on
    Ukraine.

Report  of  Ukraine's  first  Ombudsman's  visit  to  the   Ukrainian   Free
University dated 26 May 2004.

Human Rights Watch World Report on Ukraine, January 2005.

Amnesty International Report on Ukraine, May 2005
