
ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL


 JA (Practice on reconsideration:  Wani applied) Ecuador [2006] UKAIT 00013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at: North Shields Hearing Centre  Date of Hearing:  9 December 2005

      Date of Promulgation: 22 February 2006

                                   Before:

                    Mr C M G Ockelton (Deputy President)
                Mr J R Aitken (Designated Immigration Judge)
                      Mr D G Zucker (Immigration Judge)

                                   Between


                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:           Ms F McCrae, instructed by Ben Hoare Bell
For the Respondent:    Ms H Rackstraw, Home Office Presenting Officer

In the 'second stage' of a reconsideration, the Tribunal is to  act  on  the
decision made after the first stage and incorporate  that  decision  in  its
determination  as  envisaged  in  the  Practice  Direction  and  Wani.   Any
difficulties are to be resolved by those responsible for  the  first  stage:
infelicity of expression of the decision after the  first  stage  is  not  a
reason for relitigating the issue of whether there was a material  error  of
law.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

  1. The Appellant is a citizen of  Ecuador.   He  arrived  in  the  United
     Kingdom in 1997 and claimed asylum.  He was refused.  An appeal to  an
     Adjudicator was dismissed on 18 January 1999.  He was not removed.  On
     3 January 2003, when he was still in the United Kingdom, he made a new
     human rights and  asylum  claim.   At  the  Respondent's  request,  he
     submitted his full papers on 4 April  2003.   Further  representations
     were submitted on 12 December 2003.  On 30 March 2004, his asylum  and
     human rights claims were refused and the Respondent decided to  remove
     him as an  illegal  entrant.   He  appealed  to  an  Adjudicator  and,
     following a hearing on 14 June 2004, the Adjudicator, Mrs N  A  Baird,
     allowed his appeal on asylum and human rights grounds.  The  Secretary
     of  State  sought  and  was  granted  permission  to  appeal  to   the
     Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal.   Following  the  commencement  of  the
     appeals provisions of the 2004 Act, the grant takes effect as an order
     for reconsideration by this Tribunal.

  2. The basis of the Appellant's original (1997) claim was that he  feared
     persecution for his political opinion.   His  recent  claim  is  quite
     different.  In it he gives a detailed account of his homosexuality and
     his fear of persecution or ill-treatment as  a  homosexual  if  he  is
     returned to Ecuador.  Mrs Baird had before her a  considerable  amount
     of country evidence on this topic, as  well  as  the  Appellant's  own
     statements and oral evidence, including his explanation for not having
     mentioned his homosexuality in the course of his previous  claim.   In
     the course of her review of the evidence, she wrote as follows:

           "50.  It seems to me that the Appellant was credible.  I  accept
                 that he is a homosexual and lives with his partner.   I  do
                 find it difficult to understand why he did not mention this
                 when he came to this country.   I  do  however  accept  his
                 explanation for this.


           51.   I  accept  that  he  had  some  difficulties  in  Ecuador,
                 although I take the view that the treatment to which he was
                 subjected does not amount to persecution.  I accept that he
                 was  discriminated  against  by  the  general  public   and
                 insulted and physically harmed but I do not  think  he  was
                 persecuted.  He was not at that time  living  openly  as  a
                 homosexual."

      Then, after further reviewing the country evidence, there is this:


           "56.   In  these  circumstances,  I  do  not  believe  that  the
                 Appellant could openly have a  homosexual  relationship  in
                 Ecuador.  I think if his sexual orientation became known he
                 would not only be at risk of discrimination, prejudice  and
                 violence by the general population but would be at risk  of
                 arbitrary arrest,  humiliation  and  ill-treatment  at  the
                 hands of the police.  I think  such  treatment  constitutes
                 persecution."

  3. Those conclusions, we should make it clear, were based not only on the
     country  information  but  on  her  findings  as  to  the  Appellant's
     particular circumstances now.  Thus she allowed the appeal  under  the
     Refugee Convention and Articles 3 and 8 of the European Convention  on
     Human Rights.

  4. The grounds of appeal to  the  Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal  were  as
     follows:

           "1.   It is respectfully  submitted  that  the  adjudicator  has
                 erred in allowing  this  appeal.   The  appeal  before  the
                 adjudicator was Human Rights only, the adjudicator did  not
                 have jurisdiction to allow this appeal  under  the  refugee
                 convention.
           2.    The Respondent's asylum claim was dismissed at an  earlier
                 hearing.  The Adjudicator has completely failed to  address
                 Deevaseelan, in  particular  para  40(2)  and  42(7).   The
                 adjudicator has even stated  at  para  40  "I  do  find  it
                 difficult to understand why he did not mention this when he
                 came to this country."  It is respectfully  submitted  that
                 given this the adjudicators  next  comment  "I  do  however
                 accept his explanation of this."  Is  totally  insufficient
                 in light of Para 40(2) Deevaseelan.
           3.     The  adjudicator  at  para  51  has  accepted  that   the
                 Respondent has not  been  persecuted  in  Ecuador,  as  she
                 believes that he did not openly live as a homosexual.   The
                 adjudicator  has  therefore  failed  to  explain  why   the
                 respondent  should  be  persecuted  now  on  return  if  he
                 conducted his affairs privately.
           4.     It is respectfully submitted that given these  facts  the
                 Adjudicators decision could have  been  different.   It  is
                 therefore requested that permission to appeal be granted."

  5. The grant of permission, by a Vice President,  was  supported  by  the
     following reasons:

           "1.   The Appeal before the Adjudicator was in respect of  Human
                 rights and not asylum.
           2.    The grounds of appeal are arguable in all respects."

  6. The reconsideration hearing began on 6 September  2005  by  video-link
     from the hearing centre at Bradford before a  panel  consisting  of  a
     Senior Immigration Judge, an Immigration Judge and a non-legal member.
      The purpose of that hearing was, as required by  Rules  31(2)(a)  and
     62(6) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure)  Rules  2005,
     to determine whether the Adjudicator had made a material error of law.
      In the determination of that issue, and indeed in the reconsideration
     generally, the Tribunal was, by Rule 62(7),  limited  to  the  matters
     raised in the grounds of appeal to the Immigration Appeal Tribunal.

  7. At or immediately following the  hearing  on  6  September  2005,  the
     Tribunal as then constituted decided that the determination  contained
     material errors of law and made arrangements for the  adjournment  and
     transfer of the hearing to North Shields to enable the  appeal  to  be
     heard afresh, including the taking of oral evidence again.

  8. The process under which that adjournment and transfer  took  place  is
     set out the AIT's Practice Direction at paragraphs 14.1 to  14.4.   We
     do not need to set them  out  in  full.   They  were  the  subject  of
     consideration by Collins J in R (Wani) v SSHD and AIT [2005] EWHC 2815
     (Admin), in which judgment was handed down the day before we  convened
     to continue the hearing of this reconsideration.   We  must,  however,
     set out paragraph 14.4, which is in the following terms:

           "14.4 Where the Tribunal acting under paragraph  14.2  transfers
                 the proceedings, it shall prepare written reasons  for  its
                 finding that the original Tribunal made a material error of
                 law and those written reasons shall  be  attached  to,  and
                 form part of,  the  determination  of  the  Tribunal  which
                 substitutes a  fresh  decision  to  allow  or  dismiss  the
                 appeal."

  9. The two stages of a reconsideration are clearly envisaged by Rule  31.
     It is only if the Tribunal finds that there was a  material  error  of
     law in the previous decision that it is to go on  and  decide  whether
     the appeal should be allowed or dismissed.  Numerous considerations of
     economy will frequently require arrangements to be made for the second
     stage of a reconsideration that are different from those  relating  to
     the first stage.  The Practice Direction, and principles  of  judicial
     comity in the Tribunal, require that a  reconsideration  divided  into
     stages be allowed to proceed seamlessly from the  one  to  the  other.
     Save in exceptional circumstances, the constitution  of  the  Tribunal
     that is substantively considering whether the appeal should be allowed
     or dismissed is to follow the decision, albeit made by  other  members
     of the same Tribunal, that the material error of law existed.  So much
     is clear from the Practice Direction itself;  and Wani authoritatively
     declares that that practice and those arrangements are lawful.

 10. What Wani also makes clear,  however,  is  that  the  members  of  the
     Tribunal dealing with the first stage must express their decision that
     there was a material error of law, and the reasons for that  decision,
     in a form that can properly be  incorporated  in  a  determination  as
     envisaged by paragraph 14.4  of  the  Practice  Direction.   The  next
     appellate stage after a reconsideration is the Court  of  Appeal,  and
     the decision of the Tribunal at the end of the reconsideration must be
     one that properly incorporates this Tribunal's decision on each of the
     tasks set for it by Rule 31.  In particular, it will be  necessary  to
     demonstrate the reasons for the Tribunal's view that it  was  entitled
     to proceed to decide whether the  appeal  should  now  be  allowed  or
     dismissed.  It can do that only  by  giving  proper  reasons  for  the
     finding that there was a material error of law.  Only if that is  done
     by those dealing with the first stage can  those  with  responsibility
     for the second stage incorporate those reasons in their determination,
     confident that the Tribunal as a whole has given to the parties and to
     any other reader a fully reasoned decision.

 11. In the present case, the reasons were  expressed  by  the  panel  that
     began the reconsideration on 6 December 2005 in the following words:

           "The appeal was on human rights grounds only;   the  Adjudicator
           had no basis upon which to allow the appeal on asylum grounds.


           The Adjudicator failed to give adequate reasons for her  finding
           that the Appellant would be at risk on return."

 12. We have to confess that a requirement to incorporate those  words  (or
     their  burden)  and  no  others   in   our   determination   of   this
     reconsideration stretches judicial comity to its utmost.   Neither  of
     the grounds identified is supported  by  any  reasoning.   The  first,
     although, as we have indicated, it featured both  in  the  grounds  of
     appeal to and the  grant  of  permission  by  the  Immigration  Appeal
     Tribunal, is, with respect, incomprehensible.  The  Appellant's  claim
     at the beginning of 2003 was that his return to Ecuador  would  breach
     the Refugee Convention.  His solicitors' letter of  12  December  2003
     reminded the Secretary of State  that  the  Appellant  was  making  an
     asylum as well as a human rights claim.  The letter of refusal,  dated
     30 March 2004, refers to the 1997 asylum claim  and  points  out  that
     there was no reference to homosexuality then.   After  giving  further
     reasons, the letter continues as follows:

           "10.  For the above reasons, it has  been  concluded  that  your
                 client did not leave Ecuador because of a well-founded fear
                 of persecution due to his sexual orientation.   It  is  not
                 accepted  therefore  that  a  special   adjudicator   might
                 reasonably take a favourable view of this claim despite the
                 rejection of the earlier one, which means that we  can  not
                 accept your representations as a fresh  claim  for  asylum.
                 The  previous  decision  as  upheld   by   an   independent
                 adjudicator will not be reversed."

 13. The letter goes on to deal with the Secretary of State's  reasons  for
     refusing the human rights claim.  The notice  of  decision,  dated  30
     March 2004, is, in part, in the following terms:

           "You have  made  an  asylum  and/or  human  rights  claim.   The
           Secretary of State has decided to refuse your claim  for  asylum
           and/or human rights for  the  reasons  stated  on  the  attached
           notice.


           RIGHT OF APPEAL


           You  are  entitled  to  appeal  to  the  independent   appellate
           authorities  against  this  decision  on  one  or  more  of  the
           following grounds:


           Before removal:
           ...
         . That your removal from the United Kingdom as  a  result  of  the
           decision would:
                . breach the United Kingdom's obligations  under  the  1951
                  Refugee Convention;
                . be incompatible  with  your  rights  under  the  European
                  Convention on Human Rights."


 14. The Appellant's appeal to the Adjudicator  was  expressly  on  grounds
     based on both Conventions.

 15. It is in this context that we must read the bald  statement  that  the
     Appellant  did  not  have  a  Refugee  Convention  appeal  before  the
     Adjudicator.  It is true that under paragraph 346 of  the  Immigration
     Rules the Secretary of State has power to decide whether to  treat  an
     application as a fresh claim.  That appears to have been  the  process
     adopted in the letter of refusal, although the  reference  to  Special
     Adjudicators is somewhat mystifying, since they were  abolished  on  2
     October 2000.  But paragraph 346 does not purport to remove a right of
     appeal in a case where an asylum claim has been refused.  Under s96 of
     the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as it was  in  force
     at the time of the  decision  in  this  appeal:   it  has  since  been
     amended) the Secretary of State,  by  himself  or  by  an  immigration
     officer, had power to certify that (if  we  may  summarise)  a  ground
     relied on in an appeal had been or should have been dealt  with  in  a
     previous  appeal  by  the  same  individual.   The  effect   of   such
     certification was to remove a right  of  appeal  or  to  terminate  an
     appeal that had already been commenced.  In this appeal, there was  no
     such certification.  That fact is, by itself, sufficient to  give  the
     Appellant the right to raise, in his  appeal,  grounds  based  on  the
     Refugee Convention if he chose to do so.  Further, despite  the  terms
     of the letter of refusal, the reference to Refugee Convention  grounds
     in the notice of decision makes it clear that  this  was  not  a  case
     where any certification under s96 was ever intended.

 16. It would appear to follow that the Appellant did indeed have  a  right
     of appeal on Refugee Convention grounds, which he  exercised.   It  is
     not remotely surprising that the Adjudicator considered them.  We were
     told by the  Appellant's  representative  before  us  that,  when  she
     appeared before the Tribunal as constituted to determine whether there
     was an error of law, she was told that it was clearly right that there
     was no appeal on Refugee Convention grounds and she  felt  constrained
     to accept what an apparently strong Tribunal was telling her.

 17. The second part of the decision that there was a material error of law
     appears to be  based  on  the  second  and  third  paragraphs  of  the
     Secretary of State's grounds of appeal.  Unlike the first part, it may
     conceivably be correct:  but it is not presented in a form which would
     enable any other member of the Tribunal to adopt it without  expansion
     or explanation.  The Adjudicator summarised the  material  before  her
     and then gave nine paragraphs of reasons  for  her  decision.   It  is
     therefore surprising to find a completely  unreasoned  assertion  that
     her decision was unreasoned.   Insofar  as  any  finding  of  lack  of
     reasons is to be based on Devaseelan, it is  necessary  of  course  to
     remember that paragraphs 37 to 42 of that case incorporate guidelines,
     not rigorous rules.  If the decision is based  on  the  allegation  in
     paragraph 3 of the grounds, it  is  necessary  to  remember  that  the
     Adjudicator took into account the way  that  the  Appellant  has  been
     living in this country for several years.

Best Practice

 18. We emphasise that we would  not  invite  other  constitutions  of  the
     Tribunal to enter on considerations such  as  the  foregoing.   It  is
     clear from the Practice Direction that, where a reconsideration  takes
     place in two stages, it is for those who deal with the first stage  to
     determine conclusively all matters relating  to  the  existence  of  a
     material error of law, and for those dealing  with  the  second  stage
     simply  to  incorporate  the  decision  on  that  issue   into   their
     determination.  Similarly, as  explained  in  Wani,  it  is  (save  in
     exceptional circumstances) not open to the parties to re-argue  issues
     going to the existence or otherwise of material errors of law  at  the
     second stage of the reconsideration.

 19. On the other hand, and as this case shows,  it  may  happen  that  the
     reasons given by the panel at the first stage  are  not  such  as  can
     properly be incorporated as  they  stand  into  the  decision  of  the
     Tribunal on the  reconsideration  as  a  whole.   We  hope  that  such
     examples will be infrequent:  certainly, the ruling in Wani  that  the
     reasons given at the end of the first stage must  be  communicated  to
     the parties will no doubt ensure that they are in future carefully and
     fully written.  Even so, ambiguities and occasional incompleteness may
     occur.  Neither   the   existence   of   any   such   ambiguities   or
     incompleteness,  nor  a  subsequent  Immigration  Judge's  actual   or
     potential disagreement with the first stage reasons, gives  any  basis
     for departing from the procedure set up  by  the  Practice  Direction.
     The parties' occasion for testing the  validity  of  the  reasons  for
     finding that there was a material error of law is  by  appeal  to  the
     Court of Appeal when the Tribunal has finished its work.  The task  of
     those charged with the second stage of the reconsideration  is  simply
     to carry it out in accordance  with  the  directions  that  have  been
     given.  If the directions are not clear, or if  the  reasons  are  too
     exiguous to form part of the Tribunal's determination, then those  who
     were responsible for writing them should be asked to expand them  into
     a form in which they can properly appear in the  final  determination.
     It is their task which has not yet been fully performed.

 20. Thus the requirements of the Practice Direction and judicial comity in
     such a case are that the chairman of the  Tribunal  dealing  with  the
     first stage be contacted and  asked  to  complete  his  or  her  task.
     Following the ruling in Wani, the  result  of  that  process  will  be
     communicated to the parties.  It follows  that,  where  possible,  any
     such request should be made sufficiently in advance of the hearing  of
     the second stage for the parties to be able to deal properly with  the
     issues arising at that stage, as identified in the  expanded  reasons.
     A unified Tribunal, with its judges working with (rather than against)
     each other, can demand nothing less than the process of  communication
     we suggest.

 21.  How  fully  the  reasons  need  to  be  given  will  depend  on   the
     circumstances of  the  case.   We  expect,  however,  that  where  the
     Tribunal proceeds to a second stage of reconsideration  on  the  basis
     that the parties have consented to a decision that it should do so, or
     conceded that there was a material error of law,  it  will  rarely  be
     necessary to do other than record the consent or concession.

This appeal

 22.  This  appeal  is  wholly  exceptional.   The  second  stage  of   the
     reconsideration, coming so soon after the decision in  Wani  before  a
     panel constituted with a Deputy President of  the  Tribunal  gives  us
     this opportunity to explore the consequences of Wani itself.  Further,
     the reasons given for proceeding from the first stage  to  the  second
     are, as it happens, seriously defective, to such an extent that before
     us Ms Rackstraw did not seek to rely very firmly either on them or  on
     the Secretary of State's original grounds of appeal to the Immigration
     Appeal Tribunal.

 23. For that reason, we did not find it necessary to seek expansion of the
     reasons from those who constituted the Tribunal at the first stage  of
     this reconsideration;  the determination which we make is  by  consent
     of the parties.
 24. The Tribunal sitting on 6 December 2005 identified material errors  of
     law in the Adjudicator's determination as set out in paragraph  11  of
     this determination.  By agreement of  the  parties,  we  substitute  a
     determination allowing this appeal on asylum and human rights  grounds
     for the reasons given by the Adjudicator in her decision  of  14  June
     2004.



                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT
                                                             Date:
