

Asylum and Immigration Tribunal

                       SI (reported cases as evidence) Ethiopia [2007] UKAIT
                                                                       00012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 18 May 2006                               |On 06 February 2007           |
|                                             |                              |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                       Senior Immigration Judge Storey
                      Senior Immigration Judge Moulden


                                   Between


                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Denholm, Counsel, instructed by J D Spicer &
Co.
For the Respondent:        Miss K Lonsdale, Home Office Presenting Officer

Subject  to  one  exception,  country  guidance  cases  continue   to   give
authoritative guidance on the country guidance issue(s)  identified  for  so
long as they remain on the AIT website as CG cases.
However, the AIT Practice Directions make  clear  that  a  country  guidance
case may be departed from by an immigration judge, albeit only  in  strictly
limited circumstances relating to fresh evidence.
Typically cases reported  as  country  guidance  serve  a  dual  role:  they
contain summaries of background evidence; they also assess or evaluate  that
evidence. The obiter observations of Keene LJ in RG (Ethiopia)  [2006]  EWCA
Civ   339 concerned reliance as evidence of the background  situation  in  a
country on adjudicator determinations (in the old  two-tier  system);  these
observations are not authority for the  proposition  that  country  guidance
cases cannot be  cited for the summary of background country  evidence  they
often provide.
By contrast, cases which have in the past been reported for  what  they  say
about country conditions but were never designated as CG, whilst citable  in
certain circumstances for the summary of background  country  evidence  they
contain, are not precedents. An immigration judge who relies on such  cases,
not simply for the summary of facts they contain but  for  their  assessment
of the facts, will err in law  unless  that  assessment  accords  with  pre-
existing country guidance.
As the AIT system of reported cases has evolved, it  is  now  likely  to  be
very rare indeed that a case  will  be  reported  for  what  it  says  about
country conditions unless it is reported as a CG-designated case.



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1. The appellant is a national of Ethiopia. On 9 June  2005  the  respondent
made a decision to refuse to grant asylum and on 27  June  2005  a  decision
was made to remove her as an illegal entrant.  Directions were proposed  for
removal to Ethiopia. She appealed.  The basis of her claim was that she  had
been born in Ethiopia to a father of full Eritrean descent and a  mother  of
mixed Ethiopian/Eritrean descent. She voted  for  Eritrean  independence  in
the 1993 referendum. In May 1998 her father was detained  by  the  Ethiopian
authorities, and has not been heard of since.  On 12 November 1999  she  was
detained with  a  view  to  being  deported  to  Eritrea.  She  remained  in
detention for approximately six months,  during  which  time  she  was  ill-
treated.  She was raped on one occasion and was the victim of  an  attempted
rape on a second occasion. In April 2000  her  mother  secured  her  release
from detention by bribery. She was  in  hiding  in  Ethiopia  until  January
2001, when she travelled to Sudan.  She  remained  in  Sudan  for  one  year
before travelling to the UK on 1 January 2002.   In 2003 she  was  diagnosed
as HIV positive.  She attributes her HIV infection to the rape.

2. The hearing  of  her  appeal  took  place  on  6  September  2005  before
Immigration Judge A.D. Baker.  In a determination sent out on  15  September
2005 she accepted that the  appellant  was  a  generally  credible  witness.
Whilst accepting  therefore  that  she  had  suffered  past  persecution  in
Ethiopia for a Convention reason, she did not consider  that  the  appellant
would be of adverse interest to the authorities now.

3. The grounds for reconsideration were threefold.

4. First, it was submitted that the Immigration Judge  erred  in  concluding
that the appellant was an Ethiopian national  or, alternatively, in  failing
to have regard to all the relevant materials relating to the  issue  of  her
nationality.

5. Secondly, it was contended that the  Immigration  Judge  failed  to  make
proper findings about the  appellant's  claimed  attempt  to  apply  for  an
Ethiopian  passport.  The  Immigration  Judge  had  found  the   appellant's
evidence  with regard to  her  passport  application  made  in  London  only
'partly credible' and  had  stated  that  although  the  objective  evidence
suggested the appellant 'may have difficulty  obtaining  a  passport',  this
did not discharge the burden of proof  in  seeking  to  establish  that  she
would not be allowed to return to Ethiopia.

6. Thirdly, issue  was  taken  with  the  Immigration  Judge's  approach  to
guidance given by the Tribunal in reported cases. It  was  argued  that  the
Immigration Judge had wrongly based her decision  on  the  Country  Guidance
case of DA (Ethnicity-Eritrean -  Country  Conditions)  Ethiopia  CG  [2004]
00046, a decision notified on 16 March 2004.    Her reliance  on  this  case
was said to be erroneous because there had been a subsequent reported  case,
MA and Others (Ethiopia - mixed ethnicity - dual nationality)  [2004]  UKIAT
00324 notified on 22 December 2004.  The Tribunal in MA had before  it   new
evidence in the form of expert reports from Mr Patrick Gilkes and  Professor
L. Cliffe and evidence from  the  Ethiopian  Community  Centre  in  the  UK.
Accordingly the Immigration Judge should have treated MA as superseding  DA.
 The Immigration Judge was said to have made  no  reference  to  considering
the more recent evidence contained in MA.

7. The grounds drew specific attention to what the  Immigration  Judge  said
at paragraph 58:

         'I have considered whether there is anything  in  the  more  recent
         objective evidence to suggest that she would be at particular  risk
         of adverse attention from the authorities.  I can find nothing  and
         was not referred to any changes in the situation in Ethiopia  since
         the cases of [DA] and MA were decided.'

8. In relation to this paragraph the grounds argued that:

         '[c]ontrary to the Immigration Judge's assertion, at paragraph  58,
         there was further evidence of relevance which was not considered in
         [DA] notably the Amnesty material  .. .and the evidence  considered
         by the AIT in MA...'

Our Assessment
9. Turning to the first ground of reconsideration, for a number  of  reasons
we do not accept that the  Immigration  Judge  erred  in  finding  that  the
appellant is a national of Ethiopia. First of all there was  ample  evidence
before the Immigration Judge to show that the  appellant  met  the  criteria
for automatic acquisition of Ethiopian nationality by virtue  of  her  birth
in  Ethiopian  territory  and  the  fact  that  her  mother  held  Ethiopian
nationality  (see  for  example  her  answers  to  Q4  and  Q5  of  the  SEF
interview).  The fact that the appellant's father  was  accepted  as  having
been born in Eritrea did not alter this state  of  affairs.  As  Mr  Denholm
himself conceded, Ethiopian nationality law made clear that  a  person  born
to an Ethiopian parent of either sex was entitled to Ethiopian  nationality.
There was no suggestion of dual nationality, which  Ethiopian  law  formally
precludes in any event.

10. Secondly, the appellant herself in the  SEF form  had  stated  that  her
nationality was Ethiopian. At paragraph 46 of her asylum interview  she  had
said that she never considered herself as Eritrean. It was only in her  most
recent statement and in cross-examination that she  had  begun  to  maintain
that she was  of  Eritrean  nationality,  and  to  argue  that  in  previous
interviews she had never said she was a national of Eritrea and  never  said
her mother was Ethiopian.  Bearing in mind  these  facts,  it  was  entirely
open to the Immigration Judge  to  find  her  earlier  evidence  was  to  be
preferred on this point.

11. We would agree that the Immigration Judge did not expressly address  the
issue of whether the appellant would have been  stripped  of  her  Ethiopian
nationality prior to her leaving Ethiopia. However, we  do  not  think  this
omission gave rise to any error of  law  on  the  part  of  the  Immigration
Judge. For one thing the appellant herself did not claim that she  had  been
informed of a decision to strip her of Ethiopian nationality.  Her  evidence
was that, although she had never held an Ethiopian passport, she had held  a
school certificate and a local authority identity card and had voted in  the
1993 referendum. She had also been arrested and detained.  Cleary  therefore
she was  a person on whom official  records  were  kept  by  the   Ethiopian
authorities and as such  someone whom they would have had every  opportunity
to serve a notice on of a decision stripping her  of  Ethiopian  nationality
at any point up to her release from detention on payment  of  a  bribe.  For
another thing, the background evidence on which Mr Denholm  relied  did  not
demonstrate that the state  policy  at  that  time  of  stripping  Ethiopian
nationality from some categories of persons of (or perceived  as  being  of)
Eritrean ethnicity was done without any form or order of  notification.  The
contrary evidence (as cited in paragraph 28 of MA) included the following:

         'In August 1999 the government ordered people  of  Eritrean  origin
         between 18 and older who had voted in the 1993 referendum  as  well
         as those who had formally acquired Eritrean citizenship to register
         for alien residency permits'.

12. To reiterate, there was nothing  to  suggest  that  this  appellant  had
received such an order to register.  Hence the objective  evidence  did  not
demonstrate that the Ethiopian authorities had stripped  this  appellant  of
her Ethiopian nationality.

13. As to the second ground of reconsideration,  we  see  no  error  in  the
Immigration Judge's conclusion  that  the  appellant's  evidence  about  her
attempt to obtain a passport from the Ethiopian Embassy did not  demonstrate
a genuine attempt to obtain  Ethiopian  nationality.  At  paragraph  56  the
Immigration Judge stated:

          'The appellant's evidence with regard to the  passport  is  partly
         credible. I agree with Ms Lloyd that the passport application   has
         not been marked and  would  not  appear  to  have  been  officially
         considered. It is not reasonably likely that a  receptionist  would
         have made a decision on whether or not a passport was to be  issued
         and the appellant in her own evidence stated that she did not  want
         Ethiopian  nationality  and  had  gone  to  the  embassy   on   her
         solicitor's advice. if her solicitors had  made  contact  with  the
         embassy I would have expected there to be some reference to that in
         the papers. Whilst the objective evidence suggest that she  may  we
         have difficulty obtaining a passport, I do not find  that  this  is
         proof to the required standard that she would  not  be  allowed  to
         return to Ethiopia."

14. As we pointed out to Mr Denholm, the form the appellant  had  filled  in
even described her as Eritrean.   Mr Denholm was unable  to  show  that  the
appellant's solicitors  had  contacted  the  embassy  or  pursued  a  formal
application.   We think that the Immigration Judge  was  quite  entitled  to
find for the above reasons that the appellant had not taken  adequate  steps
to apply for and obtain Ethiopian nationality.

15. Mr Denholm sought to argue that, even if the appellant were seen as  not
having taken  adequate  steps  to  apply  for  an  Ethiopian  passport,  the
objective evidence showed that someone in her position would  be  unable  to
obtain an Ethiopian passport, since  she  had  been,  and  would  again  be,
treated  by  the  Ethiopian  authorities  as  someone  of  (mixed)  Eritrean
ethnicity and as someone who had voted in the 1993 referendum.  However,  in
the first place we do not  think  that  the  Immigration  Judge  hinged  her
assessment of risk on return wholly on the appellant being accepted  by  the
Ethiopian authorities as an  Ethiopian national. What she said was  that  'I
do not find this is proof to the required standard that  she  would  not  be
allowed to return to  Ethiopia' (emphasis added).   The  distinction  is  of
some importance in view of the lack of evidence that this appellant,  whilst
still in Ethiopia, had been ordered to apply for registration  as  an  alien
and in view of the evidence contained in both DA and MA that  in  any  event
Ethiopia  accords  rights  of  residence  to  certain  categories  of   non-
nationals.

16. Be that as it may, we consider that the evidence before the  Immigration
Judge sufficed to show the appellant would be  regarded  as  a  national  of
Ethiopia by the Ethiopian authorities. To reiterate, she was  a  person  who
had an entitlement to Ethiopian nationality under Ethiopian law,  by  virtue
of her mother's Ethiopian nationality.

17. We also reiterate the following point. Whilst it is true that there  was
expert evidence stating that persons who had voted in  the  1993  referendum
were told that they  would  be  stripped  of  their  Ethiopian  nationality,
nothing of the kind had been told to this appellant, even  though  they  had
chosen to detain her on account of her  Eritrean ethnicity.  We  would  also
note at this juncture that Mr  Denholm  did  not  seek  to  demur  from  the
general conclusions reached in MA;  indeed he sought to rely on them.

18. That brings us to the third and final ground for reconsideration,  which
attacked the Immigration Judge's approach to the Tribunal's guidance on  the
situation of Ethiopians of mixed Eritrean ethnicity. She was  said  to  have
wrongly  followed  the  Tribunal  country  guidance  (CG)  case  of  DA   in
preference to a subsequent reported case, MA. We  do  not  think  that  this
point  gets  off  the  ground.  It  depends  on  the  contention  that   the
Immigration Judge was wrong to  follow  DA  since  that  decision  had  been
superseded or at least significantly modified by the later reported case  of
MA in view of the further evidence which was before the latter. (It was  not
in dispute that at the date of hearing DA was listed on the AIT  website  as
a CG case. It was also clear that MA has never been a CG case).

19.  The  argument  here  misunderstands  the  status  of  cases  which  are
designated as 'CG'.   In relation to such cases the Asylum  and  Immigration
Tribunal Practice Directions April 2005 state that:

         "18.2    A reported determination of the Tribunal  or  of  the  IAT
               bearing  the  letters  'CG'   shall   be   treated   as   an
               authoritative  finding  on  the   country   guidance   issue
               identified in the determination,  based  upon  the  evidence
               before  the  members  of   the  Tribunal  or  the  IAT  that
               determined the  appeal. As a  result,  unless  it  has  been
               expressly  superseded  or  replaced  by   any   later   'CG'
               determination, or is inconsistent with other authority  that
               is binding on the Tribunal, such a country guidance case  is
               authoritative in any  subsequent  appeal,  so  far  as  that
               appeal:


                (a)    relates to the country guidance  issue  in  question;
               and
                (b)    depends upon the same or similar evidence.


          18.3    A list of current CG  cases  will  be  maintained  on  the
               Tribunal website. Both the respondent and any representative
               of the appellant  in  any  appeal  concerning  a  particular
               country will be expected to be conversant with  the  current
               'CG' determinations relating to the country.


           18.4 Because of the principle that like cases should  be  treated
               in like manner, any failure to follow  a  clear,  apparently
               applicable country  guidance case or to show why it does not
               apply to the case in question is likely to  be  regarded  as
               grounds for review or appeal on a point of law."


20. Mr Denholm's argument wrongly implies that a CG case cannot be  affected
by fresh evidence.  On the contrary, the Practice Directions recognise  that
a CG case may be departed from by  an  Immigration  Judge,  albeit  only  in
strictly limited circumstances:  where in relation to  the  issue  on  which
guidance has been given there is evidence which is not the same or which  is
not similar. This is pertinent because it seems to us that  the  Immigration
Judge fully recognised that the later MA decision contained  fresh  evidence
relevant to the country issue raised by the facts of her case.

21. Plainly, therefore  a  country  guidance  case  should  continue  to  be
treated as  an  authoritative  finding  on  the  country  guidance  issue(s)
identified until it is removed from the AIT website list of CG cases.  If  a
case remains on the website as a CG case, it continues  to  furnish  country
guidance unless a later case expressly supersedes  or  replaces  it  as  CG.
That does not, however, prevent that case not being followed on  a  relevant
issue if, in the context of a  particular  case,  there  is  fresh  evidence
compelling a different view, albeit "[t]he wider the risk  category  posited
the greater the duty on an Immigration Judge to give  careful  reasons  [for
not following a CG case] based on an adequate body of evidence"  (MK  (AB  &
DM confirmed) Democratic Republic of Congo CG [2006] UKAIT 00001).


22. There is a very limited exception to this principle. It does  not  arise
in this case, but we mention it here for completeness. If a case  designated
as country guidance (CG) is subsequently found by the higher courts to  have
been wrong in law because it is considered that the Tribunal's  approach  to
the assessment of the facts was legally flawed, then the effect is  that  it
was never right to follow its guidance (see OM (AA1 wrong in  law)  Zimbabwe
CG [2006] UKAIT 00077).

23. We should perhaps also clarify at this point that a new decision of  the
Tribunal (whether of the old  IAT  or  the  AIT)  is  not  of  itself  fresh
evidence. If  the  decision  in  question  is  a  reported  one,  that  will
generally be (to use the language of the Explanatory Notes to  the  previous
IAT Practice Direction  CA3  of  2003  on  Citation  of  Cases)  because  it
contains guidance as to the law or the facts, or both (a  new  principle  of
law or a matter of real and  generally-applicable  guidance  to  parties  or
assessment of facts of such generality that others ought to have  regard  to
it).  However, when the reported decision (whether  CG  or  non-CG)  is  one
reported for what it says about country conditions, it will often contain  a
summary of the background evidence,  including  the  most  recent  evidence.
Given the relative frequency with which  country  reports  are  updated,  it
would be odd if it were otherwise. This is  a  common  occurrence.  In  this
way, but in this way only, new reported decisions of the Tribunal  can  also
be useful as a source of fresh evidence.

24. We emphasis this seemingly  obvious  point  so  as  to  lay  to  rest  a
misunderstanding which appears to have arisen in the  context  of  a  recent
judgment in the case RG (Ethiopia)  [2006]  EWCA  Civ    339.  Although  the
point made is obiter, Keene LJ stated at [37]:

         "It follows from these and other authorities that, while a decision
         must show to the losing party why he has lost,  it  most  certainly
         need not deal with all the evidence  placed  before  the  decision-
         maker. That must especially hold good  when  one  is  dealing  with
         background material dealing with conditions  in  the  country  from
         which an asylum seeker has come. Such material is often  voluminous
         and it would place an intolerable burden on adjudicators to  expect
         them to refer expressly to all the relevant factual  material.   It
         is of course, a long-established principle  of  administrative  law
         that it is not to be assumed that a decision maker has left a piece
         of evidence out of account merely because he does not refer  to  it
         in his decision. One also needs to bear in mind that  the  decision
         of an Adjudicator is not binding on other  adjudicators:  it  is  a
         decision  simply  reflecting  the  evidence  before  him,  evidence
         dealing necessarily only with  the  situation  in  the  country  in
         question at a particular moment in time.  Indeed,  even  the  IAT's
         decisions in cases not categorised as "Country  Guidance" cases are
         not to be cited as  evidence  of  the  background  situation  in  a
         country: Eshete [2002] UKIAT 01963." [emphasis added]

25. Eshete was a determination of the IAT chaired by Mr J  Freeman,  then  a
Vice President. We do not know if Eshete was produced  in  full  before  the
Court of Appeal in RG (Ethiopia). We suspect that all  that  may  have  been
produced was  the  reference  to  it  at  paragraph  18.141  of  Macdonald's
Immigration Law &  Practice (6th  Edition).  In  any  event  the  Court  has
apparently simply misunderstood its meaning since Eshete  clearly  does  not
assert  that   "even  the  IAT's  decisions  not  categorised  as   'Country
Guidance' cases are not to be cited as evidence of the background  situation
in a country".  In  Eshete the IAT was faced with a submission (relating  to
the  Mengistu  regime  in  Ethiopia)  based  on  the  decision  of   another
adjudicator.  Eshete was written at a time when  the  Immigration  Appellate
Authority was a two tier system, with adjudicators on  the  first  tier  and
the Immigration Appeal Tribunal on the second-tier.  As the Tribunal  noted,
not  only  had  a  recent  practice  direction  forbidden  the  citation  of
adjudicator decisions, but:

         "3.  The decision  in  question  is  Tekleabe  (CC  51192/99):  the
              adjudicator was  Ms  AC  McGavin.  Mr  Williams  very  frankly
              acknowledged that it was not based on any background  evidence
              as to risk faced by family members of Dergue officers, but  on
              a finding as to the credibility of the individual case,  which
              was different from the present one in a  number  of  ways.  It
              concerned a much older lady, who had herself been a  treasurer
              of the Mengistu party women's association, and  involved  with
              AAPO [All Amhara People's Association] since the fall  of  the
              Dergue. Though no doubt it was a decision the adjudicator  was
              entitled to reach on the facts of the individual case,  we  do
              not think it shows any general  risk  for  family  members  of
              Mengistu officers.


           4.     It sometimes  happens  that  adjudicators  are  asked  to
              consider a whole raft of favourable decisions  on  appellants
              from  the  country  in   question   which   the   industrious
              practitioner concerned  has  managed  to  secure  from  their
              colleagues. (The unfavourable ones are allowed to  pass  into
              obscurity). We do not consider this a proper  practice:  even
              though the decisions are being relied on as  fact,  not  law,
              the adjudicator who wrote them will have had  no  opportunity
              of independent verification of the facts, as enjoyed  by  the
              various  government  and  international  organizations  whose
              reports are familiar in these cases.


         5.  If the decision  which  was  to  be  relied  on  is  based  on
              background evidence, then  that  evidence  itself  should  be
              produced; if not, it is no  reliable  guide  to  the  general
              situation. While there may be a limited place  for  referring
              adjudicators to previous decisions on close family members or
              comrades of an appellant, where the findings of fact may have
              some actual bearing on the individual case concerned,  we  do
              not think that adjudicator decisions should ever be cited  as
              of general application, on the facts any  more  than  on  the
              law."




26. Manifestly Eshete was not addressing  the  issue  of  the  propriety  of
reliance on reported IAT decisions for their summaries of factual  material.
It was talking about adjudicator decisions. Furthermore, both  the  Practice
Directions in force at the time and Tribunal case law had  fully  recognised
the value of some reported decisions of the Tribunal not  only  as  guidance
on country conditions but also as containing summaries of factual  evidence.
In addition it would be very strange  indeed  for  there  to  be  any  legal
principle effectively preventing evidence of the background situation  in  a
country from being admitted simply because it was contained within  a  legal
decision. Of course, when contained in a legal  decision  it  is  one  stage
further from the source and  is  necessarily  hearsay.   Furthermore,  since
facts are decided by the evidence, it  is  important  for  the  fact-finding
Tribunal not to proceed as if it thought that facts were to be found in  law
books. For this reason, when reported  cases  are  relied  on  as  evidence,
there may often be a need for the Tribunal to insist on  the  production  of
the original sources themselves - country reports, expert  reports  and  the
like. But reported decisions of the  Tribunal  can  generally  be  taken  to
contain accurate summaries of such items of evidence.   Not  to  allow  such
summaries  to  be  admitted  into  evidence  would  be  likely  to  engender
unnecessary and unwieldy bundles  of  documents.  If  a  party  to  Tribunal
proceedings considers that an IAT or AIT quotation from or  summary  of  the
background country materials is inaccurate, then it is open  to  that  party
to demonstrate this.

27. Having clarified this general point, we turn to  the  issue  of  whether
the Immigration Judge failed to have regard to the fresh evidence  contained
in MA.  We do not think there was any such  failure  on  her  part  in  this
determination. At paragraph 47 she recorded  Mr  Denholm's  submission  that
"whilst MA was  not  a  Country  Guidance  case,  it  was  more  recent  and
contained  a  detailed  analysis  of  the  related  country  evidence."   At
paragraph 53 she accepted that:

         "MA is not a Country Guidance case but was decided post  [DA].   It
         was  accepted  in  that  case  that  there  was  evidence  of  some
         continuing deportations but the numbers had dropped drastically  in
         recent years. The IAT was not satisfied that the objective evidence
         showed that Ethiopians of Eritrean or part Eritrean ethnicity  fell
         within a category which on that basis alone established  that  they
         had a well-founded fear of persecution. However, they accepted that
         if the reality of the situation for an individual claimant is  that
         he or she is effectively deprived of  citizenship  which  leads  to
         treatment which can properly be categorised  as  persecution  then,
         subject to the other requirements of the  Convention,  there  is  a
         right to claim refugee status."

28. It is clear from the context in which she set out her reasoning that  at
this  point  she  was  indeed  taking  into  account  the  further  evidence
contained in MA.

29. At paragraphs 54 and 55 she adopted further  conclusions  drawn  by  the
      IAT in MA.

30. At paragraph 59 she then turned to  consider  what  evidence  there  was
post-dating both  DA and MA.   She concluded:

         "I have considered whether there is anything  in  the  more  recent
         objective evidence to suggest that she would be at particular  risk
         of adverse attention from the  authorities. I can find nothing  and
         was not referred to any changes in the situation in Ethiopia  since
         the cases of  [DA] and MA were decided" [emphasis added]

31. Accordingly we consider that the Immigration Judge properly applied  the
Practice Directions. She properly recognised that in  order  to  assess  the
appellant's case, she had to consider the  DA case on the basis  that  there
had been significant new evidence dealt with in MA, as well as some  post-MA
evidence. Further, she properly viewed the state of the evidence as  it  had
developed as  continuing  to  vindicate  DA's  assessment  that  persons  of
Eritrean ethnicity would not generally face risk on return to Ethiopia.


 32. One question which might be asked in this context is whether any  legal
error arises from the fact that the Immigration Judge's reliance on  MA  was
not simply for the summary it contained of further evidence,  but  also  for
that case's assessment of the evidence. The question is  pertinent  in  this
case because we think it clear that she did rely on MA  for  its  assessment
as well as for its summary of new evidence. Obviously if the  assessment  in
MA had reached conclusions contrary to the existing CG case (DA), she  would
have erred in law: unless designated as CG, reported cases are  not  binding
on country  guidance  issues.  However,  in  our  view  MA,  insofar  as  it
consisted in assessment of the evidence, did not differ from the  assessment
in DA. Hence such reliance was not legally  flawed.  In  any  case,  nothing
turns on this point in this case, since the only legal  error  asserted  was
failure to follow MA for what it contained by way of evidence.

33. For the above reasons we conclude that the  Immigration  Judge  did  not
materially  err  in  law  and  accordingly  her  decision  to  dismiss   the
appellant's appeal must stand.




Signed                                  Date
      Dr H H Storey
       Senior Immigration Judge

