



|ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL                                   |
|                                                                  |
|                                   |                             |
|GK (Long residence -immigration history) Lebanon [2008] UKAIT     |
|00011                                                             |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|THE IMMIGRATION ACTS                                              |
|                                                                  |
|                                |                                |
|Heard at: Field House on 8      |                                |
|January  2008                   |                                |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Before                                                            |
| SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE STOREY                                  |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|GK                                                                |
|                                                                  |
|Appellant                                                         |
|And                                                               |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |        |Respondent                  |


Representation
For the appellant: Mr A Leventakis, Solicitor, ACS Solicitors
For the respondent: Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer

   1. When issues arise as to  whether  a  person  has  accrued  sufficient
      continuous residence under the  long  residence  provisions  of  para
      276A, so as to establish eligibility under either the "10 year  rule"
      (at  para  276B(i)(a))  or  under  the  "14  year  rule"   (at   para
      276B(i)(b)), careful attention must be paid to  the  immigration  law
      applicable during the relevant period or periods of residence.
   2. Parties to appeals of this kind (where  there  is  a  dispute  as  to
      whether there has been the requisite period of residence) should take
      steps to ensure that their submissions furnish  an  analysis  of  the
      individual's immigration history  by  reference  to  the  legislative
      provisions applicable during the relevant period(s) of residence.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a national of Lebanon. In  a  determination  notified
      following a hearing on 21  May  2007  Immigration  Judges  Verity  and
      Neyman dismissed his appeal against a decision dated 16 February  2007
      refusing his application for indefinite leave to remain and issuing  a
      certificate that the appellant was not entitled to the  protection  of
      Article 33(1) of the Refugee Convention because Article  1(F)  applied
      to him (whether or not he would otherwise be entitled to  protection).
      The appellant's grounds of appeal constituted an asylum  appeal  under
      s.55  of  the  Immigration,  Asylum  and  Nationality  Act  2006.  The
      appellant successfully applied for reconsideration and so  the  matter
      comes before me.

   2. It is unnecessary to set out particulars  of  the  appellant's  asylum
      claim beyond noting that  the  panel  first  decided  to  dismiss  the
      Secretary of State's certificate because they considered that  he  was
      ("at the very most" a junior and unimportant member  of  the  Lebanese
      Forces and that he had not been involved directly or  indirectly  with
      any activities which involved the ill treatment of any  other  person.
      Having gone on to consider the appellant's  asylum  and  human  rights
      grounds of appeal, the panel concluded that, given his minor role,  he
      would  not  be  of  adverse  interest  to  Hizbollah  or   any   other
      organisation.

   3. The panel also considered whether the appellant met  the  requirements
      of paras 276A-D  of  the  Immigration  Rules  HC395  as  amended.  The
      relevant provisions currently state:


        " Long residence in the United Kingdom


        276A. For the purposes of paragraphs 276B to 276D:


        (a) "continuous residence" means residence in  the  United  Kingdom
        for an unbroken period, and for these purposes a period  shall  not
        be considered to have been broken where an applicant is absent from
        the United Kingdom for a period of 6 months  or  less  at  any  one
        time, provided that the applicant in question has existing  limited
        leave to enter or remain upon their departure and return, but shall
        be considered to have been broken if the applicant:


              (i) has been removed  under  Schedule  2  of  the  1971  Act,
              section 10 of the 1999 Act, has been deported or has left the
              United Kingdom having been refused leave to enter  or  remain
              here; or


              (ii) has left the United Kingdom and, on doing so,  evidenced
              a clear intention not to return; or


              (iii) left the United Kingdom in circumstances  in  which  he
              could have had no  reasonable  expectation  at  the  time  of
              leaving that he would lawfully be able to return; or


              (iv) has been convicted of an offence and was sentenced to  a
              period of imprisonment or was directed to be detained  in  an
              institution other than a prison (including, in particular,  a
              hospital or an institution  for  young  offenders),  provided
              that the sentence in question was not a  suspended  sentence;
              or


              (v) has spent a total of more than 18 months absent from  the
              United Kingdom during the period in question.


        (b)  "lawful  residence"  means  residence  which   is   continuous
        residence pursuant to:


              (i) existing leave to enter or remain; or


               (ii) temporary admission within section 11 of the  1971  Act
              where leave to enter or remain is subsequently granted; or


               (iii) an exemption from immigration control, including where
              an exemption ceases to apply if it is immediately followed by
              a grant of leave to enter or remain.


        276A1. The requirement to be met by a person seeking  an  extension
        of stay on the ground of long residence in the  United  Kingdom  is
        that the applicant meets all the requirements in paragraph 276B  of
        these rules, except the requirement to have sufficient knowledge of
        the English language and sufficient knowledge  about  life  in  the
        United Kingdom contained in paragraph 276B (iii).


        Extension of stay on the ground of long  residence  in  the  United
        Kingdom


        276A2. An extension of stay on the ground of long residence in  the
        United Kingdom may be granted for a period not  exceeding  2  years
        provided  that  the  Secretary  of  State  is  satisfied  that  the
        requirement in paragraph 276A1 is met.


        Conditions to be attached to extension of stay  on  the  ground  of
        long residence in the United Kingdom


        276A3. Where an extension of stay is granted under paragraph 276A2:




        (i) if the applicant has spent less than 14 years in the UK  ,  the
        grant of leave should be subject to the same conditions attached to
        his last period of lawful leave, or
        (ii) if the applicant has spent 14 years or more  in  the  UK,  the
        grant of leave should not contain any restriction on employment.


        Refusal of extension of stay on the ground of long residence in the
        United Kingdom


        276A4. An extension of stay on the ground of long residence in  the
        United Kingdom is to be refused if the Secretary of  State  is  not
        satisfied that the requirement in paragraph 276A1 is met.


        Requirements for indefinite leave to remain on the ground  of  long
        residence in the United Kingdom


        276B. The requirements to be met by  an  applicant  for  indefinite
        leave to remain on the ground  of  long  residence  in  the  United
        Kingdom are that:


              (i)
                    (a) he has had  at  least  10  years  continuous  lawful
                    residence in the United Kingdom; or


                    (b) he has had at least 14 years continuous residence in
                    the United Kingdom, excluding any period  spent  in  the
                    United Kingdom following service of notice of  liability
                    to removal or notice of a decision to remove by  way  of
                    directions under paragraphs 8 to 10A, or 12  to  14,  of
                    Schedule 2 to the Immigration Act 1971 or section 10  of
                    the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 Act, or of a  notice
                    of intention to deport him from the United Kingdom; and


              (ii) having regard  to  the  public  interest  there  are  no
              reasons why it would be  undesirable  for  him  to  be  given
              indefinite leave to remain on the ground of  long  residence,
              taking into account his:


                     (a) age; and


                     (b) strength of connections in the United Kingdom; and


                     (c) personal  history,  including  character,  conduct,
                    associations and employment record; and
                     (d) domestic circumstances; and


                     (e) previous criminal record  and  the  nature  of  any
                    offence of which the person has been convicted; and


                    (f) compassionate circumstances; and


                    (g) any representations received on the person's behalf.


               (iii) the applicant has sufficient knowledge of the  English
              language and sufficient knowledge about life  in  the  United
              Kingdom, unless he is under the age of 18 or aged 65 or  over
              at the time he makes his application.


        Indefinite leave to remain on the ground of long residence  in  the
        United Kingdom


        276C. Indefinite leave to remain on the ground of long residence in
        the United Kingdom may be granted provided that  the  Secretary  of
        State is satisfied that each of the requirements of paragraph  276B
        is met.


         Refusal of indefinite leave  to  remain  on  the  ground  of  long
        residence in the United Kingdom


         276D. Indefinite leave to remain on the ground of  long  residence
        in the United Kingdom is to be refused if the Secretary of State is
        not satisfied that each of the requirements of  paragraph  276B  is
        met."


   4. (It should be noted that the panel, sitting as it was  in  July  2007,
      were not concerned with the provisions of paras 276A1-4 and 276B(iii),
      which were only inserted with effect from 1 April 2007.)


   5. The panel decided that the appellant did not meet the requirements  of
      paras 276A-B.


   6. The panel was also asked by the appellant's representatives  to  allow
      his appeal on the basis that the Secretary  of  State  had  failed  to
      apply her own policy concerning the granting of  indefinite  leave  to
      remain to those who had completed 4 years leave to remain. It made  no
      decision on this matter.

   7. Mr Leventakis's submissions focussed primarily on the issue of whether
      the panel had erred in its approach to paras 276A-B and secondarily on
      whether they should have found that the respondent had failed to apply
      his own policy regarding those who have completed 4 years  exceptional
      leave to remain.

   8. Mr Kandola did not seek to defend the  respondent's  approach  to  the
      appellant's position under paras 276A-B and  said  he  was  not  in  a
      position to assist as regards whether the respondent had a policy  for
      those who have completed four years ELR.   Initially  he  did  however
      seek to submit that I should consider the grounds before me to include
      the issue of whether the immigration judge panel was right to  dismiss
      the Secretary of  State's  s.55  certificate  and  to  find  that  the
      appellant did not  fall  within  the  Refugee  Convention's  exclusion
      clause (Article 1F). However, he conceded that the respondent had  not
      submitted any  Rule  30  "Reply"  under  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
      Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 in relation to such matters.  I  ruled
      that it was too late for him to apply to do so now: see SP  (Time  for
      reply - Rules 30(2) and 45(4)(c)) Pakistan [2006] UKAIT 00010.

   My decision
   The long residence rules
   9. I consider that the panel materially erred in law in  their  treatment
      of the appellant's position under the long residence rules. The  panel
      accepted that the appellant had been in the UK at the date of  hearing
      over 10 years, but stated:

           "Paragraph 276A(b) provides the definition of "lawful residence"
           and sub-paragraph 276A(b) (ii)  is  the  only  one  which  could
           possibly apply in this case. That refers to "temporary admission
           within Section 11 of the 1971 Act where leave to enter or remain
           is subsequently  granted".  The  appellant  had  such  temporary
           admission but leave to enter or remain has not subsequently been
           granted, so  the  Appellant  cannot  succeed  under  the  longer
           residence provisions of the Immigration Rules so  that  we  must
           dismiss any appeal there may be before us under those Rules".


  10. This analysis was erroneous in two  respects.  First,  the  panel  was
      wrong to say that  para  276A(b)(ii)  -  which  deals  with  temporary
      admission - was the "only" provision which  could  possibly  apply  in
      this case. There was another provision which also possibly and  (as  I
      will come on to) was indeed the only one that actually applied, namely
      para 276A(b)(i) - which deals with existing leave to enter or remain.


  11. That the panel was wrong to overlook para 276A(b)(i) can be seen  from
      a brief description of the appellant's immigration history, which  was
      not in dispute. I shall set it out step by step.

     1) The appellant arrived in the UK on 29 November 1995 and was granted
        6 months leave to enter;


     2) he applied for asylum on 25 January 1996;


     3) this application was refused on 11 April 2001 but on the same  date
        he was granted 4 years exceptional leave to remain until  11  April
        2005;


     4) he applied for indefinite leave to remain on 31 January 2005;


     5) this application was refused on 16 February 2007 (his case was also
        certified under s.55 on the same date);


     6) he appealed and his case was heard by the immigration  judge  panel
        on 21 May 2007.

  12. Covering as it does a period of over 11  years  (from  arrival  on  12
      November 1995 to the  date  of  decision  on  16  February  2007)  the
      appellant's immigration history has to be considered in the context of
      the law applicable at the relevant time. The only part of that law  of
      relevance to this type of case is that governing extensions  of  leave
      pending a decision on an application to vary leave.


  13.   The current law governing extensions of leave is set out at  s.3C of
      the Immigration Act 1971 (the 1971 Act) as amended. It states:

      "3C.  Continuation of leave pending variation decision
            (1)   This section applies if -
                  (a)  a person has limited leave to enter or remain in  the
                  United Kingdom applies to  the  Secretary  of  State  for
                  variation of the leave,
                  (b)  the application for  variation  is  made  before  the
                  leave expires, and
                   (c)   the  leave  expires  without  the  application  for
                  variation having been decided.
            (2)   The leave is extended by virtue of this section during any
                  period when -
                  (a)  the application for variation is neither decided  nor
                  withdrawn,
                  (b)  an appeal under section  82(1)  of  the  Nationality,
                  Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 could be brought , whilst
                  the appellant is  in  the  United  Kingdom,  against  the
                  decision on the application for variation  (ignoring  any
                  possibility of an appeal out of time with permission), or
                  (c)  an appeal under that section against that decision is
                  pending (within the meaning of section 104 of that Act.)
            (3)   Leave extended by virtue of this section  shall  lapse  if
              the applicant leaves the United Kingdom.
            (4)   A person may not make an application for variation of  his
              leave to enter or remain in the  United  Kingdom  while  that
              leave is extended by virtue of this section.
            (5)   But subsection (4) does not prevent the variation  of  the
              application mentioned in subsection (1)(a).
            (6)   In this  section  a  reference  to  an  application  being
              decided is a reference to notice of the decision being  given
              in accordance with regulations under section 105 of that  Act
              (notice of immigration decision)."


  14. Section 3C embodies the  rule  of  automatic  extension  of  leave  to
      persons who apply to vary leave within the currency of their  existing
      leave. However, as is helpfully explained in  DA (Section 3C - meaning
      and effect) Ghana [2007] UKAIT 00043,  this  rule  has  been  a  long-
      standing feature of our immigration law.  Prior  to  2  October  2000,
      automatic extension of leave to a person  making  an  application  for
      variation of leave was conferred  by  the  Immigration  (Variation  of
      Leave)  Order  1976   (SI  1976/1572),  operated  when   relevant   in
      conjunction with s.14. As from 2 October 2000, under the  Nationality,
      Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 this rule was inserted into  the  1971
      Act as  s.3C.  That  provision  has  undergone  two  further  sets  of
      amendments: the first with effect from 1 April 2003 by  s.118  of  the
      Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (the 2002 Act);  and  the
      second with effect from 31 August 2006  by  s11  of  the  Immigration,
      Nationality and Asylum Act 2006. But neither of these has altered  the
      provisions  governing  continuation  of  leave  pending  a   variation
      decision.


  15. From the above it can immediately be seen that the appellant  has  had
      continuous lawful leave to remain since his arrival in the UK. Because
      he made his  (asylum) application for variation in January 1996, which
      was a date  before his (then) current leave expired,  that  leave  was
      extended by operation  of  the  Variation  of  Leave  Order  1976  (as
      amended). It was extended until his application was decided. When  the
      decision on his asylum application was eventually made  (on  11  April
      2001) he was granted 4 years leave to remain until 11 April 2005.  But
      once again,  before  his  current  leave  expired  he  applied  for  a
      variation of his leave: that application  meant  that  his  leave  was
      automatically extended by operation  of  s.3C  of  the  1971  Act  (as
      amended with effect from 1 April 2003 by the 2002 Act).  The  decision
      refusing that application, dated 16 February 2007, is the  subject  of
      this appeal and his leave is extended during  the  period  whilst  his
      appeal is pending by operation of s.3C(2)(c) in its current form.

  16. Hence when assessing whether the  appellant  had  continuous  presence
      for the requisite period within the  meaning  of  paragraph  276A  the
      panel should have recognised that he had existing leave  to  enter  or
      remain under 276A(b)(i). They erred in overlooking this.

  17. Mr Kandola submitted, tentatively, that the long residence issue under
      paragraph 276A-D did not arise in this case because the appellant  had
      not applied for long residence. I see no merit in that submission. The
      appellant had applied for indefinite leave to remain (ILR). It is true
      he had done so on a form which referred to persons who  have  been  in
      the UK for 4 years with exceptional leave to remain (ELR) and made  no
      reference to long residence. But there was an  applicable  immigration
      rule - contained within paras 276A-D  -  under which the  position  of
      someone who had applied for ILR and who had long residence fell to  be
      considered. The appellant's position should have been considered under
      it. In deciding to consider this as a ground of appeal the  panel  was
      acting properly under Kwok On Tong principles: see RM (Kwok  On  Tong:
      HC395 para 320) India [2006] UKAIT 00039.

  18. Nevertheless, as we have seen, the panel's  failure  to  consider  the
      applicability of para 276A(b)(i) amounted to a material error of law.

  19. There was also an error in the panel's treatment of  para  276A(b)(ii)
      but it is not one which was material since it was  based  on  a  false
      premise. That false premise was that the appellant  had  been  granted
      temporary admission under Section 11 of the 1971 Act. As a  matter  of
      law the appellant could not  have  been  granted  temporary  admission
      because he had leave to enter.

  20. I cannot ascertain why the panel thought that the appellant  may  have
      been granted  temporary  admission.  Mr  Kandola  for  the  respondent
      confirmed that there was nothing on the Home Office file to show  that
      this had happened. It may have been that the panel thought that he had
      because of something said by Mr Leventakis, who  represented  on  that
      occasion as well. I infer that from the fact that  he  made  the  same
      suggestion to me, although he accepted that he had nothing on his file
      to confirm it. ( I would observe that even if  for some  period  prior
      to 11 April  2001  the  appellant  had  been  someone  granted  -  and
      properly granted - temporary admission, it is plain that on that  date
      he was  granted lawful leave to remain for 4 years and  so  the  panel
      would still have needed to look at whether he met the  requirement  of
      continuous lawful residence  as  set  out  in  para  276A(b)(i)  taken
      together with 276A(b)(ii)  (the  latter  which  refers  to  "temporary
      admission within section 11 of the 1971 Act where leave  to  enter  or
      remain is subsequently granted".)

  21. Having found a material error of  law  and  ascertained  that  neither
      party suggested that I should adjourn, I decided I was in  a  position
      to decide the appeal for myself.

  22. In my view it is clear that the appellant met (and continues to  meet)
      the requirements of para 276B(i)(a). That is to say, he was  a  person
      who had had "at least 10 years  continuous  lawful  residence  in  the
      United Kingdom". At the date of the decision (16 February 2007) he had
      had accrued over 10 years lawful residence since he  arrived  lawfully
      on 29 November 1995. As regards the requirement of para 276B(ii),  the
      respondent has nowhere suggested that there were any  public  interest
      considerations making it undesirable for the appellant to be given ILR
      save for the exclusion-related reasons which the panel rejected.

  23. The question arises, however, what follows from this finding.  At  the
      hearing the parties appeared to be of the view that if I was satisfied
      the appellant met the relevant requirements of the 10 year  continuous
      lawful residence rule (as contained in paras 276A-B), I  should  allow
      the appeal outright. However, the relevant  rules  also  include  para
      276C which is in discretionary terms:

           "276C.  Indefinite  leave  to  remain  on  the  ground  of  long
           residence in the United Kingdom may be granted provided that the
           Secretary of State is satisfied that each of the requirements of
           paragraph 276B is met."

  24. Accordingly, since the respondent has yet to exercise that discretion,
      I consider I can only allow the appeal (under s.86(3)(a) of  the  2002
      Act) insofar as I think that the decision was not in  accordance  with
      the law (including immigration rules).

  25. In relation to the exercise of discretion which the respondent has now
      to undertake under para 276C, I would venture  only  one  observation,
      prompted by the fact that the respondent's original  decision  clearly
      expressed  the  view  that  the  appellant's  asylum  history  merited
      application (by  way  of  certification)  of  the  Refugee  Convention
      exclusion  clauses.  The  panel  rejected  that  view,  no  Reply  was
      submitted and I have earlier ruled that the exclusion issue is not for
      re-opening now. However, since during the course  of  the  hearing  Mr
      Kandola did seek (albeit half-heartedly) to persuade me to re-open it,
      it may be appropriate to add that were such (exclusion-based) concerns
      to inform the exercise of  discretion  under  para  276C,  that  might
      amount to a failure to accept a judicial determination of the relevant
      issue.

  26. Also for completeness I should briefly refer to the ground  of  review
      challenging  the panel's treatment of the "policy" of the Secretary of
      State regarding persons who have been in the UK for 4 years  and  seek
      indefinite leave to remain. Neither party was able to furnish me  with
      any evidence that such a policy exists,  although  Mr  Leventakis  was
      adamant that it did.

  27.  But even had evidence of such a policy (and what it said) been placed
      before me, the very best that could have happened from the appellant's
      point of view would have been a decision on my part that the Secretary
      of State in the reasons for refusal letter of  16  February  2007  had
      failed to turn his mind to this matter and as a result that  I  should
      allow the appeal insofar as the application of the policy remained  as
      a matter outstanding before the Secretary  of  State.   Since  on  the
      principal issue (concerning paras 276A-D) I have  in  any  event  only
      allowed the appeal to a limited extent, it would  be  appropriate,  if
      need be, for the Secretary of State to look at whether such  a  policy
      (if one exists) should apply in favour of the appellant.

  28. The Tribunal has had previous occasion to consider the long  residence
      rules, which have been a feature of  the  Immigration  Rules  since  1
      April 2003: see OS (10 years' lawful residence) Hong Kong [2006] UKAIT
      0031, HS (Long Residence - effect  of  IDI  September  2004)  Pakistan
      [2005]  UKAIT  00169,  MW  (paragraph  276  -long  residence-  'lawful
      residence') Pakistan [2007] UKAIT 00008 and MO (Long residence rule  -
      public interest proviso) Ghana [2007] UKAIT 00014. What  can  be  seen
      from this case is that when issues arise as to whether  a  person  has
      accrued sufficient  continuous  residence  under  the  long  residence
      provisions of para 276A, so as to establish eligibility  under  either
      the "10 year rule" (at para 276B(i)(a)) or under the  "14  year  rule"
      (at  para  276B(i)(b)),  careful  attention  must  be  paid   to   the
      immigration law applicable during the relevant period  or  periods  of
      residence. Where such issues arise, they cannot be answered simply  by
      looking at the current law. In this case  establishing  what  was  the
      applicable  law  at  the   relevant   time   has   proved   relatively
      straightforward. However, as is clear from DA,  matters  can  be  more
      difficult if the immigration history concerned  involves  applications
      for extension of leave once the decision is the subject of  a  pending
      appeal. The meaning of s.11 of the 1971 Act  may  also  give  rise  to
      difficulties: see Kula [2007] UKHL 54. Given the significant number of
      amendments that have  been  made  in  the  past  two  decades  to  the
      legislation governing leave to remain and temporary admission, parties
      to appeals of this kind (where there is a dispute as to whether  there
      has been the requisite period  of  residence)  should  take  steps  to
      ensure that their submissions furnish an analysis of the  individual's
      immigration  history  by  reference  to  the  legislative   provisions
      applicable during the relevant period(s) of residence.

  29. For the above reasons  the  Tribunal  materially  erred  in  law.  The
      decision I substitute is to allow the appeal but only  to  the  extent
      that it is outstanding  before  the  Secretary  of  State  to  make  a
      decision under para 276C of the Immigration Rules.


 Signed:



Dr H H Storey (Senior Immigration Judge)


Approved for electronic distribution

