


                       ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL



SA (Clarificatory questions from IJs - best practice) Iran [2006] UKAIT
00017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Field House                                   Determination
Promulgated:
On 7th February 2006              On 27th February 2006


                                   Before

                       Mr Justice Hodge OBE, President
                   Dr H H Storey, Senior Immigration Judge
                    Mr A Jordan, Senior Immigration Judge


                                   Between


                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:           Mr J Walsh (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr M Blundel, Senior Presenting Officer

There  are  procedural  matters  which  often  lead  to  the  need  for   an
intervention such as a request to the witness by the  Immigration  Judge  to
confirm the contents of any statement when that point  has  been  overlooked
by an advocate. In the main the best practice for judges in  this  field  is
to reserve until the end of evidence in  chief,  cross-examination  and  re-
examination any significant points of clarification that they may want  help
with.

An appellant's claim is of the first importance to  that  appellant.   There
is often pressure on court lists and periodically,  though  rarely  in  this
jurisdiction, it is difficult to conclude the work in  a  court  list  in  a
day.  It is not however good practice to give an  appellant  the  impression
that his case will be given anything other than the time that is  needed  to
hear  it.   A  criticism  of  an  advocate  asking  open  questions  may  be
appropriate from a judge.  Equally it may be right to  require  an  Advocate
to move on to a fresh point once the judge has understood the  matter  being
dealt with.  But it is not good practice to justify these  needs  purely  by
referring to the weight of the list or to an apparent wish  to  curtail  the
length of the hearing.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1. The appellant born 21st March 1958 is a citizen of Iran.  He  arrived  in
   the United Kingdom by lorry on 26th May 2002.  He applied for  asylum  on
   6th June 2002.  The respondent refused his application for asylum and  on
   31st July 2002 issued removal directions for the appellant's  removal  to
   Iran.

2. The appellant appealed.  His appeal was  first  heard  on  19th  December
   2002 and his appeal  was  dismissed  on  both  asylum  and  human  rights
   grounds.  He challenged that decision successfully before the Immigration
   Appeal Tribunal.  In a determination notified on 3rd  December  2003  the
   IAT remitted the Appeal for a fresh hearing.   This  took  place  on  8th
   March 2004.  In a  determination  promulgated  on  15th  March  2004  the
   adjudicator Mr P S Aujla  again  dismissed  the  Appeal  on  both  asylum
   grounds and human rights grounds.

3. The appellant again applied for permission to  appeal  that  decision  to
   the Immigration Appeal Tribunal.  In  a  decision  dated  27th  May  2004
   permission to appeal was granted on the basis that the grounds raised  on
   behalf  of  the  appellant   raised   arguable   issues   which   merited
   consideration.

4. By Article 5 of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of  Claimants  etc)
   Act 2004 (Commencement No 5 and Transitional Provisions) Order  2005  (SI
   2005/565) any appeal which immediately before  the  commencement  of  the
   2004 Act was pending before the Immigration Appeal Tribunal  shall  after
   commencement of that Act be dealt with  by  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
   Tribunal as if it had originally  decided  the  appeal  and  it  was  re-
   considering its decision.

Grounds for permission to appeal

5. It is argued on behalf of the  appellant  that  the  adjudicator  behaved
   unfairly whilst hearing the appeal and so erred in law.  The  adjudicator
   intervened 15 times during the hearing of evidence  and  made  two  other
   interventions which are challenged.

6. A number of other grounds were advanced which can be dealt with  shortly.
    The adjudicator was criticised for declining to read  the  determination
   of the Immigration Appeal Tribunal before  hearing  the  case.   In  this
   Tribunal's experience it is, and always has  been,  common  practice  for
   adjudicators, and now Immigration Judges, to read  the  determination  of
   the Immigration Appeal Tribunal when re-hearing an appeal which had  been
   remitted by the IAT.  Equally it was, and remains, common practice not to
   read earlier determinations by adjudicators which were overturned by  the
   decision of the IAT.

7. The Immigration Judiciary are wholly independent.  They are well able  to
   determine cases without being influenced by external  factors.   Only  in
   the most exceptional circumstances could the reading or  not  reading  of
   any previous determination by an adjudicator or  the  Immigration  Appeal
   Tribunal constitute an error of law.

8. In this case the Immigration Appeal Tribunal directed that the Appeal  be
   heard afresh.  This is what this adjudicator did.  It is not an error  of
   law to consider a case afresh wholly uninfluenced by  anything  that  has
   gone  before  particularly  where,  as  here,  the  appellant   had   the
   opportunity to re-present his case in whatever way  he  chose.   The  non
   reading of the determination of the IAT issued on 3rd  December  2003  is
   not material.

9. The grounds also criticised  the  adjudicator's  determination.   It  was
   described by  the  appellant's  representative  as  poorly  drafted  with
   numerous spelling errors and unnecessary repetition.  All  judges  should
   proofread their decisions in any case with  care.   It  is  important  to
   avoid bad grammar, poor drafting and spelling mistakes.  But only in  the
   most exceptional of circumstances could a determination which fails these
   tests be properly described as showing error of law still  less  material
   error of law.  The determination in  this  case  should  have  been  more
   carefully proofread.  But it is clear what the adjudicator was saying and
   deciding.  He made no error of law in relation  to  this  aspect  of  the
   matter.

10. It is further argued that the adjudicator  misdirected  himself  on  the
   findings of credibility and fact.  We  do  not  agree.   In  essence  the
   appellant says he was associated with the Mujahedin for a  period  of  15
   years from the death of his sister-in-law in 1987 until he left  Iran  in
   2002.  He said that he rented property to two Mujahedin  supporters.   He
   carried leaflets in his taxi at least once a month for at least seven  or
   eight years during this time.  He said that he was watched  carefully  by
   the authorities during this time.

11. The adjudicator relied on the background country information to  say  at
   para. 50:

   "The Mujahedin have  been  responsible  for  acts  of  sabotage,  violent
   attacks that victimise civilians and violence against Iranian  Government
   targets in the West.  The Iranian regime's  treatment  of  the  Mujahedin
   opposition has been extremely severe, with reports of  large  numbers  of
   executions and torture although there have not been any  recent  reports.
   Known  or  suspected  members  face   either   execution   or   long-term
   imprisonment if caught."

12. Given  the  appellant's  claimed  involvement  with  the  Mujahedin  the
   adjudicator found it:

   "Totally incredible that the appellant was never before approached by the
   security forces or arrested and detained on suspicion of involvement with
   the Mujahedin considering the attitude to the  authorities  towards  that
   organisation."

13. We agree with that analysis.  We  consider  that  the  adjudicator  made
   clear findings of fact.  He also gave clear reasons as to why he did  not
   regard the appellant as credible in the  claim  he  put  forward  at  the
   hearing.

Conduct of the appeal

14. It is argued on behalf of the appellant  that  the  adjudicator  behaved
   unfairly whilst hearing his appeal and so erred in law.  The  adjudicator
   intervened during the hearing on  17  occasions.   He  time  limited  the
   appellant's  counsel  submissions.   It   is   alleged   that   he   made
   inappropriate references to the number of cases he had to  deal  with  on
   the day and the time this particular case might have taken to hear.

15. We have been much assisted in our consideration of these issues  by  the
   very full and clear note taken of the proceedings by Ms Neinhuis of  JCWI
   who attended as one of the appellant's representatives and took notes  of
   the whole proceedings.

Fairness

16. It is a basic principle of the English Common Law that  proceedings  are
   conducted fairly.  Justice must not only be done but must be seen  to  be
   done.  In R v Secretary of State for the Home Department [1994]  1AC  531
   Lord Mustill said:

   "What does fairness require in the present case?  My Lords, I think it is
   unnecessary to refer by name or to  quote  from,  any  of  the  oft-cited
   authorities in which the courts have explained  what  is  essentially  an
   intuitive judgement.  These are far too well known.  From them  I  derive
   that (1) Where an Act of Parliament confers an administrative power there
   is a presumption that it will be exercised in a manner which is  fair  in
   all the circumstances (2) The standards of fairness  are  not  immutable.
   They may change with the passage of time both in... general and in  their
   application to decisions of a  particular  type  (3  )The  principles  of
   fairness are not to be applied  identically  in  every  situation.   What
   fairness demands is dependent on the context of the decision, and this is
   taken into account in all its aspects."

17. The Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure)  Rules  [2005]  (SI  no.
   230) provide at Rule 4:

   "The overriding objective of these Rules is to  secure  that  proceedings
   before the Tribunal are handled as fairly,  quickly  and  efficiently  as
   possible".

18. In WN (DRC) [2004]  UKIAT  00213  Ouseley  J  said  when  considering  a
   challenge to an adjudicator's conduct of a hearing:

   "The real test to be applied, however, is whether the hearing was fair or
   unfair and whether a fair-minded and  informed  observer  would  conclude
   that there was a real  possibility  that  the  adjudicator  was  biased."
   (para. 30)


   "The risk of cross-examining or appearing to cross-examine can be avoided
   by an adjudicator in the manner, style or length of  questions  which  he
   asks." (para. 37)

   "Questions should not be asked in a hostile tone.   They  should  not  be
   leading questions which suggest the answer which is  desired  nor  should
   they disguise what is the point of concern so as to appear like a trap or
   a closing of the net.  They should  be  open  ended  questions  neutrally
   phrased.  They can be persisted in an order to obtain an answer; but they
   should not  be  persisted  in  for  longer  than  is  necessary  for  the
   adjudicator to be clear that the question was understood, or to establish
   why it was not answered, or to pursue so far as is necessary  the  detail
   underlying the vague answer." (para. 38)


19. Ouseley J again repeated in XS  (Serbia  and  Montenegro)  [2005]  UKIAT
   00093 at para. 25:

   "The  question  that  underlies  all  cases  in  which,   as   here,   an
   adjudicator's conduct of the hearing is at issue, is whether the  hearing
   is fair, and whether there  was  a  real  possibility  that  an  informed
   observer would think that the Judge was biased."


   and at para. 27:


   "All the factors have to be considered in the  round,  because  some  may
   give a flavour of what happened without themselves  being  of  any  great
   significance.  We emphasise that because, inevitably,  in  analysing  the
   allegations  in  the  case,  they  have  to  be   considered   separately
   initially."


   Further  in  Oyono  [2002]  UKIAT  02034  the  Deputy  President  of  the
   Immigration Appeal Tribunal Mr C M G Ockelton said (para. 8):


   "It is for the parties to bring out evidence  in  the  order  they  think
   appropriate and it is for the parties to put whatever  contradictions  in
   the evidence need to be put to the witness.  When the evidence  has  been
   finished in the sense that there has been examination in chief and cross-
   examination and re-examination, it may be that the adjudicator wishes  to
   put matters arising out of the evidence to the witness; but the time  for
   that is after re-examination... an adjudicator who intervenes during  the
   course of evidence is running the risk that he will be seen to be  taking
   the side of one party or the other."


   Further at paragraph 9 he said:


   "All the matters which  are  now  said  to  have  caused  unfairness  had
   occurred before the termination of the hearing, it seems to  us  that  it
   would have been right to put those matters to the adjudicator at the time
   rather than awaiting a determination.  If the hearing  was  unfair,  then
   waiting for  the  determination  was  not  necessary  before  making  the
   allegations arising out of the conduct of the hearing."

The adjudicator hearing of 10th March 2004

20. It has not been submitted that  the  manner  in  which  the  adjudicator
   intervened in this hearing was in any way hostile.  Nor is  it  suggested
   that the adjudicator was in fact biased.  The submission on behalf of the
   appellant is that a fair-minded observer observing the  hearing  of  this
   case would have concluded that  there  was  unfairness.   It  is  further
   submitted that the alleged unfairness is so significant as to  constitute
   an error of law.

21. We have necessarily analysed the interventions made by  the  adjudicator
   as set out in the note by the appellant's representative.   We  kept  the
   observations of both parties representatives on  those  interventions  in
   mind.

22. There were nearly 80 questions put to the  appellant  and  his  witness.
   In the course of  that  questioning  the  adjudicator  intervened  on  15
   occasions.  On two occasions the  interventions  were  to  ask  that  the
   particular witness formerly adopt his statement.  There were a number  of
   interventions which sought to clarify the position.   The  appellant  was
   asked how many brothers and sisters he had by the  adjudicator.   He  was
   asked when he moved to a current address.  He was asked the date when  he
   started being given leaflets to take in his car.  He was  asked  when  he
   became a taxi driver.  There was a question from the  adjudicator  as  to
   how long he had spent in a basement when escaping.

23. There were a number  of  occasions  where  the  adjudicator  wanted  the
   witness to answer questions.  One concerned when he started participating
   with the Mujahedin.  Another was when the adjudicator wanted a yes or  no
   answer.  There was an  intervention  when  the  adjudicator  stopped  the
   appellant's counsel interrupting during cross-examination.

24. We have considered all these interventions with care and in the  context
   in which they appear to have  been  made.   There  is  no  allegation  as
   indicated of any hostility.  The interventions appear to us to have  been
   designed to clarify matters, to request the witness to  answer  questions
   and to deal with procedural matters.   We  do  not  consider  that  these
   interventions taken as a whole can possibly be said to make the manner in
   which the hearing was conducted as unfair.  There seems to us to be  some
   justification for all the interventions we have noted.

25. This is not however to commend the approach taken  by  the  adjudicator.
   There are procedural  matters  which  often  lead  to  the  need  for  an
   intervention such as a request to the witness by the Immigration Judge to
   confirm the contents of any statement when that point has been overlooked
   by an advocate.  Judges often need a brief clarification of dates as they
   hear evidence.   Here  some  of  the  interventions  by  the  adjudicator
   indicated that he had done a thorough pre-reading of the papers.  But  in
   the main the best practice for judges in this field is to  reserve  until
   the end of evidence in chief, cross-examination  and  re-examination  any
   significant points of clarification that they may want help with.

26. There were four  instances,  however,  which  gave  us  some  cause  for
   concern in our consideration of this complaint  of  unfairness.   In  his
   third intervention the adjudicator apparently asked why  the  appellant's
   counsel was asking open questions and remarked  "we  could  be  here  for
   three hours".  The ninth  intervention  appears  in  fact  to  have  been
   addressed to the Presenting Officer.  The adjudicator said "can you  move
   on please I have two to three other cases to hear".

27. An appellant's claim is of  the  first  importance  to  that  appellant.
   There is often pressure on court lists and periodically, though rarely in
   this jurisdiction, it is difficult to conclude the work in a  court  list
   in a day.  It is not however good  practice  to  give  an  appellant  the
   impression that his case will be given anything other than the time  that
   is needed to hear it.  A criticism of an advocate asking  open  questions
   may be appropriate from a judicial office  holder.   Equally  it  may  be
   right to require an Advocate to move on to a fresh point once  the  judge
   has understood the matter being dealt with.  But it is not good  practice
   to justify these needs by referring to the weight of the list  or  to  an
   apparent wish to curtail the length of the hearing.  However  looking  at
   the matter in the round we do not consider that those  two  interventions
   can themselves be regarded as creating a sense of unfairness.

28. The final two interventions complained  of  are  where  the  adjudicator
   intervened twice in the  course  of  the  appellant's  Counsel's  closing
   submission.  He was asked to wind up and on one occasion it was indicated
   that he only had two or three minutes more.

29. The adjudicator's Record of Proceedings show that this  case  took  some
   two hours and five minutes to hear.   The  Tribunal  is  aware  that  the
   average length of hearing throughout the jurisdiction for asylum cases is
   one hour twenty minutes.  That does  not  suggest  that  there  was  time
   pressure for this  hearing.   The  adjudicator's  Record  of  Proceedings
   indicates that he  asked  the  counsel  to  keep  the  matters  short  in
   submissions.

30. The adjudicator had the benefit of a  clear  skeleton  argument  setting
   out the factual issues in the appeal.  In our  judgement  there  were  no
   legal issues of any complexity whatsoever in this case.  Members  of  the
   Mujahedin or persons associated with that organisation run a real risk of
   persecution for their political opinions within Iran.  The key issue  was
   whether the appellant's claim to be associated  with  the  Mujahedin  was
   credible.  Had it been held as credible then refugee  status  would  have
   followed.

31. The issue before the adjudicator was the credibility of  the  appellant.
   The facts he relied on were set out in the  submissions  of  counsel.   A
   reading of all the papers in this case suggests that the adjudicator  was
   properly familiar with the case before the hearing started.  He  had  the
   benefit of hearing the appellant's oral evidence and that of his witness.
    We regard in the circumstances of this case that the time  given  of  20
   minutes to the appellant's counsel to make final submissions as adequate.
     We  were  un-persuaded  by   the   appellant's   counsel   during   our
   reconsideration hearing that he had had anything left to say which he was
   unable to say in the course of his submissions.  If there were  any  such
   matters he was unable to make them clear to this  Tribunal.   We  do  not
   regard the curtailing of the appellant's representatives  submissions  in
   this case as itself pointing to unfairness.

32. As indicated we do not consider the  individual  interventions  made  by
   the adjudicator in this case as being unfair in themselves.  Looked at in
   the round and  balancing  the  15  interventions  against  the  65  other
   questions asked during the questioning of  the  witnesses  and  balancing
   that against the length of submissions we cannot see that there has  been
   unfairness in this case.

33. There is no allegation of bias made against the adjudicator.   There  is
   no suggestion that the manner of the adjudicator was hostile towards  the
   appellant.  Our analysis of his interventions taken individually and then
   considered collectively does  not  in  our  judgement  suggest  that  the
   hearing was unfair.  We do not accept that there has  been  an  error  of
   law.  We have also rejected the other grounds of appeal for  the  reasons
   given above.

Decision

34. For the reasons given above the decision of the adjudicator  to  dismiss
   this appeal on asylum grounds and on human rights grounds stands.








Mr Justice Hodge OBE
President
14 February 2006
