


Asylum and Immigration Tribunal

  MM and FH (Stateless Palestinians - KK, IH, HE CG reaffirmed) Lebanon CG
                             [2008] UKAIT 00014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |                           |
|On 29 June 2007                                 |                           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       Senior Immigration Judge Mather
                      Senior Immigration Judge Nichols
                                Mr J H Eames

                                   Between

                                     MM
                                     FH

                                                                  Appellants

                                     and


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:         Mr D Blum, Counsel, instructed by Knights
Solicitors
For the Respondent:         Miss E Laing, Counsel, instructed by The
Treasury Solicitors.

     i.  The  differential  treatment  of  stateless  Palestinians  by  the
        Lebanese authorities and the conditions in the camps does not reach
        the threshold to establish  either  persecution  under  the  Geneva
        Convention, or serious harm under paragraph 339C of the Immigration
        Rules, or a breach of Articles 3 or 8 under the ECHR.
    ii.  The  differential  treatment  of  Palestinians  by  the   Lebanese
        authorities is  not  by  reason  of  race  but  arises  from  their
        statelessness.
   iii. The decision in KK, IH, HE (Palestinians-Lebanon-camps)  Jordan  CG
        [2004] UKIAT 00293, is reaffirmed.



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   Both appellants  in  these  appeals  are  stateless  Palestinians  from
    Lebanon. They both appealed on asylum and human rights grounds  against
    a decision of the respondent to  refuse  to  grant  them  asylum  under
    paragraph 339 of HC  395.    The  appeals  were  both  dismissed.   The
    evidence of both appellants was found, for the most  part,  not  to  be
    credible.  The sole issue in the appeals on which  reconsideration  has
    been ordered is whether or not the appellants as stateless Palestinians
    would suffer discrimination on return to Lebanon that would  amount  to
    persecution or breach their Article 3 or Article  8  rights  under  the
    European Convention on Human Rights ("the  ECHR").   The  Tribunal  has
    already considered the issue in KK, IH, HE (Palestinians-Lebanon-camps)
    Jordan CG [2004] UKIAT 00293, and the purpose of this  hearing  was  to
    consider whether the current evidence now establishes that Palestinians
    living in Lebanon face discriminatory conditions that do  amount  to  a
    persecution and/or a breach of their Article 3  and  Article  8  rights
    under the ECHR.

The Adjudicator's Findings in Respect of the First Appellant

2.   The Adjudicator as he then was, Mr G.M. Petherbridge, heard  the  first
    appellant's appeal on 4 December 2003.  The appellant was  born  on  24
    April 1972 in El-Buss refugee camp, Tyre  Province,  Southern  Lebanon.
    He went to primary school while living in that camp and  completed  his
    secondary school education in the  Burj  El-Shemali  refugee  camp.  He
    studied biology at the Arab Beirut  University  in  1993  but  did  not
    complete his studies because he claimed that he  decided  to  join  the
    Palestinian Liberation Organisation (Fateh) in 1995.  He  claimed  that
    he had undertaken military training at the  Al-Rashidieh  Refugee  Camp
    and that he worked as a guard for  the  PLO.    He  claimed  he  was  a
    follower of Sultan Abdul Aynian, the leader or a  leading  official  of
    the Fateh group in southern Lebanon.  Sultan Abdul Aynian was wanted by
    the Lebanese government on suspicion  of  the  commission  of  criminal
    offences.  The Lebanese authorities kept a checklist  of  followers  of
    Sultan Abdul Aynian at the checkpoints outside the  refugee  camps  and
    would arrest anyone with such an association if they decided  to  leave
    the camp.  In June 1999 two of the appellant's friends, who  were  also
    members of the Fateh, were arrested trying to leave the camp  and  were
    never heard of again.  The appellant, fearing that  he  would  also  be
    arrested, used an agent to get him out of southern Lebanon and  claimed
    that the agent had facilitated his  safe  passage  through  a  Lebanese
    checkpoint. The appellant travelled through Europe. He arrived  in  the
    UK on 17 December 1999 and he applied for asylum.

3.   The Adjudicator accepted that the appellant was what he described as  a
    first sergeant guard in Fateh, but rejected  his  evidence  as  to  the
    reasons why he fled the refugee camp, finding he  was  not  a  credible
    witness and that he had not established any reasonable likelihood  that
    he had been persecuted because of his membership of Fateh.

4.   The Adjudicator was also asked to consider the appellant's  claim  that
    he would face discrimination and ill-treatment amounting to persecution
    and a breach of his human rights.   In this regard he found:

         "50.     A further strand to the appellant's claim  is  based  upon
             whether the discrimination and  ill-treatment  of  Palestinian
             refugees by the Lebanese authorities amounts to persecution.


         51.  In her  submissions,  Miss  Sheikh  has  suggested  that  this
             persecution has been suffered by the appellant as  part  of  a
             particular social group.  It seems to me that  if  I  were  to
             find that  the  discrimination  suffered  by  the  Palestinian
             refuges amounted to persecution then accepting as  I  do  that
             the appellant is a Palestinian refugee, his claim must succeed
             both under the Refugee Convention and Article 3  of  the  1950
             Convention.


         52.  However, on the facts before me I do  not  consider  that  the
             appellant has been discriminated against  to  an  extent  that
             amounts to persecution.


         53.  The appellant and his family have  lived  in  the  Palestinian
             refugee camp, certainly for the whole of the appellant's life.
             The appellant's family have two different houses in  different
             refugee camps.  The appellant himself was educated to a  point
             where he was able to go to university.  He chose not to pursue
             that because of his wish to join Fateh in one of  the  refugee
             camps.  He had no problems with the  authorities  until  1998,
             which eventually I  did  not  accept  as  being  truthful.  [A
             reference to the appellant's evidence that he had been stopped
             leaving Rashidieh camp in 1998]


         54.  I have been referred to the Court of Appeal decision in [2003]
             EWCA Civ 649 Karyem.


         55.  I cannot find on the evidence before me,  that  the  appellant
             has  shown that he  has  suffered  differential  treatment  in
             relation to economic, social and cultural benefit  as  between
             Lebanese nationals and/non nationals or stateless persons.


         56.  There is nothing in the appellant's evidence that supports any
             claim that he has been discriminated against other  than  very
             general  assertions  that  Palestinian  refuges  had   limited
             employment opportunities. The fact is that this appellant  was
             employed, was paid for that  work  and  supported  within  the
             refugee camp.   At  the  same  time  he  was  able  to  travel
             backwards and forwards to his parent's house in another one of
             the refugee camps.  He was educated and  could  have  gone  to
             Beirut University.  His parents in  fact  had  two  houses  in
             separate refugee camps.


         57.  None of this is predicated on the finding that  the  appellant
             had been discriminated against and therefore  I  would  reject
             any claim on  behalf  of  this  appellant  that  he  has  been
             discriminated against  to  an  extent  that  would  amount  to
             persecution as acknowledged by the 1951 Convention that  would
             accord  him  refugee  status.   As  I  reject  therefore   the
             appellant's asylum claim for the reasons as set out above,  so
             I  would  reject  any  claim  under  Article  3  of  the  1950
             Convention."


5.   It was on these findings that the Tribunal, on the application  of  the
    appellant, ordered reconsideration because it was  considered  arguable
    that the Adjudicator's findings about the level  of  discrimination  in
    Lebanon against Palestinians were not clear.  We should just  make  one
    point at this stage.  At paragraph 8 of Mr  Blum's  skeleton  he  makes
    reference to the Adjudicator's finding that the appellant's family  had
    two homes and says:

        There was no evidential basis for this conclusion (see paragraph 43
        of the determination)

6.   In fact the  Adjudicator's  finding  was  made  as  a  result  of  oral
    evidence given by the appellant and is referred to in his in record  of
    proceedings.  The appellant was asked where his parents  lived  and  he
    said Rashidieh camp. He confirmed that this was where he  was  employed
    as a guard with Fateh and he said that they had two  houses,  i.e.  the
    family.  The family had moved to Rashidieh camp  after  he  left.   The
    family had lived in Burj el-Shemali camp before that.

The Adjudicator's Findings In Respect of the Second Appellant

7.   The second appellant was born  on  16  June  1975  in  Burj  el-Shemali
    refugee camp in southern Lebanon.  He  lived  there  with  his  family,
    parents, three brothers and four sisters.   He was educated to  primary
    and high school level and then enrolled on a two year carpentry  course
    at the Siblin Training Centre run by the United Nations.  He  graduated
    from the course there in 1993.  He then worked for a French company  in
    the Burj el-Shemali refugee camp called Du-Garif, where he was employed
    as a carpenter.

8.   He claimed that he had been  a  political  activist  with  Fateh  since
    1993.  He said he had been the victim of targeting by other factions of
    the Fateh movement and that as a result of the  problems  he  had  fled
    Lebanon at the end of June 1998.   He arrived in the UK on 5 July  1998
    and immediately claimed asylum.  The Adjudicator as  he  then  was,  Mr
    M.A. Khan, heard the appellant's appeal on 7 May 2004.   He  found  the
    appellant was not a credible or consistent witness.  He disbelieved his
    account that he had been a political activist with the Fateh  movement.
    He failed, however, to make any finding on a submission made before him
    as to the discrimination likely to be  suffered  by  the  appellant  on
    return  to  Lebanon.   The  appellant's  representatives  applied   for
    permission to appeal as it then was on 15  September  2004,  which  was
    granted only on the discrimination point.  The appeal comes  before  us
    now of course as a reconsideration.

Material Error of Law

9.   There is no issue between the parties that both Adjudicators  did  make
    a material error of law, which was the first issue for the Tribunal  to
    decide. In relation to the first appellant's appeal  this  was  by  the
    failure  of  the  Adjudicator  properly  to  address   the   issue   of
    discrimination, and in relation to the second  appellant's  appeal,  by
    the failure of the Adjudicator to deal with a  material  issue,  namely
    discrimination, at all.

10.  The first appellant had described in earlier statements  a  generalised
    antagonism from the Lebanese authorities against  Palestinian  refugees
    and that he feared  discriminatory  treatment  by  Lebanese  forces  on
    return.  He had been forced to become a Fateh guard, which  he  claimed
    was one of the few  options  open  to  him  as  a  consequence  of  the
    discrimination that he faced. He also said in  interview  that  he  was
    unable to continue with his university education as  a  result  of  the
    cost (paragraphs 8-10 of Mr Blum's skeleton).

11.  The  second  appellant  had  complained  about  general  discriminatory
    conditions faced by Palestinian refugees in Lebanon in his Statement of
    Evidence form and grounds of appeal and earlier statements  (paragraphs
    4 and 5 of Mr Blum's skeleton).

The Appellants' Statements  before  This  Tribunal  on  the  General  Living
Conditions for Palestinian Refugees in Lebanon

The First Appellant
12.  The first appellant made a statement for the hearing  before  us  dated
    13 June 2007 (pages 1-7 of his supplementary bundle).  He  states  that
    there has been a serious deterioration in the way in which Palestinians
    are regarded by the Lebanese authorities and the Lebanese people.   The
    first appellant is in regular contact with his  family,  he  speaks  to
    them once a week.  They have informed him there is  no  improvement  in
    the day to day situation faced by camp residents and that  security  at
    Burj el-Shemali camp is very poor.  No one feels safe.   Conditions  in
    the camp are also extremely poor: there is overcrowding and poverty  is
    acute.  UNRWA  has  reduced  its  assistance  to  Palestinian  refuges.
    Education is limited  and  can  only  be  accessed  via  UNRWA  because
    Palestinian children have no right to state education in  Lebanon.   He
    describes children of ten carrying guns and being forced to work inside
    the camp because of poverty levels.  He fears the same would happen  to
    his daughter and that she will face a life  without  access  to  proper
    education, a health system and will have to live in severe poverty  and
    overcrowding.  He describes at paragraph 8 of  his  statement  how  the
    houses are built so closely together that the alleyways  become  sewage
    facilities.  This is unhealthy and undesirable.   Pollution  is  severe
    and there are no proper facilities to dispose of rubbish.

13.  The appellant's wife is Polish.   She met the appellant whilst she  was
    working in the UK in 2004.  They were married according to Islamic  law
    on 12 December 2004 and have lived together in the UK since that  date.
    The have one daughter who was born on 28 July 2005.  The  marriage  and
    the daughter's birth were recognised  by  the  Lebanese  Sunni  Marital
    Court on 31 August 2005.  A marriage  certificate  was  issued  by  the
    Ministry of Interior on 15 September 2005.  The appellant and his  wife
    have been refused permission to register the marriage in the UK.    The
    first appellant did not think his wife  would  be  able  to  adjust  to
    living  conditions  in  the  camp  in  southern  Lebanon.   There   are
    difficulties over the supply of electricity.  The Lebanese  authorities
    restrict fresh drinking water and there are water shortages.  His  wife
    is Catholic and he feared that she would not be readily accepted either
    by his family or the community.

14.  The first appellant stated that his employment opportunities  would  be
    extremely restricted because he is Palestinian.   He  would  require  a
    work permit even to work as a basic labourer and would not be paid  the
    same as other non-nationals. He states that this discrimination  exists
    because of the prejudice against Palestinians.  Most Palestinians  also
    face  discrimination  because  of  their  Sunni  religious  background,
    whereas the majority of the country in southern Lebanon  is  Shia.   He
    would face humiliation in terms of his ability to exercise  freedom  of
    movement, for example the unnecessary imposition of  waiting  times  to
    gain entry to camps was  specifically  directed  against  Palestinians.
    He would feel like  a  prisoner  within  the  refugee  camp  given  the
    Lebanese authorities' attitude to those living in the camps.

15.   The  first  appellant  said  that  he  had  received  training  as   a
    hairdresser from a friend in the UK.  He would be unable to follow this
    chosen profession in Lebanon because he would need a licence  from  the
    local council and the procedure  was  lengthy,  and  he  believed  that
    ultimately a licence would not be granted to a Palestinian.   He  would
    therefore be denied  the  right  to  put  his  employment  skills  into
    practice. Any work that he did  obtain  would  be  tainted  because  of
    discriminatory terms and conditions he would be subjected to because of
    his Palestinian origin.

16.  We have also read and considered a statement made  by  the  appellant's
    wife dated 11 June 2007 at pages 14 - 24 of  the  supplementary  bundle
    produced for this appellant.   On 28 March 2007 she  visited  Burj  el-
    Shemali camp where she stayed until 14 April 2007.   The purpose of the
    visit was to meet her husband's family.   She met  with  her  husband's
    parents, four sisters and three brothers, who are still living  at  the
    camp together with other relatives.  She noted the  conditions  in  the
    camp were extremely  poor.   The  houses  were  built  extremely  close
    together and there was little lighting and a lack of  basic  facilities
    such as heating and electricity.  She noted the  frequent  power  cuts.
    Hygiene in the camp was very poor.  Living  conditions  were  extremely
    cramped, including that of her  husband's  family.   She  realised  she
    could not live in the camp.  Permission had to be obtained for  her  to
    leave the military checkpoint and was refused on one occasion when  she
    needed to visit a pharmacy to buy nappies for her  daughter.   She  was
    worried that the environment would be completely  unsafe  for  a  young
    child. She witnessed violence.  The streets are not lit  at  night  and
    therefore people remain indoors.   Water has to be boiled before it  is
    used. There are difficulties storing  fresh  food,  indeed  fresh  milk
    because of the frequent electricity cuts.  She feared  that  she  would
    not be able to practice her religion, or that it would be difficult for
    her to do so in Lebanon.  She would be viewed  as  an  outsider  and  a
    stranger because of her faith. She refused to comply with a request  by
    her husband's family to wear a hijab, and this caused upset.  She could
    not envisage any circumstances where it would be possible  for  her  to
    adjust to life inside such a camp, and that as a person  who  had  been
    brought up in a European country her life would be unbearable living in
    Lebanon for any longer than the visit that she had endured.

17. We make it clear that there were no submissions made  to  us  that  the
    appellant's Article 8 appeal encompassed a real risk of a violation  of
    his right to family life on the basis that it  was  not  reasonable  to
    expect family life to continue in Lebanon.


Statement of the Second Appellant

18.  The second appellant made a statement dated 18 June 2007  dealing  with
    the conditions as he knows them inside the Burj  el-Shemali  camp.   He
    has been in regular contact with his family since he came to the UK and
    telephones them every month. There is no improvement  in  their  lives.
    He also talks of a lack of proper water and electricity.   He  mentions
    that the houses are  built  extremely  close  together  and  there  are
    inadequate waste disposal facilities, resulting in  extreme  pollution.
    There is a lack of proper medical facilities in the camps  since  UNRWA
    have  reduced  their  assistance.   Palestinians  are  denied   medical
    treatment as well as access to social assistance.  He states  that  his
    profession i.e. a skilled carpenter and kitchen  fitter  and  furniture
    designer is prohibited to Palestinians in  Lebanon.   Palestinians  are
    not allowed to own businesses or property, and receive no protection if
    they work for a Lebanese person.

19.  The second appellant also gives details of  the  strong  opposition  to
    the Palestinian people from  the  Lebanese  nationals  because  of  the
    troubles over the years and  the  blame  placed  at  the  feet  of  the
    Palestinians for those troubles.

The Expert Evidence
Report of Abbas Shiblak dated 27 June 2007

20.  We should state at the  outset  in  relation  to  the  evidence  of  Mr
    Shiblak that the Tribunal  received  a  copy  of  an  e-mail  from  the
    appellant's representatives, Knights Solicitors, and a covering  letter
    of 2 July 2007, i.e. after the hearing of this appeal, as  confirmation
    that Mr Shiblak had been made aware of the Tribunal's  decision  in  KK
    before the preparation of his report.   The  e-mail  confirms  that  Mr
    Shiblak was asked to consider where there had been any diminishment  of
    Palestinian rights since  KK  was  promulgated  in  October  2004,  and
    whether the situation had got significantly worse since that date.   We
    mention it because the issue was raised with Mr Shiblak by  Miss  Laing
    at the hearing,  and  the  decision  is  our  starting  point  for  the
    determination of the issues in this appeal, for the reasons that we set
    out later.

21.  Mr Shiblak is a Research Associate at the University of Oxford  Refugee
    Studies Centre.  He is a principal researcher on areas specialising  on
    refugees from the Middle East, and the issue of  statelessness  in  the
    Arab region. He sets out his background and qualifications at section 7
    of the report.  We do not intend to repeat what he has said there  save
    to  note that his last two visits to Lebanon  were  in  June  2006  and
    April  2007 when he spent about three weeks there during  each  of  the
    trips, and that he visited a number of refugee camps including Burj el-
    Shemali.   He met with UNRWA  officials;  the  Lebanese  ambassador  in
    charge of Palestinian  affairs;  the  PLO  representative  in  Lebanon;
    representatives  of  NGOs   working   with   the   refugees   and   the
    representative of the UNHCR in the  Middle  East.   We  have  read  his
    report and where relevant we have referred to its content.

22.  We heard oral evidence from Mr  Shiblak.   He  confirmed  that  he  had
    reread his report that morning and he  adopted  it.  He  confirmed  his
    visits to Lebanon; the first had been two weeks before the war  erupted
    in 2006.

23.  He was asked about paragraph  2(c)  of  the  report.   This  states  as
    follows:

        "(c)      Despite the fact that Palestinian refugees were living in
             the country for three  generations  since  1948,  the  Lebanese
             authorities deny Palestinians  refugees  residency  rights  and
             consider them foreign citizens who could have been  in  Lebanon
             for a few days. In many aspects, Palestinian  refugees  are  in
             fact worse off.  Foreigners for instance  are  allowed  to  own
             property in  Lebanon  but  such  a  right  is  denied  for  the
             Palestinians.   Lebanon  also  denies   social   security   for
             Palestinian refugees under the pretext that  these  rights  are
             offered to citizens of other states  on  a  reciprocity  basis.
             Lebanon has such reciprocal arrangements with at least two Arab
             states, Syria and Egypt that put the workers of these countries
             in a better position than the Palestinian refugees in terms  of
             access to the job market, the number of issued work permits and
             social security benefits.  Available statistics suggest that in
             1991, the Ministry of Labour issued about 18,000  work  permits
             to Egyptian workers, but only 350 permits to Palestinians.  The
             majority of Palestinian workers are required  to  pay  fees  of
             US$830 to apply for such permits or renew, which in most  cases
             the Lebanese authorities refuses to issue.  In  April  2007,  I
             visited Beirut  and  met  a  group  of  Egyptian  agricultural,
             construction and building maintenance workers at  the  airport.
             In the course of my conversation with them I was informed  that
             they received health, medical and social benefits as part of  a
             Memorandum of Understanding between Egypt and Lebanon."

24.  Mr Shiblak was not sure, when questioned, what other  states  also  had
    the same reciprocal agreement with Lebanon.  He thought the Gulf States
    were amongst those countries because they  had  a  mutual  interest  in
    terms of investment, transfer of trade and personnel.  He said part  of
    the agreements did relate to the professions.  It was not only  related
    to manual labour. He was asked what overriding justification was  given
    by the  Lebanese  authorities  for  the  exclusion  or  restriction  of
    Palestinians in terms of employment, ownership of property  and  social
    security.  He said it was based on a political formula in Lebanon which
    had been devised because of  the  sensitive  sectarian  division.   The
    formula  was  made  in  1923  and  again  in  1946  when  Lebanon   got
    independence, and it relates to a balance between the religious  groups
    in Lebanon which the authority does not want to upset, and the Lebanese
    authorities think that the integration of Palestinians would upset this
    formula as they are mainly Sunni.  He  said  that  most  discrimination
    against Palestinians is motivated by the need to reduce or minimise  or
    get rid of the Palestinian refugee element.  In this regard he referred
    us to paragraph 2(b) of his report in which he described what is  meant
    by the favourite slogan  of  Lebanese  politicians:  "No  to  Tawteen".
    This he  said  meant  no  permanent  settlement  or  implementation  or
    colonisation of Palestinians within Lebanon.   All  Lebanese  political
    groups were agreed on this. The policy was to push Palestinians out  of
    Lebanon, by imposing restrictions on them. At paragraph 2(g) Mr Shiblak
    referred to an infamous remark made by a renowned Lebanese poet. He had
    demanded at the beginning of the civil war  that  the  Palestinians  of
    Lebanon be distributed between the Arab states in numbers proportionate
    to the population of the states. When  he  was  asked  what  proportion
    Lebanon should take he had replied:

        "Those we have killed are sufficient".

    Mr Shiblak had said that this summarised the attitude of  the  Lebanese
    establishment.

25.  He was asked about the impact of the Syrian withdrawal from Lebanon  on
    Palestinians living there.  He said there was a security vacuum created
    which all the different groups competed to fill.  During the Syrian era
    the Lebanese establishment was no more than an extension to the  Syrian
    presence, and the camps became an open ground for groups to compete  to
    control them.   Extremist Islamic groups had found a  foothold  in  the
    camps backed by Sunni fundamentalists.  The Palestinians living in  the
    camps were affected by this conflict more than any  other  category  of
    resident.   Two-thirds  of   the   innocent   civilian   victims   were
    Palestinians living in the camps. The Syrians used groups by  proxy  in
    the camps to destabilise Lebanon.  This caused the Lebanese authorities
    to impose a strict siege on the camps. In the Burj el-Shemali  camp  it
    was besieged on all sides.  There was only one gate  where  the  people
    had to queue to get in and out.  The Lebanese authorities  were  trying
    to make sure they knew what was going on in the camps by  imposing  the
    siege and at the checkpoints, and as  a  result  ordinary  Palestinians
    suffered.  He described how in the Palestinian controlled  areas  women
    had to give birth at the checkpoints and he was aware of a lady who had
    passed away while waiting in a long queue.  Lebanese  intelligence  was
    actually trying to recruit informers in the camps.  All the groups were
    active in securing intelligence in the camps, including  Hezbollah  and
    the Syrian army.

26.  Mr Shiblak was referred to paragraph 2(d) of his report which states:

        "One of the most damaging constraints on Palestinians in Lebanon is
        that which excludes refugees from the professions and a wide  range
        of  skilled  and  semi-skilled  work,  as  well  as  public  sector
        employment, making it almost impossible for them  to  work  in  the
        private sector either.   Those who work in the private sector  have
        to do so, in most cases, under black-market conditions.   They have
        no pension or social benefits.  The now resigned  Labour  Minister,
        Hamadeh Trad, issued a memorandum in June 2005 trying  to  legalise
        menial labour for Palestinians.   His measures were [sic] not  been
        implemented because of political and bureaucratic reasons  and  the
        lack of cooperation by the private sector which is characterised by
        anti-Palestinian racial attitudes.  Since June 2005, there has been
        no  successor  to  Mr  Trad.   However  the  government   has   not
        implemented any changes in favour of basic  employment  rights  for
        Palestinians.  This is based upon my  regular  research  and  close
        supervision of the Lebanese political scene."

27.  Mr Shiblak said that the Minister Trad, who represented Hezbollah,  had
    issued a ministerial decree  in  2005  taking  off  from  the  list  of
    professions prohibited to Palestinians, jobs which are mainly  clerical
    and manual professions. This is an annual ritual for  Labour  ministers
    since 1962 when they had the power to decide what jobs foreigners could
    do in the country.  The decision (of Labour Minister Trad) had  had  in
    practice no impact whatsoever because  of  bureaucratic  and  political
    manoeuvring.  Minister Trad was amongst the five who had resigned  from
    the present government and was not in office any more. There  had  been
    hope from the Palestinian side for change but it did not materialise.

Cross-examination by Miss Laing

28.  Miss Laing asked Mr Shiblak whether  he  had  a  natural  sympathy  for
    Palestinians and he said that he thought anyone who saw  an  individual
    as a human being should be concerned.  He said however he was  no  more
    sympathetic to Palestinians than he was to Kurds or  the  Bidoon.    He
    was sympathetic to any  group  that  was  denied  basic  human  rights.
    Objectively his duty was to the court and was not based on his personal
    opinion.   She suggested that his sympathy  had  led  him  to  adopt  a
    position of an advocate for the Palestinian  cause.  He  disagreed  and
    said that he should not be labelled.  He was referred to  section  5(c)
    of his report.  He deals with the position in  relation  to  the  first
    appellant in this section of the report.   He  was  asked  whether  his
    views did not show a particular  empathy  with  the  first  appellant's
    personal situation and that was  he  not  attempting  to  persuade  the
    Tribunal to do the same.  He said that any observer who closely watched
    the Palestinians in Lebanon would say the same.

29.  He was then asked about his comments in the report he had  prepared  on
    the second appellant, page 18 of the report paragraph  8(h),  where  Mr
    Shiblak states:

        "(h) The present Lebanese government of PM Fauad Siniora took  some
             steps in the  last  few  years  to  improve  the  Palestinians'
             conditions so as to steer  them  away  from  being  used  as  a
             political  card  by  the  Syrian  government.    The   Lebanese
             government issued a pardon to the Fateh representative,  Sultan
             Abu-Al-Ayneen, who was sentenced to death during the Syrian era
             of domination.  The Lebanese government agreed  to  reopen  the
             PLO office in Beirut in early 2006.  The  government  partially
             removed its long standing restriction  of  not  permitting  any
             construction work to  improve  the  infrastructure  within  the
             camps, mainly in Ein El-Hilweh camp."

30.  Miss Laing asked Mr  Shiblak  whether  it  was  not  correct  that  the
    removal of Syrian influence had had a positive effect on  Palestinians.
    He replied that he could not link it with the removal of  Syrians,  but
    with the present  situation  where  there  was  open  conflict  between
    Syrians and the Lebanese government.   It was a gesture by the Lebanese
    to try and do something in the context of  competing  with  the  Syrian
    intelligence who were recruiting in the camps for their own agenda.  He
    described how he had met with Ambassador Makkawi of the Lebanese  Prime
    Minster's office who had spoken  to  him  about  some  positive  ideas,
    including allowing material for construction  in  camps.   He  met  him
    again in Beirut in his office and he said there  were  difficulties  in
    implementing these polices because of the polarisation of the  Lebanese
    government.  Miss Laing asked Mr Shiblak if he would nevertheless agree
    that there was a focus for goodwill at work in the Lebanese government.
      He did agree, but said that the Lebanese government was motivated  by
    the conflict with Syria.  The  sentence  of  the  Fateh  leader  was  a
    political trial and was not legal.   Lebanon  at  the  time  was  under
    Syrian influence.  The Lebanese government were trying to revoke  this,
    and make good their relationship with the main Palestinian group Fateh.
      But so  far  as  many  Palestinians  were  concerned,  including  the
    activists around the sheik and those in his clan, he could not  protect
    them.

31.  Miss Laing referred Mr Shiblak to the report of Jim Quilty at pages  20
    - 38 of the appellant's authorities' bundle and to the section  headed:
    "Changes in Lebanon's Legal and Market Landscapes February 2005", where
    he refers to:

           "The political  reformulation  that  followed  the  Syrian  army
           withdrawal"

    She asked Mr Shiblak whether that caused him  to  reconsider  his  view
    that the political changes were not to do with the  Syrian  withdrawal.
    He replied that everything had a political agenda in Lebanon.   However
    whether  in  reality  the  Syrian  withdrawal   had   an   impact   was
    questionable, there was no real change.

32.  Referring to the Minister Hamadeh Trad, Miss  Laing  asked  Mr  Shiblak
    for his views on what Mr Quilty had said as follows:

        "More  than  anything  else"  says  Suheil   El-Nator   "Mohammed's
        Memorandum was a political move, designed to say 'We want  to  deal
        with Palestinians differently  than  we  have  up  to  now'.   This
        inspired polemics on both sides of the  Lebanese  political  divide
        [because] the memorandum implicitly recognised the  misery  of  the
        Palestinians here and acknowledged the need to so  something  about
        it.   This is important."

33.  Mr Shiblak said that he did not dispute the intention but the  question
    was what it meant in practice. He knew Souheil El-Nator, and questioned
    whether he could speak for the whole government.  He  was  referred  to
    the report of Souheil El-Nator entitled: "Human Rights Dilemma  of  the
    Palestinian Refugees in Lebanon"  at  pages  1-19  of  the  appellant's
    bundle of objective evidence.   At page 11 of the report he stated:

        "Practically, a broad segment  if  [sic]  Palestinian  workers  are
        employed  in  daily  agricultural  work,  construction,  travelling
        sales, mechanical work, repair and workshops, and  as  beauticians.
        Another segment works in a number of occupations, such as  teachers
        in private schools, and in rare cases as secretaries  and  computer
        operators in companies and offices.  Finally, a  third  segment  of
        the Palestinian population - mostly women - is employed to  provide
        services in private homes and associations."

    Mr Shiblak said he could not see why this was not accurate.

34.  Miss  Laing  referred  Mr  Shiblak  to  Mr  Quilty's  comments  on  the
    requirement of Palestinians to purchase work permits to work legally in
    Lebanon. Quoting from Mr El-Nator, Mr Quilty states:

        "Nator acknowledges that the new permit regime -  which  makes  the
        paperwork more affordable and ties permits  to  the  calendar  year
        rather than to individual jobs - is somewhat more  reasonable  than
        the previous one. The whole regime, however,  places  obstacles  in
        the  way  of  the   Palestinians   finding   work,   and   provides
        opportunities for Lebanese employers to deny it to them."

35.  She asked Mr Shiblak whether he accepted that the current  work  permit
    regime was more reasonable than the previous one.  Mr  Shiblak  replied
    that it was not more reasonable because it had never been  implemented.
    He was asked whether the number of jobs from  which  Palestinians  were
    excluded included the job of a hairdresser.  He said that if  that  was
    among the list of jobs removed that  it  would  still  require  a  work
    permit, which was not easy to acquire.  An individual would have to pay
    a $30 fee no matter what the outcome.  In  1999  Egyptians  had  18,000
    work permits in  Lebanon,  Palestinians  had  300.   Miss  Laing  asked
    whether or not the reality was that a number of Palestinians worked  in
    an unregulated way, in the black market economy.   Mr  Shiblak  replied
    that this was correct but they  were  obliged  to  do  so  and  had  no
    protection. It was put to him that many people in the UK did  this.  He
    replied that it was the lucky ones in Lebanon who were working  in  the
    black market conditions.

36.  Miss Laing asked  Mr  Shiblak  whether  he  agreed  that  the  Lebanese
    economy was not good, particularly because of the war.   He  said  that
    since two years ago the Lebanese authorities had been cracking down  on
    companies using illegal workers i.e. working  without  a  work  permit.
    The  war  was   affecting   everybody.   The   discrimination   against
    Palestinians was not linked to the general conditions of  the  economy.
    Miss Laing asked  him  whether  he  agreed  with  Mr  Quilty  that  the
    situation as to the enforcement of the law was not consistent.  He said
    it was not consistent when it came to Palestinians.  At page 5  of  the
    report Mr Quilty said:

        "Lebanese commerce, as has  been  noted  by  many  local  political
        analysts, has many excellent laws but their enforcement ranges from
        selective to arbitrary.  The same is true of inhumane laws like the
        ones that governed its refugee community."

37.  Miss Laing said the first point was whether or not  Mr  Shiblak  agreed
    that the Lebanese government enforced laws selectively or  arbitrarily.
    He replied it depended who you are.   Miss Laing said the second  point
    was whether the same applied to inhumane laws,  i.e.  that  enforcement
    was selective.  Mr Shiblak said that it could be.

38.  Turning to the issue of education, Miss Laing referred  Mr  Shiblak  to
    the curriculum vitae of Dr Mahmoud El-Ali,  a  Palestinian  independent
    researcher whose report appears  at  pages  20  -22  of  the  objective
    bundle.  At (iv) Dr El-Ali gives details of  his  formal  training  and
    education and records at  paragraph  1  that  he  attended  the  Siblin
    training centre, which is a  UNRWA  establishment  where  he  gained  a
    teaching diploma and gradated in 1971.  Mr Shiblak agreed  that  anyone
    who had studied at the Siblin  training  centre  would  have  to  be  a
    registered refugee with UNRWA, although not necessarily  that  he  came
    from one of the camps.  He also  agreed  that  he  must  have  acquired
    Lebanese nationality and that he had an impressive education.   He said
    he must have been amongst the lucky ones that got Lebanese nationality.
     He noted that he was an  inhabitant  of  one  of  the  seven  villages
    annexed to  the  mandatory  areas  of  Palestine.  He  would  have  got
    nationality in accordance with the 1994 law.   He  was  also  a  senior
    member of the staff in UNRWA, and had an income that enabled him to  be
    educated.

39.  Miss Laing asked Mr Shiblak if there were about  30,000  refugees  that
    had been naturalised.   He  replied  that  this  was  the  majority  of
    inhabitants of the seven villages he had mentioned, although there  was
    controversy regarding the number, it was estimated to be 3-4,000.    Mr
    El-Ali was an inhabitant of one of the seven villages.

40.  Miss Laing then turned to the reciprocal agreement between Lebanon  and
    other countries to which Mr Shiblak had referred in  his  report.    He
    said  that  the  benefits  and  details  of  these  agreements  varied.
    However, there were agreements with Egypt, Syria and the  Gulf  States.
    Miss Laing put it to Mr Shiblak that he had mentioned that Lebanon  and
    the Gulf States had a mutual interest in trade and asked him whether he
    accepted that a state was entitled to enter into a reciprocal agreement
    if it was in the interest of the state to do so.   Mr  Shiblak  replied
    yes, of course he did.  However in the  case  of  Palestinians  it  was
    different.  They were not a citizen of any other  state,  they  had  no
    state, they had been in Lebanon for sixty-seven  years  and  that  gave
    them some rights, although not necessarily rights that  other  citizens
    had.  Miss Laing continued that it followed from  the  difference  that
    stateless Palestinians and nationals of other states were  not  in  the
    same position.  She asked Mr Shiblak whether he accepted that stateless
    Palestinians resident in Lebanon were in a different position to  other
    foreign nationals. He replied that other foreign nationals  were  in  a
    more favourable position.  He agreed that  according  to  international
    law, a stateless Palestinian was in  a  materially  different  position
    from a national of a different country, however made it clear  that  he
    did not believe that Palestinians should be in this position.

41.  Turning to the Tribunal's decision in KK, Miss Laing asked  Mr  Shiblak
    what impact this had on his opinion and conclusion.   He  said  he  had
    only read the case two days ago.  He had prepared two reports,  one  on
    18 June and one on 27 June.  He was not aware of the content of KK when
    he wrote the first report. He had mentioned it at page 5 paragraph  (h)
    of his report on the first appellant, where he states:

        "Since the 'KK' decision which I  have considered, it is  important
        to note that the condition faced by Palestinian refugees since  the
        date of  that  decision  has  significantly  declined  because  the
        discriminatory measures have not  receded,  the  living  conditions
        remain extremely poor and matters are exacerbated  because  of  the
        declining security in the camps.  UNRWA's services are declining in
        terms of resources and in terms service delivery."

42.  Mr  Shiblak  said  that  was  not  enough,  but  thought  the  security
    situation was getting worse as was  the  situation  regarding  property
    ownership for Palestinian  refugees.   It  was  put  to  him  that  the
    situation regarding property ownership was the same as at the time  the
    Tribunal decided the case of KK, as  were  living  conditions  and  job
    opportunities.  Mr Shiblak then accepted that the only  difference  now
    was the security situation, and added that he had glanced  through  the
    KK decision.

43.  Miss Laing suggested that the situation  had  changed  for  the  better
    because Syrians had influence on the direction  of  the  Lebanese.   Mr
    Shiblak disagreed and said that although  they  were  gone,  they  were
    there invisibly.  She put  it  to  him  that  nevertheless  whilst  the
    Syrians had been present there was a large number of Syrian workers  in
    Lebanon who had now gone.   He  said  he  thought  that  in  the  first
    instance after the withdrawal that might have been the case, but  there
    were still thousands of Syrian workers in the  market.   She  suggested
    there was less competition.  He said there was  still  competition  for
    Palestinians because there were other foreign labourers.  She put it to
    him that there had been a relaxation on building  restrictions  in  the
    camps.  Mr Shiblak disagreed and said there an intention to  relax  the
    restrictions but it had not happened  in  practice.   He  had  observed
    Shamali during his last visit.  A third of the camp had been  destroyed
    in 1982 and that destruction was still present and  there  was  further
    destruction last summer.  There had been no real change. He  could  see
    no important change on the ground.

Re-examination by Mr Blum

44.  Mr Blum asked Mr Shiblak what was the main motivation of  the  Lebanese
    government in not according the same rights to Palestinian refugees  as
    nationals of the state.  Mr Shiblak replied that the main objective was
    deeper than the daily politics of Lebanon, it was the political formula
    to which he had referred earlier and that was an open and  known  fact.
    Mr Blum asked him how carefully he had read KK.  He said  he  had  paid
    particular attention to the refusal and the Home Office explanation and
    that had attracted most of his attention.  However he said that he  had
    read the whole of the decision of KK.

Submissions on Behalf of the Respondent
45.  Miss Laing  relied  on  her  skeleton  dated  28  June  2007.   In  her
    submissions she said that  the  main  question  for  the  Tribunal  was
    whether or not the position had changed materially since  the  decision
    in KK, and we consider that decision later.  She reminded us that in KK
    the Tribunal found the general conditions for  Palestinians  living  in
    Lebanon did not  amount  to  persecution  as  defined  in  the  Refugee
    Convention nor did they amount to a breach of Article 3  of  the  ECHR.
    She submitted that, if anything, since then the conditions had slightly
    improved and therefore could not amount to  persecution  or  cross  the
    Article 3 threshold.  She said that she used Article 3 as shorthand  to
    include humanitarian protection.

46.  She reminded us of the definition of a refugee for the purposes of  the
    Refugee Convention which we do not intend  to  repeat  here.  She  also
    referred us to Professor Hathaway's definition of persecution as:

        "... the sustained or  systemic  failure  of  state  protection  in
        relation to one of the core entitlements which has been  recognised
        by the international community. The types of harm to  be  protected
        against include the breach of any right within the first  category,
        a discriminatory or non-emergency abrogation of a right within  the
        second, or a failure to implement a right within the third category
        which is either discriminatory or not grounded in an absolute  lack
        of resources."

47.  This refers to Professor  Hathaway's  formulation  of  a  hierarchy  of
    human rights according to their relative importance.  In this case  the
    Tribunal was concerned  with  categories  2  and  3  as  identified  by
    Professor Hathaway.  The parties were agreed that the factors relied on
    are freedom from arbitrary arrest and detention; freedom  of  movement;
    and opportunities  or  rights  connected  with  education,  employment,
    shelter, healthcare, owning property, access  to  social  security  and
    legal aid, and the right to establish institutions.

48.  She said it was the Secretary of State's submission as follows:

         "(a)     The evidence demonstrates that the appellants have no well-
             founded reason to fear arbitrary arrest or detention, or  that
             their freedom of moment will  be  restricted.   Nor  does  the
             evidence demonstrate, save to a very limited degree, that they
             have been unable  to  access  economic,  social  and  cultural
             rights.


         (b)  Differential treatment between nationals and non-nationals  in
             relation to access to economic,  social  and  cultural  rights
             cannot amount to discrimination  in  the  sense  necessary  to
             establish persecution, and the same principle applies  to  the
             treatment of stateless persons: an individual cannot establish
             by such generalised evidence of differential treatment that he
             is persecuted in his country of habitual residence.


         (c)  In any event, curtailment of  such  rights  or  discriminatory
             denial of access to benefits can only amount to persecution if
             there  is  no  justification,  and  the  measures  involved  -
             persistent and serious ill-treatment - are of a  substantially
             prejudicial nature  and  effect  a  significant  parts  of  an
             individual's  existence  so  that  it  would  make  his   life
             intolerable if he were to return: the appellant must  be  able
             to point to something which has an exceptional impact  on  him
             personally.


         (d)  For these reasons, the Article 3 threshold is not crossed (and
             neither is there any entitlement to humanitarian protection)."

49.  Miss  Laing  then  turned  to  deal  with  the  issue  of  differential
    treatment and  justification.   She  submitted  that  the  differential
    treatment of nationals in relation to access to  economic,  social  and
    cultural benefits does not amount to persecution.  Firstly, as a matter
    of international law it is for the host country to regulate  access  to
    and residence of  aliens.  This  would  include  an  alien's  right  to
    employment, education, housing and other economic, social and  cultural
    benefits.   She submitted that the restrictions placed  on  aliens  and
    exercise of this sovereign power cannot be justified as  discrimination
    because the comparators are not in analogous positions.  In any  event,
    access to these benefits is dependent on the resource available in  the
    host state. The state must be free to  provide  for  its  own  citizens
    first, before it provides for aliens. The objective  evidence  suggests
    that Lebanon has high levels of international debt and the standard  of
    living of its own nationals is not high. She submitted  that  nationals
    and non-nationals or aliens are not in a comparable situation  for  the
    purposes of any discrimination  analysis,  and  this  also  provided  a
    justification if one was needed for  any  differential  treatment  that
    might be identified.  She submitted that the evidence which  is  before
    the Tribunal did establish that  any  difficulty  that  the  appellants
    might experience as aliens was justified by a  lack  of  resources.  In
    addition those rights were denied on the basis of  lack  of  reciprocal
    arrangements with another state.

50.  She submitted that the principle is  recognised  in  international  and
    domestic law.  She quoted Article 2(3) of the International Covenant on
    Economic and Social and Cultural Rights (ICESC) which provides that:

        "The relevant countries, with due regard to human rights and  their
        national economy, may determine to what extent they would guarantee
        the economic rights recognised in  the  present  covenant  to  non-
        nationals."
51.  Article 1(2) of the International Covenant on the  Elimination  of  all
    Forms of Racial Discrimination (ICERD) provides:

         "This Convention  shall  not  apply  to  distinctions,  exclusions,
         restrictions  or  preferences  made  by  a  state  party  to   this
         Convention between citizens and non-citizens."

52.  She relied on a  number  of  domestic  examples  which  illustrate  the
    respondent's point that aliens do not have equal rights with  citizens.
    For example in the UK, EEA nationals of new Accession States who do not
    have a work permit are not permitted to work without the  authorisation
    of the Secretary of State.  Asylum support is below the level available
    to British nationals and  others  who  are  entitled  to  claim  income
    support, and asylum seekers in the UK do  not  enjoy  full  freedom  of
    movement and are subject to conditions about their place of  residence.



53.   Miss  Laing  then  turned  to  deal  with  the  general  position   of
    Palestinians in the Lebanon. She relied on the findings of the Tribunal
    in KK, particularly at paragraphs 81 to 92 which we consider later.  In
    KK the Tribunal had noted the delicate political balance in Lebanon and
    the difficulties which had been caused when Lebanon  accepted  a  large
    number of stateless people in 1948 and 1949.   The  refugees  had  been
    accepted on the basis that they would be supported  and  provided  with
    facilities by UNRWA which was responsible  for  their  material  needs.
    The Tribunal said at paragraph 101 of KK:

         "... bearing in mind the delicate political balance in Lebanon, the
         Lebanese authorities are entitled to take account of the  political
         impact upon their society of one-tenth of the  population  suddenly
         being granted citizenship and thereby enfranchised."

54.  The Tribunal did not consider that the  Lebanese  authorities'  concern
    that the Palestinians should be able to return to their home areas  was
    an illegitimate one.  Miss Laing reminded us that Mr Shiblak had placed
    considerable weight on the political balance, as  the  reason  for  the
    discriminatory practice as he saw  it.   She  submitted  there  was  no
    change in the position in the evidence before the Tribunal today.

55.  The Tribunal had also held  in  KK  that  the  specific  history  of  a
    particular appellant should be taken  into  account  in  assessing  the
    general situation and the  degree  of  likelihood  that  what  he  will
    experience on return to Lebanon would be persecutory, or in  breach  of
    his human rights.  She submitted that the position for Palestinians  in
    Lebanon remained the same as the Tribunal in KK  had  considered.   She
    referred again to the quote by Jim Quilty at page 5 paragraph 2 of  his
    report that the enforcement of Lebanese law ranges from  the  selective
    to the arbitrary and the same is true of inhumane laws  like  the  ones
    that govern the refugee community.  She mentioned the drop  in  UNRWA's
    spending because of dwindling foreign donations at paragraph  12(b)  of
    her skeleton.  Importantly, she relied on the  fact  that  Lebanon  has
    consistently  refuse  to  adopt   the   Refugee   Convention   or   the
    Statelessness  Convention.   Miss  Laing  submitted  that  that  was  a
    conscious and deliberate decision by the Lebanese authority not to bind
    itself.  Further, UNRWA's role is to provide for Palestine refugees  in
    the camps what the Lebanese state does not, and this includes  housing,
    healthcare, education and welfare support.  Miss Laing  submitted  that
    the "three  pillars  of  Palestinian  activism  in  Lebanon"  were  the
    provision  of  civic  rights  to  refugees,  resisting  naturalisation,
    locally referred to as "implantation"  (the  Tawteen  described  by  Mr
    Shiblak), and upholding the right of  return  to  their  homeland/natal
    villages.  She referred us to the COIS at paragraph 6.105, which quotes
    the writer Are Knudsen from his 2003 work "Islamism  in  the  Diaspora:
    Palestinian refugees in the Lebanon 2003".   He  refers  to  the  three
    pillars of Palestinian political activism as above and states:

         "These claims may at first not seem  contradictory.   The  refugees
         demand 'civic rights', that is  the  right  to  live  and  work  in
         Lebanon, but do not seek citizenship (which, inter  alia,  includes
         the right to vote). This is because naturalisation would compromise
         the right of return and symbolically erase the Palestinian  refugee
         community, as well as being construed as a victory for the  Israeli
         authorities,  who  categorically  reject  the  refugees  'right  of
         return'.  Upholding the right  of  return  is  therefore  a  highly
         charged symbolic issue, especially for the  older  generation,  and
         bridges past wrong doings (forced  exodus)  the  future  redemption
         (returning  to  Palestine).   Nonetheless,  a   large   number   of
         Palestinians have been naturalised in  recent  years.   Since  1994
         decrees by the Lebanese authorities have naturalised  about  30,000
         Palestinians, the majority of them from the former security zone to
         the south of the country (Peteet 1996: page P29)"

56.  Dealing with the issue of freedom from arbitrary arrest  or  detention,
    Miss Laing submitted that neither appellant had  been  the  subject  of
    arbitrary arrest or detention. The second appellant did not refer to it
    at all. The first appellant, although he claimed  to  fear  arrest  and
    detention, was found not to be credible.  His fear was  linked  to  the
    desire of the  Lebanese  government  to  arrest  Sultan  Abdul  Aynian;
    however he has now been issued with a pardon.    She  referred  to  the
    findings of the Tribunal in KK at paragraph 94, where they  found  that
    there was no evidence that Palestinians  were  exposed  to  a  risk  of
    arbitrary arrest.  She also referred  us  to  the  background  material
    which, although it confirms  the  risk  of  arbitrary  arrest,  applies
    equally to Palestinians, Lebanese citizens and other non-nationals. She
    submitted that there is no evidence  that  Palestinians  are  routinely
    targeted and any such detention and questioning  is  justified  by  the
    notoriously unstable security situation in the country.

57.  Dealing with freedom of movement, Miss Laing said that the evidence  in
    the first appellant's case supported a conclusion that he  had  had  no
    problems  moving  from  one  camp  to  another,  or  to  Beirut.    The
    Adjudicator found that his family  had  two  houses  in  two  different
    refugee camps, and he was able to  travel  to  and  fro  between  those
    camps.  We have already indicated how  the  Adjudicator  came  to  that
    conclusion on the first appellant's oral evidence. The second appellant
    had  also  moved  camps  without  difficulty  and  was  found  by   the
    Adjudicator to be  able  to  move  camp.   Neither  appellant  had  any
    difficulty travelling to Beirut to leave  Lebanon.    She  pointed  out
    that two recent  Guardian  articles  which  had  been  served  with  Mr
    Shiblak's  report,  referred  to  two  individuals,  one  of  whom,   a
    Palestinian woman and a left-wing activist born in  Ein  El-Hilweh  but
    who lived outside the camp and also spent time back in the camp, and to
    a young Palestinian whose reason for not leaving the camp  was  because
    he felt like a fish out of water and did not like the way the  Lebanese
    soldiers looked at him when he  did  so.  The  article  refers  to  the
    practical difficulties for  Palestinians  to  leave  camps,  especially
    after the violent incident of Nahr Al-Bared, which was a battle between
    a Jihadi group, Fatah Al-Islam and  the  Lebanese  army.   The  article
    referred to other clashes of similar nature.  Miss Laing submitted that
    it was scarcely surprising that in  these  circumstances  the  Lebanese
    army was inclined to carefully check who was coming and going from  the
    camps.

58.  She referred particularly to the evidence of Mr Quilty  who  states  at
    page 8 paragraph 1 of his report that:

        "Camp residents are generally free to leave whenever they please"


59.  His report suggests that freedom  of  movement  is  not  systematically
    impeded, but is experienced in an arbitrary way.  He  confirms  freedom
    of moment between the camps, subject to limitations of space.   He also
    refers to Palestinians who live  in  the  camps,  and  those  who  live
    outside of the camps, the latter tending to be:


        "The better off and the most wretched"

60.  In KK the Tribunal had held that the  checkpoints  applied  equally  to
    Lebanese  citizens  and  to  Palestinians,  and  the  same  levels   of
    harassment applied. Miss Laing pointed out that of course  this  is  no
    longer the position as the Syrian checkpoints are no longer  in  place.
    However, the Tribunal had also reached the same conclusions, as set out
    above, as to the  ability  to  live  outside  of  the  camps  and  that
    Palestinians were free  to  move  from  one  camp  to  the  other.  She
    submitted that the  allegation  that  Palestinians  are  persecuted  by
    reason of their freedom of movement being restricted is unfounded.

61.  In relation to the issue of education, Miss Laing submitted  that  both
    appellants had attended  primary  and  secondary  schools.   The  first
    appellant had begun a course at Beirut Arab University, although it was
    not completed.  The second appellant did a two year carpentry course at
    Siblin College, from which he qualified.  She referred us to  what  the
    Tribunal in KK found with regard to education, that UNRWA was the  sole
    provider for Palestinians.   Most  Palestinians  were  able  to  attend
    Lebanese schools and universities.  Primary education was satisfactory,
    secondary less so.  Miss Laing submitted that Mr Quilty did not  adduce
    any evidence that  the  basic  educational  needs  of  Palestinians  in
    Lebanon were not met other than to make a reference to increased  class
    sizes.  She submits that the background material,  the  COIS  and  USSD
    reports,  demonstrate  that  the  inadequacies  in  the  provision   of
    education apply equally to Lebanese citizens,  Palestinians  and  other
    non-nationals.

62.  In relation to employment,  Miss  Laing  pointed  out  that  the  first
    appellant had worked as a guard and the second had worked for a  French
    company as a carpenter after he graduated from  the  Siblin  vocational
    training centre.  There was  no  evidence  and  neither  appellant  had
    suggested any period of unemployment.  The first appellant had taken up
    hairdressing in the UK and claimed that he would not  be  permitted  to
    work as a hairdresser in Lebanon, so he would be unemployed.   However,
    the Guardian article submitted by  the  appellants  states  that  young
    Palestinians in Ein El-Hilweh who are lucky enough to obtain  work  can
    only get jobs as barbers, taxi drivers and construction  workers.   The
    memorandum of 27 June  2005  lifted  the  restriction  on  Palestinians
    working  in  manual  and  clerical  jobs  (but  not  professions),   so
    hairdressing is no longer an excluded job.  Mr Shiblak's  evidence  was
    that he was not sure whether hairdressing was proscribed or not.

63.  The Tribunal in KK considered the  lack  of  work  permits  granted  to
    Palestinians and the fact that when granted  they  were  for  unskilled
    occupations.  Mr Quilty in his report at page 5, third paragraph,  gave
    evidence  that  some  individual  Palestinians  had  been  employed  in
    professions that were legally forbidden to them because their  lack  of
    status made them cheaper to employ.  He refers to  the  employment  for
    example, of  Burj  El-Shemali  residents  in  seasonal  labour  in  the
    agricultural and  construction  sectors.    Taxi  driving  used  to  be
    available as alternative employment for  Palestinians  and  had  become
    less accessible as a result of the banning by the government  of  cheap
    fuel in most public transport vehicles.    A  small  faction  of  well-
    educated Palestinians had found work with the UNRWA or the NGOs.   Miss
    Laing pointed out that Dr Mahmoud Al Ali  (report  in  the  appellant's
    objective evidence bundle at pages 20 to 22) appears  to  be  one  such
    well-educated Palestinian.  His education started  at  Siblin  training
    centre although he is now a Lebanese citizen.

64.  Mr Quilty at page 10, paragraph 2 of his report states  that  Burj  El-
    Shemali's unemployment levels reflect its location in  the  undeveloped
    south of Lebanon and economic disparities in Lebanon as a whole,  where
    available economic opportunities are  concentrated  in  Beirut  at  the
    expense of outlying regions.  The Palestinians  he  states  "have  long
    faced competition from Syrian migrant labourers"  who  are  willing  to
    work for less, but since the assassination of Hariri,  the  numbers  of
    Syrian migrant labourers competing with Palestinian's have declined.

65.  Miss Laing referred to the introduction  of  reforms  in  2005  by  the
    Labour minister Trad Hamedeh.  These  reforms  sought  to  improve  the
    situation for Palestinians who wished to work.  There are  restrictions
    on the jobs that non-nationals (not just Palestinians) are entitled  to
    undertake; from 7 June 2005 the list of excluded jobs has reduced  from
    seventy-two to twenty-two.  As she had already stated, the  restriction
    on undertaking manual and  clerical  work  was  lifted,  and  only  the
    professions are still excluded. Whilst accepting  that  the  memorandum
    introducing  this  change  was  not    implemented  consistently,   she
    submitted that it signalled a  profound  change  of  approach  for  the
    Lebanese government.  The new work permit  regime  is  more  reasonable
    than its predecessor.  Mr Quilty said at page 14, paragraph 8:

         "A sympathetic Labour minister has set out to regulate and open  up
         the job market for Palestinian labour".

66.  In relation to shelter and infrastructure, Miss Laing pointed out  that
    the first appellant's family have two houses.   Neither  appellant  had
    said when they lived in Lebanon they lacked adequate  shelter  or  were
    subject to poor living conditions.  Both Mr Quilty  in  his  report  at
    page 6 paragraph 2, and Mr Shiblak in his report,  page  7,  paragraphs
    3(h) and (i), refer to the easing or partial  removal  on  the  ban  on
    construction work in the camps.  Inhabitants need permission to let the
    construction materials in.  She pointed out that in the COIS, reference
    is made to  information  from  UNRWA  (paragraph  6.107),  that  whilst
    permission is required from the Lebanese  army  to  bring  construction
    materials to the camps, it did not cause delays in the  period  covered
    by the report.  She also referred to the position at  the  time  of  KK
    when  construction  in  the  camps  was  prohibited.   In  general  the
    infrastructure  in  the  camps  was  poor,  with   overcrowded   living
    conditions, poverty, and unemployment. The roads and sewers  were  poor
    too.

67.  She referred to El-Buss  camp  where  the  first  appellant  spent  his
    primary school years and  where  inhabitants  live  in  concrete  block
    shelters (COIS, paragraph 6.156).  It is exactly the same in  Burj  El-
    Shemali, where he moved.  In Rashidieh, the other camp where the  first
    appellant lived, she quotes paragraph 6.16 of the COIS where it states:

         "Almost all shelters in the camp are ventilated and  supplied  with
         water and electricity".

68.  The homes in this camp have private toilets, but  there  is  no  sewage
    network.  The second appellant has lived in Burj El-Shemali and Ein El-
    Hilweh where, according to paragraph 6.142 of the COIS:

         "Shelters are small and very close to each other.  Some still  have
         zinc sheet roofing."

69.  In relation to healthcare, she submitted that  neither  appellant  said
    they did not have access to adequate health care in  Lebanon,  or  that
    they were discriminated against  in  the  receipt  of  healthcare.  The
    second appellant claimed that he had received treatment in hospital for
    a month following an attack in  which  he  was  injured  -  D4  of  the
    respondent's original bundle.   His account was of  course  disbelieved
    by the Adjudicator.  However his statement indicates on  its  face,  no
    difficulty with access to healthcare.  In KK the Tribunal  referred  to
    the fact that UNRWA is the sole provider of health  services  and  that
    the Palestinians only have limited access to  the  government  provided
    health service.  The UNRWA services have been reduced because of budget
    cuts.  Miss Laing stated that UNRWA operated twenty-five primary health
    care facilities and  provided  emergency  aid  to  families  unable  to
    support  themselves.   UNRWA  had  contracts  with  thirteen   Lebanese
    hospitals  for  the  provision  of   specialist   care.    There   were
    deficiencies in the provision, both by UNRWA and by the Palestinian Red
    Crescent.  She quoted from the COIS, paragraph 5.43, which  deals  with
    the UNRWA health programme and states:

         "The UNRWA health programme aims to protect, preserve  and  promote
         the health status of Palestinian  refugees  and  meet  their  basic
         health needs consistent with basic WHO principles and concepts  and
         with the standards of public sector health services in the agencies
         area of operations."

70.  She stated that in addition there are a number of NGOs that are  active
    in the camps and which do provide, inter alia, medical services.

71.  Mr Quilty in his report at page 6, paragraph 9, states that  the  UNRWA
    health care centre at Burj El-Shemali now has two  doctors  instead  of
    one.  This is considered a "great improvement in service".  Up until  a
    year previously there had been only one doctor on the staff.

72.  In relation to the land  ownership,  the  Tribunal  in  KK  noted  that
    Palestinians did not have the right to purchase land in Lebanon  or  to
    inherit land, whereas nationals  of  recognised  states  could  do  so.
    There are nevertheless restrictions on foreigners owning land,  and  Mr
    Shiblak had referred to this in his report at page 9,  paragraph  4(d).
    The Lebanese parliament justified the restrictions on  Palestinians  on
    the ground that it was protecting the right of Palestinians refugees to
    return to the homes they fled after the creation of the State of Israel
    in 1948.

73.  In relation to access to social security, legal aid, and the  right  to
    establish institutions, Miss Laing submitted that it  is  correct  that
    the Lebanese government denies these  rights  to  Palestinians  on  the
    basis that they are not nationals  of  a  state  which  provides  these
    rights on a reciprocal basis to Lebanese  nationals  resident  in  that
    state. She submitted that this is proper justification for  the  denial
    on the  basis  of  either  international  comity  (i.e.  the  right  to
    establish institutions), or on the basis that the  rights  in  question
    impose costs on the host state such that the host state is justified in
    restricting their provision to nationals of  States  which  accord  the
    same rights to  Lebanese  nationals.   She  reminded  us  in  her  oral
    submissions that Mr Shiblak had accepted that States were  entitled  to
    pursue reciprocal arrangements.  So  far  as  the  right  to  establish
    institutions is concerned, she asked us to note what is recorded in the
    USSD report at section 6A:

         "Palestinians refugees may  organise  their  own  unions;  however,
         because of restrictions on their right to  work,  few  Palestinians
         participated actively in trade unions."

74.  Miss Laing submitted that access to social security and legal  aid  are
    aspirations put forward in the fourth category of Hathaway's  hierarchy
    of human rights, and lack of access to these aspirations does not  fall
    within the definition of persecution.

75.  Miss Laing then dealt with the additional arguments relied  on  by  the
    appellants, of which there are four.  The first is  that  there  was  a
    lack of evidence  before  the  IAT  in  KK  about  the  differences  in
    treatment between the Palestinians and other non-nationals resident  in
    Lebanon. The second is that the AIT should consider  the  situation  of
    "non-ID Palestinians".  These number between 3,500 and  5,000  persons.
    They are not entitled to UNRWA support, and are not registered with the
    Lebanese authorities.  Neither appellant  in  this  case  is  a  non-ID
    refugee and whilst there is  evidence  that  non-ID  refugees  do  have
    particular difficulties, it was agreed that this  was  not  a  relevant
    issue in these appeals and that matter was not pursued.  The  third  is
    that significant reliance is placed by the appellants on  the  specific
    provisions of the Refugee Convention and of the  Stateless  Convention.
    The  fourth  is  that  there  is  discrimination  here  which  breaches
    international norms (because it is discrimination  on  racial  grounds)
    and makes it more likely to constitute persecution.

76.  Dealing with the first, Miss Laing accepted the AIT had mentioned  lack
    of  specific  evidence  on  the  differences   in   treatment   between
    Palestinians  and  non-nationals  resident  in  Lebanon  who  are   not
    Palestinians, and she accepted there was now more  evidence  available.
    She submitted that the evidence showed that the difference in treatment
    stemmed from the lack of  reciprocal  arrangements,  she  put  it  more
    strongly, the impossibility of such arrangements.  She  submitted  that
    the  impossibility  of  any  reciprocal  arrangements  was  a  rational
    justification for any differences in treatment of  which  complaint  is
    made.

77.  Miss Laing made a short submission on the appellant's reliance  on  the
    Refugee and Statelessness Conventions.  She submitted  the  fundamental
    point was that Lebanon has made a  conscious  decision  not  to  ratify
    either of these Conventions.  She submitted that the use that could  be
    made of Lebanon's  failure  to  comply  with  the  provisions  of  both
    Conventions was limited.

78.  Dealing with the issue of discrimination on the grounds of  race,  Miss
    Laing said it was the Secretary of State's submission that the evidence
    did not show that the Lebanese state discriminated against Palestinians
    on grounds of race.  Rather, the situation  of  stateless  Palestinians
    stems precisely from their statelessness. She relied  on  the  evidence
    that 30,000 or so Palestinians had  been  naturalised,  thus  acquiring
    citizenship.   Stateless  Palestinians  are  neither  in  an  analogous
    situation to Lebanese citizens, nor to nationals of  other  states,  in
    particular she argued that nationals of States  which  have  reciprocal
    arrangements with Lebanon.

79.  The respondent further  submitted  that  the  Roma  rights  case-  R  v
    Immigration Officer at Prague Airport and  another  ex  parte  European
    Roma rights  Centre  and  others  [2004]  UKHL  55,  (produced  by  the
    appellants), concerned the practices of immigration officers at  Prague
    Airport.  This was a case where  the  House  of  Lords  held  that  the
    operation of a scheme for questioning applicants  for  leave  to  enter
    discriminated against citizens of the Czech Republic on the grounds  of
    race, because those of Roma ethnic origin were  questioned  differently
    from  those  of  non-Roma  ethnic  origin.   She  submitted  that   the
    observation of Baroness Hale, quoted at paragraph 41 of the  Mr  Blum's
    skeleton, should be understood in that context.  Baroness  Hale  stated
    that Article 1(2) of the ICERD "...certainly does not mean  that  State
    Parties can discriminate between non-citizens on racial  grounds."  She
    further submitted that the obligation of "good faith"  referred  to  in
    paragraph 34 of his skeleton was of limited scope, and referred  us  to
    paragraphs 62-64 of Lord Hope's speech in the Roma rights case.

80.   Turning  to  Mr  Blum's  argument  that  the  justification  for   any
    differential treatment was irrelevant,  she  submitted  that  the  only
    reference to motive being irrelevant was in the speech of  Lord  Steyn,
    where he refers to Nagarajan v London Regional Transport  [2000]  1  AC
    501, at paragraph 36 of the decision.  This was a case dealing with the
    Race Relations Act 1976 under  which  it  is  clear  that  direct  race
    discrimination cannot be justified (Section 1(a)).  She submitted  that
    the same was not true of Article 14 of the ECHR.  Under Article 14, the
    court considers whether there is objective and reasonable justification
    for the differential treatment.  She argued  that  in  any  event,  the
    evidence did not establish direct race discrimination,  and  relied  on
    her earlier submissions relating to the  30,000  Palestinians  who  had
    been naturalised.  She submitted that the Lebanese authorities, in some
    areas, differentiated between non-nationals according to  whether  they
    have reciprocal arrangements with their home state.   She  argued  that
    this had a differential impact on stateless Palestinians, but  that  it
    was indirect discrimination which, even under the Race  Relations  Act,
    can be justified.  She submitted that the Tribunal  should  follow  the
    line adopted in KK and consider the Lebanese government's justification
    of the steps it has taken.

81.  In conclusion in her skeleton, Miss Laing said that  the  Secretary  of
    State  submitted  that  the  position  of  Palestinians  in  the  camps
    generally had not changed in any material way since the IAT decision in
    KK.  She submitted that it was  plain  that,  taking  the  difficulties
    faced by  stateless  Palestinians  residing  in  Lebanon  cumulatively,
    neither the minimum level of severity for persecution nor the Article 3
    threshold is reached.  In this regard she also referred to  the  recent
    decision  of  the  Tribunal  in  MA  (Palestinian  Arabs   -   Occupied
    Territories - risk to Palestinian territories) CG [2007] UKAIT 00017 in
    which the Tribunal accepted there was extensive  economic  deprivation,
    and there were much more intrusive security measures  and  still  found
    that neither persecution nor a violation of Article 3 was established.

82.  Miss Laing made further representations to us which we deal with  where
    necessary in the context of Mr Blum's skeleton. She did submit that  we
    should approach the evidence of Mr Shiblak with  caution.   She  argued
    there were two flaws to his approach.  First of all, he  did  not  come
    across as an impartial, objective expert.  She submitted  that  he  had
    allowed his sympathy towards the Palestinians to cloud his objectivity.
     Secondly, he had not been altogether careful  and  scrupulous  in  his
    preparation of the report because even  though  the  relevance  of  the
    IAT's decision in KK must have been obvious to him,  he  did  not  even
    look at it for  the  first  report  and  only  glanced  through  it  in
    preparation for the second report.  This was reflected in the fact that
    he had tried to suggest that the position at the time of  KK  was  that
    there was no restriction on Palestinians owning property,  whereas  the
    reality was the opposite.  She said that the second appellant,  in  his
    statement dated 23 December 2004 at paragraph 11, had said  that  there
    were restrictions on his  working  in  the  UK.  However  there  was  a
    considerable amount of evidence in his statement served for the hearing
    today which suggested that he had been  working.   There  had  been  no
    change in his  official  position  since  2004,  when  he  was  granted
    temporary permission, with a restriction on working.   Mr  Shiblak  had
    said that he would have to work in the black market if he was  returned
    to Lebanon; however it was clear that he had been working in  this  way
    in the United Kingdom.

83.  Finally, in response to Mr Blum's submission that the  first  appellant
    had been accepted as a low level member of Fateh, Miss Laing  submitted
    that since the head of Fateh in Lebanon had been pardoned, and  he  was
    in any event a low level member, there was no  real  risk  established.
    In any event, the  core  of  his  claim  as  to  persecution  had  been
    rejected.

Submissions On Behalf Of the Appellants

84.  Mr Blum relied on his skeleton dated 28 June 2007.

85.  In relation to Mr Shiblak's evidence, Mr  Blum  invited  us  to  attach
    weight to what he had said in his statement and in oral evidence to us.
     He said the comments he had made about the second  appellant  at  page
    11, paragraph 11(c) of his report, was a  repetition  of  the  evidence
    that had been given to him by the appellant and  was  not  evidence  of
    empathy or bias.   Mr Shiblak had said that he was an objective witness
    and he had an impressive pedigree.  He had experience of the camps, and
    that had been lacking in the decision in KK.  He asked us to find  that
    he had been overwhelmingly consistent.

86.  Mr Blum clarified that the main issue before  the  Tribunal  today  was
    whether on a cumulative basis, discrimination endured  by  Palestinians
    living in Lebanon, was capable  of  constituting  persecution  for  the
    purposes of the 1951 and 1950 Convention.  He said it  was  clear  that
    there was no need to establish physical harm. The conditions, to  which
    Palestinians were generally subjected, breached both  Conventions.   It
    was the appellant's argument that there was differential discrimination
    between two sets of non-nationals, i.e.  Palestinians  and  other  non-
    nationals. The purported objective justification was simply a mechanism
    for bypassing the underlying intention of marginalising the Palestinian
    community.  Mr Blum said that the position of the  Palestinians  living
    in Lebanon was tragic.  They were out of their homeland but there was a
    protection gap.  Palestinians were excluded by virtue of Article 1D  of
    the Geneva Convention, i.e. that they were in some cases deemed  to  be
    persons already receiving UN protection or assistance -  from  UNRWA  -
    which was supposed to provide them with greater protection but did  not
    as it only applied to those  who  left  Palestine  in  1948  and  their
    descendants.  He argued  that  the  Palestinians'  position  should  be
    considered  as  analogous  to  ordinary  refugees  under   the   Geneva
    Convention.   He  submitted  that  the  Tribunal  could  look  to   the
    requirements of the Geneva Convention as a  means  of  recognising  the
    rights of Palestinians. In his skeleton at paragraph 26 he states  that
    the 1951 Convention is instructive as to the level of treatment that is
    mandated for recognised refugees, and is relevant as to whether Lebanon
    has acted in a discriminatory manner and unlawfully under international
    law.  The treatment of Palestinian refugees must be considered  against
    the human rights norms that are applied to  other  recognised  refugees
    (and not to be considered in any way analogous to the rights of migrant
    workers).  Mr Blum accepted that Lebanon had taken a conscious decision
    not to sign the Geneva Convention, which was Miss Laing's point, but  a
    state could not exclude rights that were afforded in international law.
      He referred us in particular to paragraph 6 of the Geneva  Convention
    that requires that refugees be exempt from requirements:

        "which by  virtue  of  their  nature  a  refugee  is  incapable  of
        fulfilling"
87.  He submitted this was indicative of how Palestinian refugees should  be
    treated under international law, their position being very  similar  to
    those of Convention refugees. He cited the example of  the  ability  to
    obtain employment in Lebanon  for  a  Palestinian.  In  relation  to  a
    Palestinian refugee who is a doctor or a lawyer it was  impossible  for
    him to work as a doctor or lawyer in Lebanon because he  had  no  state
    that would enable the Lebanese government to enter into any  reciprocal
    agreement. This was discriminatory against Palestinian  nationals.   He
    referred us to Article 7 of the 1951 Convention which states  that  all
    refugees should enjoy exemption from  legislative  reciprocity  in  the
    territory of the contracting states after  a  period  of  three  years'
    residency.  The same exemption from reciprocity is found  in  the  1954
    Convention  Relating  to  the  Status  of  Stateless  Persons.   Whilst
    acknowledging that Lebanon had not signed either  Convention,  Mr  Blum
    argued that there was a need to look at the real motive of the Lebanese
    government's approach.  He said  that  although  it  was  correct  that
    states were entitled to enter into  reciprocal  agreements,  when  they
    were dealing with stateless persons  they  had  to  bear  in  mind  the
    provisions of the 1954 Convention. Mr Blum  drew  our  attention  to  a
    number  of  Conventions  that  have  been  signed   by   Lebanon:   The
    International Covenant  on  Civil  and  Political  Rights  (1966)  (the
    ICCPR); the ICESCR and the ICERD.  In relation to the ICESCR, whilst he
    acknowledged Article 2(3) (see para 50), he submitted that  article  11
    of that Convention was of prime significance in the appeal. This reads:

         "The state parties to the present covenant recognise the  right  of
         everyone to an adequate standard of  living  for  himself  and  his
         family, including adequate  food,  clothing  and  housing,  and  to
         continuous improvement of living  conditions.  The  states  parties
         will take appropriate steps  to  ensure  the  realisation  of  this
         right, recognising to  this  effect  the  essential  importance  of
         international cooperation based on free consent."

88.  At paragraph 44 of his skeleton Mr Blum turned to deal with  the  issue
    of justification for discrimination.  He submitted that in this  regard
    it was necessary to consider the vulnerability of the  Palestinians  as
    stateless people.  It could not be compared  to  migrant  workers  from
    their own state. It  was  the  appellants'  submission  that  this  was
    significant where  there  was  a  marked  differential  impact  on  the
    Palestinians  as  a  specific  ethnic   group.    He   submitted   that
    discriminatory treatment between nationals and  non-nationals  is  more
    likely  to  amount  to  persecution  if  it  breaches   internationally
    protected norms.  His reliance on the covenants  set  out  above,  that
    Lebanon has  signed,  supported  this.  He  submitted  that  systematic
    discriminatory breaches of  rights  such  as  the  right  to  work;  to
    education; to social security and to an  adequate  standard  of  living
    were  universally  condemned  and  their  protection  was   universally
    recognised.  Lebanon's treatment  of  Palestinian  refugees  should  be
    considered against treatment to be provided by host  states  under  the
    1951 Refugee Convention and the 1954 Statelessness Convention.  Mr Blum
    argued that in approaching the legitimacy of reciprocal  agreements  it
    was important to bear in mind the responsibility of states  to  protect
    those who were stateless.  He  took  issue  with  the  submission  that
    Palestinian refugees were not discriminated against because  they  were
    Palestinian, but because they were stateless and  argued  that  Tawteen
    was the overriding reason for those reciprocal agreements. The majority
    of Palestinians were Sunni Muslims and their naturalisation would upset
    the precarious demographic and religious balance between Christians and
    Muslims in Lebanon.  Mr Blum pointed out  that  the  naturalisation  of
    30,000 Palestinians relied on  by  the  respondent  referred  to  seven
    villages where the residents were predominately Shia. He submitted that
    the Palestinians were clearly discriminated against  because  they  are
    Sunni Muslim.  Under the various  covenants  that  it  has  signed  the
    Lebanese state had  to  act  in  good  faith  and  in  accordance  with
    international covenants, and it clearly had not done so in relation  to
    the Palestinians.

89.   Mr  Blum  said  there  were  two  principle  justifications  for   the
    discriminatory  treatment  of  Palestinian  refugees  by  the  Lebanese
    authorities.  The first was to  safeguard  their  right  of  return  to
    Palestine: the majority of Palestinians sought to resist naturalisation
    in Lebanon for this reason. The second is fear of Tawteen.  However the
    Palestinian refugees have never sought  citizenship  or  the  right  to
    vote. It was not necessary to grant citizenship or the right to vote in
    order to give civil rights to Palestinians in Lebanon.  He argued  that
    Tawteen has an enormous impact on the psyche of  Palestinians  and  the
    Lebanese. There was no national law or proportional  justification  for
    the discrimination against Palestinians on this basis and he  submitted
    the Tribunal should exercise caution to ensure that it did  not  accord
    undue deference to the Lebanese government's asserted justification for
    the differential treatment.  He argued  that  laws  that  differentiate
    between non-nationals and  stateless  persons  constitute  a  disguised
    discrimination if they  overwhelmingly  affected  only  one  ethnic  or
    national group, and this was the position in Lebanon.  He  referred  us
    to the latest US State Department report (objective bundle at page 265)
    which reports:

        "Systematic discrimination against Palestinian refugees continued"

90.  The CMI Working Paper at page 40 of the objective bundle refers to:

         "Institutionalised legal discrimination of refugees."

91.  He submitted that Palestinian refugees  were  subjected  to  persistent
    discriminatory denial of second and third level rights, the  effect  of
    which was sufficiently serious to amount to persecution.

92.   Mr  Blum  submitted  that  the  underlying  objective  of   reciprocal
    agreements was to ensure that Palestinians did not gain a foothold.  He
    argued it made little difference to the resources of the Lebanese state
    where, for example, they might have a reciprocal agreement with  Syria,
    because the Lebanese state still had to provide benefits (i.e. medical,
    social) to those workers and that was not of benefit  to  Lebanon.  The
    primary motivation was not the protection of state resources,  but  was
    an attempt to modulate the situation for Palestinians.  The attempt  to
    exclude Palestinians was racial.  He invited the Tribunal to find  that
    the refusal to afford rights to  Palestinians  by  Lebanese  for  these
    reasons was clearly motivated by discrimination.

93.  Turning to the Tribunal's decision in KK, Mr Blum  submitted  that  the
    Tribunal's  attention  in  that  case  had  not  been  drawn   to   the
    international agreements that he had now referred this Tribunal to  and
    that would entitle the Tribunal to reach a different conclusion on  the
    evidence before it today.  He submitted that the Tribunal  in  KK  gave
    insufficient  consideration  to  the  differential  treatment   between
    Palestinians  refuges  and  other  non-nationals.  The  application  of
    reciprocal agreements to Palestine  stateless  refugees  constituted  a
    serious breach of  international  human  rights  norms,  with  specific
    reference to common Article 7 of the 1951 Refugee  Convention  and  the
    1954 Statelessness Convention, in conjunction with the  ICCPR,  ICESCR,
    and ICERD.  He submitted that when they evaluated the justification for
    differential treatment of Palestinians, the Tribunal in  KK  considered
    the  impact  on  Lebanese  society  were  Palestinians  to  be  granted
    citizenship.  This approach took no account of the option  of  granting
    them civil  rights  but  not  naturalisation.   The  approach  was  not
    consistent with international human rights norms.  He  submitted  there
    had been a change in circumstances since KK was decided.  The Hezbollah-
    Israel war; the increase in extremist groups, and the  recent  conflict
    in the northern camp of Nahr Al-Bared have created a greater atmosphere
    of insecurity and increased the risk  of  harassment  of  Palestinians,
    especially male Palestinians.

94.  Turning then  to  specific  areas  of  discrimination,  beginning  with
    freedom of movement, he reminded us at paragraph 71 of the skeleton  of
    the evidence of identity checks on  Palestinian  refugees  entering  or
    leaving certain refugee camps, by the Lebanese army and of random stops
    by Lebanese police as Palestinians  exit  Beirut,  and  the  fact  that
    Palestinian  refugees  have  been  singled  out  during  demonstrations
    involving other nationalities.  In addition Mr Blum said that if it was
    correct that there was no specific targeting of Palestinians  over  and
    above other non-nationals, why was there a comment at page 268  of  the
    US State Department Report that Palestinian refugees  were  subject  to
    arrest and detention.

95.  In relation to education, in his skeleton he pointed out  the  evidence
    concerning restricted access to  education  for  non-nationals,  though
    this applies  to  all  non-nationals  (paragraphs  72  and  73  of  the
    skeleton). Mr Blum said that the position of Dr  Mahmoud  El-Ali  could
    not be determinative of the general position for Palestinians.  He  was
    from one of the seven villages on the border and had  been  naturalised
    in  1994.   He  said  that  although  UNRWA  was  mandated  to  provide
    education, it had clear problems with funding.  He accepted  there  was
    no obligation in international law on Lebanon to provide  education  to
    Palestinians, but that right was protected under the ICERD, and it  was
    infringed by denial of access to education to Palestinians.

96.  In relation to real estate ownership, Mr Blum submitted that there  was
    clear discrimination against Palestinians in this  area.   He  referred
    (at paragraph 78 of the skeleton) to the introduction of Decree 296  (3
    April  2001)  that  effectively  prevented  Palestinians  from  owning,
    bequeathing or even registering real estate which they  had  bought  or
    were buying in instalments. This states:

         "No real right of any kind may be acquired by any person that  does
         not carry a citizenship issued by a recognised  state,  or  by  any
         person if such acquisition contradicts with the provisions  of  the
         Constitution relating to the Prohibition of Settlement (Tawteen)."

97.  He submitted that the law was  worded  in  a  manner  that  exclusively
    prevented Palestinians from owing property. This discrimination against
    Palestinians with regard to the right to own and inherit property  when
    taken in conjunction with  inadequate  housing  conditions  in  refugee
    camps, he submitted, created a situation where Palestinian refugees are
    discriminated against in their  enjoyment  of  the  right  to  adequate
    housing,  which  violated  Article  11(1)  of  the  ICESCR.    Further,
    discrimination in relation to property ownership  is  prohibited  under
    Article  5  of  the  ICEDR.   Therefore  Lebanon's  justification   was
    inconsistent with its obligations under international law.

98.   In  relation  to  access  to  employment,  Mr  Blum   submitted   that
    Palestinians should be in an analogous position to refugees covered  by
    Article 17 of the 1951 Refugee Convention  which  requires  contracting
    states to accord to refugees lawfully staying in their  territory,  the
    most favourable treatment accorded to nationals of foreign countries in
    the same circumstances, as regards the right to engage in wage  earning
    employment.  He pointed out that the right to work is an "economic  and
    social" right protected by Article 6 of the ICESCR.  Mr  Blum  referred
    us to two cases, the first, the Refugee Status  Appeals  Authority  for
    New Zealand in Refugee Appeal No. 73/92 Re CZZ [5 August 1994] in which
    it was observed that:

         "... substantial impairment of ability to  earn  a  living  coupled
         with  other  discriminatory  factors  could,   depending   on   the
         circumstances, constitute persecution."

99.  He accepted that the case was not successful on its facts but  said  it
    was of persuasive authority that the impaired ability to earn a  living
    could amount to persecution.

100. Borca v INS 77 F. 3d 210, 215-16 (7th Cir 1996), was a case in  the  US
    Court of Appeals, in which the court investigated the possibility of  a
    well-founded fear  of economic persecution even where  there  was  some
    ability to find alternative work.  The court said in that case:

         "To establish a well-founded fear of  economic  persecution,  Borca
         must show that she faces a probability of deliberate imposition  of
         substantial economic  disadvantage  on  account  of  her  political
         opinion."

    Mr Blum accepted that this was a case involving different  legislation.
    However the court had found there was no  need  for  physical  harm  to
    establish economic persecution, and he  submitted  the  same  principle
    applied in the UK jurisdiction.  The US court had found the need for  a
    deliberate imposition of punishment and the analogy here was that there
    was a deliberate restriction on  the  employment  for  Palestinians  in
    Lebanon, and the situation was therefore analogous.

101. Mr Blum said that the ministerial decree that regulates the  rights  of
    Palestinians to work in  Lebanon  -  Decree  No.  17561  of  18.9.1962,
    contains three restrictive principles: (a) obtaining a work permit; (b)
    national preference; and (c) reciprocity of  rights.   He  reminded  us
    again  that  the  status  of  stateless  Palestinians  meant  that  the
    reciprocal treatment of Lebanese nationals is not possible due  to  the
    absence of a recognised Palestinian  state;  Palestinian  refugees  are
    thus at a disadvantage from other foreign  nationals  seeking  work  in
    Lebanon.

102. He submitted that  Palestinians  were  excluded  from  legal,  medical,
    pharmacology, architectural and engineering professions because of  the
    reciprocity  agreements  and  requirement  for  Lebanese   nationality.
    Although this would apply to other non-nationals, again Mr Blum  argued
    that this would have a differential impact on Palestinians, as  opposed
    to  other  non-nationals,  as  they  could  not  avail  themselves   of
    reciprocal agreements.  He points out at paragraph 91 of  the  skeleton
    that the amendments proposed by Minister Trad Hamadeh, i.e.  memorandum
    1/67, dated 27 June 2005, which allowed  Palestinians  to  obtain  work
    permits for manual and clerical jobs, had made no de facto  difference,
    because, as Mr Shiblak had said the memorandum had not been implemented
    consistently, and the ban on Palestinians  seeking  employment  in  the
    professions had remained in place.  He said it was particularly telling
    that  in  1999  only  350  work  permits  were  granted   to   resident
    Palestinians compared with more than 18,000 permits issued to  Egyptian
    labourers.  He points out that many  Palestinians,  especially  in  the
    south of Lebanon, work in agriculture and that this sector has suffered
    severe losses as a result of the Israeli  bombing.   Many  Palestinians
    have, as a result, been unable to return to this work. This was clearly
    a factor that had occurred after the Tribunal's decision in KK.

103. Mr Blum drew our attention to the limited ability of UNRWA  to  provide
    for Palestinians, because of its shrinking budget.  The  PLO  has  also
    faced a large decrease in funds and that has led to a reduction in  the
    level of support it provides. The reality is  that  only  about  5%  of
    Palestinians in Lebanon are in lawful employment.  This information  is
    taken from the report entitled "Human Rights Dilemma of the Palestinian
    Refugees in Lebanon" by Mr Souheil El-Natour, the director of the Human
    Development Centre in Beirut.  At page 14 the report quotes a  director
    of an NGO, who has stated  that  nearly  60%  of  all  Palestinians  in
    Lebanon live under the poverty line, as defined by  the  UN.   Mr  Blum
    said that this illustrated the dynamics of the  Palestinian  employment
    situation in Lebanon.

104. Turning to access to social security, Mr Blum  acknowledged  that  this
    was not a second or  third  category  right  as  defined  by  Hathaway;
    however it was a factor to be taken into account in the  round.   Again
    the 1951 Refugee Convention requires contracting states to  accord  the
    same rights in respect of social security to refugees lawfully  staying
    in their country as it does to  nationals.   The  granting  of  a  work
    permit does not permit Palestinians to benefit from the Lebanese social
    security system.  Mr Blum argued again that although  non-nationals  do
    not have access to social security, except when their known state has a
    reciprocal  agreement  with  Lebanon,  for  the  reasons  before,  this
    effectively excludes  all  Palestinians  because  of  the  differential
    treatment that results between Palestinians and other non-nationals.

105. The same points are made  essentially  in  relation  to  the  right  to
    establish institutions, where it is submitted that Palestinians are not
    allowed to establish their own civil society associations, and  because
    non-nationals may only  create  associations  under  the  condition  of
    reciprocity,  again  this  has  a  disproportionate   impact   on   the
    Palestinians.

106. In relation to health services, the  Palestinians  have  no  access  to
    Lebanese government hospitals, or other related  health  services.   Mr
    Blum accepted that UNRWA is mandated to provide health services for the
    Palestinian refugees.  However again he submitted that because  of  the
    significant reduction in funding to UNRWA, this  has  meant  a  serious
    deterioration in the level of service offered.   In  particular,  there
    has been a significant reduction in funding  for  emergency  treatment.
    Mr Blum submitted that the provision of health care and the  restricted
    ability of UNRWA to cover the health needs of the Palestinian refugees,
    had to be regarded in the context of the international agreements  that
    Lebanon had signed and which do not distinguish  between  citizens  and
    non-citizens alike.

107. In relation to legal aid, again this would  only  be  offered  to  non-
    citizens where they were nationals of  countries  providing  reciprocal
    rights  to  Lebanese   nationals,   and   that   effectively   excluded
    Palestinians.

108. Mr Blum drew our  attention  to  Lebanese  societal  attitudes  towards
    Palestinians, many of whom are blamed  for  Lebanon's  misfortunes.  He
    drew our attention to statements by government ministers, including the
    President  who  has  indicated  that  Lebanon  will   never   integrate
    Palestinians, or give them the rights they demand  because  that  would
    remove them from the support of UNRWA.  He referred us to the US  State
    Department Report, March 2007, which confirms that  Palestinian  groups
    in refugee camps operate an autonomous and arbitrary system of  justice
    within the camps that is not under the control of the  Lebanese  state.
    According to the same  report,  Palestinian  refugees  are  subject  to
    arrest, detention, and harassment by  the  state  security  forces  and
    rival Palestinian factions.  The US State  Department  Report  confirms
    the  difficulties  faced  by  Palestinian  refugees  in   relation   to
    discrimination, particularly in the area of employment.

109. Turning to the access right for  building  and  construction  materials
    into the refugee  camps  and  to  conditions  in  the  camps,  Mr  Blum
    acknowledged the conflicting evidence  regarding  the  lifting  of  the
    prohibition on building materials  entering  the  camps.   However,  he
    submitted the prohibition  remains  and  it  exclusively  affected  the
    Palestinians.  It inhibits the ability to  repair  and  maintain  their
    shelters.  The prohibition is a  measure  only  taken  in  relation  to
    Palestinian camps and directly discriminates against Palestinians.   He
    referred us in this regard to the evidence  contained  in  the  Amnesty
    International Report, "Lebanon: Limitations on  Rights  of  Palestinian
    Refugee Children - Briefing to the  Committee  on  the  Rights  of  the
    Child", 5 July 2006, at  page  175.   He  drew  our  attention  to  the
    evidence that  highlights  the  conditions  in  the  camps,  which  are
    atrocious.  For  example  in  the  report  entitled  "Institutionalised
    Discrimination against Palestinians in Lebanon, a report  submitted  to
    the  UN  Committee  on  the  Elimination  of  All   Forms   of   Racial
    Discrimination" dated  February/March  2004,  at  page  11,  under  the
    heading "Housing," it states:

         "The refugee camps, where most Palestinians reside,  are  extremely
         crowded and are of poor condition.  The average  refugee  household
         consists of 2.2 rooms and occupancy rate is 2.6 persons  per  room.
         Among recently displaced families, this figure rises to 3.4 persons
         per room.  Most camps lack adequate water and electricity and  only
         57% of households  are  connected  to  the  public  sewage  system.
         Nearly seven out of ten households are cold and difficult  to  heat
         during winter.  Lebanese authorities prohibit  Palestinians  living
         in the camps from transporting building materials into the  refugee
         camps, especially in southern  Lebanon.  Hence,  the  shelters  are
         dilapidated.  In some  camps,  restrictions  are  so  extreme  that
         authorities even confiscate wood  planks  and  nails  from  refugee
         camps residents."

110. He referred us to the risk encountered in  the  camps  because  of  the
    high levels of crime and, since the decision  in  KK,  the  decline  in
    security in the camps and the decline in UNRWA's services in  terms  of
    its resources for service delivery.

111. Mr Blum referred us to some of the  particular  difficulties  faced  by
    Palestinian  refugees  such  as  health  problems;  poverty;   security
    controls and the increasing  influence  of  armed  groups  and  radical
    Islamist movements within the camps.  In this regard he reminded us  of
    the personal statement made by the second appellant's common-law  wife.
    He said that since the decision in KK, there had been a decline in  the
    security of the camps, and it was not in issue that there  had  been  a
    rise in fundamentalism and extremist groups operating within the camps.
     This has resulted in an intensification of violence in the camps which
    was likely to  put  normal  Palestinians  in  a  much  more  precarious
    situation.

112. He also referred us to the recent fighting in  the  Ein  Al-Hilweh  and
    the Nahr Al-Bared refugee camps which have caused a large migration  of
    Palestinians  and  raised  the  risk  of  indiscriminate  violence.  He
    accepted that neither appellant was from these camps, and the  evidence
    that  is  quoted  at  paragraphs  130-133  of  his   skeleton   related
    specifically to those two camps.  However,  he  also  made  submissions
    regarding the Bourj Al-Shamali refugee camp.  The  population  of  this
    camp is approximately 17,000 and it is said to be one  of  the  poorest
    camps and a symbol of Palestinian deprivation in Lebanon. For  this  he
    refers us to the  expert  report  of  Mr  Quilty  at  page  26  of  the
    appellant's authorities bundle, quoting an informant:

         "Bourj  Al-Shamali,  the  author's  NPA  informant  says,  has  the
         distinction of being one of the poorest camps in  Lebanon.  Another
         informant  referred  to  the  camp  as  a  symbol  of   Palestinian
         deprivation in Lebanon.


         The camp's dominant architectural style is a single  storey  breeze
         block structure topped with sheets of tin for  roofing.   Like  the
         other camps in south Lebanon, the  residents  of  Bourj  Al-Shamali
         were for years forbidden to bring building materials into the camp,
         so that when the ban was eased somewhat a couple of years ago,  the
         camp infrastructure was in desperate condition.


         Three UNRWA operated wells provide the camp's  water  supply.  Camp
         toilets are connected to percolating  pits  and  sewage  and  waste
         water run into open storm drains along roads and pathways.


         A  number  of  health  conditions  result  from  the  camp's   poor
         infrastructure. Skin diseases are  particularly  common,  resulting
         from the consumption of contaminated water.  For the last  year  or
         so, an NGO financed project  has  been  attempting  to  repair  the
         infrastructure of the village and camp of  Bourj  Al-Shamali.   The
         project has ground to a halt due to lack of funds.


         All the authorities the author consulted  for  this  report  agreed
         that  health  conditions  in  Bourj  Al-Shamali  are   particularly
         grievous."


113. Mr Blum pointed out that because most of the inhabitants of  this  camp
    were agricultural seasonal workers on a daily basis, and received  very
    low wages; in the aftermath of the Hezbollah-Israel war many lost their
    means of livelihood because the  citrus  orchards  are  still  full  of
    cluster bombs.

114. Mr Blum invited us  to  consider  the  individual  impact  on  the  two
    appellants. The first appellant complained  in  his  statement  of  the
    general discriminatory situation that he faced.   This gave rise  to  a
    general atmosphere of a lack of security and although not enough on its
    own, when it was considered with all the other obstacles that had  been
    identified, e.g. employment, health, standard of living, all  of  these
    factors together did constitute persecution.  The second appellant  was
    not able to complete his university education. He was a  Fateh  member,
    albeit found to be a low level one, and he would be returning to a camp
    where various factions were vying for control.  Mr Blum submitted  that
    in these circumstances he might be at a slightly higher risk on return.



The Tribunal's Decision in KK
115. We start by summarising what the Tribunal found in  KK,  at  paragraphs
    81 to 92.  Here  the  Tribunal  considered  the  general  position  for
    Palestinians in Lebanon.  They considered evidence about the  provision
    by UNRWA of schools, primary health care facilities and  emergency  aid
    to families unable to support themselves.  At paragraph 82 the Tribunal
    noted:

        "82. UNRWA describes  the  situation  of  Palestinian  refugees  in
             Lebanon as involving them in facing specific problems. They  do
             not have social and civil rights and have a very limited access
             to the government's public health  or  educational  facilities,
             and no access to public or social services. The  majority  rely
             entirely on UNRWA as the sole provider of education, health  in
             relief and social services. They are considered  as  foreigners
             and prohibited by law from working in some  seventy-two  trades
             and professions which has led  to  high  levels  of  employment
             among the refugee population. It seems that popular  committees
             in the camps representing the refugees regularly discuss  these
             problems with the Lebanese government of the  UNRWA  officials.
             As we say, UNRWA provides  services  and  administers  its  own
             installations and has a camp services office in each camp which
             residents can visit to update records  or  raise  issues  about
             services  with  the  camp  services  officer  who  will   refer
             petitions etc. to the UNRWA administration in  relevant  areas.
             It is said that socio-economic  conditions  in  the  camps  are
             generally poor.  There is a high population density  and  there
             are  cramped  living  conditions  and   an   inadequate   basic
             infrastructure as regards matters such as roads and sewers.  As
             we have noted above, some  two-thirds  of  registered  refugees
             live in and around cities and towns."

116. The Tribunal then turned to deal with the specific submissions made  to
    them on the discrimination faced by  Palestinians  living  in  Lebanon,
    because of the way they were treated in contrast to Lebanese  citizens.
    The first point made was that  Palestinian  refugees  were  subject  to
    arrest, detention and harassment by state security forces. The Tribunal
    rejected the submission  that  this  was  discrimination  amounting  to
    persecution, because they found on the evidence before them  that  this
    appeared to be a general problem and there was no  distinction  in  the
    treatment  between  refugees  and  nationals.   They   considered   the
    restrictions on freedom of  movement,  particularly  at  that  time  at
    Syrian checkpoints.  The Tribunal found that the  restrictions  applied
    equally to Lebanese citizens and Palestinians, at least at  the  Syrian
    checkpoints, and the  same  level  of  risk  and  harassment  and  ill-
    treatment appeared to exist. We note,  in  this  regard  however,  that
    matters have moved on since the Syrian withdrawal  from  Lebanon.   The
    Tribunal found that it could not be properly said  that  conditions  in
    the Palestine refugee camps  were  life  threatening,  generally.   The
    Tribunal commented at paragraph 86:

        "... Our view is  that  although  there  is  evidence  as  we  have
        described briefly above - for example from the UNRWA at page 91  of
        Mr Southey's bundle - concerning the serious problems in the  camp,
        to regard the circumstances in the camps  as  life  threatening  is
        excessive  and  objectively  unfounded,  having   regard   to   the
        information in the international reports provided to us."

117. In dealing with the specific  conditions  of  Palestinians  within  the
    camps, the Tribunal  found  that  primary  education  was  regarded  as
    satisfactory,  but  secondary  education  less  so.   They  found  that
    Palestinians had only limited access to the government's public  health
    service. They found  that  Palestinians  were  reliant  upon  UNRWA  to
    provide general health services unless individual Palestinians were  in
    a position to pay for private health care.  Nevertheless  the  Tribunal
    pointed to evidence that UNRWA operated twenty-five primary health care
    facilities, and the provision of emergency aid to  families  unable  to
    support themselves. They referred to the gross under-funding  of  UNRWA
    for these purposes.

118. Turning to construction in the  refugee  camps,  at  the  time  of  the
    decision in KK, this was prohibited.  The  Tribunal  noted  that  as  a
    result most Palestinians lived in poverty in  breeze  blocks  shelters.
    They said at paragraph 91:

        "91. The UNRWA website states that all of the camps suffer  from  a
             lack of proper infrastructure  and  overcrowding,  poverty  and
             unemployment. Living conditions and  specific  aspects  of  the
             infrastructure such as roads and sewers are described as  being
             inadequate.  The Amnesty International team which visited  four
             camps between 27 May and 14 June 2003  noted  that  the  sewage
             systems in most of the camps appeared to be damaged  and  posed
             health risks to the community and that living  conditions  were
             aggravated by crowding in the camps."

119. The Tribunal considered the evidence that the denial  of  work  permits
    to Palestinians was brought to an end in 1991.  They recognised however
    that in practice few Palestinians had received work permits, and  those
    that did were mainly for unskilled  occupations.   The  Tribunal  noted
    that Palestinians were  banned  form  working  in  seventy-two  skilled
    professions, and that obtaining work  was  an  ongoing  problem.   They
    referred to the fact that non-Lebanese nationals might be able to  work
    within  the  list  of  trades  and  professions  that  were  ostensibly
    restricted to Lebanese nationals, as they said:
        "Based on the exercise of discretion by  the  Ministry  of  Labour,
        founded on requirements of 'public interest'  and  'reciprocity  of
        treatment'."

120. The Tribunal then went on to set out their understanding of  reciprocal
    agreements, which is as we have set out  above.  They  recognised  that
    reciprocal treatment was not  open  to  Palestinians,  since  they  are
    stateless, but said:-

        "It is however unclear from the evidence whether  the  Syrians  and
        other non-Lebanese who work in significant numbers in  Lebanon  are
        able to fulfil this requirement, as we  have  not  been  told  that
        there are reciprocal arrangements in place in Syria  or  the  other
        countries available to Lebanese nationals.  The same point  can  be
        made with regard to rights to social security. Again,  Palestinians
        cannot qualify, given their inability  to  provide  reciprocity  of
        treatment, but again we are unclear as to the situation with regard
        to nationals of other states working in Lebanon.   As  regards  the
        purchase of land,  as  we  have  noted  above,  it  is  clear  that
        Palestinians do not have the right to do so in Lebanon or indeed to
        inherit  land.   It  appears,  however,  that  all   nationals   of
        recognised states can  acquire  or  inherit  property  in  Lebanon,
        according to paragraph 5 of the  amnesty  document,  and  there  is
        clear discrimination in that regard.   It  is  said  in  the  State
        Department Report at page  86  of  Mr  Southey's  bundle  that  the
        Lebanese parliament has justified this law on the grounds  that  it
        is protecting the rights of Palestinian refugees to return  to  the
        homes from which they have fled after the creation of the State  of
        Israel in 1948.   It  is  also  said  in  this  regard  that  other
        foreigners may own a limited size  plot  of  land  but  only  after
        obtaining the approval of five  different  district  officers,  and
        that the law applies to all foreigners  but  it  is  applied  in  a
        manner disadvantageous to the 25,000 Kurds in the country."

121. The Tribunal then turned to deal with the legal arguments  in  relation
    to discrimination in the appeals  before  them.   We  do  not  need  to
    rehearse the arguments that were put to the Tribunal, as it is the same
    argument  that  is  put  to  this   Tribunal   in   relation   to   the
    disproportionate impact  of  the  treatment  of  non-nationals  by  the
    Lebanese government, on the Palestinians. In dealing with  whether  the
    discrimination against Palestinians impacted on the second category  of
    rights as identified by Professor Hathaway, (to which we  have  already
    referred) and this included the right to freedom from arbitrary  arrest
    and equal protection for all, the Tribunal found that the evidence  did
    not show that Palestinians in particular were  exposed  to  a  risk  of
    arbitrary arrest. Outside of the camps they found that they were at  no
    greater risk than a Lebanese citizen from Syrian checkpoints,  although
    they accepted that  they  might  be  at  greater  risk  at  a  Lebanese
    checkpoint.  They accepted a submission on behalf  of  the  respondent,
    that the latter was the product of the historical problems in  Lebanon,
    the camp violence and the civil war and concluded:

         "that such detention and questioning of Palestinians as takes place
         at Lebanese checkpoints has a significant degree  of  justification
         to it in light of the understandable concerns that the  authorities
         might have."

122. In relation to equality of protection for all, the Tribunal  noted  the
    Lebanese authorities did not tend to  assert  their  authority  in  the
    camps, and that violence was a significant problem there.  The Tribunal
    did not  accept  that  the  presence  of  armed  factions  on  Lebanese
    territory amounted to the existence of:

         "a  public  emergency  threatening  the  life  of  a  nation  whose
         existence has been officially proclaimed, which is the  only  basis
         upon which it is said that second category rights can be denied".

123.  Turning  to  Professor  Hathaway's   third   category   rights,   e.g.
    employment, housing and medical care, the Tribunal  concluded  that  it
    was clear it could in practice be difficult for  Palestinians  to  live
    outside  the  camps,  which  meant  that  they  had  to  live  in  very
    substandard accommodation inside the camps, and the  restrictions  they
    faced on  employment  denied  them  the  funds  necessary  to  purchase
    services privately. Having considered the submissions before them,  the
    Tribunal came to the following conclusion at paragraph 101:

        "As regards these points, as we have noted above, although there is
        an extent to which under Lebanese law other foreign  nationals  are
        not discriminated against to the same  extent  in  Lebanon  as  the
        Palestinians are,  there  is  a  lack  of  evidence  in  regard  to
        particular matters as to whether or not they are  in  fact  in  the
        same position, especially  as  regards  employment  and  access  to
        social services. Moreover, other foreign nationals in Lebanon  will
        have been regularly admitted under Lebanese immigration laws  which
        may well give status restricted either in point of time or  of  the
        rights which they may pursue whilst  lawfully  there.   That  is  a
        situation which is not apparently comparable to that of Palestinian
        refugees and their descendants, whose needs are to be provided  for
        primarily by an international agency,  UNRWA.   If  Mr  Southey  is
        relying on what he considers to be the genuine justification rather
        than  the  purported  justification,  then  we  find  ourselves  in
        agreement with Miss  Laing  that,  bearing  in  mind  the  delicate
        political balance in Lebanon, the Lebanese authorities are entitled
        to take account of the potential impact upon their society of  one-
        tenth of the population  suddenly  being  granted  citizenship  and
        thereby enfranchised.  The purported justification is  not  in  any
        event in our view a legitimate one.  The period of time  factor  is
        also in our  view,  though  not  without  relevance,  in  no  sense
        determinative. All the indications are that the Palestinians  would
        prefer on the  whole  to  return  to  their  homeland  rather  than
        continue the existence that they have in the camps in  the  various
        countries in which they find themselves, and in our view  it  is  a
        factor that the Lebanese state is entitled to  take  into  account.
        We remind ourselves that this arises in the context of  Article  26
        of the International Covenant on Civil and  Political  Rights  upon
        which both Mr Southey and Mr Cantor relied, but we consider that it
        has   some   relevance   to   the   other   provisions   concerning
        discrimination to which we turn."

124. The Tribunal then considered Article 2(3) of the ICESCR, which we  have
    set  out  earlier  at  paragraph  50  of  this  determination.    After
    considering this same submission which was put to this  Tribunal,  they
    concluded as follows:

         "104. We are not sure to what extent a report  of  the  UN  Special
             Rapporteur [which had indicated  that  Article  2(3)  must  be
             narrowly construed, and could only be relied on by  developing
             countries and only with respect to  economic  rights]  can  be
             said to qualify or give binding guidance on the meaning  of  a
             provision in an international agreement, and also we have  not
             heard argument on whether Lebanon can be described as being  a
             developing country, although we consider that it can  probably
             properly be so described.  If that is right,  then  even  with
             the Special Rapporteur's restriction, the  construction  would
             cover economic rights if not social and cultural  rights,  and
             we do not consider that it  can  properly  be  said  that  the
             obligation to pay due regard to human rights in the context of
             Article 2(3) includes any discrimination which is outlawed  by
             a Convention such as the Statelessness  Convention.   We  note
             the point made by Miss Laing at paragraph 9 of her skeleton of
             the Statelessness Convention provides that contracting parties
             should accord a stateless person treatment  as  favourable  as
             possible and in  any  event  not  less  favourable  than  that
             accorded to aliens generally in the  same  circumstances,  for
             example,  in  relation  to  wage  earning,  employment,   self
             employment  and   housing,  and  that  in  relation  to   free
             movement,  stateless  persons  are   also   subject   to   the
             regulations applicable to aliens generally.  There is  in  our
             view force in the submission at paragraph 10 of  her  skeleton
             that the treatment of aliens or  stateless  persons  different
             from and less favourable than that accorded by  the  state  to
             its own citizens, does not of itself  amount  to  persecution,
             and in this context we bear in mind the distinctions that have
             been pointed out to us between the treatment  of  Palestinians
             in Lebanon on the one hand and citizens  of  other  states  in
             Lebanon on the other hand.

         105. We return to the point  made  by  Miss  Laing  concerning  the
             particular context in which these appeals arise. It is  not  a
             straightforward issue of a  state  carrying  out  a  range  of
             discriminatory measures against stateless persons  and  others
             within its jurisdiction.  It is clear from the  UNRWA  mandate
             that there are specific matters which are within the remit  of
             UNRWA and other matters which are  within  the  remit  of  the
             State of Lebanon.  UNRWA on its own account  is  under  funded
             and it is clearly labouring to do the best it can  under  very
             unpromising conditions.  That having  been  said,  undoubtedly
             there are aspects of discrimination  against  Palestinians  in
             Lebanon for which  the  Lebanese  state  can  be  said  to  be
             accountable.   Various  justifications  are  given  for   this
             including economic circumstances, fear of armed  militias  and
             reserving the right of the  Palestinians  without  restriction
             ultimately to return to their own homelands.


         106. Having considered these matters as a whole, as we have done in
             some detail above, we have concluded that to the extent  there
             is a discriminatory denial of third category rights in Lebanon
             for Palestinians, this does not amount  to  persecution  under
             the Refugee Convention or breach  of  protected  human  rights
             under Article 3 of the ECHR.  We do not consider that  it  has
             been shown that the discrimination is of such a degree that it
             can properly be described as degrading as set out in Ireland v
             United Kingdom [1978] 2 EHRR 25.  On  this  point  we  address
             particularly the matters set out  at  paragraphs  16.5  of  Mr
             Southey's skeleton. The contentions that he  makes  there  and
             made  before  us  in  submissions  concerning  the   perceived
             hopelessness of the situation  for  those  in  the  camps  and
             bearing in mind the points made in  the  East  African  Asians
             case with regard to the nature of discrimination are  not such
             that it can properly be said to breach Article 3."

125. The Tribunal took into account, in relation to  the  appellants  before
    them, that they would have somewhere to live in Lebanon, although  they
    accepted that it would not be in ideal conditions, and they would  have
    access to basic medical  facilities,  and  that  in  the  case  of  one
    appellant it was likely he would find work.  They  reminded  themselves
    that the threshold in Article 3 is high and concluded  in  relation  to
    the International Covenants to which they had been referred:

         "Moreover, the International Covenants to which  we  have  referred
         contain, in contrast to the absolute nature of  Article  3  of  the
         ECHR, clear derogations and areas of appreciation. They are in many
         instances exhortatory and aspirant of an  ideal,  for  that  reason
         necessarily  requiring  modification   in   its   application,   as
         recognised by the covenants. Before any  breach  of  such  convents
         could properly be regarded as a breach of  the  provisions  of  the
         European Convention which bind the UK, there would  require  to  be
         such flagrant denials as would result in the high threshold imposed
         by Article 3 being breached.  In the circumstances,  therefore,  we
         consider that the Article 3 threshold would not be crossed  in  any
         of these cases on the basis of general attitudes in Lebanon towards
         Palestinians."

126. We have set out in some detail  the  findings  from  KK,  because  they
    illustrate why we have reached the conclusion below that  the  Tribunal
    has not been presented with any new or significant evidence that should
    cast doubt on the decision reached by the Tribunal in KK.

The Law
127. We have  reminded  ourselves  that  the  burden  of  proof  is  on  the
   appellants to establish that they are refugees as defined in  Regulation
   2  of  the  Refugee  or  Person  in  Need  of  International  Protection
   (Qualification) Regulations 2006 (the Protection Regulations), and  that
   they are entitled to the grant of asylum pursuant to paragraph 334 of HC
   395 of the Immigration Rules as  amended,  and/or  that  it  will  be  a
   violation of their Articles 3 and 8 rights under the ECHR to return them
   to Lebanon now.   The  standard  of  proof  in  both  cases  is  one  of
   reasonable likelihood or real risk.  The parties have both  referred  us
   to Hathaway's definition of persecution; however we are bound  to  apply
   the  definition  contained  in  Regulation  5(1)   of   the   Protection
   Regulations.  This provides as follows:-


        "Act of Persecution


        5(1)      In deciding whether a person  is  a  refugee  an  act  of
        persecution must be:


             (a)   sufficiently serious by its nature or  repetition  as  to
                  constitute a severe violation of a basic human right,  in
                  particular a right from which derogation cannot  be  made
                  under Article 15 of the Convention for the Protection  of
                  Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms;  or


             (b)    an  accumulation  of  various  measures,   including   a
                  violation of a human right which is  sufficiently  severe
                  as to  affect  an  individual  in  a  similar  manner  as
                  specified in (a)."


    This definition accepts in our view that cumulative violation of  human
    rights could create persecution, so in this regard it  encompasses  the
    Hathaway principles to which we were referred.

128. We have borne in mind that if the  appellants  do  not  establish  that
    they are entitled to refugee status under the regulations that we  will
    need to consider whether they have established that  they  are  persons
    eligible for humanitarian protection pursuant to paragraph 339C  of  HC
    395.

Our Findings and Conclusions
129. The first point we make is that the impact  of  the  evidence  that  we
    have considered from both the first and second appellants, and the wife
    of the first appellant, about the  conditions  in  Palestinian  refugee
    camps in Lebanon, is not, in our view, any different  in  any  material
    way from the  evidence  that  the  Tribunal  considered  in  KK.    The
    generally very poor conditions that all three  witnesses  described  in
    their statements are the  same  conditions  that  the  Tribunal  in  KK
    identified at paragraphs 82 and 88-91.

130. We have considered Miss Laing's submission that we  should  not  attach
    too much weight  to  Mr  Shiblak's  evidence  because  he  was  not  an
    impartial objective expert witness.  We have also considered Mr  Blum's
    submission that Mr Shiblak had  clear  and  direct  experience  of  the
    camps, in contrast to the expert witnesses who had appeared before  the
    Tribunal in KK.  On the latter point, we accept that Mr Shiblak is in a
    position to give his opinion about conditions in the camp,  because  he
    has seen them for himself and to that extent we do attach weight to his
    opinion, in the same way that we attach weight to what  the  appellants
    and the first appellant's wife said  about  conditions,  again  because
    they have direct and personal experience.  However, as we have  already
    stated, the conditions that have been outlined to us do not  appear  to
    have significantly changed since the decision in KK, and it appears  to
    us that those factors alone cannot entitle us to go behind the decision
    in KK.  We do think it is clear, from the manner in  which  Mr  Shiblak
    expressed himself in his report and in oral evidence  to  us,  that  he
    clearly has a great deal of sympathy for the plight of the Palestinians
    in Lebanon.  To this extent, his report is not wholly impartial.  It is
    also of considerable concern to the Tribunal that  Mr  Shiblak  clearly
    did not have a detailed knowledge of the evidence that had been  before
    the Tribunal in  KK,  and  the  reasons  for  its  conclusion.  In  his
    position, we would have expected him to undertake a  detailed  analysis
    of the Tribunal's decision in KK, to see  whether  his  expert  opinion
    took matters any further now.   In relation to the general  conditions,
    by which we mean employment,  health  matters,  living  conditions  and
    property ownership,  we  are  of  the  view  that  nothing  Mr  Shiblak
    described in his report is materially different from the situation that
    was considered by the Tribunal in KK.  Indeed, under  cross-examination
    Mr Shiblak accepted that the only difference that could  be  identified
    was that the security situation had got worse in the camps.

131. Nevertheless, we have considered Mr Shiblak's evidence  insofar  as  it
    goes, which as we say relates to conditions in the camps,  and  amounts
    to his opinion that the Lebanese refuse to accord the  same  rights  to
    Palestinian refugees as they do  to  their  own  nationals  because  of
    Tawteen.  We deal first with the specific areas in their daily lives in
    Lebanon where the appellants claim that they will face  discrimination,
    amounting to a breach of the Geneva Convention and  their  ECHR  rights
    under Articles 3 and 8.  The first  is  fear  of  arbitrary  arrest  or
    detention.  We can see nothing in the evidence that has been  presented
    to us that has changed at all since the decision in KK.   The  Tribunal
    in KK rejected  a  submission  that  Palestinians  were  exposed  to  a
    discriminatory risk of arbitrary arrest.  It remains the case that  the
    risk of arbitrary arrest applies to Palestinians, Lebanese citizens and
    other non-nationals in the same way.  The Tribunal in KK considered the
    evidence  that  Palestinians  were  at   greater   risk   at   Lebanese
    checkpoints, however concluded that the  security  situation  justified
    that risk.  We do not  consider  that  the  comment  in  the  US  State
    Department Report:

        "Palestinian  refugees  were  subject  to  arrest,  detention   and
        harassment  by  statue  security  forces  and   rival   Palestinian
        factions."

     is any more  than  a  comment  on  the  authorities'  reaction  to  the
    security situation.  This section of the  US  State  Department  Report
    refers the reader in turn to section 2D, which deals  with  freedom  of
    movement within the country, and here it states:

        "Security services use checkpoints to conduct warrantless  searches
        for smuggled goods, weapons, narcotics and subversive literature."

132. We do not see this comment as support for  any  other  conclusion  than
    that the Palestinians may well be on the receiving end of many of these
    searches.  However, we agree with Miss  Laing,  that  it  is  justified
    because of the very difficult security  situation.   More  importantly,
    there is nothing material in this evidence that the Tribunal in KK  has
    not already considered. The same applies to the  issue  of  freedom  of
    movement, which is bound up with the  issue  of  arbitrary  arrest  and
    detention.  We agree  with  the  submissions  of  Miss  Laing  in  this
    respect: and we find neither appellant has established that  they  will
    face persecution because they will be subject to discriminatory  levels
    of arbitrary arrest and detention, or  that  they  will  be  persecuted
    because their freedom of movement will be restricted.

133. In relation to education, we have  noted  the  educational  history  of
    both appellants, which does not support their personal claims  to  have
    suffered persecution  in  this  respect.    We  accept  that  there  is
    restricted access to education for non-nationals  in  Lebanon;  however
    these restrictions apply to all non-nationals.  Nothing in the evidence
    that Mr Blum referred to us in his skeleton at paragraphs  72  and  73,
    persuades us that the Palestinians face any greater  difficulties  than
    any other non-nationals or, again, that there is  anything  fresh  that
    was not considered by the Tribunal in KK in respect of this evidence.

134. In  relation  to  real  estate  ownership,  we  have  noted  Mr  Blum's
    submission  that  the  Palestinians  face  differential  treatment   in
    comparison  with  other  non-nationals  because  they  do  not  have  a
    recognised state, and hence are prevented by Decree 296 from owning  or
    bequeathing etc. real estate.  As Miss Laing pointed out, the  Tribunal
    in KK considered this evidence. We have noted the  quote  from  the  US
    Department of State report at page 11 under the heading "Protection  of
    Refugees":

        "The law does not explicitly target Palestinian refugees, but  bars
        those who are not bearers of nationality of a recognised state from
        owing property.  Palestinians no longer may purchase property,  and
        those who own property prior to 2001 are prohibited from passing it
        on to their children. The parliament justified  these  restrictions
        on the grounds that it was  protecting  the  right  of  Palestinian
        refugees to return to the homes they fled after the creation of the
        State of Israel in 1948.   Other foreigners may own a limited  size
        plot of  land  but  only  after  obtaining  the  approval  of  five
        different district officers.  The law applies  to  all  foreigners,
        but it was applied in a manner disadvantageous to the 25,000  Kurds
        in the country."

135. We return to the specific point made by Mr Blum that this  legislation,
    when taken in conjunction with the inadequate housing conditions in the
    refugee camps violates Lebanese obligations under Article 11(1) of  the
    ICESCR and Article  5  of  the  ICERD.    However,  this  evidence  was
    considered by the Tribunal in KK at paragraph 92 of the  decision,  and
    there is nothing generally in the  evidence  that  would  entitle  this
    Tribunal to go behind the decision in KK, subject to what we say  later
    about the international covenants that have been signed by Lebanon.

136. In relation to access to employment, we note the employment history  of
    both appellants when they were living in Lebanon, which again does  not
    support their case that they have faced persecutory treatment  in  this
    respect in the past. We have also noted the  evidence  that  the  first
    appellant may well be able to obtain work as a barber in Lebanon  since
    hairdressing appears to be no longer  an  excluded  job.    Mr   Blum's
    submission,  whilst  identifying  the   undoubted   difficulties   that
    Palestinians face in the employment field, still comes down to the fact
    that these difficulties stem, again, from the  Palestinians'  inability
    to avail themselves of reciprocal agreements.  We accept the point made
    that it is possible for the impairment of ability to earn a  living  to
    amount to discrimination, constituting persecution.   However  we  find
    that the limitations placed by the Lebanese authorities on Palestinians
    are properly justified on the grounds of their  statelessness.   We  do
    not agree that this can be seen as analogous to a deliberate imposition
    of punishment: it is a state of affairs  that  exists  in  relation  to
    Palestinians, outside of the control of the Lebanese authorities,  i.e.
    that the Palestinians are stateless.   In any  event,  this  again  was
    considered fully by the Tribunal in KK.   We agree  with  Miss  Laing's
    submission that even if the reforms of 2005 have not  been  implemented
    consistently,  nevertheless  it  does  show  a  significantly   changed
    approach from the  Lebanese  authority.   Whilst  we  accept  that  the
    reality on the ground is that a very small percentage  of  Palestinians
    obtain lawful employment, that situation prevails because of  the  lack
    of status of Palestinians.  There is nothing in the  evidence  that  Mr
    Blum  submitted  that  persuades  us  that  the  Lebanese'  authorities
    attitude  towards  the  Palestinians  in  relation  to  employment   is
    discrimination  amounting  to  persecution.    The   fact   that   many
    Palestinians may have lost their employment in agriculture as a  result
    of the Israeli bombing is a tragic consequence of  the  actions  of  an
    external force.  It is not evidence that the Lebanese  authorities  are
    engaged in  a  strategy  of  discrimination  against  the  Palestinians
    sufficient to engage either Convention.

137. We do not see  that  the  evidence  presented  to  us  in  relation  to
    housing, and the maintenance of housing within the  camps  is,  in  any
    material way, different from that which the Tribunal considered in  KK.
     We note that the evidence in relation to these  particular  appellants
    is that neither said that they lacked  adequate  shelter,  although  we
    have taken account of the evidence of the first appellant's  wife  when
    she visited Burj el-Shemali  camp.   Mr  Quilty  does  clearly  make  a
    reference to the  easing  of  the  ban  on  the  bringing  of  building
    materials into the camps in his report,  as  does  Mr  Shiblak  in  his
    report on the first appellant where he states at Section 8(h):

         "The present Lebanese government of PM Fuad Siniora took some steps
         in the last few years to improve the Palestinians' conditions so as
         to steer them away from being used  as  a  political  card  by  the
         Syrian government.  The Lebanese government issued a pardon to  the
         Fateh representative, Sultan Abu-Al-Ayneen, who  was  sentenced  to
         death during the Syrian era of domination.  The Lebanese government
         agreed to reopen  the  PLO  office  Beirut  in  early  2006.    The
         government partially removed its long standing restriction  of  not
         permitting any construction work to improve  infrastructure  within
         the camps, mainly in the Ein El-Hilweh camp."
138. We would accept, having considered this evidence, that the  prohibition
    on construction work in the camps largely remains, but it is clear from
    the expert evidence before us and the objective material, that the  ban
    has been eased in some of the camps and that in any event,  even  where
    permission is required to bring construction materials into the  camps,
    that does not seem to have caused  significant  problems.   We  do  not
    gloss over in making this comment  that  the  ability  of  Palestinians
    within the camps  to  repair  and  maintain  their  dwellings  is  very
    difficult, and  we  have  accepted  the  evidence  of  those  who  have
    witnessed first hand what the actual living conditions are like on  the
    ground.   It is evident that shelters within the camps are generally in
    a very poor state of repair.   Nevertheless, it seems to  us  that  the
    situation was worse when the Tribunal considered  this  matter  in  KK.
    Then construction in  the  camps  was  completely  prohibited,  and  if
    anything, the evidence now is that access  to  building  materials  has
    improved, albeit on a very  small  scale.   There  is  nothing  in  the
    evidence that has now been put to this  Tribunal  that  persuades  that
    this is a relevant adverse factor that should be considered in relation
    to general discrimination against the Palestinians.  On  the  contrary,
    the evidence is that there has been a small shift in  the  attitude  of
    the Lebanese authorities to the Palestinians' benefit,  not  detriment.



139. In relation to health care, we have noted the reduction in  funding  to
    UNRWA and the service it provides to the  Palestinians.   We  recognise
    that this must necessarily have resulted in a reduction in  service  to
    the  Palestinian  refugees.  Nevertheless,   we   note   Miss   Laing's
    submission, as to the level of services currently available, and  which
    we have set out at paragraph 58 of the determination.  This was exactly
    the same evidence that the Tribunal considered in KK, and we would make
    the comment in relation to the position on  health  care,  again,  that
    nothing material has changed since that decision.  We do  not  consider
    that the  restricted  health  service  available  to  the  Palestinians
    through UNRWA demonstrates  that  they  are  discriminated  against  in
    relation to the provision of health care, for exactly the same  reasons
    that the Tribunal gave in KK.  There is no basis for this  Tribunal  to
    go behind that decision.

140. We think that very little turns on the submissions that  were  made  to
    us with regard to the access to social  security;  legal  aid  and  the
    right to establish institutions.   Mr Blum's submissions all turned  on
    the inability of the Palestinians to access  these  rights  because  of
    their statelessness. In addition, Miss Laing  rightly  pointed  to  the
    fact that social security and legal aid are  aspirations  that  do  not
    fall within the definition of persecution, which  was  accepted  by  Mr
    Blum.   Nothing turns on his submission  that  the  Refugee  Convention
    requires contracting  states  to  afford  the  same  access  to  social
    security to  refugees  as  to  nationals,  because  Lebanon  is  not  a
    signatory to that Convention.  We do consider the denial of  access  to
    these rights by the Lebanese authorities on the ground that there is no
    basis for reciprocity, is justified on the grounds of  cost.   We  note
    also the Tribunal in KK reached the same decision for the same reasons.




The  Impact  of  Differential  Treatment;  Justification  and  the  Lebanese
Authorities' Obligations in International Law

140. We turn then to deal with the general submission  before  us  that  the
    Palestinian refugees' inability to rely on reciprocity because of their
    statelessness has a differential impact on them compared with other non-
    nationals that amounts to discriminatory persecution. The  first  point
    to note is that the Tribunal in KK identified that they had  little  or
    no evidence before them as to the position for other foreign nationals,
    and whether there were reciprocal agreements in place  between  Lebanon
    and other countries that enabled those nationals to benefit from access
    to rights which are denied to Palestinians.  The only  evidence  before
    us is that of Mr Shiblak at Section 2 paragraph (C) of his  report,  in
    which he says that Lebanon has reciprocal arrangements  with  at  least
    two Arab states, Syria and Egypt, and this has put the workers of these
    countries in a better position than Palestinians refugees  in  relation
    to their access to the job market; the number of  issued  work  permits
    and social security benefits available to them.   In  support  of  this
    opinion, he refers to the fact  that  the  Ministry  of  Labour  issued
    18,000 work permits to Egyptian workers in 1991, but only  350  permits
    to Palestinians.  In April 2007 he visited Beirut when he met  a  group
    of Egyptian agricultural, construction and building maintenance workers
    at the airport, and during the course of a conversation with  them  was
    informed that they do receive health, medical and  social  benefits  as
    part of a Memorandum of Understanding between Egypt and Lebanon.

141. We do not consider this evidence to be particularly  helpful  in  terms
    of assessing any differential impact upon Palestinian  refugees  living
    in Lebanon. The evidence is  very  limited  in  its  nature,  and  does
    nothing more than confirm what is in any event accepted,  and  that  is
    that foreigners of other states,  (in  this  case  Egypt),  which  have
    reciprocal agreements with Lebanon, as a result do  have  access  to  a
    number of rights.

142. We reject Mr Blum's submission that the lack of  reciprocity  available
    to Palestinian refugees is a cloak used by the Lebanon  authorities  to
    mask a discrimination to prevent settlement of a significant number  of
    Sunni Muslims.  We think it is right as a matter of  principle  and  of
    international law, that Lebanon does have the  right  to  regulate  the
    access to and conditions of  residence  of  aliens  in  its  territory.
    Further, nothing that Mr Blum submitted persuades us that the  lack  of
    resources is not a proper justification for any differential  treatment
    experienced by Palestinian refugees.  We repeat what was  said  by  the
    Tribunal in KK, that UNRWA is responsible for the material needs of the
    Palestinian refugees albeit that it labours under  a  serious  lack  of
    funding. We also repeat and confirm what the Tribunal said in KK  about
    the delicate political balance in Lebanon.  Although Mr Blum  submitted
    that civil rights were not dependent on the grant of citizenship or the
    right to vote, nevertheless the granting of equal access to all of  the
    rights that we have discussed above, must necessarily have an impact on
    the political balance in the country.  In our view  this  is  a  matter
    that the Lebanese authorities were entitled to  take  into  account  in
    relation to how far they are prepared to open up access to these rights
    to the Palestinians.   We  do  not  think  that  in  this  respect  the
    situation is any different  from  that  which  was  considered  by  the
    Tribunal in KK.

143. We turn to Mr Blum's  submission  that  in  KK  the  Tribunal  did  not
    consider Lebanon's signature to a number of  international  agreements.
    We reject his submission that  the  application  of  the  principle  of
    reciprocity to Palestinian refugees  involves  a  breach  of  Lebanon's
    obligations under these Conventions, because we do not accept  that  it
    amounts to indirect discrimination on the grounds of race.  Nothing  in
    any  of  the  Conventions  to  which  Mr  Blum  referred  us,  excludes
    justification for actions by a state on  the  grounds  of  differential
    treatment between nationals and non-nationals.  We do accept  that  any
    differential treatment should be  in  accordance  with  internationally
    recognised human rights norms.  Mr Blum referred us to  Article  26  of
    the ICCPR, which provides that signatory states must  ensure  that  the
    content of its legislation is not discriminatory.  We accept that  this
    can apply to both direct and indirect discrimination  i.e.  that  there
    may be no intention to discriminate in relation to legislation, but  it
    may have a disproportionate or adverse affect on a certain category  of
    persons.  Nevertheless, this does not prevent justification,  where  it
    is  indirect  discrimination.   The  ICESCR  specifically  provides  in
    Article 2 that developing countries may determine the extent  to  which
    they would guarantee the economic rights recognised in the covenant  to
    non-nationals.  The Tribunal in KK also referred to this provision.  We
    cannot see that Article 11 is in conflict with what is said at  Article
    2 (3) of the Convention,  in  other  words  Article  11  cannot  impose
    obligations on a signatory  state,  where  they  cannot  be  guaranteed
    because of lack of resources.  The  ICERD  specifically  excludes  non-
    citizens at Article 1(2), and in any event, as we have said, we do  not
    accept that the evidence demonstrates that the Lebanese authorities are
    engaged in a policy of discrimination against the Palestinians, on  the
    grounds of race.  In this regard we agree  with  Miss  Laing  that  the
    evidence before us demonstrates  that  the  differential  treatment  of
    Palestinian refugees stems entirely from their statelessness, and  that
    the justification for not increasing access of Palestinians refugees to
    civic rights i.e. lack of reciprocity and lack of resources, is  proper
    and reasonable and is in accordance  with  international  human  rights
    norms. In this regard we adopt and confirm the findings of the Tribunal
    in KK, and we conclude that Lebanon's  obligations  under  the  various
    covenants to which we have been referred, has no impact on the findings
    of the Tribunal in KK.   We note in any event that KK did consider some
    of these covenants, as we have mentioned earlier.

144. For these reasons we confirm the decision  in  KK.   We  recognise  the
    serious difficulties faced by  Palestinians  living  in  the  camps  in
    Lebanon. However we conclude that their living conditions and treatment
    by the Lebanese authorities is not discriminatory  on  the  grounds  of
    race.  We further find on the evidence presented to us that it does not
    reach the minimum level of severity to establish persecution or  so  as
    to breach the Article 3 threshold.




The Application for these Findings to the Appellants
The First Appellant

145. The first appellant was found not to be credible  in  relation  to  the
    level of involvement he claimed with Fateh.  It is accepted that he was
    a low level member of the Fateh.  No evidence was placed before us that
    low level members of Fateh face any real risk of persecution on  return
    to Lebanon.  We agree with Miss Laing's submission that in the light of
    the pardoning of the head  of  Fateh  in  Lebanon,  there  is  no  real
    likelihood that this appellant will face persecution on account of  his
    membership and in any event, there is no credible evidence that he  was
    of any interest to the authorities on that account  when  he  lived  in
    Lebanon.  We accept that  the  appellant  will  be  returning  to  very
    difficult conditions.  However for the reasons that  we  have  set  out
    above, this is not discrimination amounting to  persecution.   We  have
    noted that the appellant has received training  as  a  hairdresser  and
    that this, on the evidence before us, is not a prohibited employment to
    Palestinians in Lebanon.  We see no reason therefore why he  would  not
    be able to earn a living in that capacity.  In any event,  it  was  his
    evidence that he was employed as a guard by Fateh in the refugee  camp,
    and so clearly did have  employment  when  he  was  living  there.   We
    conclude that the first  appellant  has  not  established  that  he  is
    entitled to refugee status or that the living conditions  to  which  he
    would have to return in Lebanon breach either  his  Article  3  or  his
    Article 8 under the ECHR.   We  have  also  considered  whether  he  is
    entitled to humanitarian  protection,  and  for  the  same  reasons  we
    conclude that no substantial grounds have been shown for believing that
    he would face a real risk of suffering serious harm because he does not
    face a risk of torture or inhuman or degrading treatment or  punishment
    on return to Lebanon.  As we stated at paragraph 18 (ante), the Article
    8 ECHR ground of this  appeal  was  not  pursued  in  relation  to  the
    protection of family life.

The Second Appellant
146. The second appellant was found to be wholly lacking in  credibility  as
    to his involvement with Fateh.  We note from his  evidence,  which  was
    accepted, that he did work when he was living in  the  Burj  el-Shemali
    refugee camp, when he was employed as a carpenter.  We see  no  reason,
    even accepting the difficulties that we have  outlined  above,  why  he
    could not pursue such employment again.  We have made a finding, as  we
    have already stated in  relation  to  the  first  appellant,  that  the
    general  conditions  are  not  discriminatory  such  as  to  amount  to
    persecution.   The second appellant's case was  based  totally  on  the
    general conditions.  In the circumstances  we  find  that  he  has  not
    established that he is entitled to refugee status or that  there  would
    be a breach of either of his Article 3 or  Article  8  ECHR  rights  on
    return for the reasons that we have already given.  Similarly, we  find
    that he has also not established that he is  entitled  to  humanitarian
    protection for the same reasons as we gave in  relation  to  the  first
    appellant.




Decisions
First Appellant

147. The original Tribunal made a material error of law.

148. The following decision is accordingly substituted:

    The appeal is dismissed on asylum grounds.

    The appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds.

    The appellant is not entitled to humanitarian protection.

Second Appellant
149. The original Tribunal made a material error of law.

150. The following decision is accordingly substituted:

    The appeal is dismissed on asylum grounds.

    The appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds.

    The appellant is not entitled to humanitarian protection.




Signed
Senior Immigration Judge Nichols

   Background Materials Considered By the Tribunal in Chronological Order

1951 Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees

1954 Convention Relating to the Status of Stateless Persons

International Covenant on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination                                                   4   January
1969


International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights      23 March 1976

International  Covenant  on  Economic,  Social  and  Cultural  Rights      3
                                                     January 1976

Finding Means - UNRWA Financial Situation and the Living
Conditions of Palestinian Refugee,  2003

International Federation for Human Rights - Investigative
International Mission Lebanon - Palestinian Refugees:
Systematic Discrimination and Complete Lack of Interest on     March 2003
The Part of the International Community

Amnesty International, Lebanon, Economic and Social Rights     2004
of Palestinian Refugees,

Institutionalised Discrimination Against Palestinians in Lebanon:
The National Institution for Social Care and Vocational Training
(Report submitted to the United Nations Committee on the
Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination) 64th Session
of CERD - Geneva                                      February/March 2004

International Covenants on the Elimination of All Forms of
Racial Discrimination (CERD): Shadow Report the 14th
Periodical Report of State Parties due in 2004: Lebanon,
by the Palestinian Human Rights Organisation 2004

Refugee Feature: Palestinian Refugees -
A Legacy of Shame UNRWA Press Release UNRWA               3 March 2004

Falling Behind: A Brief on the Living Conditions of Palestinian
Refugees in Lebanon                                            March 2005




Palestinian Refugees in Canadian Law and Practice -
The Coalition against the Deportation of Palestinian
Refugees C/O QPIRG McGill 2005

UNRWA to Cut Refugee Food Rations: Sources Daily Star
Mr Mohammed Zaatari.                                      18 January 2006

Palestinian Refugees in Lebanon: Longstanding Suffering
Amnesty  International                                            17   March
2006

Palestinian Refugees in Lebanon: Longstanding Suffering
Amnesty International Palestinians Return Centre                   28  March
2006

US Committee for Refugees and Immigrants "Army Surrounds
Nahr Al-Bared Camp after Shoot-out between Militants"              22  April
2006

 Marginalised Community: the case of Palestinian Refugees
in Lebanon - Mr Jabber Suleiman                                April 2006

Lebanon: Limitations on Rights of Palestinian Refugee
Children - Briefing to the Committee on the Rights  of  the  Child         5
June 2006

Lebanon: Discrimination against Palestinians must end.
Amnesty International                                          8 June 2006

Report                   of                    Jim                    Quilty
                               20 June 2006

Country of Origin Information Report Lebanon.                  July 2006

Lebanon: the Other Palestinians Le Monde Diplomatique -
Ms Marina Da Silva
                                             July 2006
OHCHR, Committee on Elimination of Racial Discrimination
discusses Humanitarian  Crises  in  Lebanon                        3  August
2006

Forced Migration Review Issue 26 Palestinian Displacement:
A Case Apart?                                             August 2006

Freedom in the World 2006 Lebanon Freedom House           6 September 2006

Operational Guidance Note Lebanon                         20 September 2006

UNHCR Position on the International Protection Needs of
Asylum Seekers from Lebanon Displaced as a Result of the
Recent Conflict                                           15 November 2006

US Committee for Refugees and Immigrants World Refugee
Survey 2006

Human Rights Watch World  Report                                 11  January
2007

Human Rights Dilemma of the Palestinian Refugees in Lebanon
- Mr Souheil El-Natour, Director of Human Development Centre
(HDC), NGO Beirut and Background of HDC                         14  February
2007

US State Department Report Lebanon                             6 March 2007

Lebanon: Cashed Up Palestinians See Livelihoods Decimated
by  Security  Crisis.  IRIN                                        22  April
2007

Two Dead as Violence Hits Palestinian Camps.  Daily Star
Lebanon.  Mr Mohammed Zaatari                             24 April 2007

Lebanon: Refugees Learn to Substitute Government (IPS)
Dharj Jamail                                          2 May 2007

Lebanon: Palestinians Face Siege after Eleven Lebanese Soldiers
Killed. IRIN                                          20 May 2007

Lebanon: Many Dead as Lebanese Army Battles Militants in
Palestinian Camp.  Voice of America News, Challiss McDonough   20 May 2007

Lebanon: Bombardment May Spark Palestinian Uprising
Warn Analysts: IRIN                                             22 May 2007

Lebanon: Violence Highlights Regional Polarisation (IPS).
Ellen Massey                                          22 May 2007

"A Life of Filth and Poverty in the Crowded Alleys.
Refugees have no rights and little hope".  World News.
The Daily Telegraph.  Miss Kitty  Logan.                             23  May
2007

Lebanon: 30,000 Caught in Crossfire (IPS).  Jackson  Allers.         24  May
2007

Palestinians Flee Camp during Lull in Fighting between
Lebanese Army and Islamic Militants.  Voice of America News.         26  May
2007

Lebanon: Aid Agencies Concerned About Security in Camp:  IRIN.       30  May
2007
Lebanon: Refugee Resentment Simmers as Fighting Escalates
- Inter Press Service News Agency (IPS) Mr Jackson  Allers           4  June
2007

Palestinian Refugee Camp. Miss Margaret Basheer.  Beirut             4  June
2007

Lebanon: Fears for Thousands of Refugees Caught up in
Intense Fighting. Amnesty International Public Statement           5 June

America News.  Miss Margaret Basheer.                          6 June 2007

Palestinian Refugees in Lebanon Deprived from Basic Rights -
Dr Mahmoud El-Ali, Independent Researcher                      7 June 2007

Amnesty International Public Statement - Lebanon: Amid
reports of harassment at army checkpoints, continuing concern
for civilians affected by fighting at Palestinian  refugee  camp          12
June 2007

The Integrated Regional Information Networks News
(IRIN, "Lebanon: Rights for Course of Probing Palestinian
Abuse Claims")                                            20 June 2007

Report of Abbas Shiblak         27 June 2007

CMI Working Paper, the Law, the Loss and Lives of
Palestinian Refugees in Lebanon, Are Knudson     2007

Amnesty              International              Report               Lebanon
            2007

Background    Information    Re:    the    CHR.     Mitchelsen     Institute
Undated
