
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Kaur (children's best interests / public  interest  interface)  [2017]  UKUT
00014 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Given orally on 10 October    |
|                                             |2016, promulgated initially on|
|on 10 October 2016, followed                 |19 October 2016 [Part 1] and  |
|by written submissions                       |on 10 January 2017 [composite]|
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before


                  THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY, PRESIDENT


                                   Between


                                Satinder Kaur
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And


               TEH SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation

For the Appellant:      Mr A Alam, of counsel, instructed by Immigration
                  Advisory Services      (UK) Ltd (Derby)
 For the Respondent:  Ms C Patry, of counsel, instructed by the Government
                  Legal Department



   1) The seventh of the principles in the Zoumbas code does not preclude an
      outcome whereby the best interests of a child must yield to the public
      interest.


   2) This approach has not been altered by  Part  5A  of  the  Nationality,
      Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.


   3) In the proportionality balancing exercise, the  best  interests  of  a
      child must be assessed  in  isolation  from  other  factors,  such  as
      parental misconduct.


   4) The best interests assessment should normally be carried  out  at  the
      beginning of the balancing exercise.


   5) The "little weight" provisions in Part 5A  of  the  2002  Act  do  not
      entail an absolute, rigid  measurement  or  concept;  "little  weight"
      involves a spectrum which, within its self-contained boundaries,  will
      result  in  the  measurement  of  the  quantum  of  weight  considered
      appropriate in the fact sensitive context of every case.


   6) In every balancing exercise, the scales must be properly  prepared  by
      the  Judge,  followed  by  all  necessary  findings  and  conclusions,
      buttressed by adequate reasoning.




                                  DECISION

     Preface

     This is the composite, final decision  of  the  Tribunal,  encompassing
    its earlier decision and directions dated 14 October 2016.

                                PART 1

Initial Decision (given orally on 10 October 2016)

 1. This appeal has its origins  in  a  decision  made  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State dated 30 June 2015.  By that decision the  Secretary
    of State refused an application for  leave  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom based on Article  8  of  the  Human  Rights  Convention.   That
    application was made by the  Appellant  (the  mother  in  the  relevant
    family unit), who is a citizen of India now aged 37 years.

 2. The second member of the family unit is the  Appellant's  partner,  who
    has been in the United Kingdom since 2010.  Between the period 2008 and
    2011 the couple gave birth to two children.   These  children  are  now
    aged five and seven years respectively.  The Appellant appealed to  the
    First-tier Tribunal ("FtT") against the Secretary  of  State's  refusal
    decision.  The FtT dismissed the  appeal.   Permission  to  appeal  was
    granted on a relatively narrow ground relating to the interplay between
    Section 117B(6)(a) and Section 117D(1) of the Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002.

 3. The question which arises is whether the FtT fell into legal  error  in
    the following way.  It  is  quite  clear  in  my  judgment  that  these
    provisions contemplate a two stage exercise.  The question  of  whether
    the second stage is reached depends upon the answer posed to the  first
    question.  That question is: is the  child  in  question  a  qualifying
    child?  The answer  to  that  question  is  provided  by  applying  the
    definition that is enshrined in section 117D (1)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (the "2002 Act").   This section  makes
    provision for two possibilities.  One is that the person, who  must  be
    under the age of 18, is a British citizen.   The  second  is  that  the
    person has lived in the United Kingdom for a continuous period of seven
    years and is, of course, under the age of 18.

 4. If neither of those possibilities applies there is no second stage.  If
    either does apply the second stage involves giving effect to  the  test
    contained in Section 117B(6)(b)  of  the  2002  Act.   This  provision,
    which, notably, does not apply  to  those  liable  to  deportation,  is
    another which expresses "the public  interest",  in  this  instance  in
    negative terms:

         "In the case of a person who is  not  liable  to  deportation,  the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where -

          a) The person has a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship
             with a qualifying child, and

         (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave  the
         United Kingdom."

    Also notable is the absence of any  accompanying  list  of  factors  to
    which regard must be had in  determining  what  is  "reasonable".    In
    principle, therefore, decision makers and Judges have a wide margin  of
    appreciation in this respect.

 5. On one  view  the  grant  of  permission  to  appeal  resolves  to  the
    arguability of the contention that the FtT arguably  erred  in  law  by
    conflating these two stages: that is one way  in  which  the  grant  of
    permission may be viewed.  The fundamental question is whether the  two
    separate stages were properly appreciated and applied by the  Tribunal.
    The answer to  this  fundamental  question  turns  on  this  Tribunal's
    consideration  and  construction  of  the  relevant  passages  in   the
    decision.  These begin at [48] and they continue through to [75].

 6. It is trite that the decision must be considered as a whole and not  in
    isolated fragments.  Approached in this way  I  am  satisfied  that  no
    error of law has arisen.  I conclude that the FtT was aware of and gave
    effect to the two separate stages.  The Judge's  consideration  of  the
    question of British citizenship  regarding  the  two  children  was  in
    substance confined to the second stage.   This  was  supported  by  the
    authority of the decision of the Supreme Court in  ZH  (Tanzania)*  and
    that of EV (Philippines)*.  It matters not as a matter of  the  correct
    observance of the doctrine of precedent that, most recently, the  Court
    of Appeal has given effect to EV (Philippines) in the  decision  of  MA
    (Pakistan)* as it would have been bound in any event by the decision in
    ZH (Tanzania).

    [* full citations infra]

 7. I conclude therefore that no error of law within the terms of the grant
    of the permission to appeal  has  been  demonstrated.   That  would  be
    sufficient to dispose of the appeal and give rise to an order affirming
    the decision of the FtT but for one consideration.  Mr Alam  on  behalf
    of the Appellant has canvassed the possibility of seeking permission to
    apply to amend the grounds of appeal to introduce  a  new  ground.   Ms
    Patry, I will assume, is implacably opposed to that application.

 8. Giving effect to the overriding objective and taking into account  that
    there are children involved I consider that the fair and reasonable way
    of dealing with this is to require Mr Alam  to  formulate  the  amended
    ground in writing.  That will be done by 16.00 tomorrow.   It  will  be
    emailed to the Tribunal and directed to Ms Patry, who  will  then  have
    the opportunity to respond in writing on, first of all, the question of
    whether permission to amend the grounds should be granted and  secondly
    responding to the substance of the ground in any event: by  18  October
    2016.

 9. On this scenario the  Tribunal  will  then,  in  purely  written  mode,
    approach the matter in the following way.  First it will decide whether
    permission to amend should  be  granted  at  all.   If  that  yields  a
    negative answer that would be the end of the matter.  If  the  Tribunal
    is minded to grant permission  to  amend  then  I  shall  consider  the
    amendment  on  its  merits  and  that  will  include  Ms  Patry's  full
    submission.  The possibility of a further oral hearing  will,  in  this
    eventuality, be considered by the Tribunal.

                               PART 2

                  Decision Continued (following further written submissions)

10. The additional ground of appeal which has now been formulated is to the
    effect that the FtT, in focusing on the precarious  immigration  status
    of the children, erred in law having regard to  the  statement  of  the
    Supreme Court in Zoumbas v SSHD [2013] UKSC 74 that a child should  not
    be blamed for matters for which it is  not  responsible,  such  as  the
    conduct of a parent.

    The FtT's Decision Examined

11. In its decision, the FtT,  in  the  context  of  considering  the  best
    interests of the children, stated at [51]:

         "The best interests of the children are a primary consideration  in
         this case but may be outweighed by the cumulative effect  of  other
         matters that weigh in the public interests".

    The Tribunal then considered the decision in ZH (Tanzania) [2011]  UKSC
    4 in a passage which includes the following:

         "The Tribunal should take into account the fact that  the  children
         should not suffer as a result of the behaviour of their parent, but
         in certain cases the cumulative effect of other factors might still
         outweigh the best interests of the children.  A  child's  interests
         are a primary consideration but they are not paramount".

    Continuing, the Tribunal stated at [53]:

         "Applying both Section 55 [of the 2009 Act] and the guidance in ZH,
         it is clear that the safety and welfare  of  the  children  are  of
         primary consideration.  However, that does not mean that the family
         necessarily must be given the right to remain  living  in  the  UK.
         [The children] were born in the UK but they have no right to remain
         here and this is an important consideration.   They  are  also  not
         British citizens".

    In a later passage, the tribunal refers to the decision  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal in AM (Section 117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 0260 (IAC), noting the
    analysis that in section  117B  of  the  2002  Act  Parliament  clearly
    distinguished between those who have  formed  a  private  life  in  the
    United Kingdom during an unlawful sojourn and during  any  period  when
    their immigration status is precarious.

12. The Tribunal next gave consideration to the strength of the  children's
    ties with the United Kingdom, noting in particular that the older child
    had lived here for the seven years of her life.   The  Judge  made  the
    conclusion - in my judgement both unavoidable and unremarkable  -  that
    the best interests of these two young children lie  in  remaining  with
    their parents.  The question of  whether  it  would  be  reasonable  to
    expect the children to accompany the parents to the country  of  origin
    was then examined.  Following an outline of  material  aspects  of  the
    evidence, this yielded the conclusion, at [65]:

         "Having considered all the evidence in the round I do not find that
         it would be unreasonable to expect the children  to  leave  the  UK
         with their parents".

    Finally, in considering the  issue  of  proportionality,  the  Tribunal
    recognised the established private life in the United  Kingdom  of  all
    four  family  members.   In  concluding  that  the  impugned   decision
    represented an interference with the private life protected by  Article
    8 ECHR, the Tribunal stated at [73]:

         "Any private life the Appellant has established in the UK should be
         given little weight because it was established at a time  when  she
         remained as an overstayer  and  the  children  have  no  rights  to
         remain".

         ["She" refers to the mother]




    The 'Sins of the Parents' Principle

13. The decision of Supreme Court in Zoumbas is especially  noteworthy  for
    the code of seven principles  formulated  by  Lord  Hodge,  giving  the
    unanimous judgment of the court at [10]. The first six are as follows:

         (1) The best interests of a child are  an  integral  part  of  the
        proportionality assessment    under Article 8 ECHR
        (2) In making that assessment, the best interests of a  child  must
        be a primary consideration, although not always  the  only  primary
        consideration; and the child's best interests do not of  themselves
        have the status of the paramount consideration
        (3) Although the best interests of a child can be outweighed by the
        cumulative effect of other considerations, no  other  consideration
        can be treated as inherently more significant.
        (4) While different judges might approach the question of the  best
        interests of a child in different ways,  it  is  important  to  ask
        oneself the right questions in an orderly manner in order to  avoid
        the risk that the best interests of a child  might  be  undervalued
        when other important considerations were in play.
        (5) It is important to have a clear idea of a child's circumstances
        and of what is in a child's best interests before one asks  oneself
        whether those interests  are  outweighed  by  the  force  of  other
        considerations.
        (6) To that end there is no substitute for a careful examination of
        all relevant factors when the interests of a child are involved  in
        an Article 8 assessment.

    The seventh principle is expressed in the following terms:

        "A child must not be blamed for matters for which he or she is  not
        responsible, such as the conduct of a parent".

14. Zoumbas was preceded by ZH (Tanzania) where Baroness  Hale  stated  the
    following, at [33]:

             "We now have a much greater understanding of the importance of
             these issues in assessing the overall well-being of the child.
             In making the proportionality assessment under article 8,  the
             best interests of the child must be a  primary  consideration.
             This means that they must be considered first.  They  can,  of
             course, be  outweighed  by  the  cumulative  effect  of  other
             considerations.   In    this    case,    the    countervailing
             considerations  were  the  need  to  maintain  firm  and  fair
             immigration  control,  coupled  with  the  mother's  appalling
             immigration history and the  precariousness  of  her  position
             when family life was created. But,  as  the  Tribunal  rightly
             pointed out, the children were not to be blamed for that.  And
             the inevitable result of removing their primary carer would be
             that they had to leave with her. On the facts, it is as  least
             as strong a case as Edore v Secretary of State  for  the  Home
             Department [2003] 1 WLR 2979, where Simon Brown LJ  held  that
             "there really is only room for one view" (para 26).  In  those
             circumstances, the Secretary of State  was  clearly  right  to
             concede that there could be only one answer".

    The  two  children  concerned  were  aged   nine   and   twelve   years
    respectively, were British citizens by virtue of having been born to  a
    British citizen father and had lived in the United  Kingdom  all  their
    lives.  Lord Hope added the following, at [44]:

        "The fact that the mother's immigration status was precarious  when
        they were conceived may lead to a suspicion that  the  parents  saw
        this as a way of strengthening her case for being allowed to remain
        here.  But considerations of this kind cannot be held  against  the
        children in this assessment.  It would be  wrong  in  principle  to
        devalue what was in their best interests  by  something  for  which
        they could in no way be held to be responsible".

    In short, the error of law committed by both the Tribunal and the Court
    of Appeal was a failure to accord primacy to the best interests of  the
    children.  This is also the  central  theme  in  the  short  concurring
    judgment of Lord Kerr.  See [46]:

        "It is a universal theme of the various international and  domestic
        instruments ...that, in  reaching  decisions  that  will  affect  a
        child, a primacy of importance must  be  accorded  to  his  or  her
        interests.  This is not,  it  is  agreed,  a  factor  of  limitless
        importance in the  sense  that  it  will  prevail  over  all  other
        considerations.  It is a factor, however,  that  must  rank  higher
        than any other.  It is not merely one consideration that weighs  in
        the balance alongside other competing factors".

15. Zoumbas concerned a family unit  consisting  of  two  foreign  national
    parents whose presence in the United Kingdom  throughout  the  relevant
    period, some ten years, was at all material  times  unlawful.  Equally,
    the presence of the three children born to them in the United Kingdom -
    aged seven and four years  and  six  months  respectively  -  had  been
    unlawful throughout  the  entirety  of  their  short  lives.  The  main
    ingredients in  the  factual  matrix  included  the  dismissal  of  the
    mother's asylum claim, an unsuccessful ensuing appeal to the  Tribunal,
    further representations on behalf of the  family  by  the  father  and,
    ultimately, a decision by the  Secretary  of  State  that  the  further
    representations did not generate a realistic prospect of success in  an
    appeal to a Tribunal and, hence, did not constitute a fresh claim under
    paragraph 353 of the Immigration Rules.   This  stimulated  a  judicial
    review challenge.

16. It is of some  significance  that,  ultimately,  the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State in Zoumbas withstood challenge, notwithstanding that
    the parents had chosen to conduct themselves  in  such  a  manner  that
    their presence and that of all three children in the United Kingdom was
    at all times unlawful during the whole of the period of some ten  years
    under scrutiny.  Whither and of what impact the "sins of  the  parents"
    principle in this decision?

 1. The answer must lie, firstly, in the elementary, established dogma that
    general legal principles are not to  be  equated  with  absolute  legal
    rules.  They do not have  the  status  of  "hard-edged  or  bright-line
    rules": EB (Kosovo) v SSHD [2009] AC 1159, per Lord  Bingham  at  [12].
    This is especially true in cases where the sometimes elusive and always
    challenging Article 8 ECHR lies at the heart of the  judicial  decision
    making.  Secondly, in every proportionality  balancing  exercise  under
    Article 8  ECHR  the  context  is  unavoidably  fact  sensitive.   This
    approach is readily identifiable in [13] of the judgment of Lord Hodge.



 2. Secondly, the assessment of a child's best interests must focus on  the
    child, while simultaneously evaluating the reality of the child's  life
    situation and circumstances.   Factors  such  as  parental  immigration
    misconduct must not intrude at this stage. See EV (Phillipines) (infra)
    at [33]. This requires care and discipline  on  the  part  of  decision
    makers and Judges.  The child's best interests, once assessed,  are  an
    important component of the overall proportionality balancing  exercise.
    However, they have a free standing character.  Avoidance  of  error  is
    likely to be promoted if the best interests assessment is  carried  out
    first. Parental misconduct typically takes the form of  illegal  entry,
    unlawful overstaying or illegal working.   Factors  of  this  kind  may
    legitimately enter the  equation  at  a  later  stage  of  the  overall
    proportionality balancing exercise as they are clearly embraced by  the
    public interest in the maintenance of immigration control.  This is the
    stage at which a child's best  interests,  though  a  consideration  of
    primary  importance,  can  potentially  be  outweighed  by  the  public
    interest.  I shall revisit this issue infra in the context  of  a  more
    detailed examination of Part 5A of the 2002 Act.

 3. Thirdly, in  every  case  of  this  kind,  there  is  an  Article  8(2)
    proportionality balancing exercise to be performed.  At the  outset  of
    the exercise, the scales are evenly balanced.   The  exercise  is  then
    performed by identifying all  material  facts  and  considerations  and
    attributing  appropriate  and  rational  weight  to  each.   The   best
    interests of an affected child feature in the balancing  exercise.   It
    is incumbent upon the court or tribunal concerned to make an assessment
    of those interests. The balance  must  then  be  struck,  treating  the
    child's best interests as a primary consideration.   As  these  do  not
    have the status of the primary consideration they are capable of  being
    outweighed by other public interest factors, singly or cumulatively, in
    any given case.  If  the  "sins  of  the  parents"  principle  has  the
    unwavering potency which the Applicant's amended ground of challenge in
    substance advances, Zoumbas would have been decided differently.



Enter the 2002 Act

 4.  ZH (Tanzania) and Zoumbas were both decided prior to the advent of the
    Immigration Act 2014 and, with it, the commencement of the new Part  5A
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the  2002  Act").
    In  the  present  context,  it  is  appropriate  to  highlight  certain
    provisions  and  features  of  the  new  statutory  regime.  The  legal
    landscape has now altered.  Sections 117A and 117B, in tandem,  mandate
    courts and tribunals which are determining proportionality issues under
    Article 8(2)  ECHR  to  attribute  little  weight  to  a  private  life
    established by a person during any period  of  unlawful  or  precarious
    residence in the United Kingdom. The statutory injunction is framed  in
    uncompromising language:

    "Little weight should be given to -

          a) A private life; or

          b) A relationship formed with a qualifying partner

    that is established by a person at a time when the  person  is  in  the
         United Kingdom unlawfully."

     Per section 117B(4).  Section 117B(5) continues:

         "Little weight should be given to a private life established  by  a
         person  at  a  time  when  the  person's  immigration   status   is
         precarious."

     I shall explore infra the extent to which  these  two  provisions  have
    greater elasticity than at first blush appears.

 5. Subject to considering certain recent authority of the Court of  Appeal
    (infra), the aforementioned provisions of the 2002 Act, viewed  in  the
    abstract, invite the following analysis.  The  legislative  instruction
    to attribute "little weight" to a person's private life established  or
    developed during a period of unlawful or precarious  residence  in  the
    United Kingdom is unambiguous and unqualified. This legal rule  appears
    to have the effect, in the not untypical case, that while  the  child's
    best interests have the status of a primary consideration, the  private
    lives of parents and children developed during periods of precarious or
    unlawful  residence  in  the  United  Kingdom  are  automatically   and
    compulsorily given little weight.

 6.  Notably,  neither  section  117B  (4)  nor  (5)  makes   any   special
    prescription for  children.  In  particular,  Parliament  has  made  no
    distinction between adults and children.   These  statutory  provisions
    embrace any person, irrespective of age, whose private life falls to be
    considered in any given case. This  is  not  without  significance  not
    least because, in practice, it is the conduct of  parents  which  gives
    rise to unlawful and precarious periods of private  life  developed  by
    children.

 7. This particular feature of  the  legislation  was  highlighted  in  the
    decision of this Tribunal in Miah (section 117B NIAA 2002  -  children)
    [2016] UKUT 131 (IAC) at [23] - [24].  There it was held that since the
    list of statutory considerations in Part 5A is not  exhaustive,  having
    regard to  the  words  in  parenthesis  in  section  117A  (2)  -  "(in
    particular)" - factors such as an affected child's  age,  vulnerability
    and other personal  circumstances  may  in  principle  be  legitimately
    considered. Factors of this kind are clearly capable, in principle,  of
    counter balancing the ascription  of  little  weight  to  private  life
    developed during periods of precarious or unlawful immigration  status.
    In this way the apparently blunt impact of section 117B(4) and (5)  can
    be softened in an appropriate case.

 8. What is the relationship  between  section  117B(4)  and  (5)  and  the
    uncompromising  policy  statement  resting  at  the  apex  of  the  new
    statutory regime? Section 117B(1) provides:

    "The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is  in  the  public
         interest."

This statement of the public interest previously belonged to  the  realm  of
    Government policy.  It has now been given statutory effect.  While this
    has occurred in an Article 8 ECHR context, this public  interest,  with
    its various ingredients, clearly applies to every  case  in  which  any
    question of immigration control arises. I consider the correct analysis
    to be that in the new Part 5A regime, Parliament has clearly  expressed
    the view that the efficacy of immigration controls would be  undermined
    if a private life formed or developed during  periods  of  unlawful  or
    precarious residence in the United Kingdom  were  to  attract  anything
    other than little weight. Section 117B(4) and (5) are to be  viewed  in
    this light.

 9. The phrase "little weight" is unsophisticated, perhaps deceptively  so.
    It invites reflection. It does not denote an  absolute  measurement  or
    concept.  While the  intention  underlying  these  statutory  words  is
    evident, "little weight" is  not  to  be  confused  with  "no  weight".
    Furthermore, I consider that the  measurement  of  "little  weight"  is
    unlikely to be the same in every case.  It will, rather, vary according
    to the particular context. Thus there is a spectrum  the  existence  of
    which may not be entirely obvious at first glance.  In the abstract, at
    the upper end of this spectrum lie cases qualifying for the attribution
    of a quantum of weight approaching the notionally  moderate,  while  at
    the lower end there will be cases deserving of virtually no weight.

10. At this juncture, I turn to consider some of the recent Court of Appeal
    authority and, in doing so, I broaden the  analysis  somewhat.   In  NA
    Pakistan v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016]  EWCA  Civ
    662, the Court of Appeal observed at [26] that Part 5A of the 2002  Act
    -

    "... is framed in such a way  as  to  provide  a  structured  base  for
         application of and  compliance  with  Article  8,  rather  than  to
         disapply it."

     In considering the  "Exception  1"  and  "Exception  2"  provisions  in
    section 117C(4) and (5), the Court drew attention to the importance  of
    context at [31]:

         "In terms of relevance and weight for  a  proportionality  analysis
         under Article  8,  the  factors  singled  out  for  description  in
         Exceptions 1  and  2  will  apply  with  greater  or  lesser  force
         depending on the specific facts of a particular case."

11. The Part 5A library  of  jurisprudence  welcomed  its  latest  addition
    recently.  In Rhuppiah v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2016] EWCA Civ 803, the Court of Appeal examined  the  interaction  of
    section 117A(2) and section 117C.  Sales LJ observed:

    "It is possible to conceive of cases  falling  within  section  117B(4)
         (unlawful presence  in  the  UK)  or  section  117B(5)  (precarious
         immigration status in the UK) in which private or family  life  (as
         appropriate) of an especially strong kind has been  established  in
         the host country such that it should be accorded great  weight  for
         the purpose of analysis under Article 8 : Jeunesse v Netherlands is
         a prime example."

The Court acknowledged the correctness of the argument  that  Part  5A  "...
    had to be construed in such a way as to accommodate this sort of case".
    Next, the Court noted that sections 117B(1), (2) and  (3)  and  117C(1)
    have the status of Parliamentary statements of public policy which  are
    "definitive as to that aspect of the public interest": [49].  Sales  LJ
    continued:

         " But it should be noted that having regard to such  considerations
         does not mandate any particular outcome in an Article  8  balancing
         exercise: a court or tribunal has to take these considerations into
         account and give them considerable weight, as is appropriate for  a
         definitive statement by Parliament about a particular aspect of the
         public interest,  but  they  are  in  principle  capable  of  being
         outweighed by other  relevant  considerations  which  may  make  it
         disproportionate under Article 8 for an individual  to  be  removed
         from the UK."

12. The Court then turned its attentions to the "little weight"  provisions
    in section 117B.  Sales LJ  categorised  these  "normative  statements"
    which are "less definitive" than those found in  other  provisions  and
    continued at [53]:

         "Although  a  Court  or  Tribunal  should  have   regard   to   the
         consideration that little weight should be given  to  private  life
         established in such circumstances, it is possible without  violence
         to the language to say that such generalised normative guidance may
         be  overridden  in  an  exceptional  case  by  particularly  strong
         features  of  the  private  life  in  question,  where  it  is  not
         appropriate in Article 8 terms to  attach  only  little  weight  to
         private life. That is to say for  a  case  falling  within  section
         117B(5) little weight should be given to private  life  established
         in the circumstances specified, but that approach may be overridden
         where the private life in question has  a  special  and  compelling
         character. Such an interpretation  is  also  necessary  to  prevent
         section 117B(5) being applied  in  a  manner  which  would  produce
         results in some cases which would be incompatible with  Article  8,
         ie is necessary to give proper effect to Parliament's intention  in
         Part 5A;  and  a  similar  interpretation  of  section  117B(4)  is
         required, for the same reasons."

     It is necessary also to consider the following passage, in [54]:

         "In my view, reading section 117A(2) and section  117B(5)  together
         in this way, as is  appropriate,  means  that  considerable  weight
         should be  given  to  Parliament's  statement  in  section  117B(5)
         regarding the approach which should normally be adopted."

     The critical word, I venture to suggest,  is  "normally".  The  passage
    continues:

         "In order to identify an exceptional case in which a departure from
         that approach would be justified, compelling reasons would have  to
         be shown why it was not appropriate."

     Finally, Sales LJ, pointedly, distinguished  the  test  of  "compelling
    circumstances" from that of "very compelling circumstances", applicable
    in relation to foreign criminals.

 1. The effect of the analysis  which  I  have  developed  in  [25]  above,
    considered in tandem with the decision in Rhuppiah,  is  that,  through
    the medium of permissible judicial  statutory  construction,  there  is
    some  flexibility  in  the  "little  weight"  legislative  instructions
    contained in section 117B (4) and (5) of the 2002 Act.  Tribunals  must
    be  alert  to  this  in  their  conduct  of  proportionality  balancing
    exercises, in particular in considering  whether  the  factors  on  the
    public interest side of the scales outweigh those on  the  other  side,
    especially where the tribunal's assessment of a child's best  interests
    points to a course other than the removal or deportation of the  person
    or persons concerned.

 2. Next I turn to the question  of  whether  the  "sins  of  the  parents"
    principle acknowledged by the Supreme Court in both ZH  (Tanzania)  and
    Zoumbas has survived the advent of Part 5A of the 2002 Act.  I consider
    an affirmative answer appropriate for  three  reasons.   The  first  is
    that, taking into account  the  entirety  of  the  relevant  context  -
    historical, juridical and jurisprudential - within  which  there  is  a
    clearly discernible Parliamentary intention and of the  executive  (via
    the Immigration Rules) to introduce maximum prescription in  the  field
    of immigration law, the burial, or adjustment, of this principle, which
    would have been achievable by a simple drafting mechanism,  is  nowhere
    reflected  in  the  legislative  language.   The  second  is  that,  as
    emphasised in the decisions of  this  Tribunal  in  Forman  (ss  117A-C
    considerations) [2015] UKUT 00412 (IAC) and Miah (supra), the words  in
    parenthesis in Section 117A(2) - "(in particular)"  -  have  the  clear
    effect that courts and tribunals are at liberty to take  into  account,
    where material, considerations other than those enumerated in  Sections
    117B and 117C.  The third reason is that in the Part 5A regime there is
    a clearly discernible  legislative  intention  to  confer  on  children
    special levels of protection.

 3. Developing the third of these reasons,  section  117B  (6)  makes  some
    contribution to this debate. It provides:

         "In the case of a person who is  not  liable  to  deportation,  the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where-


             (a)    the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child, and


             (b)   it would not be reasonable to expect the child to  leave
                  the United Kingdom".

    Part 5A of the 2002 Act reflects the ever  increasing  prescription  in
    Article 8 cases which has become one  of  the  stand  out  features  of
    modern immigration law, in both primary legislation and the Rules.   It
    is  evident  that  both  Parliament  and  the  executive  have  focused
    intensely on the Article 8 jurisprudence in their attempts to establish
    maximum codification.  As the recent decision of the Supreme  Court  in
    Ali v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016] UKSC  60  makes
    clear, the notion  that  a  complete  Article  8  code  has  been  thus
    established is fallacious: per Lord Reed  at  [51]  -  [53]  and   Lord
    Wilson at [80].  The significance in the present context of Part 5A  of
    the 2002 Act and section 117B (6) in particular is that Parliament,  in
    enacting the new regime, focused special attention on children and,  in
    doing so, had the opportunity to make explicit provision for the weight
    to be attached to the parental immigration misconduct issue embedded in
    the seventh of the principles compromising the Zoumbas code: it did not
    do so.

 4. As the decision in Hesham Ali makes clear,  the  fundamental  task  for
    tribunals in appeals involving recourse to Article 8 of the  Convention
    is, having made appropriate findings of fact, to  identify  the  public
    interest engaged, to correctly measure its strength and, ultimately, to
    determine whether the private and family life factors advanced  by  the
    appellant outweigh the public interest to the extent that the  impugned
    decision is disproportionate.  While this is the general  approach,  in
    the particular context of deportation the public interest is especially
    potent and will be outweighed only by an Article 8 claim which is "very
    strong indeed - very compelling": per Lord Reed at [50].   Furthermore,
    in all cases the tribunal will give appropriate weight to the  decision
    maker's reasons for the proposed course of action:  per  Lord  Reed  at
    [44], reaffirming Huang v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
    [2007] UKHL 11, per Lord Bingham at [16].

 5. Given the recent vintage of the  decision  in  Hesham  Ali  and  having
    regard to the recurring challenges encountered by judges at  the  first
    tier of decision making in immigration appeals, it  is  appropriate  to
    highlight the short concurring judgment  of  Lord  Thomas  LCJ.   In  a
    welcome contribution, the Lord Chief Justice, echoing the jurisprudence
    of this Tribunal, emphasises the importance of making clear findings on
    material issues of fact.  The next requirement on Judges is to "set out
    in clear and succinct terms their reasoning", with particular reference
    to [37] - [38], [46] and [50] of  the  judgment  of  Lord  Reed.   Lord
    Thomas then advocates the adoption of  the  "balance  sheet"  approach.
    This is a self-evidently  important  stage  in  the  judicial  decision
    making. It involves  the  identification  of  the  material  facts  and
    factors belonging to the two basic sides of the equation.  This  serves
    as a timely reminder to First-tier Tribunal Judges  to  continue  doing
    what one already finds in the strongest judgments.  The  final  element
    of this exercise requires the Judge to -

     "...   set out reasoned conclusions as to whether  the  countervailing
        factors outweigh the importance attached to the public interest  in
        the deportation of foreign offenders."

 6. In the judgment of the Lord Chief Justice there are clear echoes of the
    decision  of  the   Upper   Tribunal   in   Forman   (Sections   117A-C
    considerations) ]2015] UKUT 412 (IAC), at [20]:

    "The rigid, prescriptive nature of sections 117A - 117C of the 2002 Act
         invites reflection on the topic of judgment design  and  structure.
         Where the decisions of tribunals list, explicitly and sequentially,
         each of the obligatory statutory considerations, accompanied by the
         Tribunal's evaluation and application thereof, there should  be  no
         scope for debate.  Adherence  to  this  discipline  will  have  the
         supreme merit of reducing the possibility of error of law. This  is
         illustrated in MK (section 55 - Tribunal options) [2015]  UKUT  223
         (IAC), at [41] - [43]. Furthermore,  tribunals  are  well  used  to
         having to craft their decisions in accordance with the dictates  of
         discipline and structure, in the light of decisions such as  Razgar
         v SSHD [2004] UKHL 27, at [17]. The same  exhortation  is  made  in
         relation to the Tribunal's exercise of evaluating and applying  the
         related provisions of the Immigration Rules:  see  MK,  at  [45]  -
         [49]. Fundamentally, the decision must be crafted in such a way  as
         to demonstrate that the statutory requirements have been given full
         effect."

The proposition that adherence to  these  disciplines  in  judgment  writing
    will enhance the end  product  and,  simultaneously,  comply  with  the
    principles rehearsed in MK (Duty to Give Reasons) [2013] UKUT 641 (IAC)
    is incontestable. The resulting benefits will include not  only  higher
    quality judgments.  They should, in principle, extend to  fewer  grants
    of permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal and  fewer  remittals  to
    the First-tier Tribunal.

 7. While the decision in Hesham Ali does not, of course, apply directly to
    the new Part 5A regime, its impact  in  this  particular  sphere  will,
    predictably, become clearer with  the  passage  of  time.   While  some
    adaptation may conceivably prove necessary, harmony will be  achievable
    with such calibration which may from time to  time,  in  the  light  of
    concrete cases, emerge as appropriate.

17. I finish by making brief reference to two further recent  decisions  of
    the Court of Appeal.  In MM (Uganda) v SSHD [2016]  EWCA  Civ  450  the
    Court of Appeal decided that the  application  of  the  "unduly  harsh"
    provision in Section 117C(5) of the 2002 Act involves  a  balancing  of
    the  wider  public  interests,  encompassing  all   the   circumstances
    including in particular the immigration and  criminal  history  of  the
    parent concerned.  In MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ  705.  a  different
    constitution  of  the  Court   of   Appeal   held,   with   significant
    reservations, that the effect of being bound by MM  (Uganda)  was  that
    the correct approach to Section  117B(6)  should  mirror  the  approved
    approach to Section 117C(5).  Thus the Secretary  of  State's  argument
    that Section 117B(6) does not focus exclusively on the  best  interests
    of an affected child but embraces also the public interests  prevailed.
    This argument, notably, acknowledged that  the  fact  of  seven  years'
    residence in the United Kingdom of  an  affected  child  qualifies  for
    significant weight: see [28].  Thus, the court held, at [45]:

        "... The only significance of Section 117B(6)  is  that  where  the
        seven year Rule is satisfied, it is a factor of some weight leaning
        in favour of leave to remain being granted".

    Elias LJ repeated this in [49].

18. Digressing momentarily, in EV (Philippines) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 874,
    Christopher Clarke LJ stated at [33]:

    "The best interests of the child are to be determined by  reference  to
         the child alone without reference to  the  immigration  history  or
         status of either parent."

     In MA (Pakistan), Elias LJ, having quoted this, stated:

         "Accordingly,  when   making   that   assessment,   it   would   be
         inappropriate to treat the child  as  having  a  precarious  status
         merely because that was true of the parents."

I consider that each of these statements invites a little further  analysis.
     The best interests of any affected child constitute  a  free  standing
    factor and should  properly  be  assessed  before  the  proportionality
    balancing exercise is carried out.  This exercise will be vulnerable to
    challenge if the child's best interests have not, first  and  foremost,
    been adequately and correctly assessed.   Any  issues  of  unlawful  or
    precarious immigration status or parental misconduct have  no  role  to
    play in this assessment.  Such issues do, however, arise at  the  stage
    of completing the "balance sheet" advocated  by  Lord  Thomas  (supra).
    Issues of this kind are plainly relevant and they belong to the  public
    interest side of the balancing   equation. It is at this later point in
    the exercise that they enter the stage: see [20] supra. I consider this
    analysis to be harmonious with the  formulations  of  both  Christopher
    Clarke LJ and Elias LJ.  Furthermore, this analysis is active proof  of
    the wisdom - and necessity - of the structured  approach  advocated  by
    Lord Thomas in Ali. And as Elias LJ stated in MA (Pakistan) at [57]:

         "... It is vital for the court to have  made  a  full  and  careful
         assessment of the best interests of the child before any  balancing
         exercise can be undertaken.  If that is not done, there is a danger
         that those interests will be overridden simply because  their  full
         significance has not been appreciated.  The court  must  not  treat
         the other considerations as so powerful as to assume that they must
         inevitably outweigh the child's best interests  whatever  they  may
         be, with the result that no proper assessment takes place."

     I would suggest that this passage repays careful reading in  all  cases
    where issues of this kind arise.

19. The analysis must, however, take one step further,  for  the  following
    reasons. In MA (Pakistan), at the time when the Secretary of State made
    the final decision refusing leave to remain, the two parents concerned,
    having initially resided lawfully (though precariously), in the  United
    Kingdom for some four years, had not possessed any  form  of  residence
    authorisation during the subsequent period of approximately five  years
    and their two children, both born in  the  United  Kingdom,  were  aged
    seven and four years respectively.  Referring to the  decision  of  the
    Upper Tribunal, Elias LJ  examined  the  two  grounds  of  appeal.  His
    evaluation of the first ground, at [87], was as follows:

    "The Appellants  submit  that  the  UT's  consideration  of  Article  8
         contained material errors of law. First, the UT's consideration  of
         s. 117B(6) was unlawful. Once the  judge  was  satisfied  that  the
         parents  were  not  liable  to  deportation  and  had   a   genuine
         relationship with their children, the only question was whether  it
         would not be reasonable for the child to leave the  UK.  The  judge
         answered that question by focusing on the conduct of  the  parents,
         which was an illegitimate approach. For reasons I have given  above
         at some length, the judge was adopting the proper approach  to  the
         interpretation of the section when he had regard to the conduct  of
         the parents. If that is the right test then given the dishonesty of
         these appellants, the decision to refuse leave to the children  was
         manifestly proportionate even though it was in their best interests
         to remain in the UK. This was a very careful judgment in which  all
         relevant factors were considered, and in my view the judge was well
         entitled to strike the proportionality balance as he did."

     Thus the  best  interests  of  both  children  were  considered  to  be
    lawfully outweighed by the public interest in the maintenance  of  firm
    immigration control. The court made clear that in the  particular  case
    of a "qualifying" child [see  sections  117B  (6)  (a)  and  117C  (5)]
    "strong" or "powerful" reasons are required  to  outweigh  the  child's
    best interests, as assessed: see [ ].

20. Turning to the second ground of appeal, Elias LJ stated, at [88]:

    "The second ground was this: having established that it would be in the
         children's best interest to stay in the UK,  the  judge's  findings
         are entirely contrary to the guidance in the Supreme Court case  of
         Zoumbas at para.10.7 that a "child must not be blamed  for  matters
         for which he or she is not responsible, such as the  conduct  of  a
         parent."  I  would  accept  that  the  judge  did  contradict  that
         principle when he treated the children's status as precarious,  but
         reading the judgment as a whole it is plain that  this  was  not  a
         significant element in  his  reasoning.  He  focused  on  the  very
         powerful  public  interest  in  removing  the  fathers,  and  their
         precarious status certainly was  material  to  the  proportionality
         analysis. For reasons I  have  explained  above  (paras.41-42)  the
         conduct of the parents is relevant to  their  own  situation  which
         bears upon the wider public interest and does not amount to blaming
         the children even if they may be prejudiced as a result."

I would make three observations.   First,  I  recognise  that  the  analysis
    which I have offered in [17] - [19] above  does  not  equate  precisely
    with that of Elias LJ.  However, I discern no  mutual  incompatibility.
    Second, the Court of Appeal did not consider the decision of the  Upper
    Tribunal in AM (s 117B)  Malawi  [2015]  UKUT  260  (IAC)  relating  to
    "precarious" immigration status. Where a person does not possess  leave
    to remain, the juridical reality is that their immigration  status  is,
    as a minimum, precarious and may in certain circumstances be  unlawful.
    Thus it may be that the first  instance  judge  in  MA  (Pakistan)  was
    compelled to treat the  children's  immigration  status  as  precarious
    bearing in mind the dictates of sections 117A and 117B of the 2002 Act,
    subject of course to (a) the Rhuppiah qualification  that  the  outcome
    produced  must  be  harmonious  with  Article  8  ECHR  and   (b)   the
    requirement,  highlighted  above,  that  this  factor  be  ignored   in
    assessing a child's best interests.

21. My third observation is that an  outcome  for  a  family  which  has  a
    prejudicial impact upon a child member is  not  incompatible  with  the
    seventh principle of the Zoumbas code.  Where, in any given  case,  the
    evaluation of parental immigration misconduct in the balancing exercise
    contributes to a conclusion which will involve the entire  family  unit
    departing the United Kingdom, this does not (per Elias LJ) "amount  to"
    blaming the children.  Critically - absent some other vitiating  factor
    - the assessment of the best interests of  the  children,  always  most
    aptly carried out at the beginning of the  overall  exercise,  will  be
    unassailable in law provided that the factor of parental misconduct has
    not intruded at that stage.

Conclusion

22. Ultimately, I accept the submission of  Ms  Patry  that,  properly  and
    fairly analysed, the decision of the FtT neither infringes the  seventh
    principle of the Zoumbas code nor contravenes the approach espoused  in
    MA (Pakistan).  As the passages quoted in [11] - [12] above make clear,
    the judge focused particularly on the issues of where the children  had
    been born, their lack of British citizenship,  the  strength  of  their
    ties with the United Kingdom and whether  it  would  be  reasonable  to
    expect them to  accompany  their  parents  upon  departing  the  United
    Kingdom.  There is no identifiable blemish in this approach. The burden
    of the argument underpinning the draft  amended  ground  of  appeal  is
    expressed thus in Mr Alam's written submission:

    "It is submitted that the [FtT] focused  heavily  upon  the  precarious
         immigration history of the children which in effect  penalises  the
         children for ...  their parent's behaviour."

For the reasons explained above,  I  consider  that  this  analysis  of  the
    decision of the FtT is  untenable.   In  the  judicial  exercise  being
    conducted, the principal error  of  law  to  be  avoided  was  that  of
    permitting the issue of parental misconduct to intrude at the stage  of
    assessing the children's best interests.  I consider  that  this  error
    was indeed avoided. The remainder of the  balancing  exercise,  reading
    the decision as a whole, seems to me unimpeachable.

42.  For the reasons elaborated above, I conclude that the proposed  amended
    ground of appeal has no merit.  As it possesses  a  certain  degree  of
    novelty and importance, I have considered it appropriate to address  it
    at some length.  Taking this into account, I grant permission to amend,
    bearing in mind also that this ground, if advanced originally, would in
    my estimation have been considered sufficiently arguable to warrant the
    grant of permission to appeal.





DECISION

43.  There being no error of law in the decision of the FtT, same is  hereby
    affirmed and the appeal is dismissed.








                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY
                                             PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER

                                                      Date: 21 December 2016



