
MN (Non-recognised adoptions: unlawful discrimination?) India UKAIT 00015

                       ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

                                                        Heard at: Birmingham
                                                Date of Hearing: 19 May 2006
                                      Date of promulgation: 12 February 2007
                                   Before:


 Mr C M G Ockelton, Deputy President of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
                    Designated Immigration Judge O'Malley
                          Immigration Judge R A Cox

                                   Between

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                   THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, NEW DELHI
                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the Appellant:           Mr R de Mello & Mr T Muman, both instructed by
UKIC
For the Respondent:          Mr J Singh, Home Office Presenting Officer

The law and Immigration Rules distinguishing between (i) adoptions in  those
countries whose adoptions are recognised in the  United  Kingdom  under  the
Adoption (Designation of Overseas  Adoptions)  Order  1973  and  (ii)  other
adoptions  have  a  sound   objective   basis   and   are   not   unlawfully
discriminatory under the Race Relations Act 1976  (as  amended)  or  Article
14.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is the reconsideration of the appeal of the appellant,  a  citizen
    of India, against the decision of  the  respondent  on  12  March  2004
    refusing her entry clearance to  the  United  Kingdom  as  an  adoptive
    child.

 2. The following statement  of  facts  is  adapted  from  the  Immigration
    Judge's careful determination.  The sponsor was born on  15  May  1954.
    He married in November 1976.  That marriage  was  dissolved  by  decree
    absolute on 10 April 2003.  The sponsor and his first  wife  had  lived
    apart since 2000.  There were three children of the  marriage,  all  of
    whom are now adults.  Although the  sponsor  lives  and  works  in  the
    United Kingdom he visits India on a regular basis.  His family in India
    employed a servant, who was married and who had a daughter born 19  May
    1994, who is the appellant.  Her father, the servant's husband, died on
    2 June 2002.  The servant herself did not enjoy good health but she and
    the appellant were assisted financially by the sponsor,  who  paid  her
    school fees, including the cost of boarding at a hostel linked  to  her
    school and also paid for medical attention for her mother.

 3. In about 2000 the  person  who  is  now  the  sponsor's  wife  met  the
    appellant;  the  acquaintance  deepened  after  she  met  the  sponsor.
    Sometimes the appellant came to the sponsor's present wife's house when
    her mother was ill.

 4. On  2  September  2002  there  was  a  formal  ceremony  in  which  the
    appellant's mother agreed to the sponsor adopting  the  appellant.   By
    then the sponsor had been separated from his first wife for two  years;
    he no longer had any contact with his children.  In evidence before the
    Immigration Judge, the  sponsor  said  that  from  September  2002  the
    appellant lived under his care, but at the school,  apart  from  school
    holidays when she would live in his home whenever he was in India.   By
    then the sponsor's  present  wife  had  become  more  involved  in  the
    appellant's care and would care for the appellant if the sponsor was in
    the United Kingdom.  She obtained entry clearance to the United Kingdom
    as the sponsor's fianc�e and married him in the United  Kingdom  on  15
    March 2003.  After the  marriage  she  returned  to  India  on  several
    occasions specifically to care for the appellant and  has  a  power  of
    attorney to deal with the sponsor's  affairs  in  India  including  the
    appellant's care.

 5. On 31 July 2003 the sponsor and his present  wife  executed  an  Indian
    adoption deed showing them to be the  joint  adoptive  parents  of  the
    appellant.  The appellant's mother also signed  the  deed  and  it  was
    subsequently registered  with  the  court  in  Ludhina,  which  is  the
    sponsor's and the appellant's home.  On 4 April  2004  the  appellant's
    mother died.

 6. The present application had been made  on  12  January  2004.   It  was
    refused, as we have said, on 12 March 2004.   The  appellant  appealed.
    The Explanatory Statement was prepared on 24 February 2005.

 7. Following a concession made in the Explanatory Statement,  the  reasons
    for the respondent's refusal of the application stand as follows:

        "I am not satisfied that the adoption  was  in  accordance  with  a
        decision taken by the competent administrative authority  or  court
        in the child's country of origin;
        I am not satisfied that the child has lost or broken ties with  her
        family or origin;
        I am further not  satisfied  that  the  adoption  was  not  one  of
        convenience arranged to facilitate the  child's  admission  to  the
        United Kingdom."

 8. Those reasons have to be read in the context of the fact that India  is
    not a country whose  adoption  orders  are  recognised  in  the  United
    Kingdom, a matter which we  discuss  further  below.   It  is  in  that
    context also that the Explanatory Statement has to be read, directed as
    it is largely to considering whether the requirements of paragraph 309A
    of the Immigration Rules (de  facto  adoption)  could  be  met  in  the
    appellant's case.

 9. The Immigration Judge found as a fact on the evidence before  her  that
    the sponsor and his wife had complied with the requirements  of  Indian
    law and that their adoption of the appellant was valid in  India.   She
    found that at the date of the decision the appellant's  mother  was  in
    ill health and that her death or complete inability to continue to care
    for the  appellant  was  reasonably  foreseeable  at  that  date.   The
    evidence before her indicated that the sponsor and his present wife had
    gone to great lengths to ensure the  appellant's  happiness  and  well-
    being and had recently spent a  holiday  with  her  in  Thailand.   The
    Immigration Judge found that paragraphs 310(ix), (x) and (xi) were met.
     She dismissed the appeal because the appellant  had  been  subject  to
    neither an adoption recognised in the United Kingdom,  as  required  by
    paragraph 310(vi), nor a de facto adoption  as  required  by  paragraph
    309A.

10. The Immigration Judge also considered arguments put  before  her  under
    Article 8 of the European Convention on  Human  Rights,  on  which  she
    wrote as follows:

        "I am satisfied that [the appellant] has established the start of a
        family life with both the sponsor and with [his wife] but  that  to
        interfere with those rights in all the circumstances of  this  case
        would not be disproportionate.  [The appellant] has not lived  with
        her adoptive parents on a full-time basis  and  they  have  already
        demonstrated their willingness and ability to make arrangements for
        her care and education in India.  There is nothing to  prevent  the
        adoptive parents from making a formal  application  to  adopt  [the
        appellant] in the United Kingdom by firstly  having  a  home  study
        report completed.  If they choose to follow this path they are free
        to refer to the positive findings in this determination  which  has
        failed for technical reasons.  On this basis  I  cannot  find  that
        [the appellant's] circumstances are 'truly exceptional'."

11. The Immigration Judge accordingly dismissed the appeal.  The "technical
    reasons" to which she refers in the paragraph we have  cited,  are,  of
    course, the fact that the appellant did not meet  the  requirements  of
    the Immigration Rules.

12. Reconsideration was sought on the grounds that  the  Immigration  Rules
    should be read down in order to regard the sponsor and his wife as  the
    appellant's parents for these purposes; that the refusal  to  recognise
    an Indian adoption  is  discriminatory  under  Article  14  taken  with
    Article 8; that the Immigration Judge erred in  failing  to  "import  a
    degree of flexibility" to the requirements of paragraph 309A; that  the
    refusal  of  the  appellant's  application  was  a  matter  of   racial
    discrimination; that in that context the Entry  Clearance  Officer  had
    power under the Prerogative to depart  from  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules; and that the Immigration  Judge  had  erred  in  her
    assessment of  Article  8.1  [sic]  and  had  contradicted  herself  in
    "recommending that the appellant's adoptive parents seek a 'home  study
    report'  and  make  a  formal  application  in  the  UK  to  adopt  the
    appellant".  Reconsideration was  ordered  on  all  those  grounds.   A
    further issue became apparent during the hearing, relating  to  the  UK
    government's published information on those seeking  to  bring  adopted
    children and children for adoption to the  United  Kingdom.   We  heard
    submissions from both parties at the hearing; subsequent to the hearing
    the respondent forwarded copies of some of the material provided by the
    Secretary of State,  and  the  appellants  responded  in  writing  with
    further submissions.  No further submissions have  been  received  from
    the respondent.

13. We do not need to set out  the  relevant  Immigration  Rules  in  full.
    Paragraph 310 provides for the admission of a  child  who  has  already
    been adopted, provided that the  adoption  is  one  recognised  in  the
    United Kingdom.  The appellant's Indian adoption is not  recognised  in
    the United Kingdom, so she cannot meet the  requirements  of  paragraph
    310.  It is the lack of recognition of her adoption which  is  in  some
    respects at the heart of her case  before  us.   Paragraph  309A  makes
    provision for those who have lived as part of a family abroad.   As  we
    remarked at the hearing, paragraph 309A is  probably  not  intended  to
    facilitate the entry of children by themselves: it is probably intended
    to ensure that, if a number of members of the family are to come to the
    United Kingdom together, a child who has been living as a child of  the
    family with the parents for some time  is  not  left  behind.   In  the
    appellant's most recent submissions it is acknowledged  on  her  behalf
    that she did not meet the requirements of  paragraph  309A.   Paragraph
    316A sets out the requirements to be satisfied in the case of  a  child
    seeking to enter the United Kingdom for the purpose of  being  adopted.
    One of the requirements is that the child:

      "(vii)     will be adopted in the United Kingdom by  his  prospective
               parent or parents in accordance with  the  law  relating  to
               adoption in the United Kingdom, but the proposed adoption is
               not one of convenience to facilitate his  admission  to  the
               United Kingdom."

14. Thus, a child who has been through a process that would  be  recognised
    in law in the United Kingdom as adoption may enter under paragraph 310,
    a child who has lived abroad as part  of  a  family  for  a  sufficient
    length of time may be admitted under paragraph 309A; and  a  child  who
    falls within neither of those categories can be admitted for  adoption.
    In the last case, however, the adoption has to be  in  accordance  with
    United Kingdom law, which requires a number of investigations, of which
    the production of a "home study report" forms part.

15. The submissions made on behalf of the appellant before us go in part to
    questions relating to discrimination and in part to questions  relating
    to Article 8.  Before considering them in any detail,  we  must  remind
    ourselves of the relationship between adoption and immigration, and  of
    the relationship between the various provisions to which  reference  is
    here made.  Nothing that was said in the present appeal  causes  us  to
    doubt what we said in SK ("Adoption" not recognised in UK) India [2006]
    UKAIT 0068, as follows:

      "19.  ... The rules  relating  to  adoption  cannot  be  governed  by
             considerations  of  immigration  law.  Indeed,  the  rules   of
             adoption are no more part of immigration law than the rules  of
             nature relating to the  generation  of  children  are  part  of
             immigration law. They are merely part of the background to  the
             law of status.


      ...


      21.   Adoption appears to be regulated everywhere.  The  greater  the
             effects of the adoption, the more likely the regulation  is  to
             be intense. In English law, as in  many  other  countries,  the
             legal consequences of adoption are very substantial,  affecting
             status, marriage, succession and social security benefits.  Any
             country asked to attribute  legal  consequences  to  a  private
             arrangement is entitled to enquire into the  process  of  their
             acquisition, simply because the arrangement is not  a  natural,
             but purely a legal process.




      22.   There is no jus gentium or natural law right  to  adopt  or  be
             adopted, and no jus gentium or natural law right  to  have  the
             rights which in a particular state accrue from adoption.  There
             can be no "human right" to enjoy in any  particular  state  the
             consequences of adoption, unless the adoption is one recognised
             as such in that state.




      23.   [The] argument that the Immigration Rules and other  provisions
             relating to immigration law should be read as if they permitted
             an  Indian  adoption  to  be  recognised  as  an  adoption  for
             immigration purposes would not necessarily  do  applicants  any
             favours,  precisely  because  adoption  is  not  a  matter   of
             immigration  law  and  has  effects  which   go   well   beyond
             immigration law. As the title of the Adoption  (Designation  of
             Overseas Adoptions) Order 1973 indicates, it is not legislation
             about immigration: it is legislation about adoption.  If  [the]
             arguments were to be accepted, and the  appellant  were  to  be
             granted a visa as the adopted child of the sponsors, she  would
             have her visa, and would no doubt  be  granted  admission:  but
             that would not be sufficient to make her the adopted  child  of
             the sponsors. On arrival she would  not  be  treated  as  their
             child, because India is not a designated country. Although  she
             had obtained her visa, she would be the sponsors' child for  no
             other purposes unless and until they  adopted  her  in  a  form
             recognised  in  English  law.  The  Immigration  Rules   cannot
             properly be segregated from the general law for the purpose  of
             attack on  their  rules  on  adoption:  on  the  contrary,  the
             Immigration Rules are, so far as we  can  see,  constructed  in
             such a way as to be consistent with the  rest  of  English  and
             United Kingdom law on the effects of overseas  adoptions.  They
             need to be coherent, because  otherwise  the  person  might  be
             treated as a child of the family for immigration  law  purposes
             but not otherwise; or  vice  versa.  [It  is  asserted  on  the
             appellant's  behalf]  that  there  is  no  rational  basis  for
             treating India differently from the countries that are  on  the
             list of designated  countries:  he  provided  no  arguments  in
             support of that assertion. As we understand it, the position in
             India, Pakistan and Bangladesh is that adoption is regarded  as
             a private arrangement between families, with no public  effects
             or need for public scrutiny. In the absence of evidence we  can
             take no firm view on the issue, but  we  incline  to  the  view
             that, if that is so, it would be a proper reason for  exclusion
             from designation.


        24.      It follows from what we have said  above  that  nobody  is
             entitled to say that  an  adoption  is  entitled  to  worldwide
             recognition in each individual state simply because  it  is  an
             adoption recognised by the laws of  some  other  state  or  the
             customs of some other culture. As the effects of adoption  vary
             from state to state, there is nothing surprising, or wrong,  or
             disproportionate,  or  irrational  in  saying  that  the  legal
             requirements for adoption in the state in which the adoption is
             asserted must be met before the  adoption  will  be  recognised
             there. Nobody is entitled to  say  "I  have  adopted  (or  been
             adopted) according to my rules; therefore you  are  obliged  to
             recognise the adoption as entirely  valid  under  your  rules".
             Unless an Indian adoption can be found to  be  subject  to  the
             same requirements and the same intentions, and to have the same
             effects as an adoption  in  the  United  Kingdom,  there  would
             appear to be no reason why it should be treated  as  though  it
             were a United Kingdom adoption. And if it is not to be  treated
             in general as a United Kingdom adoption, there is no reason why
             it should be treated as  a  United  Kingdom  adoption  for  the
             purposes of the Immigration Rules. The truth of the  matter  is
             that adoption means different things  in  different  countries.
             The fact that the same word is used  does  not  mean  that  the
             effects are, or ought to be, the same.

        25.      Paragraph 316A ... is the complement to paragraph 310. ...
             The limited leave obtained under that paragraph can mature into
             indefinite leave to remain under paragraph 311 in  due  course.
             The purpose of paragraph 316A is in part to make provision  for
             claimants  coming  from  countries  whose  adoptions  are   not
             recognised in the United Kingdom. Paragraph 316A  enables  such
             individuals to be brought to the United Kingdom with a view  to
             being adopted according to United Kingdom law. The requirements
             are more onerous than those of paragraph 310 appear  to  be  on
             their face: but there is no reason at all to suppose  that  the
             requirements for  securing  an  adoption  in  a  country  whose
             adoptions are recognised by the United Kingdom are in substance
             more onerous than those for securing an adoption in the  United
             Kingdom. Paragraph 316A was introduced on 2  October  2000,  no
             doubt in the light of the coming into force of the Human Rights
             Act 1998 on that day; but it has subsequently been  amended  in
             order to comply with The  Hague  Convention  on  Protection  of
             Children and Cooperation in Respect of Inter-Country  Adoption,
             to which both the United Kingdom and India are parties.


        26.      If the effect of the Immigration Rules'  incorporation  of
             the Adoption (Designation of Overseas Adoptions) Order had been
             that a person from a country not designated in that  Order  had
             no access to adoption recognised in the United Kingdom (because
             an adoption in his own country would not have  effect  as  such
             for any United Kingdom purpose) that would be a serious matter.
             ...  the Immigration Rules were described as "hopeless" in that
             they offered nothing to the claimants, who in  that  case  were
             from  Pakistan.  The  Immigration  Rules  have,  however,  been
             amended a number of times since the decision in Re  J.  One  of
             the amendments is the introduction of paragraph  316A.  It  may
             well be that paragraph 310 taken on its  own  would  offer  the
             appellant nothing: but there is no reason to  take  it  on  its
             own. The Immigration Rules must be seen as a whole."

16. The considerations we set out there must provide a context and starting
    point for our response to the arguments put to us  on  the  appellant's
    behalf in this appeal.  If the appellant comes to the  United  Kingdom,
    it will not be as the adopted child of the sponsor and his  wife.   She
    is (unlike the appellant in SK) not related  by  blood  to  either  the
    sponsor or his wife.  She is not in English law their daughter and  she
    would not become  their  daughter  by  being  admitted  to  the  United
    Kingdom.  We cannot properly be  asked  to  interpret  the  Immigration
    Rules in order to provide a  route  to  adoption  without  any  of  the
    safeguards provided either by adoption in  the  United  Kingdom  or  by
    adoption in one of the countries specified in the Adoption (Designation
    of Overseas  Adoptions)  Order,  which  operate  adoption  legislation,
    procedures and social work practices  to  standards  similar  to  those
    operated in the United Kingdom.

17. Two arguments based on discrimination are advanced  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant.  Each of them can succeed only if there is no  justification
    for the alleged differentiation.  It is not entirely easy to  see  what
    that differentiation is in the argument based on Article  14.   Looking
    at the Immigration Rules as a whole, there is ample provision  for  the
    adoption of the appellant in a manner appropriate  for  protecting  her
    rights as a child whose interests and whose protection  ought  to  take
    precedence in any such arrangement.  The argument  based  on  the  Race
    Relations Act 1976 as  amended  focuses  on  an  allegation  of  direct
    discrimination against the appellant as a person of Indian nationality.
     It does not seem to us that that  is  quite  accurate.   There  is  no
    direct discrimination  against  Indians.   The  discrimination,  if  it
    exists, is in relation to Indian  adoptions.   It  would  therefore  be
    indirect discrimination: a person of Indian nationality finds  if  more
    difficult to fulfil the rules as to adoption  which  apply  equally  to
    everybody.

18. Neither of the discrimination arguments can succeed if there is a sound
    objective basis for the difference in  treatment.   The  difference  in
    treatment, we remind ourselves, is not a difference between  people  of
    different nationalities who are adopted in what is broadly speaking the
    same mode: it is between people who  have  been  subject  to  different
    legal processes, who happen to be of different nationality.

19. It is in our view difficult to imagine an area of law where it is  more
    obviously right to treat personal choices with the greatest of caution,
    and to impose legal restrictions on  them,  than  in  relation  to  the
    passage of children from the care and control of one adult to  another.
    That, with the greatest respect to the way in which  complex  arguments
    were put to us, is a complete answer to them.  We are not dealing  here
    with  an  unjustifiable  discrimination  between   the   treatment   of
    comparable individuals: we are dealing instead with  individuals  whose
    status is not comparable, and who are therefore  treated  in  different
    ways for a reason which is  obviously  justifiable  on  any  ground  of
    public policy.  We do not need to consider  whether  the  Secretary  of
    State or the Entry Clearance Officer has a statutory defence to a claim
    of racial discrimination, for there is no racial  discrimination.   The
    appellant is treated differently from a person who  was  adopted  in  a
    country whose adoptions are recognised in the United  Kingdom  because,
    for very good reasons, United Kingdom law does not regard her as having
    acquired the status of the sponsor's daughter.  She is  at  liberty  to
    acquire that status by an  adoption  in  a  country  which  treats  the
    process of adoption in a manner comparable  to  that  in  which  it  is
    treated  in  the  United  Kingdom,  and  whose  adoption   orders   are
    accordingly recognised here.  She is not at  liberty  to  acquire  that
    status in any other way, and the refusal to allow her to do so  is  not
    unlawful discrimination.

20. That is sufficient to deal with the matters raised in the  grounds  for
    reconsideration.  As we said earlier, an additional  point  emerged  at
    the hearing.  The Presenting Officer referred to Home  Office  guidance
    which, he submitted, ought to have drawn the sponsor's attention to the
    fact that there was no realistic prospect of the appellant's  admission
    to the United Kingdom as his daughter on the basis of the process which
    she had undergone.  Certain government documents were forwarded  to  us
    after the hearing.  One is a Home Office  leaflet,  effective  from  16
    April 2004, headed "Inter-Country Adoption and the Immigration  Rules".
    The other is an odd collection of five pages apparently emanating  from
    the DfES, headed "The Intercountry Adoption Procedures".  Although  the
    text runs seamlessly from page to page, page 1 is described as "page  1
    of 5, March 2005", page 2 is "page 2 of 4, First Revision  June  1999",
    and the other pages are pages 3, 4  and  5  of  5,  dated  March  2002.
    Further, page 2 is headed with the logo of the  Department  of  Health,
    whereas the  other  pages  have  that  of  the  DfES.   The  additional
    submissions on behalf of  the  appellant  are  not  directed  to  those
    documents specifically, but instead make reference to  the  Immigration
    Directorate's Instructions of September 2001 and September 2004.   They
    assert that "the ECO was required to  inform"  the  appellant  and  the
    intending  adopters  of  the  need  to  comply  with  the   documentary
    requirements set out  in  what  is  described  as  "Section  8  of  the
    Intercountry Adoption Procedures submitted by the HOPO".   It  is  said
    that the Entry Clearance Officer's failure to pass Home Office leaflets
    to the appellant or the sponsor or to draw their attention to the  need
    to show that they could and would  comply  with  the  requirements  for
    adoption in the United Kingdom is a circumstance rendering the  present
    case exceptional.  It is pointed out that ss56 and 56A of the  Adoption
    Act 1976 impose criminal penalties on those bringing  children  to  the
    United Kingdom for adoption; those penalties do not apply if the  child
    is being brought  to  the  United  Kingdom  with  a  view  to  adoption
    recognised by the Hague Convention and it is submitted that the failure
    to enable the parties to prepare properly for such an eventuality is an
    additional argument in the appellant's favour under Article 8.

21. We reject the submissions based on the Home Office and DfES  documents.
    There is no reason at all to suppose that the appellant and the sponsor
    have not had the benefit of proper legal advice from  an  early  stage.
    The Immigration Judge refers to, and accepts, a legal opinion given  by
    an Indian lawyer.  Whilst of course it could not be  assumed  that  the
    Indian lawyer was an expert on the United Kingdom law of  adoption,  it
    is clear that the sponsor and his wife were prepared to involve lawyers
    in their affairs and no doubt pay for them.  Nobody  could  conceivably
    imagine that bringing somebody else's child to the  United  Kingdom  on
    the basis of an adoption  purportedly  undertaken  abroad  would  be  a
    simple matter.  It was for the appellant (or,  more  realistically  the
    sponsor) to inform herself or himself about the law.  It  was  not  the
    Entry Clearance Officer's duty to advise either the  appellant  or  the
    sponsor.  Certainly the Entry Clearance  Officer  could  have  no  duty
    imposed on him by the Immigration Directorate's Instructions, which  do
    not apply to Entry Clearance Officers, but to Immigration Officers.  In
    any event, the sponsor's most recent witness statement  indicates  that
    he would have great difficulty in  paying  for  a  home  study  report.
    There is no suggestion that he has been more able  to  afford  such  an
    expense at any time since the date  of  the  decision.    There  is  no
    indication in that witness statement that the sponsor was able to  meet
    the other requirements for adopting a child in the United  Kingdom,  at
    the  date  of  the  application,  at  the  date  of  the  decision,  or
    subsequently.  Even if there were such a duty on  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer as is alleged, therefore, the appellant and the sponsor are not
    shown to have suffered in any way  by  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer's
    failure to advise them of the terms of paragraph 316A.

22. What then of the appellant's Article 8 argument?  In order to show that
    she should be admitted despite the terms of the Immigration Rules,  she
    needs to show that her case is truly exceptional.  We accept  that  the
    Immigration Judge may have assumed too casually that  the  sponsor  and
    his wife could realistically live with  the  appellant  in  India:  but
    there is no doubt at all that they have been able to make  satisfactory
    arrangements for her whilst being  based  in  the  United  Kingdom  and
    visiting her from time to time.   That  was  sufficient  when  she  was
    younger: it is difficult to see  that  it  would  not  also  have  been
    sufficient at the date of the decision (and even more so today).   That
    the appellant meets some of the requirements of paragraph 310 is not  a
    truly exceptional circumstance.  We have rejected the  arguments  based
    on the allegation that the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  failed  to  give
    advice  that  he  should  have  given.   There   is   no   element   of
    discrimination that could count in the appellant's favour under Article
    8.  The lapse of time since the appellant's application was made is  no
    doubt regrettable, but it cannot of itself show that, at  the  date  of
    the decision, she should have been granted  entry  clearance.   Against
    anything that could be said on the appellant's behalf under Article  8,
    however, we have to accept the fact that if  she  were  admitted  there
    could be no assurance that she would be allowed to live as part of  the
    sponsor's family, until he had satisfied the United Kingdom authorities
    that he was a proper  person  to  adopt  her.   As  we  understand  his
    position, he was not at the date of the decision and has never been  in
    a position to do so.

23. Looking at the matter as a whole as we do we are unable to say that the
    appellant's circumstances are such that the refusal to allow her  entry
    clearance to the United Kingdom is a disproportionate interference with
    the rights she has as a person who in India,  but  not  in  the  United
    Kingdom, is regarded as the daughter of the  sponsor  resident  in  the
    United Kingdom.

24. For the foregoing reasons we consider that the Immigration  Judge  made
    no material error of law.   We  accordingly  affirm  her  determination
    dismissing this appeal.





                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT
                                                             Date:
