
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Chin and Another (former BOC/Malaysian national - deportation) [2017] UKUT
00015 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision Promulgated          |
|On 22 December 2016                          |On 8 May 2017                 |
|                                             |                              |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                THE PRESIDENT, THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY

                                   Between

                              mr soo thoon Chin
                              mrs mei poh teng
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent




Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr G Davison, of counsel, instructed by The Chancery
Partnership
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


The deportation of a former Malaysian national and former BOC is  liable  to
be deemed unlawful where relevant Government  Policies  relating  to  inter-
state arrangements with Malaysia have not been taken into account  or  given
effect.

                                  DECISION

Introduction

 1. In the case management directions of Upper Tribunal Judge  Bruce  dated
    13 September 2016 one  finds  the  following  useful  synopsis  of  the
    framework of this appeal:

         "The first Appellant Mr Chin resists his  deportation  to  Malaysia
         inter alia on the grounds  that  he  is  not  a  national  of  that
         country.  He asserts that he is stateless.  The second Appellant is
         party to these  proceedings  as  she  is  the  wife  of  the  first
         Appellant who faces deportation as his family member".

    In the various decisions and notices  generated  by  the  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department ("the Secretary of State") Mr Chin's date
    of birth is stated to be 12 April 1962 (now aged 54 years)  and  he  is
    described as a "British Overseas Citizen" ("BOC").  Mr Chin is  married
    to the second Appellant, Mrs Teng.

 2. Both the underlying decision making process of the Secretary  of  State
    and the progress of  these  appeals  have  been  regrettably  sluggish.
    There are notices and decisions dating from November 2010.  Quite how a
    period of six years has been permitted to elapse  since  then,  without
    finality, is unclear.  The gravest period of individual delay began  on
    25 November 2010, when the Secretary of State wrote to Mr Chin inviting
    his representations against deportation from the United Kingdom and  16
    January 2014 when, by a further letter,  Mr  Chin  was  notified  of  a
    further decision that Section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007 applies.
     This generated a right of appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal  ("FtT")
    which Mr Chin duly exercised.

Chronology

 3. The following are the main milestones in Mr Chin's immigration history:

      a) He resided lawfully in the United Kingdom between February and June
         2001.

      b) In August 2002 he was admitted to the United Kingdom as  a  visitor
         for a sojourn of six months.   His  wife  had  entered  the  United
         Kingdom two days previously with a visitor's  visa  valid  for  six
         months.

      c) In November 2004 the couple's two children (both now of adult  age)
         were granted leave to enter as visitors for six months.

      d) On 18 July 2005 Mr Chin was granted a BOC passport with a period of
         validity expiring ten years later.

      e) The two children and Mrs Teng  resided  unlawfully  in  the  United
         Kingdom from May 2005 and March 2006 respectively.

      f) In December 2004 Mr Chin's solicitors submitted an application  for
         indefinite leave to remain in his behalf and, in April  2006,  they
         included his spouse  and  two  children,  as  dependants,  in  this
         application.

      g) On 23 November 2006 Mr Chin relinquished his Malaysian nationality.

      h) The aforementioned application was refused in June 2007  and  Forms
         IS/151A were prepared  in  respect  of  all  four  persons  -  but,
         evidently, not served.  A period of three years inertia followed.

 4. At this point in the tale  Mr  Chin  acquired  a  significant  criminal
    record.  On 17 June 2017 he was convicted upon  indictment  of  customs
    and excise offences and, on 01 September  2010,  was  sentenced  to  30
    months' imprisonment.  Next, on 25 November 2010, Mr Chin  was  invited
    via the usual form  of  notice  to  make  representations  against  his
    possible deportation.  This was followed by a  reconsideration  of  the
    indefinite  leave  to  remain  on  compassionate  grounds  application,
    yielding a further refusal decision based on Mr Chin's offending, under
    Rule 322(5A).

The Secretary of State's Decision

 5. Following yet another hiatus a formal Home Office  notice  of  decision
    dated 16 January 2014 was served on Mr Chin.  This identified him as  a
    "BOC".  In the text it  is  noted  that  deportation  action  is  being
    pursued against Mrs Teng.  Their case was considered under the  Article
    8 ECHR regime of the Rules, yielding the  conclusion  that  neither  of
    them satisfied the relevant Rules requirements or succeeded  under  the
    rubric of  "exceptional  circumstances".   The  overarching  conclusion
    expressed was that the public  interest  in  their  deportation  should
    prevail.  Deportation was based on the "conducive to the  public  good"
    ground.

Appeal to the FtT

 6. By its decision dated 10 April 2014 the  FtT  allowed  the  Appellants'
    appeals.  This brief decision contains no consideration  whatsoever  of
    the legal issues or the merits generally.  While the judge professed to
    find that the Secretary of State's decision was "not in accordance with
    the law", and appeared to remit the case to the Secretary of State  for
    s fresh decision, the sole basis for the tribunal's decision  was  that
    the  Secretary  of  State  had  failed  to  comply  with  earlier  case
    management directions.  On 04 June 2014 the  Upper  Tribunal  set  this
    decision aside and remitted the appeals for a fresh decision by FtT.

 7. This gave rise to a further decision of the FtT, dated 23 January 2015.
     The FtT decided as follows:

      a) Mr Chin was a "foreign criminal" within the meaning of the 2007 Act
         notwithstanding his BOC status.

      b) Mr Chin relinquished his Malaysian nationality on 23 November 2006.



      c) Mr Chin is not stateless: this part of the judgment  is  unreasoned
         and is followed by a long quotation from the Home Office Policy  on
         BOCs,  which  is  left  in  limbo  without  further   analysis   or
         consideration or findings.

      d) The deportation decisions were harmonious with the Article 8 regime
         of the Rules.

      e) Returning to the Home Office Policy in the penultimate  section  of
         the judgment, the Tribunal noted the  following  four  matters:  Mr
         Chin had never presented a letter from  the  Malaysian  authorities
         indicating that he could not be returned to Malaysia;  he  had  not
         applied for a visa to enter Malaysia; he  has  never  attempted  to
         enter Malaysia voluntarily; and, finally, the Malaysian  government
         has provided written confirmation to the United Kingdom  government
         that BOCs who  have  renounced  their  citizenship  can  return  to
         Malaysia and begin steps to re-acquire their Malaysian  nationality
         -  and,  specifically,  could  apply  for  a  five  year  residence
         authorisation, designed to lead to citizenship, before leaving  the
         United Kingdom.

    The appeal was dismissed accordingly.

Appeal to this Tribunal

 8. By  order  of  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Blum  dated  08  September  2015
    permission to appeal was granted in the following terms:

         "It is arguable that the [FtT] failed to consider  the  possibility
         that a BOC may also be a stateless person and the legal impact that
         statelessness may have on an automatic deportation".

    Regrettably, the appeal has progressed laboriously  through  the  Upper
    Tribunal system.  Having been listed  speedily,  at  a  hearing  on  03
    November 2015 this Tribunal, in the light of certain  submissions  made
    on  the  Appellants'  behalf,  adjourned  the  appeal  to  enable   the
    Appellants to make an application to the Secretary of State.  As  noted
    in our ruling dated 04 November 2015, the Secretary of  State  has  not
    made any statelessness decision in  the  history  of  this  case.   The
    ruling stated:

         "If the first Appellant considers  that  he  is  entitled  to  this
         status, he  should  make  the  appropriate  application  under  the
         relevant regime of the Immigration Rules (paragraphs 401 - 403)."

     The hearing of the appeal was adjourned accordingly.

 9. The Appellants' representatives  delayed  in  making  this  application
    until 21 June  2016.   This  elicited  a  decision  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State,  dated  21  July  2016,  refusing  the  Appellants'
    application under paragraph 322(1B) of the Rules viz on the ground that
    he is the subject of a deportation  order.  Evidentially,  the  precise
    nature of the application made to the Secretary of  State  is  unclear.
    However, what is clear is that the ensuing decision did not address the
    issue of statelessness at all. Given the appeal history, this was quite
    remarkable. This was followed by a case management review  held  on  13
    September 2016 and, ultimately,  the  hearing  of  this  appeal  on  22
    December 2016.

Two Significant Pieces of Evidence

10. It is convenient at this juncture to highlight  at  this  juncture  two
    noteworthy pieces of evidence.  The first is a  letter  dated  13  July
    2015 from the High Commission of Malaysia.  This describes Mr Chin as a
    BOC and indicates that he was born in  Penang,  Malaysia  on  12  April
    1962.  The text continues:

         "... the above-named is no longer a citizen of  Malaysia  from  the
         date stated on Borang K registered  0000106146  at  Malaysian  High
         Commission on 23 November 2006.  Therefore, he is not  eligible  to
         apply for a Malaysian passport".

    There is also a formal UKBA document  (IS.151FCD),  dated  23  November
    2011, stating:

         "We have applied to obtain an Emergency Travel Document (ETD)  from
         the Malaysian authorities.  Once this is obtained you will be  made
         a subject of a deportation order and will  be  removable  when  all
         your appeal rights are exhausted".

    It is common case that no ETD has been issued in respect of Mr Chin.

The Issues Considered

11. This Tribunal had occasion to review the law on statelessness in R  (on
    the application of Semeda) v Secretary of State for the Home Department
    (statelessness; Pham [2015] UKSC 19  applied)  (IJR)  [2015]  UKUT  658
    (IAC). Its decision drew  attention  to   the  test  for  statelessness
    enshrined in Article 1(1) of the United Nations Convention relating  to
    the Status of Stateless Persons (the "1954  Convention")  namely  where
    the person concerned is not considered to be a national  by  any  state
    under the operation of its law: see [13].  This Tribunal  observed,  at
    [14]:

        "It is no coincidence that statelessness was made the subject of an
        international  treaty  during   the   same   era   when   elaborate
        international provision was made for refugees. Statelessness, as  a
        matter of law, denotes the lack  of  any  nationality.  While  some
        stateless persons are also refugees, not all asylum  claimants  are
        stateless and not all stateless persons are refugees. Statelessness
        is a global  phenomenon  which  has  multiple  causes.  It  invites
        reflection on the two conventional mechanisms  whereby  nationality
        is acquired, namely (a) through birth on the territory of  a  state
        (jus soli) and (b) from  birth  through  descent  (jus  sanguinis).
        Statelessness is addressed not only in the 1954 Convention but also
        in the Convention on the Reduction  of  Statelessness  (1961),  the
        American Convention on Human Rights, the  African  Charter  on  the
        Rights and Welfare of the Child  and  the  European  Convention  on
        Nationality."




    At [16] this Tribunal stated:


         "At a practical level, the question of whether  the  definition  of
         statelessness is satisfied will frequently require an assessment of
         whether the person concerned possesses or has access to a document,
         such as a  passport  or  a  national  identity  card  or  something
         kindred, which denotes that the individual is recognised by one  of
         the states of the world as one of its  nationals.  This  will  form
         part of the enquiry, assessment and decision in the  generality  of
         cases of this kind. Furthermore, it is appropriate to observe  that
         most  cases  are  likely  to  involve  a  significant  measure   of
         evaluative assessment, to be contrasted with stark fact finding, on
         the part of the decision making official."




    Account was also taken of the decision of the Supreme Court in  Pham  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015] UKSC 19 that in  some
    cases the practice, as well as the laws, of the government of a foreign
    state may have to be considered: see per Lord Carnwath at [38].

12.  Some  reflection  on  the  broader  international   law   context   is
    instructive.  Nationality provides the link between  a  state  and  its
    people.  It is a status to which a person can lay claim only under  the
    relevant laws of the state concerned.  Once  acquired,  the  status  of
    nationality confers benefits and imposes  duties.  In  the  Nationality
    Decrees in Tunis and Morocco case [PCIJ, Series B, Number 4  1923]  the
    International Court of Justice was requested  by  the  Council  of  the
    League of Nations to provide an advisory opinion in a  dispute  between
    Britain and France over French nationality decrees which had the effect
    of giving  French  nationality  to  the  children  of  certain  British
    subjects.  The Court declared (at page 24) that -

         "....  The question of whether a certain matter is or is not solely
         within the jurisdiction of  a  state  is  an  essentially  relative
         question,  it  depends  upon  the  development   of   international
         relations.  Thus,  in  the  present  state  of  international  law,
         questions of nationality are, in the  opinion  of  this  Court,  in
         principle within this reserved domain."

  13. This principle was stated even more emphatically by  the  ICJ  in  the
      Nottebohn case (ICJ Reports 1955, at 4 and 23).  It  was  restated  in
      Article 1 of the Hague Convention on the Conflict of Nationality  Laws
      (1930):

         "It is for each state to determine under its own law who  are  its
    nationals."

     As  the  next  succeeding  sentence  demonstrates,  this  rule  is  not
absolute:

         "This law shall be recognised by other  states  insofar  as  it  is
         consistent with international conventions, international custom and
         the  principles  of  law  generally  recognised  with   regard   to
         nationality."

14. While nationality provides the vital nexus between the  individual  and
    the state concerned, it has an important broader dimension.  It is well
    established that via nationality the individual can  have  recourse  to
    the benefits of international law (Shaw, International law, 6th ed,  pp
    659-660).  This, however, is not available in  limbo.   Rather,  it  is
    accessible only through the medium of  the  state,  which  means  state
    conferral of the status of nationality.

15. The status of BOC is regulated by Part III of the  British  Nationality
    Act 1981 (the "1981 Act").  This operates in tandem  with  the  British
    Nationality (General) Regulations 2003. The  general  rule  devised  is
    that BOC status can be acquired only be registration.   On  01  January
    1983 a substantial  group  of  persons  -  around  1.5  million  former
    Commonwealth citizens  -  attained  the  status  of  BOC  by  automatic
    reclassification.  Since then, the policy underpinning the 1981 Act has
    been to limit the number of new BOCs and the design of the  legislation
    itself is to gradually phase out this category.

16. Malaysia is  an  Independent  Commonwealth  Country.   It  secured  its
    independence, under the guise of the Federation of Malaya, in 1957.  At
    this time many Malaysians had the status of Commonwealth Citizen  which
    they retained and, in due course, on 01 January 1983 those belonging to
    this class were reclassified BOCs.  In Fransman's  British  Nationality
    Law (3rd Edition) one finds the following passage of note at page 1085:



         "Malaysia does not permit multiple nationality, but the exact state
         of Malaysian law in this regard has been unclear for years  and  is
         still unclear.  There have been  times  ....   when  any  BOCs  who
         relied upon their British overseas citizenship by obtaining  a  BOC
         passport  were  relieved  of  their  Malaysian  passports  (by  the
         Malaysian authorities) on the  ground  that  they  were  no  longer
         Malaysian  (having  automatically  lost  Malaysian  nationality  by
         acting as BOCs)."

     The author continues:

         "....  Such people in the UK at the time of these events have  been
         granted indefinite leave, as BOCs  who  could  not  be  removed  to
         Malaysian or elsewhere. But that is not to say that all  such  BOCs
         were regularised in  this  way  or  that  such  regularisation  was
         pursuant to any general Home Office policy or practice."

    At this juncture, it is appropriate to  observe  that  no  Home  Office
    policy  relating  to  BOCs  who  formerly  held  Malaysian  nationality
    features in either the Secretary of State's decisions or arguments this
    appeal. I shall comment further on this infra.

17. The operation of Malaysian law and practice in  this  sphere  is  given
    some colour by the facts in R (Ku) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home
    Department [2013] EWHC 3881 (Admin).  There the claimant, a BOC without
    right of abode in the United Kingdom and a former citizen of  Malaysia,
    who had renounced this status, was removed by the Secretary of State to
    Kuala Lumpur where, on arrival, he was refused entry and  was  returned
    to the United Kingdom.  The evidence recited in the judgment appears to
    indicate an indeterminate state of affairs vis-�-vis the Malaysian  and
    United Kingdom Governments.  In this context, the learned deputy  judge
    noted, inter alia, at [26]:

         ".... The material before me  establishes  that  in  February  2013
         Malaysia agreed that a BOC such as the claimant who was prepared to
         return to Malaysia  voluntarily  could  apply  for  a   five   year
         residence pass (intended to lead to citizenship)  before  departure
         from the United Kingdom.  This would allow him to live and work  in
         Malaysia while his application to  reacquire  his  citizenship  was
         processed."

    The judgment also quotes from a Malaysian Government  letter  dated  15
    July 2011 containing the following passage:

         "With regards to the removal of BOC holders who have  no  right  to
         remain in the UK, the Government of Malaysia would be in a position
         to accept the removal of such persons provided that they  could  be
         determined previously to be Malaysian nationals.  In such cases  it
         is of paramount importance for the UK to give ample notification as
         well as sufficient timeframe to the Malaysia authorities."

    I interpose: there is no evidence that (a) these  arrangements  do  not
    apply to Mr Chin or that (b) any of these steps has been taken  in  his
    present case.

18. The challenge of  Mr  Ku  was  based  squarely  on  issues  of  policy,
    including the Secretary of State's  Enforcement  Instructions  Guidance
    ("EIG").   His  contention  that  the  removal  decision  was  not   in
    compliance with the relevant policies was rejected: see  [27]  -  [33].
    His further challenge, based on the  so-called  "limbo"  policy  (which
    features nowhere in the present case) was also rejected: see [39].

19. The decision in Lu is of some three years vintage. It  is  based  on  a
    series of policy materials (letters et al)  predating  2013.   None  of
    these materials features in the evidence of argument  in  this  appeal.
    Equally, none of them plays any expressed part in the decisions of  the
    Secretary of State belonging to the framework of this appeal.

20. I have considered the  decision  of  the  Special  Immigration  Appeals
    Commission in Hamza v Secretary of State [2010]  UKSIAC  23/2005.  This
    concerned section 40(4) of the 1981 Act, which precludes the  Secretary
    of State from making a deprivation  of  British  Citizenship  Order  if
    satisfied that this would render the subject stateless.   This  has  no
    application to the present case. Ditto the decision of the CJEU in Kaur
    (ECR 2001, 1-01237) which decided that in order to determine whether  a
    person is a national  of  the  United  Kingdom  of  Great  Britain  and
    Northern Ireland for the purposes of Community Law, it is necessary  to
    refer  to  the  1982  Declaration  on  the  definition  of   the   term
    "nationals", which substituted  its  1972  predecessor.   I  derive  no
    assistance from either of these decisions.

21. On behalf of  the  Appellant  Mr  Davison  submitted  that  the  second
    decision of the FtT is vitiated by error  of  law  on  account  of  its
    failure to determine whether Mr Chin is stateless  -  and,  if  he  is,
    whether he can be lawfully deported to Malaysia.  In  this  context  Mr
    Davison drew attention to the Secretary  of  State's  formal  statement
    (via letter dated 01 November 2016) that Mr Chin is not stateless as he
    is recognised as a BOC "albeit that he does not have a right of abode".
     Mr Davison submitted that the Secretary of State's  classification  of
    Mr Chin as a BOC who has no right of abode in the United Kingdom impels
    ineluctably to the conclusion that he is a stateless person  as  he  is
    not a citizen or national of  any  other  country  of  the  world.   Mr
    Davison's alternative submission is that given the Secretary of State's
    contention that Mr Chin is not stateless  as  he  is  recognised  as  a
    British national albeit without right of abode, it must follow that  he
    is not vulnerable to  deportation  given  the  definition  of  "foreign
    criminal" in Section 117D (2) of the 2002 Act, namely -

         "... a person who is not a British citizen, who has been  convicted
         in the UK of an offence and who has been sentenced to a  period  of
         imprisonment of at least twelve months, or has been convicted of an
         offence that has caused serious harm, or is a persistent offender".



22. There were both written and oral submissions on behalf of the Secretary
    of  State.   These  drew  attention  to  Section  40  of  the   British
    Nationality Act 1981, which provides:

        "(1) In this section a reference to a person's "citizenship status"
        is a reference to his status as-
             (a) a British citizen,
             (b) a British overseas territories citizen,
             (c) a British Overseas citizen,
             (d) a British National (Overseas),
             (e) a British protected person, or
             (f) a British subject.

        (2) The Secretary of State may by  order  deprive  a  person  of  a
        citizenship status if the Secretary  of  State  is  satisfied  that
        deprivation is conducive to the public good.


        (3) The Secretary of State may by  order  deprive  a  person  of  a
        citizenship  status  which  results  from   his   registration   or
        naturalisation if the Secretary of  State  is  satisfied  that  the
        registration or naturalisation was obtained by means of-
             (a) fraud,
             (b) false representation, or
             (c) concealment of a material fact.


        (4) The Secretary of State may not make an order  under  subsection
        (2) if  he  is  satisfied  that  the  order  would  make  a  person
        stateless.


        (4A)** But that does not prevent the Secretary of State from making
        an order under subsection (2) to deprive a person of a  citizenship
        status if-
              (a)  the  citizenship  status  results  from   the   person's
        naturalisation,
             (b) the Secretary of State is satisfied that  the  deprivation
             is conducive to the public  good  because  the  person,  while
             having that citizenship status, has conducted him  or  herself
             in a manner  which  is  seriously  prejudicial  to  the  vital
             interests of the United Kingdom, any of the  Islands,  or  any
             British overseas territory, and
             (c)  the  Secretary  of  State  has  reasonable  grounds   for
             believing that the person is able, under the law of a  country
             or territory outside the United Kingdom, to become a  national
             of such a country or territory.


        (5) Before making an order under  this  section  in  respect  of  a
        person the Secretary of State must give the person  written  notice
        specifying-
             (a) that the Secretary of State has decided to make an order,
             (b) the reasons for the order, and
             (c) the person's right of appeal under section 40A(1) or under
        section 2B of the Special Immigration Appeals Commission  Act  1997
        (c. 68).


        (6) Where a person acquired a citizenship status by  the  operation
        of a law which applied  to  him  because  of  his  registration  or
        naturalisation   under   an   enactment   having   effect    before
        commencement, the Secretary of  State  may  by  order  deprive  the
        person of the citizenship status  if  the  Secretary  of  State  is
        satisfied that the registration or naturalisation was  obtained  by
        means of-
             (a) fraud,
             (b) false representation, or
             (c) concealment of a material fact."


        [** In force from 20 July 2014]


    The Secretary of State's case also draws on Schedule 2 to the 1981 Act.
     Under the rubric of  "Provisions  for  Reducing  Statelessness",  this
    provides:

        "Persons born in the United Kingdom after commencement


        1. -


        (1) Where a person born in the United  Kingdom  after  commencement
        would, but for this paragraph, be born stateless, then, subject  to
        sub-paragraph (3)-
             (a) if at the time of the birth his  father  or  mother  is  a
         citizen or subject of a    description mentioned  in  sub-paragraph
         (2), he shall be a citizen or subject   of  that  description;  and
         accordingly
             (b) if at the time of the birth  each  of  his  parents  is  a
             citizen or subject of a different description so mentioned, he
             shall be a citizen or  subject  of  the  same  description  so
             mentioned as each of them is respectively at that time.


        (2) The descriptions referred to in sub-paragraph (1) are a British
        overseas territories citizen, a  British  Overseas  citizen  and  a
        British subject under this Act.


        (3) A person shall not be a  British  subject  by  virtue  of  this
        paragraph if by virtue of it he  is  a  citizen  of  a  description
        mentioned in sub-paragraph (2).


        Persons born in a British overseas territory after commencement


        2.-


        (1) Where a person born  in  a  British  overseas  territory  after
        commencement would, but for  this  paragraph,  be  born  stateless,
        then, subject to sub-paragraph (3)-
             (a) if at the time of the birth his  father  or  mother  is  a
             citizen or subject of a description mentioned in sub-paragraph
             (2), he shall be a citizen or subject of that description; and
             accordingly
             (b) if at the time of the birth  each  of  his  parents  is  a
             citizen or subject of a different description so mentioned,  he
             shall be a citizen  or  subject  of  the  same  description  so
             mentioned as each of them is respectively at that time.


        (2) The descriptions referred to in sub-paragraph (1) are a British
        citizen, a British Overseas citizen and  a  British  subject  under
        this Act.


        (3) A person shall not be a  British  subject  by  virtue  of  this
        paragraph if by virtue of it he  is  a  citizen  of  a  description
        mentioned in sub-paragraph (2).


        Persons born in the United Kingdom or a dependent


        3.-


        (1) A person born in the  United  Kingdom  or  a  British  overseas
        territory after commencement shall be entitled, on  an  application
        for his registration under this paragraph, to be so  registered  if
        the following requirements are satisfied in his case, namely-
             (a) that he is and always has been stateless; and
             (b) that on the date of the application he was under the age of
             twenty-two; and
             (c) that he was in the United Kingdom  or  a  British  overseas
             territory (no matter which) at the beginning of the  period  of
             five years ending with that date and that (subject to paragraph
             6) the number of days on which he  was  absent  from  both  the
             United Kingdom and the British  overseas  territories  in  that
             period does not exceed 450.


        (2) A person entitled to registration under this paragraph-
             (a) shall be registered under it as a British citizen  if,  in
             the period of five years mentioned in sub-paragraph  (1),  the
             number of days wholly or partly spent by  him  in  the  United
             Kingdom exceeds the number of days wholly or partly  spent  by
             him in the British overseas territories;
             (b) in any other case, shall  be  registered  under  it  as  a
             British overseas territories citizen.


        Persons  born  outside  the  United  Kingdom   and   the   overseas
        territories after commencement


        4.-


        (1) A person born  outside  the  United  Kingdom  and  the  British
        overseas territories after commencement shall be  entitled,  on  an
        application for his registration under this  paragraph,  to  be  so
        registered if the following requirements are satisfied, namely-
             (a) that that person is and always has been stateless; and
             (b) that at the time of  that  person's  birth  his  father  or
             mother was a citizen or subject of a description  mentioned  in
             sub-paragraph (4); and
             (c) that that person was in the United  Kingdom  or  a  British
             overseas territory (no matter which) at the  beginning  of  the
             period of three years ending with the date of  the  application
             and that (subject to paragraph 6) the number of days  on  which
             he was absent from both the  United  Kingdom  and  the  British
             overseas territories in that period does not exceed 270.


        (2) A person entitled to registration under this paragraph-
             (a) shall be registered under it as a citizen or subject  of  a
             description available to him in accordance  with  sub-paragraph
             (3); and
             (b) if more than one description is so available to him,  shall
             be registered under this paragraph as a  citizen  of  whichever
             one or more of the descriptions so available to him is  or  are
             stated in the application under this paragraph to be wanted.


        (3) For the purposes of this paragraph the descriptions of  citizen
        or subject available to a person  entitled  to  registration  under
        this paragraph are-
             (a) in the case of a person whose father or mother was  at  the
             time  of  that  person's  birth  a  citizen  of  a  description
             mentioned in sub-paragraph (4), any description of  citizen  so
             mentioned which applied to his father or mother at that time;
             (b) in any other case, a British subject under this Act.


        (4) The descriptions referred to in sub-paragraphs (1) to (3) are a
        British citizen, a British overseas territories citizen, a  British
        Overseas citizen and a British subject under this Act.


        Persons born stateless before commencement


        5.-


        (1) A person born before commencement  shall  be  entitled,  on  an
        application for his registration under this  paragraph,  to  be  so
        registered if the circumstances are such that, if-
             (a) this Act had not been passed, and the  enactments  repealed
             or amended by this Act had continued in force accordingly; and
             (b) an application for the registration of  that  person  under
             section  1  of  the  British  Nationality  (No.  2)  Act   1964
             (stateless persons) as a citizen  of  the  United  Kingdom  and
             Colonies had been made on the date  of  the  application  under
             this paragraph, that person would have been entitled under that
             section to be registered as such a citizen.


        (2) A person entitled to registration under this paragraph shall be
        registered under it as such a citizen as he would  have  become  at
        commencement if,  immediately  before  commencement,  he  had  been
        registered as a citizen of the United Kingdom  and  Colonies  under
        section 1 of the British Nationality (No. 2) Act 1964 on  whichever
        of the grounds mentioned  in  subsection  (1)(a)  to  (c)  of  that
        section he would have been entitled to be so registered on  in  the
        circumstances described in sub-paragraph (1)(a)  and  (b)  of  this
        paragraph.


        Supplementary


        6.


        If  in  the  special  circumstances  of  any  particular  case  the
        Secretary of State thinks fit, he may for the purposes of paragraph
        3 or 4 treat the person who is the subject of  the  application  as
        fulfilling the requirement specified  in  sub-paragraph  (1)(c)  of
        that paragraph although the number of days on which he  was  absent
        from both the United Kingdom and the British  overseas  territories
        in the period there mentioned exceeds the number there mentioned."




    The kernel of the Secretary of State's case is that Mr  Chin,  being  a
    BOC, is not de iure stateless.

My Conclusions

23.  The  Secretary  of  State's  reliance  on  the  statutory   provisions
    reproduced above is misconceived since  (a)  this  is  not  a  case  of
    deprivation of citizenship status (section 40) and (b) place  of  birth
    and its ramifications (Schedule 2) feature  not  in  the  Secretary  of
    State's decision making and are remote from the issues in this appeal.

24. Two further conclusions are incontestable. First, Mr Chin was  formerly
    a national of Malaysia but has not held this status since  23  November
    2006.  Second, Mr Chin was formerly a BOC, a status which expired on 17
    July 2015.  It is correct that at the time of the deportation decision,
    16 January  2014,  Mr  Chin  was  a  BOC.   However,  there  have  been
    developments since then.

25. The first of these developments materialised  when  the  first  of  the
    FtT's two decisions was made.  This gave the  Secretary  of  State  the
    opportunity to review the deportation decision and, in  particular,  to
    examine it in the light of the policies noted in  [17]  -  [18]  above.
    However, the Secretary of State failed to take this simple and  obvious
    course.  While the challenge to the first decision of the FtT was  duly
    vindicated, this was a  vacuous  victory,  making  no  contribution  to
    finality in Mr Chin's case.

26. The second main post-decision development occurred when  this  Tribunal
    adjourned the hearing of the appeal  to  enable  Mr  Chin  to  make  an
    application  to  the  Secretary  of  State  for  a   determination   of
    statelessness under paragraphs 401 - 403 of the Rules.   Bizarrely,  in
    the decision which ensued, the Secretary of State did not  address  the
    issue of statelessness at all.  This  lack  of  co-operation  with  the
    Upper Tribunal is disturbing.

27. The third notable post-decision development is found in  the  Secretary
    of State's letter dated 01 November 2016 wherein it is asserted that Mr
    Chin is not stateless as he is recognised as "a British national albeit
    that he does not have a right of abode".  This statement is incoherent.
     Mr Chin has never held British nationality. Furthermore,  this  letter
    fails to engage with the elephant in the room, namely at the time  when
    it was written Mr Chin was no longer a BOC.  Insofar as  this  purports
    to be an assessment  of  whether  Mr  Chin's  case  complies  with  the
    definition of statelessness enshrined in  the  1954  Convention  it  is
    truly hopeless. It is clear that what is asserted in the  letter  dated
    01 November 2016 underlay the Secretary of State's deportation decision
    over two years previously.

28. Errors of law abound in the Secretary of  State's  decision  making  in
    this case. First, the assertion that Mr Chin is a British  national  is
    manifestly unsustainable in law.  The second error of law is that  when
    the deportation decision was made it was clearly contemplated  that  Mr
    Chin would continue to hold the status of BOC when  deported.   However
    his passport expired on 17 July 2015.  The third error of  law  relates
    to  the  Secretary  of  State's  policies  vis-�-vis  former  Malaysian
    nationals.  There  is  no  evidence  that  these  policies  have   been
    considered, much less given effect, by the decision makers in Mr Chin's
    case.  The primary public law duly in play was to consider whether  the
    policies applied to Mr Chin and, if so, how, simultaneously  respecting
    the Lumba principle (Lumba v SSHD [2011] UKSC 12).  This duty  was  not
    performed, either at the time of making  the  deportation  decision  or
    when several opportunities to do so presented  themselves  subsequently
    at the review stages which materialised.    All  of  these  errors  are
    perpetuated in the written and oral submissions advanced on  behalf  of
    the Secretary of State.

29. Given the errors of law in the Secretary of State's decision  diagnosed
    above, the decision of the FtT cannot stand and is  hereby  set  aside.
    No further hearing is required in order to  determine  the  appeal  (an
    issue which I canvassed with the representatives at the  conclusion  of
    the hearing).  The Secretary of State's decision  is  unsustainable  in
    law and the appeal succeeds accordingly.  The result is that  a  lawful
    decision has not yet been made in this case. It is now incumbent on the
    Secretary of State to reconsider the series of decisions  and  position
    statements in the history of this case and to make a  lawful  decision,
    duly guided by this judgment.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed to the extent identified above.






                                                                       [pic]
                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY
                                             PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER

                                                      Date: 28 December 2016







TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make  a  whole  fee
award of any fee which has been paid or may be payable  on  account  of  the
errors of law identified above






                                                                       [pic]
                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY
                                             PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER

                                                      Date: 30 December 2016
