

Asylum and Immigration Tribunal

      AA (DP3/96 - Commencement of Enforcement action) Pakistan [2007] UKAIT
                                                                       00016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 3 November 2006                            |On 13 February 2007          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                       SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE MATHER
                        SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE LANE

                                   Between

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

   1. For the purposes of DP3/96, service of a notice of intention to deport
      or service of illegal entry papers amount to decisions that 'stop the
      clock'. Time spent in the United Kingdom following such service will
      not be counted for the purposes of applying that Policy. (This list
      may be regarded as essentially the same as that in paragraph
      276B(i)(b) of HC395).
   2. Withdrawal of an adverse asylum decision does not of itself amount to
      withdrawal of a consequential removal decision (see s77 of the 2002
      Act).


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Lemer, Counsel instructed by Mitre House
Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr P Tranter, a Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan.  He was  born  on  19  January
    1970.  He arrived in the United Kingdom on 31 October 1999 and  claimed
    asylum on 2 November 1999.  Following two  refusals  on  non-compliance
    grounds his asylum application was eventually refused on its merits  on
    1 July 2005.  In the  meantime  the  appellant  also  made  a  marriage
    application which was refused on  3  June  2005.   In  both  cases  the
    respondent's decision was to remove the appellant  to  Pakistan  as  an
    illegal entrant.  The decisions were served on  forms  ISI51B  (asylum)
    and ISI51A pt 2 (marriage).  The appellant appealed both decisions  and
    the appeals were heard together by Designated Immigration Judge Coleman
    on 21 September 2005.  She dismissed his  appeal  against  the  'asylum
    decision' on both asylum and human rights grounds.  The  appellant  did
    not have the right to appeal the refusal of the marriage application on
    immigration grounds from within the United Kingdom because he  did  not
    have leave to enter or remain  at  the  time  that  he  made  it.   The
    Designated Immigration Judge did not expressly say so in  her  decision
    but it is clear that she rejected the assertion that the refusal of the
    marriage application was not in accordance with  the  law  because  the
    respondent had not properly considered his policy known as DP3/96.

2.    The appellant applied  for  review.   The  order  for  reconsideration
    said:-

        "The appellant argues that enforcement action did not  commence  in
        2000 as the Home Office withdrew it.  Reliance is placed on  Akaeke
        [2005] EWCA Civ 947.  I consider the  grounds  arguable.   All  the
        grounds of the application may be argued."


      At the outset of  the  hearing  before  us  Mr  Lemer  said  that  the
    appellant did not propose to challenge the asylum decision.


    We are concerned with issues arising out of DP3/96 and Article 8 ECHR.

Chronology
3.    It may be of assistance here to set out a chronology:-
    Dates   Events
    19 January 1970    Appellant born


    31 October 1999    Appellant arrives in UK


    2 November 1999    Appellant claims asylum


    17 April 2000      IS151A served on appellant


    7 April 2001        Asylum  application  rejected  -  non-compliance  -
                               failure to return Statement of Evidence Form


    30 August 2001     Appellant marries and shortly  thereafter  makes  an
                               application to remain on the  basis  of  that
                               marriage


    5 September 2001   Respondent's decision to refuse asylum withdrawn


    9 November 2001    Appellant's asylum interview - did not attend


    16 November 2001   Asylum claim again rejected


    Unknown date       Second refusal of asylum withdrawn


    22 January 2004    Appellant's daughter born


    3 June 2005  Marriage application refused


    15 June 2005 Notice of appeal of refusal of marriage application


    1 July 2005  Asylum claim refused


    29 July 2005 Notice of appeal against asylum refusal


    21 September 2005  Appeal hearing

The Designated Immigration Judge's Determination
      Asylum and Articles 2 & 3 ECHR
4.    As the appellant did not wish to pursue the reconsideration on  asylum
    grounds there is no need for us to deal with it.  That is  relevant  in
    as much as there is now no proper basis upon which  the  appellant  can
    assert that he is at real  risk  of  serious  harm  if  he  returns  to
    Pakistan.

5.    The Designated Immigration Judge rejected the appeal on  human  rights
    grounds insofar as the appellant relied on Articles 2  or  3  upon  the
    same basis as his asylum claim.  There was no challenge to that.

      Marriage and DP 3/96
6.    Referring to the claim under DP3/96 and the appellant's marriage,  the
    Designated Immigration Judge recorded (at  paragraph  22(a))  that  the
    respondent

      "....firstly considered the claim  under  his  policy  DP  3/96.   The
        appellant's situation  was  not  covered  by  that  policy  as  the
        marriage had not predated enforcement notice by two  years  because
        the appellant had been served with the IS151A form  notifying  that
        he was an illegal entrant on 17 April 2000".

      Article 8 ECHR
7.    The respondent refused the application under Article 8  on  the  basis
    that, although he accepted the appellant had family life in the  United
    Kingdom, it  would  not  be  interfered  with  because  there  were  no
    insurmountable obstacles to his  wife  and  child  going  with  him  to
    Pakistan and continuing family life there.  He said that returning  him
    would not be disproportionate even if the appellant's wife did  not  go
    back with  him,  because  the  appellant  entered  the  United  Kingdom
    unlawfully, had married and started a family knowing of the possibility
    that he would be unable to stay in the United Kingdom, and his child is
    young enough to adapt to life in Pakistan.  He also took  into  account
    the fact that the appellant could apply for entry clearance to re-enter
    the United Kingdom as a spouse, meaning that any  disruption  would  be
    temporary.  He said there were no compelling reasons for regarding  the
    case as exceptional.

8.    Dealing with Article 8, the Designated Immigration Judge  noted  that,
    following the marriage in July 2001, the appellant and his wife  had  a
    daughter.  She was born on 22 January 2004 and they all live  together.
    The appellant's wife's family has supported them  since  the  birth  of
    their child because the appellant, having sought permission to work  in
    the United Kingdom, was refused the right to do so.  The appellant  and
    his wife accepted that they were aware of his immigration  status  when
    they  married.   The  Designated  Immigration  Judge   rejected   their
    assertion that because the respondent had withdrawn two asylum  refusal
    decisions the appellant was likely to be granted leave to remain.   The
    appellant  and  his  wife,  when  giving  evidence,  referred  to   the
    appellant's wider family having fallen out with him because he had been
    engaged to marry a cousin.  He failed to do so and married his wife  in
    the UK instead.

9.    The Designated  Immigration  Judge,  in  coming  to  her  conclusions,
    referred to the  alleged  disagreements  with  the  appellant's  family
    because of the failure to honour the engagement.  She  noted  that  the
    appellant is not in contact with any close  family  in  Pakistan.   She
    found there was no reason why disagreement  with  family  members  with
    whom he has no continuing contact should interfere with the appellant's
    family life if he and his  wife  chose  to  reside  in  Pakistan.   She
    accepted the appellant's wife has been in the United Kingdom for a long
    time and has family here, but noted that she is  of  Pakistani  origin,
    visited there in 2000, speaks Urdu and understands  the  culture.   She
    also noted that the appellant's wife married him knowing that he had no
    right to remain here.  She concluded that it was  not  unreasonable  to
    expect her, and their child, to return to Pakistan  with  her  husband.
    She accepted that the IS151A was served on the appellant in April 2000,
    saying that would be normal procedure.

10.   She then said that  if  there  were  no  interference  with  protected
    family life she did not need to consider the matter further, though she
    did go on to do so in case she was wrong  about  there  not  being  any
    interference.  She considered whether it would be  disproportionate  to
    expect the appellant to return if it was  unreasonable  to  expect  his
    wife and child to return to Pakistan with him.  She said he entered the
    United Kingdom unlawfully and she noted  Counsel's  argument  that  the
    appellant should have been  granted  leave  to  remain  under  "DP3/96"
    because the enforcement notices and IS151As were not served until "1995
    which post-dated the marriage by over  four  years".   (She  must  have
    meant 2005).  She then said:-

         "However that ignores the previous service of  such  a  notice  in
        April 2000 which I have accepted.  Furthermore on the basis  of  my
        arguments above it would not have been unreasonable to  expect  the
        appellant's wife to return with him  to  Pakistan.   Therefore  the
        appellant does not come within the  respondent's  published  policy
        relating to marriage".

11.   She looked at the question of delay  and  referred  to  Akaeke  [2005]
    EWCA Civ 947.  Having taken that  case  into  account  she  said  that,
    whilst there had been a delay of four years, she  did  not  regard  the
    appellant as having made continuous or strenuous efforts to press for a
    decision until 2004.   She  said  the  appellant  was  responsible  for
    considerable delay earlier in the procedure by his two failures;  first
    to submit a Statement of Evidence Form in time and, second, failing  to
    attend an interview.  She said there was no evidence of strong  private
    life, the appellant has no property in the United Kingdom, there was no
    evidence that he has been studying, he has been  unable  to  work  and,
    although he has been here for a considerable time, it is  not  so  long
    that it would be unreasonable to require him to leave.  She  concluded,
    as a secondary finding, that  any  interference  with  the  appellant's
    family life would not be disproportionate.

DP3/96

12.   The  policy  known  as  DP3/96  was  introduced  to  be  applied  when
    considering deportation cases under paragraph 364 of HC  395.   At  the
    time, deportation was the sole method of removal of those who  remained
    without authority or who had failed to comply with, or had  contravened
    a condition of their leave.  Since that time the regime for the removal
    of illegal entrants and immigration offenders has changed and it is now
    largely achieved through administrative removal.   It  has  never  been
    suggested that DP3/96 does not apply equally to administrative removal.
     It potentially benefits those who are liable to administrative removal
    but who have married before enforcement action was taken.   The  policy
    says:-

        "As a general rule, deportation action under 3(5)(a) or 3(5)(b) (in
        non-criminal cases) or illegal entry action should not normally  be
        initiated in the following circumstances (but see notes below):


        (a)      where the subject has a genuine  and  subsisting  marriage
             with someone settled here and the couple have lived together in
             this country continuously since their marriage for at least two
             years before the commencement of enforcement action;


        and


        (b)      it  is  unreasonable  to  expect  the  settled  spouse  to
             accompany his/her spouse on removal."


13.   The notes referred to are as follows:-

        "(i)     In this instruction, 'settled' refers to British  citizens
             who live in  the  United  Kingdom  or  to  nationals  who  have
             indefinite leave to enter or indefinite leave to remain here.


        (ii)     In considering whether or not, under paragraph 5(b) above,
             it would be unreasonable for a settled spouse to accompany  the
             subject of enforcement action on removal the  onus  rests  with
             the settled spouse to make out a case with supporting  evidence
             as to why it is unreasonable for him/her to  live  outside  the
             United Kingdom.  Factors which  caseworkers  should  take  into
             account, if they are made known to them, will  include  whether
             the United Kingdom settled spouse:


      (a)   has very strong and close family  ties  in  the  United  Kingdom
                  such as older children from a previous  relationship  that
                  form part of the family unit; or

      (b)   has been settled and living in the United Kingdom for  at  least
                  the preceding ten years; or

      (c)   suffers from ill-health and medical evidence conclusively  shows
                  that his/her life  would  be  significantly  impaired  or
                  endangered if he/she were to accompany his/her spouse  on
                  removal.

      (iii) In this instruction commencement of enforcement action is to  be
             taken as either:

      (a)   a specific instruction to leave with a warning of  liability  to
                  deportation if the subject fails to do so; or

      (b)   service of a  notice  of  intention  to  deport  or  service  of
                  illegal entry papers (including  the  service  of  papers
                  during a previous stay in the United  Kingdom  where  the
                  subject has returned illegally); or

      (c)   a recommendation by court  that  a  person  should  be  deported
                  following a conviction.

      (iv)  The commencement of enforcement  action  'stops  the  clock'  in
             terms of the two year qualifying period referred  to  paragraph
             5(a) above in which a marriage must have subsisted.  No further
             time can then be accrued to meet this criterion,  e.g.,  whilst
             making  representations,  appealing  against  a   decision   or
             applying for judicial review.

      (v)   This notice contains guidance as to the approach to  be  adopted
             in the generality of cases but it must be remembered that  each
             case is to  be  decided  on  its  individual  merits  and,  for
             instance, a particularly poor immigration history  may  warrant
             the offender's enforced departure from the  UK  notwithstanding
             the factors referred to above."

14.   In order to determine whether the Designated Immigration  Judge  erred
    in law in relation to DP 3/96 it is necessary to establish whether  the
    marriage took place at least  two  years  before  the  commencement  of
    enforcement action.  In order to decide that, it is  necessary  for  us
    first to consider what  amounts  to  the  commencement  of  enforcement
    action.  Enforcement action is not commenced only  by  the  service  of
    illegal entry papers, but it is that  mechanism  we  consider  in  this
    determination.  Note (iii)(b) addresses the issue in part but does  not
    wholly answer the question.   It  has  not  been  challenged  that  the
    appellant was served with an IS151A  in  April  2000.   The  Designated
    Immigration Judge was correct to say that it would be normal procedure,
    and the appellant has not sought to argue that that did not happen.

15.   The form IS151A, headed "Notice to a Person  Liable  to  Removal",  is
    addressed to an individual and the person signing the form has to  tick
    one of two boxes.  The first box, "A", refers to an illegal entrant  as
    defined in section 33(1) of the Immigration Act 1971, or a member of  a
    family of such a person on whom removal directions  have  been  served.
    Box "B" refers  to  a  person  subject  to  administrative  removal  in
    accordance with section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.  The
    form then goes on to give notice of liability to detention.  It says

        "You are therefore a person who is liable to  be  detained  pending
        the completion of  arrangements  of  dealing  with  you  under  the
        Immigration Act 1971.   I  propose  to  give  directions  for  your
        removal from the United Kingdom in due course and details  will  be
        given to you separately".

16.   The appellant was served with a form IS151B  on  1  July  2005.   This
    form is frequently, but wrongly, described as removal  directions.   It
    is headed "Decision to  Remove  an  Illegal  Entrant/Other  Immigration
    Offender or a Family Member of such  a  Person  -  Asylum/Human  Rights
    Claim Refused."  In the appellant's case, the  form  addressed  to  him
    says:-

        "You were served with form IS151A on 06/04/2005  informing  you  of
        your  immigration  status  and  your  liability  to  detention  and
        removal.


        As a consequence, a decision has been taken to remove you from  the
        United Kingdom.


        You have made an asylum and/or human rights claim.   The  Secretary
        of State has decided to refuse your claim for asylum  and/or  human
        rights for the reasons stated on the attached notice."


    The form then goes on to tell the appellant of his appeal rights before
    removal.  It refers to the One-Stop  Procedure  and  the  Statement  of
    Additional Grounds.  It confirms that  the  person  cannot  be  removed
    while the appeal is in progress.  It concludes by saying: -


        "Directions will be given for your removal from the United  Kingdom
        to Pakistan".

17.   For the sake of completeness,  we  should  mention  the  similar,  but
    different, form "IS151A Part 2".  The difference between  ISI51A  Pt  2
    and ISI51B is in relation to appeal  rights.   IS151A  Part  2  is  the
    appropriate form to be served where the right  of  appeal  only  arises
    after removal.  It is otherwise similar to the IS151B.  It recites  the
    service of an earlier IS151A, and concludes with  the  same  indication
    that directions are to be given for removal from the United Kingdom.

18.   It is therefore clear that there is a two stage  process.   The  first
    is to give notice of liability to removal.  The second is the notice of
    decision to remove.

19.   It is apparent in this case that the appellant  was  served  with  two
    IS151As, one in April 2000 and the other in April 2005.

20.   The appellant's marriage took  place  in  2001.   If  the  enforcement
    action only started on service of the IS151B on 1  July  2005  then  it
    clearly pre-dated enforcement  action  by  two  years.   The  appellant
    contends first that service of the IS151A does not comprise enforcement
    action.  Second, if it does, it was  withdrawn  when  the  decision  to
    refuse the asylum application was withdrawn.  The  respondent  contends
    that the enforcement action started with service of the IS151A in April
    2000 (i.e. before the marriage) and that an IS151A cannot be withdrawn.
     Our attention was drawn to two earlier decisions of the Tribunal.  The
    first is AA (Shala - DP3/96) Sudan [2004] UKIAT 00240.  Counsel in that
    case  argued  that  DP3/96  had  not  been  properly  considered.   The
    Immigration Appeal Tribunal said this:-

        "Though the notice of 1 October 2000 was  no  longer  effective  to
        bring about the appellant's  removal,  once  the  Home  Office  had
        recognised they had wrongly refused him  asylum  on  non-compliance
        grounds, and withdrawn that decision, it had most  certainly  given
        him notice that he was liable to removal.   The  Home  Office  were
        entitled to take the view, in their letter of 9 September 2002 that
        his marriage on 29 August 2000 did not pre-date such notice  by  at
        least two years".


21.   That is the extent of the Tribunal's consideration of the  issue.   It
    does not help, in this case, because the question we have  to  consider
    is not whether the appellant had been given notice that he  was  liable
    to removal, but whether enforcement action had commenced.  The Tribunal
    in that case did not address the meaning of commencement.

22.   The second decision is MA (DP3/96 - Interpretation) Algeria [2005]
    UKAIT 00127.  At paragraph 23 of that decision the Tribunal said this:-

        "When one looks at the wording of IS151A, IS151A Part 2 and IS151B,
        it is in our view sufficiently clear  that  the  purport  of  those
        documents is entirely consistent with the concept  of  commencement
        of enforcement action, albeit not within the specific terms set out
        in paragraph 5(iii)(a) of DP3/96.  It is clear  for  example,  from
        IS151A Part 2  that  a  decision  has  been  taken  to  remove  the
        appellant from the United Kingdom.  The implication must clearly be
        that if he does not leave voluntarily he will be removed.  The  use
        of the word 'deportation' should not in our view  be  taken  to  be
        purely a reference to the technical  process  of  deportation,  but
        rather more broadly to the process of removal of a  person  who  in
        this case was subject to administrative removal in accordance  with
        Section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999  as  set  out  in
        IS151A".


23.   We also find that  unhelpful  when  considering  the  point  at  which
    commencement action is deemed to  commence.   It  is  unhelpful  to  us
    because the Tribunal has "rolled up" the two stages of the process  and
    referred to  them  together  as  commencing  enforcement  action.   The
    decision begs the question as to whether the IS151A is the commencement
    of enforcement proceedings or just a notice telling an  appellant  that
    that is a likely event.

24.   Before we go on to draw conclusions on that  issue  we  also  need  to
    look at whether an IS151A can be withdrawn.  The answer seems to appear
    in  chapter  7  of  the  Immigration  Directorate  Instructions.    The
    instructions start by referring to two stages.  Those are not  the  two
    stages represented by IS151A and IS151B (or IS151A part 2) but, rather,
    the decision making process giving rise to  the  issue  of  an  IS151A.
    Those stages are to consider first, whether the person is  in  fact  an
    illegal entrant and second, whether to treat him as such.   The  second
    stage requires the decision maker to consider whether the service of  a
    notice of illegal entry (IS151A) "would disadvantage the individual  in
    question in some way".  The instruction  says  that  if  it  would  not
    disadvantage a  person  then  it  should  be  issued  and  the  reasons
    recorded.  It also says that if it is concluded that prejudice would be
    caused, and there are no countervailing reasons why it is  nevertheless
    fair and appropriate to serve the notice, then it is not to be  issued.
    That part of the IDI does not go directly  to  answering  the  question
    that we have to deal  with  but  the  next  section  does.   After  the
    heading:-

        "After papers have been served",


    it says:


        "In the course of enquiries, the level of information available  to
        officers changes - perhaps through interview, further interview, or
        representations from legal representatives and other  bodies,  etc.
        Officers should bear in mind that they have a continuing discretion
        as to whether to maintain or withdraw the notice of illegal  entry.
        If as a result of information obtained at a later  stage  or  as  a
        result of a change of circumstances, it becomes  apparent  that  an
        individual is being prejudiced as a result of the notice of illegal
        entry and that it is unfair on them to maintain it, then the notice
        should be withdrawn."


25.   Thus it is clear that an IS151A can be  withdrawn.   The  question  of
    whether it actually has been withdrawn still arises.  The guidance says
    that, whenever a notice of illegal entry is withdrawn:-

        "It is essential that all parties involved in a case  are  informed
        in writing as soon as practicable."


    We have seen no written notification  in  this  case  that  the  IS151A
    served in April 2000 has been withdrawn at any time.  Withdrawal of the
    notice clearly does not automatically occur when an adverse decision on
    an asylum claim  is  withdrawn,  for  whatever  reason.   We  have  not
    considered, because it was neither  relevant,  nor  argued  before  us,
    whether the withdrawal of illegal entry papers pursuant to the  IDI  is
    effective for the purpose of calculating the two years referred  to  in
    DP 3/96.

26.   For the sake of completeness we mention the  following  parts  of  the
    IDI.  Where an IS151A has been served, and an immigration  decision  to
    remove is then made, the decision maker is told to:-

        "Serve the immigration decision to remove, either


        IS151A Part 2 (where the appeal right is 'out of country'); or


        IS151B (where asylum or human rights claim has been refused)


        If asylum or human rights or HR is claimed after serving the IS151A
        Part 2, withdraw this notice, prepare an  undated  IS151B  for  the
        file ready to be served to be served with the RFRL if the claim  is
        refused."

27.   We quote the above because it emphasises the distinction  between  the
    IS151A Part 2 and IS151B and the respondent's procedure.  It  does  not
    have any direct relevance to this appeal.

28.   The appellant cannot take advantage of the policy in DP3/96.   He  was
    served with an IS151A in April 2000.  It was not withdrawn.  The  notes
    to DP3/96 expressly say that commencement of enforcement action  is  to
    be taken as one of several actions, which include "service of a  notice
    of intention to deport or service of illegal entry  papers".   We  find
    that the expression  "Illegal  entry  papers"  is  clearly  capable  of
    covering form ISI51A.

Article 8

29.   The challenge to the Designated  Immigration  Judge's  findings  under
    Article 8 arises out of the  delay  which  the  appellant  asserts  has
    occurred in his case.

30.   In  her  determination  the  Designated  Immigration  Judge's  primary
    finding on Article 8 was that there will be no  interference  with  the
    appellant's family life because his wife will  accompany  him  back  to
    Pakistan.  That is plainly wrong.  The appellant's wife  is  a  British
    citizen, who was living in the  United  Kingdom  before  the  appellant
    arrived and married her.   It  is  not  therefore  a  question  of  the
    appellant and his spouse being removed together as would be the case if
    they had both arrived from Pakistan.   Whilst  it  is  the  appellant's
    human rights with which we are concerned, it  must  be  the  case  that
    there will be an interference with his protected family life if  he  is
    removed to Pakistan.  It cannot be automatically assumed that a British
    citizen, with her family in the United Kingdom and who is settled here,
    in both the legal and social meaning of the word, would  simply  go  to
    Pakistan without a second thought.  In the situation where an appellant
    has married a British citizen who has not said  she  will  return  with
    him, the question of whether she can be expected to accompany him  back
    is to be considered when looking at Article 8.2  and  the  question  of
    proportionality.

31.   Mr Lemer put it another way: he said the Designated Immigration  Judge
    misapplied Mahmood [2001] INLR 1.  The question of whether or not there
    are insurmountable obstacles  to  a  spouse  accompanying  a  returning
    failed asylum seeker is not an issue which goes to the question of  the
    existence of  family  life  but  to  proportionality.   The  Designated
    Immigration Judge was wrong to find that there would be no interference
    with the appellant's protected family life.

32.   However, in her alternative findings the Designated Immigration  Judge
    did address the question of the insurmountable obstacle in relation  to
    proportionality.    She   concluded   that   removal   would   not   be
    disproportionate for the reasons she gave (paragraph 10 & 11 ante).  In
    that part of her determination she  also  considered  the  question  of
    delay and that was the appropriate point for delay  to  be  considered.
    The grounds deal with delay and say that,  following  the  marriage  in
    August 2001, the appellant made enquiries of the respondent in May 2002
    because he wished to have permission to work.  The grounds assert  that
    it took one and a half years for him to be refused that permission.  In
    that time the appellant referred the issue to his Member of  Parliament
    who  was  told  that  the  respondent  had  no  record  of  a  marriage
    application.  The respondent later accepted one had been made, but only
    when evidence was presented to him  through  the  MP.   The  Designated
    Immigration Judge is criticised for saying the delay was caused by  the
    appellant in the early part of the period.  The grounds assert that was
    wrong, saying that the respondent would not have  withdrawn  those  two
    early procedural refusals if they were not his own fault.  The  grounds
    assert the  appellant  could  not  attend  the  interview  for  genuine
    reasons.  The grounds also assert that although the  judge  said  there
    have been "no continuous or strenuous efforts to  press  the  HO",  the
    appellant did start to press the respondent after  a  reasonable  time.
    The grounds accept the appellant did not write on a monthly  basis  but
    complain that the Designated Immigration Judge did not consider  a  six
    year delay was inexcusable whereas, in contrast, in Akaeke three years'
    delay was considered "a public disgrace".

33.   Mr Lemer dealt with the issue of delay in paragraph 5 of his  skeleton
    argument.  He recited the Immigration Judge's reasons and then asserted
    that she was wrong because she irrationally concluded the  respondent's
    delay was four years rather than five and erroneously placed  blame  on
    the appellant for contributing towards the  delay.   He  said  that  no
    findings of fact were made as to why the non-compliance decisions  were
    withdrawn, or why the appellant was  said  to  be  at  fault.   In  his
    skeleton argument he asserted that the Immigration Judge failed to have
    regard to the guidance in Akaeke and went on to quote paragraph  23  of
    MM (Serbia and Montenegro) [2005] UKAIT 00163.  In MM there had been no
    action on the appellant's file until six years  after  his  application
    when his MP intervened.  The Tribunal said:-

        "While there was no repeated form of pressure for a decision  until
        then (as in Akaeke) the fact that a claimant should, after so  long
        should have to enlist the help of his parliamentary  representative
        to get the executive to make the  decision  which  they  claim  the
        public interest demands is in our view quite enough  (again  as  in
        Akaeke) to entitle the  appellate  authority  to  take  a  somewhat
        diluted view of what that public interest now requires".


34.   In this case although the appellant complains that it is wrong to  say
    that he caused the delay in the early stages of his asylum process, and
    that the respondent must have conceded it was his own  fault  that  the
    two non-compliance decisions were made, it is not  in  our  view  quite
    that simple.  First it is clear that the respondent was not failing  to
    deal with the appellant's asylum application.  We have no idea why  the
    appellant failed to submit his Statement of Evidence Form in  time,  or
    why he failed  subsequently  to  attend  an  interview.   Whatever  the
    reason, it cannot be said  that  the  respondent  was  not  taking  any
    action.  We do not  regard  the  application  for  permission  to  work
    following a marriage application to be an action designed to prompt the
    respondent to deal with the asylum application.  Even if the Designated
    Immigration Judge did mistakenly say the delay caused by the respondent
    was four years, when the appellant argues that it was  five,  that  was
    not an error of law.  It is not  a  fundamental  fact  upon  which  the
    entire decision was built, which was demonstrably wrong, or  gave  rise
    to an erroneous decision.  The Designated Immigration Judge  considered
    the question of delay, and in particular referred to Akaeke during  the
    course of her reasoning.  She came to the conclusion that  it  was  not
    disproportionate to remove the appellant, having taken into account the
    relevant factors including delay.  She bore in mind that the  appellant
    will be entitled to apply  for  entry  clearance  upon  his  return  to
    Pakistan.  The decision is one she was entitled to make.

35.   Given all the factors  identified  and  addressed  by  the  Designated
    Immigration Judge, including both the ability of the appellant to apply
    for entry clearance from abroad and delay, it cannot properly be argued
    that it was irrational or perverse to find it is  not  disproportionate
    to remove the appellant, an illegal entrant.

36.   Although the Immigration Judge looked at delay from the earlier  date,
    the decision was not made in error of law and there is  no  possibility
    that  the   Tribunal   would   decide   the   appeal   differently   on
    reconsideration.  Since the hearing of this reconsideration, the  Court
    of Appeal has handed down its Judgement in HB  (Ethiopia)  [2006]  EWCA
    Civ 1713.  At paragraph 24, Buxton LJ drew together the various earlier
    decisions and summarised the  law  in  relation  to  delay.   There  is
    nothing in that summary to  suggest  that  the  Designated  Immigration
    Judge erred in law in her approach to delay.

37.   The Immigration Judge not having made an error of law in  relation  to
    DP3/96, and not having made any material error of law  in  relation  to
    Article 8 the following decision is confirmed.

      The asylum appeal is dismissed.

      The human rights appeal is dismissed (both in relation to Article 3
    and Article 8).

      The claim that the respondent's decision was not in accordance with
    the law is dismissed.






Signed                                             Date


Senior Immigration Judge Mather
Approved for electronic distribution.


