




R (on  the  application  of  Ahmed)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
Department (para 276B - ten years lawful residence) [2019] UKUT 00010 (IAC)


                            IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                      JUDGMENT GIVEN FOLLOWING HEARING


                                                                 Field House
                                                                      London

                                                                7 March 2018


                                  The QUEEN
                           (ON The application OF)
                                 JUNED ahmed
                                                                   Applicant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                                   Before

                      THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE SWEENEY



                               - - - - - - - -

Mr M Biggs, Counsel, instructed by Chancery Solicitors, appeared  on  behalf
of the Applicant.

Mr  Z  Malik,  Counsel,  instructed  by  the  Government  Legal  Department,
appeared on behalf of the Respondent.

If there is no ten years continuous, lawful residence for  the  purposes  of
para 276B(i)(a) of the Immigration Rules, an applicant cannot rely  on  para
276B(v) to argue that  any  period  of  overstaying  (for  the  purposes  of
276B(i)(a)) should be disregarded.  Para  276B(v)  involves  a  freestanding
and additional requirement over and above 276B(i)(a).

                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -
                              APPROVED JUDGMENT
                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -


MR JUSTICE SWEENEY:


Introduction

 1. By permission of Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek,  granted  at  an  oral
    hearing on 17 November 2017, the Applicant (a citizen of Bangladesh who
    is now aged 31) seeks judicial review  of  the  Respondent's  decision,
    made by a decision letter dated 13 March 2017, refusing the Applicant's
    application made on 4 February 2016, as ultimately varied on 7 November
    2016, for indefinite leave to remain on the  ground  of  his  ten  year
    residence, pursuant to paragraph 276B of  the  Immigration  Rules,  and
    certifying, pursuant to Section 94 of the Nationality, Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 Act 2002, as amended ("the 2002 Act"), that  the  human
    rights claim made by that application was "clearly unfounded".

 2. There are three Grounds of Review, namely that:-

      1) The 13 March 2017 decision was based on a  material  flaw  and  was
         thus unreasonable, because it  rested  on  a  misinterpretation  of
         paragraphs 276B and 276A of the Immigration  Rules  to  the  effect
         that the period of time  between  the  making  of  the  Applicant's
         original application to further remain on 4 February 2016  and  the
         decision on the varied application  for  leave  to  remain  on  the
         ground of long residence, was not to be  counted  when  considering
         whether, for the purposes of paragraph 276B(i)(a) and  taking  into
         account paragraph 276B(v), the  Applicant  had  had  at  least  ten
         years' continuous lawful residence.

      2) The Respondent acted unreasonably in failing to  reach  a  decision
         with respect to the exercise of her discretion;  and/or  failed  to
         provide any, or any adequate, reasoning as to the exercise of  that
         discretion; and/or failed to consider material matters.

      3) In all the circumstances, the  Respondent's  certification  of  the
         Applicant's human rights claim was unlawful - as there  is  a  real
         prospect of the Applicant showing on appeal that he was entitled to
         leave pursuant to paragraph 276B of the Immigration  Rules,  and/or
         that the Respondent acted unlawfully and unreasonably regarding the
         exercise of her discretion; and in any event, given the  length  of
         the  Applicant's  lawful  residence  in  the   UK   and   all   the
         circumstances.

 3. It is thus clear that the  target  of  the  Applicant's  claim  is  the
    Section 94 certificate.  The relief sought by the Applicant is an Order
    quashing that certificate and a declaration that the Applicant may  and
    should pursue his appeal from the 13 March  2017  decision  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal in the ordinary way.  In the alternative, an  order
    quashing the 13 March 2017 decision is sought.

 4. Whilst otherwise opposing the  claim  on  all  fronts,  the  Respondent
    accepted that, in the event that the Applicant succeeded, there were no
    "special or exceptional factors" justifying the retention of  the  case
    in the Upper Tribunal - (see R (Khan) v SSHD [2017] 4 WLR  152  at  [9]
    and [26]-[32]) and that the appropriate course would be for any  appeal
    to be heard in the First-tier Tribunal.

Factual Background

 5. The Applicant arrived in the United Kingdom on 11 October 2006, with an
    entry clearance as a student, valid from 25  September  2006  until  30
    September 2007.  He made an application for further leave to remain  as
    a student on 5 September 2007 and was granted further leave  to  remain
    on 1 October 2007, until 31 October 2010.

 6. The Applicant made an application for further leave to remain as a Tier
    1 (Post-Study Work) Migrant on 8 October 2010 and was  granted  further
    leave to remain on 24 November 2010 until 24 November 2012.

 7. The Applicant made an application for further leave to remain as a Tier
    4 (General) Student on 27 September 2012 and was granted further  leave
    to remain on 5 December 2012, until 30 April 2014.  He made  a  further
    application for leave to remain as a Tier 4  (General)  Student  on  22
    April 2014 which was granted on 16 May 2014, until 28 August 2015.

 8. On 28 August 2015 the Applicant made another application for  leave  to
    remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student, which was refused on  4  December
    2015.  On 29 December 2015 the  Applicant  applied  for  Administrative
    Review, which was refused on 20 January 2016. The  refusal  was  deemed
    served on 22 January 2016.

 9. Some 13  days  later,  on  4  February  2016,  the  Applicant  made  an
    application for further  leave  to  remain,  this  time  based  on  his
    ancestry.  On 31 March 2016 he made a further application for leave  to
    remain based on his private and family life.   The  Respondent  refused
    the ancestry application  on  24  July  2016.   On  28  July  2016  the
    Applicant sent a pre-action protocol letter.  On  11  August  2016  the
    Respondent maintained her decision,  in  consequence  of  which,  on  8
    September  2016,  the  Applicant  issued  judicial  review  proceedings
    (JR/9897/2016) challenging the Respondent's ancestry decision.

10. On 22 September 2016 the Applicant made an application  for  indefinite
    leave to remain outside the Immigration Rules.  Finally, on 7  November
    2016, the Applicant made an application for indefinite leave to  remain
    on the grounds of his ten years' residence in the United Kingdom.

11. On 17 November 2016 the parties settled the judicial review proceedings
    in relation to the ancestry application, and it  was  agreed  that  the
    application made, outside the Rules, on  22  September  2016  would  be
    considered as a variation of the applications made on 4  February  2016
    (ancestry) and 31 March 2016 (private and family life).

12. The Respondent refused the long residence  application  for  indefinite
    leave to remain in a letter dated 13 March 2017 and, under  Section  94
    of the 2002 Act, certified the Article 8 claim made therein as "clearly
    unfounded"- concluding that the Applicant had not lived in  the  United
    Kingdom continuously and lawfully for a period of ten years.

13. The letter set out the  Applicant's  immigration  history  and,  as  to
    consideration under paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules,  concluded
    that:

         "You subsequently  applied  for  further  leave  to  remain  on  04
         February 2016 13 days out of time for Family / Private  Life  leave
         to remain which you then varied to another Family  /  Private  Life
         leave application, then varying to  Outside  the  Rules  indefinite
         leave to remain then finally varying to indefinite leave to  remain
         based on 10 years lawful residency.

         As this has not been followed by a grant of leave  to  remain  your
         continuous  lawful  residence  was  broken  on  22  January   2016.
         Therefore, you have only completed  9  years  3  months  continuous
         lawful residence in the United Kingdom.

         With this in mind, you have not demonstrated ten  years  continuous
         lawful residence and cannot satisfy the  requirement  of  Paragraph
         276B(i)(a).

         For the reasons outlined above, your application is  refused  under
         Paragraph 276D with reference to Paragraph 276B(i)(a) of HC 395 (as
         amended)".

14. The letter went on to make clear that, in considering the  application,
    it had also been considered whether  the  exercise  of  discretion  was
    appropriate as the Applicant could not demonstrate 10 years  continuous
    lawful residence.

15. As to family life, it was recorded that the Applicant's partner  was  a
    Bangladesh national who was currently present in the UK with  no  leave
    to remain - and was therefore not a British citizen, was not settled in
    the UK, and was not in the UK with refugee leave or as  a  person  with
    humanitarian protection.  It was also noted that the Applicant  had  no
    children in the UK.  In those circumstances, it was concluded that  the
    family life application failed.

16. Consideration was then given to the requirements for leave to remain on
    the basis of the Applicant's private life in  the  UK  under  paragraph
    276ADE(1) of the Rules. It was concluded that  the  Applicant  did  not
    meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1) (iii), (iv), (v)  &  (vi).
    It was also concluded, against the background that  the  Applicant  had
    lived the majority of his  life  (including  his  formative  years)  in
    Bangladesh, and the maintenance of his family ties  there,  that  there
    were no significant obstacles to  the  Applicant's  reintegration  into
    Bangladesh.  Therefore,  it  was  concluded  that  the   private   life
    application failed.

17. Consideration was finally given to whether the Applicant's  application
    raised any exceptional circumstances which might warrant the  grant  of
    leave to remain outside the requirements of the Immigration Rules.  The
    letter recorded that the Applicant had stated  that  he  was  concerned
    about the risk to his and his partner's lives from political  opponents
    if they returned to Bangladesh but noted that  the  Applicant  had  not
    made a protection claim. The letter continued:

         "Consideration has been  given  to  the  fact  that  you  may  have
         established relationships with people resident  in  the  UK,  other
         than with your partner. However, you have provided no  evidence  of
         an exceptional level of dependency between you and any such  people
         in the UK. Furthermore, there is no reason  why  contact  with  any
         people you may know in the UK cannot  be  maintained  from  abroad.
         Many people maintain contact with family and  friends  from  abroad
         through modern means of communication and visits. You have provided
         no reason why you cannot be expected to do the same.

         Consideration has also been given to the fact that you have studied
         and worked in the UK and it is asserted that you  can  utilise  the
         skills that you have acquired to assist you in securing  employment
         in your home country in order to support yourself.

         Consideration has also been given to the  extent  of  the  possible
         interference with your private life, as compared to the  legitimate
         need to maintain a national immigration control.  Any private  life
         you have established here has been done so when you were here in  a
         temporary capacity.  Therefore, you have no legitimate  expectation
         of being granted on this basis.  Furthermore, there is no  evidence
         to show that you cannot re-establish  a  similar  private  life  in
         Bangladesh to that which you have in the UK.

         It has  therefore  been  decided  that  there  are  no  exceptional
         circumstances in your case. Consequently, your application does not
         fall for a grant of leave to remain outside the Rules".

18. Finally, the letter dealt with certification, as follows:

         "In addition, after considering all evidence available to them, the
         Secretary of State's official has decided that  your  Human  Rights
         Claim is clearly unfounded and hereby certifies it to be  so  under
         s.94(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.   This
         is because you do not meet the requirements for leave to remain  on
         grounds of family life under Appendix  FM  or  private  life  under
         Paragraph 276ADE(1) of the Immigration Rules. Further, you have not
         raised any circumstances that are considered to be exceptional.  In
         the light of this and the consideration  above,  it  is  considered
         that your application for leave to remain  on  the  basis  of  your
         Human Rights is clearly without substance and cannot succeed on any
         legitimate view.

         This means you  may  not  appeal  whilst  you  are  in  the  United
         Kingdom".

19. The Applicant sent a pre-action protocol letter to which the Respondent
    replied on 5 April 2017, maintaining her decision.  In consequence, the
    Applicant issued this  judicial  review  claim  on  9  May  2017.   The
    Respondent filed her Acknowledgement of Service on 21 June 2017.

20. Upper Tribunal Judge Kekic considered the case on the papers and, in  a
    decision promulgated on 10 August 2017, refused permission. On granting
    permission at the oral  renewal  hearing  on  17  November  2017  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Kopieczek said this:

         "I consider that it is at least arguable that the  period  of  time
         between the making of the application for further leave  to  remain
         (before its variation) on 4 February 2016 until the decision on the
         (varied) application for leave to remain on  the  grounds  of  long
         residence, on 13 March 2017, is  to  be  counted  when  considering
         whether the Applicant has, for the purposes of paragraph 276B(i)(a)
         had at least ten years' continuous lawful  residence,  taking  into
         account paragraph 276B(v) of the Rules.

         Whilst, on a self-contained basis, I would not have considered that
         the 'discretion'  point  or  the  'certification'  point  have  any
         extrinsic merit, they contain arguments that are bound up with  the
         main argument in terms of long residence.  Accordingly,  I  do  not
         limit the grounds that may be argued  and,  for  the  avoidance  of
         doubt, even taking into account that the main  ground  may  not  be
         successful."

Legal Framework

21. At the material time, paragraph 34 of the  Immigration  Rules  required
    that an application for leave to remain had to be  made  in  accordance
    with  sub-paragraphs  (1)  -  (10)  of  that  Rule.  As   to   multiple
    applications, paragraph 34BB (1) & (2) made  clear  that  an  applicant
    could only have one outstanding application for leave to  remain  at  a
    time, and  that  where  an  application  for  leave  was  submitted  in
    circumstances where a previous application for leave to remain had  not
    been decided, it would be  treated  as  a  variation  of  the  previous
    application.  Paragraph 34E provided that an application to vary had to
    comply with the requirements of paragraph 34.  Paragraph  34F  provided
    that any valid variation of a leave  to  remain  application  would  be
    decided in accordance with the Immigration Rules in force at  the  date
    that the variation was made.  Paragraph 34G  dealt  with  the  date  an
    application (or variation of an application) was  deemed  to  be  made,
    depending on whether it was sent by post by Royal  Mail,  submitted  in
    person, sent by courier or other postal service provider, or  made  via
    the online application process.

22. Section 82(1)(b) of the 2002 Act provides that  a  migrant  may  appeal
    from "a decision" to refuse his or her "human rights claim" (as defined
    in Section 113 of the same Act).

23. The Respondent's policy entitled "Rights of Appeal" as in force at  the
    time, deemed, amongst other things, an application for indefinite leave
    to remain made pursuant to paragraph 276B of the Immigration  Rules  to
    be a "human rights claim" for these purposes, and acknowledged  that  a
    human rights claim may be made implicitly.  Hence there is  no  dispute
    that the Applicant's application for indefinite leave to remain on  the
    ground of long residence was a human rights claim.

24. By Section 92(3) of the 2002 Act a migrant who holds a right of  appeal
    pursuant to Section 82(1)(b) of the Act "must" bring that appeal  while
    he remains in the UK unless the human rights claim "to which the appeal
    relates" has been certified by the Secretary of State as being "clearly
    unfounded", pursuant to Section 94 of the 2002 Act, in which  case  the
    appeal "must" be brought from outside the UK.

25.  Section 94 of the 2002 Act provides, insofar as relevant, as follows:

         "(1) The Secretary of State may certify a protection claim or human
             rights claim as clearly unfounded.

         (2)  A person may not bring an appeal to which this Section applies
             in reliance on Section 92(4)(a)  if  the  Secretary  of  State
             certifies that the claim or claims  mentioned  in  sub-Section
             (1) is or are clearly unfounded.

         (3)  If the Secretary of State is  satisfied  that  a  claimant  is
             entitled to reside in a state listed  in  sub-Section  (4)  he
             shall certify the claim under sub-Section (1) unless satisfied
             that it is not clearly unfounded."

26.  Section 117A of the 2002 Act provides:

         "(1) This Part applies where a court or  Tribunal  is  required  to
             determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts -

               a) Breaches a person's  right  to  respect  for  private  and
                  family life under Article 8, and

               b) As a result would be unlawful under Section 6 of the Human
                  Rights Act 1998.

         (2)  In considering the public  interest  question,  the  court  or
             tribunal must, in particular, have regard -

             (a)  in all cases to  the  considerations  listed  in  Section
                  117B, and

             (b)  in cases concerning the deportation of foreign criminals,
                  to the considerations listed in Section 117C,

         (3)  In sub-Section (2), 'the public interest question'  means  the
             question of whether an interference with a person's  right  to
             respect for private and  family  is  justified  under  Article
             8(2)".

27.  Section 117B of the 2002 Act provides that:

         "(1) The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is  in  the
             public interest.

         (2)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are able to speak  English,  because  persons  who  can  speak
             English -

             (a)  are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

         (3)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are financially independent, because such persons -

             (a)  are not a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

         (4)  Little weight should be given to -

             (a)  a private life, or

             (b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

             that is established by a person at a time when the  person  is
             in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

         (5)  Little weight should be given to a private life established by
             a person at a time when the  person's  immigration  status  is
             precarious.

         (6)  In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,  the
             public interest does not require the person's removal where -

             (a)   the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave
                  the United Kingdom".

28.  At the material time paragraph 6  of  the  Immigration  Rules  provided
that:

         "In these Rules the following interpretations apply....

         Overstayed or overstaying means the Applicant has stayed in the  UK
         beyond the latest of:

             (i)  the time limit attached  to  the  last  period  of  leave
                  granted; or

             (ii) beyond the period  that  his  leave  was  extended  under
                  Section 3C or 3D of the Immigration Act 1971".

29.  Paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules, as applicable  in  this  case,
    provided (as amended by the addition of sub-paragraph  (v)  by  HC  194
    which was laid before Parliament in June 2012) that:

         "The requirements to be met by an Applicant for indefinite leave to
         remain on the ground of long residence in the  United  Kingdom  are
         that:
         (i)(a)    he has had at least 10 years' continuous lawful residence
             in the United Kingdom.
         (ii) having regard to the public interest there are no reasons why
             it would be undesirable for him to be given indefinite leave
             to remain on the ground of long residence, taking into account
             his:
             (a)  age; and
             (b)  strength of connections in the United Kingdom; and
             (c)  personal history, including character, conduct,
                  associations and employment record; and
             (d)  domestic circumstances; and
             (e)  compassionate circumstances; and
             (f)  any representations received on the person's behalf; and
         (iii)    the Applicant does not fall for refusal under the  general
             grounds for refusal.
         (iv) The Applicant has demonstrated  sufficient  knowledge  of  the
             English language and sufficient knowledge about  life  in  the
             United Kingdom, in accordance with Appendix KoLL.
         (v)  The Applicant must not be in the UK in breach  of  Immigration
             Laws except that any period of overstaying for a period of  28
             days or less will  be  disregarded,  as  will  any  period  of
             overstaying between periods of entry clearance, leave to enter
             or leave to remain up to 28 days and any period of overstaying
             pending the determination of an application made  within  that
             28 day period".

30.  Paragraph 276D of the Immigration  Rules  made  clear  that  indefinite
    leave on the ground of long residence in the UK was to  be  refused  if
    the Secretary of State was not satisfied that each of the  requirements
    in paragraph 276B was met, by providing that:

         "Indefinite leave to remain on the ground of long residence in  the
         United Kingdom is to    be refused if the Secretary of State is not
         satisfied that each of the requirements of paragraph 276B is met".

31.  Paragraph 276A of the Immigration Rules provided that:

         "For the purposes of paragraphs 276B to 276D and 276ADE (1) -

         (a)  'Continuous residence' means residence in the  United  Kingdom
             for an unbroken period, and for these purposes a period  shall
             not be considered to have been broken where  an  Applicant  is
             absent from the United Kingdom for a period of six  months  or
             less at any one time, provided that the Applicant in  question
             has existing limited leave  to  enter  or  remain  upon  their
             departure and return, but shall be  considered  to  have  been
             broken if the Applicant:

             (i)  has been removed  under  Schedule  2  of  the  1971  Act,
                  Section 10 of the 1999 Act, has been deported, or has left
                  the United Kingdom having been refused leave to  enter  or
                  remain here; or

             (ii) has left the United Kingdom and, on doing so, evidenced a
                  clear intention not to return; or

             (iii)    left the United Kingdom in circumstances in which  he
                  could have had no reasonable expectation at  the  time  of
                  leaving that he would lawfully be able to return; or

             (iv) has been convicted of an offence and was sentenced  to  a
                  period of imprisonment or was directed to be  detained  in
                  an  institution  other  than  a  prison   (including,   in
                  particular,  a  hospital  or  an  institution  for   young
                  offenders) provided that the sentence in question was  not
                  a suspended sentence; or

             (v)  has spent a total of more  than  eighteen  months  absent
                  from the United Kingdom during the period in question.

         (b)  'Lawful  residence'  means  residence  which   is   continuous
             residence pursuant to:

             (i)  existing leave to enter or remain; or

             (ii) temporary admission within Section 11  of  the  1971  Act
                  where leave to enter or remain is subsequently granted; or

             (iii) an exemption from immigration control,  including  where
                  an exemption ceases to apply if it is immediately followed
                  by a grant of leave to enter or remain.

         (c) 'Lived continuously' and 'living continuously' mean 'continuous
             residence',  except  that  paragraph  276A(a)(iv)  shall   not
             apply".

32.  Paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules provided that:

         "(1) The requirements to be met by an Applicant for leave to remain
             on the grounds of private life in the UK are that at the  date
             of application, the Applicant:

             (i)  Does not fall for refusal under any  of  the  grounds  in
                  Section S-LTR1.2 to S-LTR2.3 and S-LTR3.1 in Appendix  FM;
                  and

             (ii) has made a valid application for leave to remain  on  the
                  grounds of private life in the UK; and

             (iii)    has lived continuously in the UK for at least  twenty
                  years (discounting any period of imprisonment); or

             (iv) is under the age of 18 years and has  lived  continuously
                  in the UK for at least seven years (discounting any period
                  of imprisonment) and it would not be reasonable to  expect
                  the Applicant to leave the UK; or

             (v)  is aged 18 or above and under 25 years and has  spent  at
                  least half of his  life  living  continuously  in  the  UK
                  (discounting any period of imprisonment); or

             (vi) subject to subparagraph (2) is aged 18  years  or  above,
                  has lived continuously in the  UK  for  less  than  twenty
                  years (discounting any period of imprisonment)  but  there
                  would be very significant  obstacles  to  the  Applicant's
                  integration into the country to which he would have to  go
                  if required to leave the UK."

33.  The  applicable  version  of  the  Respondent's  policy,  namely  "Long
    Residence v.14" at page 18 provided that a period of overstaying of  28
    days or less on the date of the application (calculated from the end of
    the last period of leave to enter or remain granted, or the end of  any
    extension of leave under sections 3C or 3D of the Immigration Act 1971)
    would be  disregarded.  There  was  a  requirement,  when  refusing  an
    application made by an applicant who had overstayed  by  more  than  28
    days, to consider any evidence of exceptional circumstances  which  had
    prevented the applicant from applying  within  the  first  28  days  of
    overstaying.   The  threshold   for   what   constituted   'exceptional
    circumstances' was said to  be  high  but  could  include  delays  from
    unexpected or unforeseeable causes.

Submissions

General

34.  In the combination of his written and oral  submissions  Mr  Biggs,  on
    behalf of the Applicant, reminded me of the  correct  approach  to  the
    interpretation of the Immigration Rules as  explained  by  the  Supreme
    Court in Mahad (and Others) v Entry Clearance Officer [2009] UKSC 16 at
    [10] and subsequently by the Court of Appeal in Pokhriyal v SSHD [2013]
    EWCA Civ 1568 at [39]-[43].  Ultimately, it was common ground  that  it
    was not appropriate, when construing Paragraph 276B(v), to consider the
    Explanatory Memorandum to Statement of Changes HC 194 which accompanied
    its introduction on 13 June 2012.

35.  Mr Biggs  submitted  that  the  correct  approach  to  decisions  under
    Section 94 of the 2002 Act and their  review  is  to  be  found  in  ZT
    (Kosovo) v SSHD [2009] UKHL 6, at [22]-[24] approving RL  &  Another  v
    SSHD [2003] 1 WLR 1230 at [56]-[58] in particular that whether a  claim
    is "clearly unfounded" is a black and white objective test, independent
    of the burden of proof.  If any reasonable doubt exists as  to  whether
    the claim may succeed then it is not clearly unfounded or, put  another
    way, if on at least one legitimate view of the facts  or  the  law  the
    claim may succeed, it is not clearly  unfounded.   Likewise,  Mr  Biggs
    underlined, if a court concludes that a claim has a realistic  prospect
    of success, the court will necessarily conclude that the  Secretary  of
    State's view was irrational.  Only when the decision maker is satisfied
    that nobody could believe the Applicant's story will it be  appropriate
    to certify on the ground of lack of credibility alone.

36.  Mr Biggs added that by virtue of ZT (Kosovo) (above)  at  [21];  R  (YH
    Iraq) v SSHD [2010] EWCA Civ 116; and FR (Albania)  &  Another  v  SSHD
    [2016] EWCA Civ  605  the  court  must  apply  the  intensive  "anxious
    scrutiny" standard of Wednesbury review, including properly taking into
    account every factor that might tell in  favour  of  an  Applicant  and
    examining the substantive integrity of the analysis  displayed  in  the
    decision letter when giving the reasons for rejecting the application -
    given that the decision maker must demonstrate that  account  has  been
    taken of relevant matters and that the correct test has been applied.

37.  As to the consideration of a human rights claim  made  in  reliance  on
    Article 8 ECHR, Mr Biggs reminded me that the Secretary  of  State  and
    the Tribunal must consider the five sequential questions identified  in
    Razgar v SSHD [2004] UKHL 27 at [17] namely:

         "(1) Will the decision be an interference with the exercise of  the
             Applicant's rights to respect for his private or (as the  case
             may be) family life.?

         (2)  If so,  will  such  interference  have  consequences  of  such
             gravity as potentially to engage the operation of Article 8?

         (3)  If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?

         (4)  If so, is such interference necessary in a democratic  society
             in the interests of national security, public  safety  or  the
             economic wellbeing of  the  country,  for  the  prevention  of
             disorder or crime, for the protection of health or morals,  or
             for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others?

         (5)  If so, is such interference proportionate  to  the  legitimate
             public end sought to be achieved?"

38.  Mr Biggs accepted that, at stage 5, the decision maker must  decide  if
    the interference with the  individual's  Article  8  interest/interests
    strikes a fair balance between the interests  involved  and  must  give
    proper weight to the Immigration  Rules,  which  will  normally  entail
    giving them substantial, or very substantial, weight where they reflect
    the Secretary of State's view as to the correct balance to be struck in
    a general class of case.  That is because, as numerous authorities make
    clear, the Secretary of State  has  constitutional  responsibility  for
    immigration policy and special expertise and reflects the Secretary  of
    State's view of the public interest and where a  fair  balance  between
    the public interest and, in general terms,  Article  8  interests  lie.
    Further, they are partly endorsed by Parliament.

39.  However, Mr Biggs submitted, where the Rules do not concern matters  of
    policy and balance they have little or no weight in the proportionality
    exercise - see R (MM) (Lebanon) and Others v  Secretary  of  State  and
    Another [2017]  UKSC  10  at  [76],  and  the  contrast  drawn  between
    underlying public interest considerations and the working out of policy
    through  the  detailed  machinery  of  the  Rules.   Additionally,   he
    submitted, where the Rules are themselves not rationally justifiable or
    are  disproportionate,  they  should  be  given  no   weight   in   the
    proportionality scales.

40.  Whilst Mr Biggs accepted that those principles  were  normally  invoked
    in cases where a migrant cannot satisfy the Rules, he argued that  they
    apply with equal, if not greater force, where a migrant is able to rely
    upon the Rules - see the discussion  in  Mostafa  (Article  8  -  entry
    clearance) [2015] UKUT 112 (IAC).

41.  Further, Mr Biggs argued that as the Rules confer rights, whether as  a
    special feature of the statutory scheme, or as an  application  of  the
    public  law  principle  that  the  Respondent  is   required   to   act
    consistently with her  policy  absent  sufficient  reason  not  to,  it
    followed that when the Rules were satisfied it  would  be  unlawful  to
    remove a migrant because to do so would not be in accordance  with  the
    law because it was inconsistent with the Rules.

42.   Even  leaving  that  aside,  Mr  Biggs  submitted,  it  would  not  be
    proportionate to remove a migrant unless the Secretary of  State  could
    point to some sufficiently cogent and compelling factor  not  addressed
    by the Rules justifying removal in the  public  interest  -  with  such
    cases being rare, if possible at all.

First Ground

43.  Mr Biggs' first submission  was  that  this  ground  had  already  been
    decided in the Applicant's favour by Upper Tribunal Judge  Kopieczek  -
    whose grant of permission entailed, Mr Briggs argued, the  binding  and
    unassailable conclusion that the Applicant's case  as  to  the  correct
    approach to paragraph 276B(v) of the Rules was properly arguable.  That
    meant, Mr Biggs submitted, that it would be arguable before the  First-
    tier Tribunal and that therefore there was a legitimate  view  of  this
    case pursuant to which the Applicant's human rights claim could succeed
    before the First-tier Tribunal.  It followed, Mr Biggs submitted,  that
    there was a binding decision that entailed that the  Applicant's  human
    rights claim was not bound to fail, that that decision was correct, and
    that therefore the application for judicial review must succeed.

44.  As to that, Mr Malik, on  behalf  of  the  Respondent,  submitted  that
    Judge Kopieczek had simply been deciding on permission and that it  was
    wholly inappropriate and misconceived to regard that as  being  in  any
    way binding on the issue.  That, he said, was a matter for me, with the
    benefit of  full  argument  -  which  the  judge,  on  permission,  had
    inevitably not received.

45.  In the alternative, Mr Biggs submitted that:

    (1)  The effect of paragraph 276B(v) of the Rules was that someone  who
         has made an application for indefinite leave to remain pursuant  to
         paragraph 276B within 28 days of becoming an overstayer  is  to  be
         treated, for the purposes of paragraph 276B, as if the  application
         was made while he held leave to remain so that  the  period  during
         which the application is awaiting decision is added to  the  period
         of continuous lawful residence required by paragraph 276B(i)(a), in
         the light of paragraphs 6 and 276A(b) of the Rules (above).

      1) That was consistent with the  language  and  purpose  of  paragraph
         276B(v) and the purpose and structure of Paragraph 276B generally.

      2) The Applicant undoubtedly made an  application  within  the  28-day
         period and the word "disregarded" in Paragraph  276B(v)  must  mean
         that he cannot be treated as having the  status  of  an  overstayer
         whilst awaiting the outcome of his application.  It  followed  that
         he must be treated as a person who was not an overstayer.

      3) It further followed, from the definition of overstayer in paragraph
         6 of the Rules, that a person who by virtue  of  paragraph  276B(v)
         was to be treated as not being an overstayer must  be  someone  who
         had, or was to be treated as though they had, leave.

      4) Such a person, who by paragraph 276B(v) was to be  treated  as  not
         being  an  overstayer  (because  his  status  in  that  respect  is
         "disregarded"), fell within paragraph 276A(b)(i) because,  for  the
         purposes of the Rules, he was a person who is treated as though  he
         has leave.

      5) Further, the only sensible way to treat someone who was deemed  not
         to be an overstayer by the Rules was to treat that person as  being
         a person who was lawfully within the UK.  That was the  reality  of
         their residence which was therefore "lawful residence" pursuant  to
         paragraph 276B(i)(a) of the Rules.

      6) Paragraph 276A(b) was no answer to that point as, on any  view,  it
         does not provide an exhaustive definition  of  "lawful  residence",
         only examples.

      7) The purpose of paragraph 276B(v) was  tolerably  clear,  namely  to
         ensure that migrants took steps to regularise their stay by  making
         an appropriate application for leave to remain within a  reasonable
         period (i.e. 28 days) of becoming an overstayer or by  leaving  the
         UK and applying from abroad if they could not do so  -  with  those
         who did apply within 28 days being permitted to reside here  whilst
         awaiting  a  decision,  which   was   an   entirely   natural   and
         unobjectionable interpretation of the provision - see, by  analogy,
         R (Bhudia) v SSHD [2016] UKUT 00025 (IAC) at [284 (iv) & (ix)].

46.  Mr Malik submitted that Mr Biggs' submissions were  plainly  wrong  and
    that the position was straightforward.  It was common ground  that  the
    Applicant had  first  arrived  in  the  UK  on  11  October  2006;  had
    thereafter lived here continuously and lawfully until 22  January  2016
    (when the administrative review decision was served on  him);  and  had
    then made an application for further leave  to  remain  on  4  February
    2016, which he had varied on 7 November  2016  to  an  application  for
    indefinite leave to remain on the ground of  long  residence.   It  was
    therefore, Mr Malik submitted, hopeless to  argue  that  the  Applicant
    could meet the  requirements  for  indefinite  leave  to  remain  under
    Paragraph 276B which had five freestanding requirements, each of  which
    (as Paragraph 276D made clear) had  to  be  met  for  an  applicant  to
    succeed.

47.  Mr Malik emphasised that the  first  requirement,  under  sub-paragraph
    (i)(a), was that "he has  had  at  least  10  years  continuous  lawful
    residence in the United Kingdom".  The definition of "lawful residence"
    was provided in paragraph 276A(b) (above)  which  made  clear  that  it
    meant continuous residence which was  pursuant  to  existing  leave  to
    enter or remain; or to temporary admission within s.11 of the 1971  Act
    where leave to enter or remain  was  subsequently  granted;  or  to  an
    exemption from immigration control (including where an exemption ceases
    to apply it is immediately followed by a grant of  leave  to  enter  or
    remain).  Thus, Mr Malik submitted, after 22 January 2016 the Applicant
    had no "lawful residence"  as  he  had  no  existing  leave,  temporary
    admission  or  exemption  from  immigration  control.    Equally,   and
    obviously, the Applicant's residence from 11 October 2006 to 22 January
    2016 was for less than 10 years.  Therefore, Mr  Malik  submitted,  the
    Respondent was clearly right to have concluded in her  decision  of  13
    March 2017, that the Applicant was unable to show that he had  had  "at
    least 10 years' continuous lawful residence in the United Kingdom".

48.  Further, Mr Malik submitted that the Applicant's reliance on  paragraph
    276B(v)  was  misconceived.  It  was,  he  submitted,  plain  from  the
    structure of paragraph 276B, read in conjunction with  paragraph  276D,
    that sub-paragraph (v) represented a freestanding requirement that  was
    additional to sub-paragraph (i)(a).   The  former  did  not  negate  or
    compromise the  requirement  under  the  latter  of  showing  10  years
    continuous lawful residence.  Rather,  sub-paragraph  (v)  involved  an
    additional requirement, which did not qualify  any  other  pre-existing
    requirement in the Immigration Rules, such that even if  a  person  had
    had at least 10 years continuous lawful residence in the UK,  he  would
    not be entitled to indefinite leave to remain if he was in  the  UK  in
    breach of immigration  laws  unless  one  of  the  exceptions  in  sub-
    paragraph (v) applied.  The exceptions were consistent with the general
    amendment of the Rules to the effect that  applications  for  leave  to
    remain by persons who had overstayed for more than  28  days  would  be
    refused on that Ground.

49.  Mr Malik underlined that in Mahad  v  Entry  Clearance  Officer  [2009]
    UKSC 16 at [10] Lord Brown noted, by reference to Odelola  v  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department [2009] UKHL 25, that the  question  of
    construction of the Immigration Rules "depends upon the language of the
    rule, construed against the relevant background" and "that  involves  a
    consideration of the immigration rules as a whole and the function that
    they serve in the administration of  immigration  policy".   Viewed  in
    that light, Mr Malik submitted,  the  Applicant's  case  was  not  only
    inconsistent with the natural reading and structure of  paragraph  276B
    but was also inconsistent with the Immigration Rules read as a whole.

50.  Mr Biggs submitted that the Respondent's  construction  would  lead  to
    starkly unfair results,  inconsistent  with  the  specific  purpose  of
    paragraph 276B(v) and the overarching purpose of paragraph  276B  which
    was to recognise that those who have residence within the  UK  for  ten
    years lawfully should be entitled to remain permanently.   Contrary  to
    those purposes, he submitted, the Respondent's construction would  mean
    that:

    (1)  An Applicant could not rely on the period when  their  application
         was outstanding even though the delay in deciding was the Secretary
         of State's responsibility and even if the delay was extensive.

    (2)   To  treat  an  Applicant  as   unlawfully   resident   would   be
         counterproductive as it  would  undermine  the  aim  of  permitting
         Applicants who have made prompt applications after  overstaying  to
         remain until their application is decided.

    (3)  Against the background of  the  Respondent's  acceptance  that  an
         application pursuant to paragraph  276B  entailed  a  human  rights
         claim (as defined in Section 113 of the 2002 Act) it was clear that
         a refusal of an application relying on paragraph 276B would  engage
         Article 8 in most cases as a decision to refuse such a claim  would
         be a decision that removal would not breach Section 6 of the  Human
         Rights Act 1998 and there was no rational, let alone proportionate,
         justification for allowing a migrant to remain in the UK  in  order
         to apply for leave to remain, but then  to  refuse  to  acknowledge
         that legitimate period of residence as lawful.

51.  Mr Biggs accepted that the Respondent's argument  that  paragraph  276B
    set out a series of separate requirements was  correct,  but  submitted
    that the fact that it did so was  clearly  not  inconsistent  with  the
    Applicant's submission as to the correct  interpretation  of  paragraph
    276B(v), namely that an Applicant must be  treated  as  if  he/she  had
    leave or as otherwise lawfully residing in the UK such as to enable the
    period to count towards the total period of lawful  residence  required
    by paragraph 276B(i)(a).

52.  Although not part of the decision letter, Mr Malik  also  argued  that,
    in any event, the critical date was 7 November 2016 (when the applicant
    had again varied his  original  application  of  4  February  2016  and
    applied  for  indefinite  leave  to  remain),  by  which  time  he  had
    undoubtedly overstayed for more than 28 days and was  therefore  unable
    to rely on Paragraph 276B(v).

53.   In  furtherance  of  that  argument  Mr  Malik  submitted  that  under
    paragraphs 34E and 34F of the Immigration Rules  a  person  wishing  to
    vary the purpose of an application for leave to remain in  the  UK  the
    application must comply with the requirements of paragraph 34 as if the
    variation was a new application, and that  any  valid  variation  of  a
    leave to remain application will be  decided  in  accordance  with  the
    Immigration Rules in force at the date  such  variation  is  made.   Mr
    Malik then drew attention to the decision of the  Court  of  Appeal  in
    Secretary of State for the Home Department v Khan [2016] EWCA  Civ  137
    at [27] & [50] in which the Court concluded  that  it  was  clear  that
    Paragraph 34E was concerned with variation of an application  and  from
    its text that there must be compliance with the  relevant  requirements
    as they apply at the date  that  the  variation  was  made  as  if  the
    variation was a new application or claim and that accordingly  "At  the
    date of the application" in  paragraph  1A(a)  of  Appendix  C  of  the
    Immigration Rules (which dealt with the need to prove a  certain  level
    of funds when applying to remain as a Tier 4 student) had to  be  "read
    accordingly".  Thus, submitted Mr Malik, "an application" in  paragraph
    276B(v) had to be "read accordingly" as well and thus  meant  that  the
    application was made on 7 November 2016 - by which time  the  Applicant
    had overstayed for longer than 28 days, such that refusal of indefinite
    leave to remain under Paragraph 276B was inevitable.

54.  Mr Biggs submitted that the Respondent's  argument  as  to  7  November
    2016 was obviously wrong, given that:

    (1)  It was only possible to vary a single continuing  application  and
         doing so does not amount  to  a  new  distinct  application  -  see
         paragraph 34BB (1)-(2) of the Rules (above); AQ (Pakistan)  v  SSHD
         [2011] EWCA Civ 833 at [22] and JH (Zimbabwe) v  SSHD  [2009]  EWCA
         Civ 78 at [35].

    (2)  That was why the Rules drew a distinction between an "application"
         and a "variation" "of the purposes of an application for  leave  to
         remain" - see paragraphs 34E and 34G of the Rules.

    (3)  Whilst the Rules treated a variation of an application  as  though
         it was an application for some purposes (e.g. requiring a charge to
         be paid and a prescribed procedure to be followed), that  was  only
         necessary because a variation  was  merely  an  alteration  of  the
         purpose of a pending application for leave to remain and was not  a
         separate application.

    (4)  An application could only be varied whilst it  was  pending  (i.e.
         before  it  was  "determined")  and  under  paragraph  276B(v)   an
         application was "pending" until it was "determined"  -  which  must
         mean decided or finally decided.

    (5)  The language used in paragraph 276B(v) was general.   It  was  not
         limited to an application made pursuant to paragraph 276B(v) - e.g.
         it covered the situation where an applicant applied within 28  days
         of becoming an overstayer who might  then  apply  years  later  for
         indefinite leave to remain pursuant to paragraph 276B.

    (6)  The Respondent's interpretation was  totally  wrong  as  it  would
         require  the  re-writing  of  paragraph  276B,  which  was  clearly
         inappropriate  -  "an  application"  would  have  to   become   "an
         application or a variation of a pending application  for  leave  to
         remain pursuant to paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules".

55.  For all those reasons, Mr Biggs  submitted  that  the  decision  of  13
    March 2017 was based upon  a  misinterpretation  or  misapplication  of
    paragraphs 276B and 276A of the Immigration  Rules,  and  that  it  was
    unreasonable and vitiated by clear material  public  law  errors  as  a
    result.

Second Ground

56.  Mr Biggs submitted that, as demonstrated by numerous authorities,  most
    recently Mandalia v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015] 1
    WLR 4546 at [29] - [31] and SH (Pakistan) v SSHD  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  at
    [17]  -  [23]  &  [29],  the  Respondent's  discretion  to  waive   the
    Immigration Rules was a broad one, and could not  be  fettered  by  the
    terms of her policies.

57.  Mr Biggs underlined that, in the decision letter,  the  Respondent  had
    accepted that she had a discretion as to whether to treat the applicant
    as having accrued the required 10  years  continuous  lawful  residence
    (see [14] above) and had considered it.  However, Mr  Biggs  submitted,
    whilst clearly under a duty to give sufficient  reasons  to  allow  the
    reader to understand what decisions  had  been  reached  and  why,  the
    Respondent had nevertheless provided no, or no adequate,  reasoning  as
    to the basis for and outcome of that consideration,  and  that  it  was
    therefore (at least) unclear on what basis (if any) a decision was made
    in that regard

58.   In  the  result,  Mr  Biggs  submitted,  the  Respondent   had   acted
    unreasonably in failing  to  reach  a  decision  with  respect  to  the
    exercise of discretion, and/or  had  failed  to  provide  any,  or  any
    adequate reasoning as to the exercise of that discretion (which,  given
    that the applicable standard of  review  was  "anxious  scrutiny",  was
    sufficient to justify a Wednesbury review); and/or (by  inference  from
    the absence of any reasoning showing that the Respondent  had  properly
    considered her discretion) had failed to consider material matters  and
    to exercise her discretion reasonably.

59.  Those public law  errors  were  material  -  with  the  obvious  factor
    supporting the possibility of the exercise of discretion being that the
    applicant had applied for indefinite leave based on  his  understanding
    of Paragraph 276B(v) which,  the  grant  of  permission  to  apply  for
    judicial review by Judge Kopieczek confirmed, was a proper position for
    him to take.

60.  Moreover and importantly, Mr Biggs continued, as argued in  support  of
    the first Ground, it was entirely within  the  spirit  and  purpose  of
    paragraph 276B generally, and of paragraph 276B(v)  in  particular,  to
    treat  the  period  awaiting  the  decision  on  his  application   for
    indefinite leave to remain as a period of "lawful residence",  even  if
    that period of lawful residence did not qualify  for  the  purposes  on
    Paragraph 276B(i)(a).

61.  At all  events,  Mr  Biggs  submitted,  it  was  plainly  open  to  the
    Respondent to exercise discretion in the Applicant's case and to  treat
    him as having accrued 10 years' continuous  lawful  residence,  and  it
    would be wrong in principle for the Tribunal to usurp the  Respondent's
    decision-making function by imposing its own view  as  to  whether  the
    discretion should have been exercised.

62.  Mr Malik submitted,  by  reference  to  R  (Thebo)  v  Entry  Clearance
    Officer [2013] EWHC 146 (Admin) and R (Sanaiya) v Upper Tribunal [2016]
    EWCA Civ 85, that the Respondent is entitled to have Immigration  Rules
    in mandatory and inflexible terms and to apply them consistently.  Thus
    here, as the Applicant did not meet the requirements of paragraph  276B
    of the Rules, the Respondent was entitled to refuse his application for
    indefinite leave to remain.

63.  Mr Malik further submitted that it appeared that the Applicant had  not
    asked the Respondent to grant him leave to remain in  the  exercise  of
    her  residual  discretion  outside  the  Rules,  nor  pointed  to   any
    exceptional   circumstances.    Nevertheless,   under    the    heading
    "Exceptional Circumstances" in her decision, the Respondent  had  given
    express consideration  to  the  Applicant's  particular  circumstances.
    There was nothing in the Respondent's published policy that applied  to
    the Applicant's circumstances and, in the context of this  Ground,  she
    had  acted  lawfully  and  rationally  in  refusing   the   Applicant's
    application.

64.  As to the Respondent's consideration of the  Applicant's  family  life,
    Mr Malik pointed out  that  the  Applicant  did  not  suggest  that  he
    qualified under Appendix FM of the  Immigration  Rules,  and  submitted
    that, in any event, it was clear that the Applicant could not meet  the
    requirements for leave to remain - whether as a partner or a parent.

65.  Mr Malik submitted that, as to the Respondent's  consideration  of  the
    Applicant's private life, it was  clear  that  the  Applicant  had  not
    discharged the burden on him to satisfy the Respondent that he met  the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE of the  Immigration  Rules,  and  that
    there was no prospect whatsoever of the Applicant being  granted  leave
    on that basis.  As noted by the Respondent  in  her  decision,  he  had
    spent the majority of his life in Bangladesh; he spoke the language; he
    had material connections there; and would be able to integrate  without
    any significant difficulty.

66.  Citing the judgment of Sales J (as he then was) in  R  (Nagre)  v  SSHD
    [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin), as approved by the Court of Appeal in Singh  &
    Khalid v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 74 and  in  Agyarko  and  others  v  SSHD
    [2015] EWCA Civ 440, and by reference to the judgment of Beatson LJ  in
    Butt v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017] EWCA  Civ  184
    at [28], Mr Malik argued that whilst it was technically possible for  a
    person to fail under  the  Immigration  Rules,  but  to  qualify  under
    Article 8, such cases would be exceptional.

67.  Mr Malik reminded me of  the  approach  of  Lord  Bingham  in  Huang  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2007] 2 AC 167 at [20]; and
    of Lord Reed in Hesham Ali (Iraq) v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2016] UKSC 60 at [53] and Agyarko v Secretary of State  for
    the Home Department [2017] UKSC 11 at [49] as to the need  to  bear  in
    mind  certain  general   considerations   -   including   the   general
    desirability of applying known rules; the damage to good administration
    and effective control if a scheme is perceived  to  be  unduly  porous,
    unpredictable or perfunctory; the fact that   a  failure  to  meet  the
    requirements in the Immigration  Rules  is  a  relevant  and  important
    consideration in an Article 8 assessment because the Rules reflect  the
    assessment of the general  public  interest  made  by  the  responsible
    minister and endorsed by Parliament; and the importance of  considering
    whether  a  person's  immigration  status  was  "precarious"  when  the
    relevant life was established.

68.  Mr Malik went on to underline that, in any event, the judgments of  the
    Supreme Court in Hesham Ali (Iraq) and Agyarko (both  above),  and  the
    subsequent judgment of the Court of Appeal in EEA (Nigeria) v Secretary
    of State for the Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ 239, show that Article
    8 must  now  be  considered  in  the  light  of  changes  made  to  the
    legislative scheme by the Immigration Act  2014  -  in  consequence  of
    which, he submitted, the appellate scheme is no  longer  based  on  the
    premise that a person may fail under the Immigration Rules, but succeed
    under Article 8 on appeal.  Now, he argued, Courts  and  Tribunals  are
    obliged to follow sections 117A - 117D  (above)  -  which  include  the
    provision that  little  weight  should  be  given  to  a  private  life
    established by a person at a time  when  their  immigration  status  is
    precarious.    In  that  regard,  Mr  Malik  drew  attention   to   the
    observations of Sales LJ (as he then was) in Rhuppiah  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 803 at [30]-[44], [49]  &
    [63].

69.  In the result, Mr Malik submitted,  taking  into  account  the  general
    considerations to which he  had  drawn  attention,  together  with  the
    evidence put forward by the Applicant, there was no arguable case  that
    the Applicant could not enjoy his private or family life (if there  was
    one) elsewhere,  or  that  the  Respondent's  decision  prejudiced  the
    Applicant's private or family life in a manner sufficiently serious  to
    amount to a breach of Article 8.  The Applicant's Article 8  claim  was
    bound to fail.

 Third Ground

70.   Mr  Biggs  submitted  that  the  Respondent's  certification  of   the
    Applicant's human rights claim was plainly unlawful. It was  clear,  he
    argued, from the submissions that he had advanced  in  support  of  the
    first and second Grounds that "on at least one legitimate view  of  the
    facts or the law the claim may succeed".  It was certainly not  a  case
    that was so weak that it was bound to fail.  Rather the plainly correct
    decision of Judge Kopieczek showed that it was at least  arguable  that
    the Applicant's case as to paragraph 276B(v) was right.  There  was  at
    least a real prospect of the Applicant showing on appeal  that  he  was
    entitled to leave under paragraph 276B; and/or that the Respondent  had
    acted unlawfully and unreasonably regarding the exercise of discretion;
    and in any event given the length of the Applicant's  lawful  residence
    in the UK and all the circumstances.

71.  Even if Grounds 1 & 2 were rejected,  Mr  Biggs  submitted,  a  crucial
    factor which supported the Applicant's Article 8 case was the  lack  of
    any  rational  or  proportionate  justification  for  the   restrictive
    construction of paragraphs 276B(1)(a) and  276B(v).   There  could,  he
    submitted, be no justification for allowing a migrant to reside in  the
    UK by paragraph  276B(v),  while  also  preventing  that  migrant  from
    relying on his legitimate residence in the UK for at  least  ten  years
    continuously.  For that reason, and by reference to R (Quila & Anor)  v
    SSHD [2012] 1 AC 621 at [45] - [59]  &  [73]  -  [80],  there  was,  he
    submitted, no proportionate justification for refusing the  Applicant's
    application for indefinite leave to remain.

72.  Adopting his earlier  submissions,  Mr  Malik  argued  that  there  was
    clearly a rational and proportionate justification for the Respondent's
    construction of paragraphs 276B(1)(a) and 276B(v); that the  Respondent
    had carefully considered everything that the Applicant had put forward;
    that, on any legitimate view, the Applicant's Article 8  claim  had  no
    prospect of success and was bound to fail; and  that  the  Respondent's
    certificate under s.94 was plainly rational.

Conclusions

73.  I accept that the question of  whether  the  Applicant's  human  rights
    claim is "clearly unfounded" involves a black and white objective  test
    independent of the burden of proof.  If there is any  reasonable  doubt
    in favour of the claim, then it is not "clearly unfounded". Equally,  I
    have applied the "anxious scrutiny" standard of Wednesbury review,  and
    considered the questions posed in Razgar (above).

74.  As to the  first  Ground,  I  reject  Mr  Biggs'  argument  that  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Kopieczek's decision to grant permission amounted to the
    binding and unassailable conclusion that the Applicant's case as to the
    correct approach to paragraph 276B(v)  of  the  Immigration  Rules  was
    properly arguable.  Rather, I agree with Mr  Malik  that  the  ultimate
    decision is a matter for me, with the benefit of full argument -  which
    the judge, on permission, had inevitably not received.

75.  The parties are rightly agreed that paragraph 276B of  the  Immigration
    Rules sets out five separate requirements.  For the reasons advanced by
    Mr Malik (summarised above) I conclude that:

    (1)  Given the definition of "lawful residence" in  paragraph  276A(b),
         it is hopeless to argue that the Applicant  could  meet  the  first
         requirement under paragraph 276B(i)(a).

    (2)  It is obvious from  the  structure  of  paragraph  276B,  read  in
         conjunction with  Paragraph  276D,  that  paragraph  276B(v)  is  a
         freestanding requirement additional  to  sub-paragraph  (1)(a)  and
         consistent with the general amendment of the Immigration  Rules  to
         the effect that applications for leave to  remain  by  persons  who
         have overstayed for more than 28  days  will  be  refused  on  that
         Ground.

    (3)  There is no arguable  merit  in  Mr  Biggs'  contention  that  the
         Applicant was to be treated, for the purposes of paragraph 276B, as
         if he had leave to remain and thus to be in "lawful residence"; nor
         in the contention that the Respondent's construction would lead  to
         starkly unfair  results  to  applicants.   Rather,  it  is  readily
         foreseeable that if applicants were to  be  so  treated,  it  would
         create fertile ground for the abuse of the system.

76.  In those circumstances it is not necessary to reach any concluded  view
    in relation to Mr  Malik's  argument  that  the  critical  date  was  7
    November 2016, not 4 February 2016.

77.  As to the second Ground, and again  for  the  reasons  advanced  by  Mr
    Malik (summarised above), I conclude that it  is  simply  not  arguable
    that the Respondent acted unreasonably by failing to reach  a  decision
    with respect to the  exercise  of  discretion;  and/or  by  failing  to
    provide any, or any adequate, reasoning as  to  the  exercise  of  that
    discretion; and/or by failing  to  consider  material  matters  and  to
    exercise her discretion reasonably.  In my view, having considered  the
    questions posed in Razgar (above), the Applicant's Article 8 claim  was
    bound to fail.

78.  I therefore conclude in relation to the first and second  Grounds,  for
    the reasons referred to above, that this is not a case in which "on  at
    least one legitimate view of  the  facts  or  the  law  the  claim  may
    succeed".  On the contrary, it was "clearly unfounded" bound  to  fail.
    Hence, I have rejected those Grounds.

79.  That rejection is fatal to the principal argument advanced by Mr  Biggs
    in support of the third Ground.  Equally, in my view, and again for the
    reasons advanced by Mr Malik (above), there is no arguable merit in  Mr
    Biggs' alternative  argument  that  the  Respondent's  construction  of
    paragraphs 276B(1)(a) and  276B(v)  lacked  rational  or  proportionate
    justification.

80.  In the result, I have no hesitation in concluding that the  Applicant's
    Article 8 claim had no prospect of success and was bound to  fail,  and
    that the Respondent's certificate under s.94 that the  application  was
    "clearly unfounded" was plainly rational.  Accordingly, the application
    for judicial review is refused.





    The Honourable Mr Justice Sweeney

    22 October 2018
