
RS and SS (Exclusion of appellant from hearing) Pakistan [2008] UKAIT 00012

                       ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at: Field House
Date of Hearing: 18 December 2007


                                   Before:


 Mr C M G Ockelton, Deputy President of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
                      Senior Immigration Judge Clements

                                   Between

                                     RS
                                     SS
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the Appellants:          Ms T White, instructed by Ali Sinclair
Solicitors
For the Respondent:          Mr J Gulvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


The general rule that an appellant who is in the United  Kingdom  cannot  be
excluded from the hearing of his own appeal does not mean  that  he  cannot,
by himself or by his representative, consent to a  requirement  that  he  be
absent from part of it.  Evidence may gain in credibility from  the  removal
of a possibility that a  later  witness  has  heard  the  evidence  that  an
earlier witness gave.  If two appeals are  combined  it  is  proper  for  an
Immigration Judge to ask, and proper for a  representative  to  agree,  that
one  appellant  remain  outside  while  the  other   gives   evidence.    An
alternative course of action is to hear the appeals successively.






                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



 1. The appellants are citizens of Pakistan, mother  and  son,  the  mother
    claiming to have been born in or about 1960 and the son in 1990.   They
    arrived in the United Kingdom and claimed asylum.  They  were  refused:
    one reason was that the Secretary of State did not accept that the  son
    was as young as he claimed.  Their appeals were  therefore  treated  as
    separate appeals against separate decisions by the Secretary of  State.
    They  came  before  an  Immigration  Judge  who  dismissed  them.   The
    appellants have sought and obtained an order for reconsideration.  Thus
    the matter comes before us.

 2. The principal ground of appeal was that  the  Immigration  Judge  erred
    fundamentally, in Ms White's submission,  in  allowing  himself  to  be
    misled in his reading of Rules 20 and 43 of the Asylum and  Immigration
    Tribunal (Procedure)  Rules  2005  and  directing  that  in  an  appeal
    hearing, which was under Rule 20, to be a hearing of the two individual
    appeals together, the son could be  required  to  be  absent  from  the
    hearing for part of it during which  time  his  mother  gave  evidence.
    There is no doubt about  the  background  to  the  Immigration  Judge's
    decision.  It was that the evidence of both appellants was  doubted  by
    the respondent.  The Immigration Judge was aware of the danger that  if
    whoever gave evidence second had heard the first  appellant's  evidence
    being given, the evidence might, on the one hand, be  tailored  to  fit
    the evidence which had already been given: but, as we pointed out to Ms
    White, on the  other  hand,  the  Immigration  Judge  would  have  been
    deprived of seeing the same story being told by a person  who  had  not
    witnessed it being told before, which might  well  have  supported  its
    credibility.

 3. The Immigration Judge indicated at the  hearing  that  he  proposed  to
    require the son to be absent while the mother gave  evidence.   Exactly
    what happened after that has not become clear until this  morning.   It
    is not mentioned in Ms White's grounds.  What appears to have  happened
    is as follows.  The Immigration Judge heard submissions from  Ms  White
    about the impossibility of requiring an appellant to be  absent  during
    the course of his own appeal.  The  Immigration  Judge  then  adjourned
    briefly in order to consider what the position was under the  Procedure
    Rules to which  we  have  referred.   When  he  returned  to  court  he
    indicated  to  Ms  White  that  there  appeared  to  him  to   be   two
    possibilities: one was  that  there  be  separate  trials  of  the  two
    appeals, in which case of course individual arrangements could be  made
    for each trial without there being a risk that an  appellant  would  be
    required to be absent for part of the trial  for  his  own  appeal,  or
    alternatively that there could be a joint trial on the  basis  that  he
    had indicated before.

 4. Ms White has told us that in those circumstances, knowing the view that
    the judge took about the presence  of  the  son  for  the  whole  of  a
    combined hearing, she chose the combined  hearing.   She  has  told  us
    today that it was her view  that  separate  trials  were,  for  various
    reasons in this case,  impossible  or  impractical  or  unrealistic  or
    uneconomic or a waste.  But the position is that  having  been  offered
    the possibility of separate trials or a combined  hearing  and  knowing
    that if there was a combined hearing the judge's view was that the  son
    had to be absent while his mother gave evidence, she chose the combined
    hearing.  In those circumstances it is clear that the  absence  of  the
    son from the hearing, although expressed by the  Immigration  Judge  in
    terms of requirement, was an absence which Ms White had, on his behalf,
    not merely accepted but in fact chosen.

 5. Her principal submission  is  that  an  appellant  cannot  lawfully  be
    required to be absent from any part of the hearing of his  or  her  own
    appeal, save in the circumstances envisaged by s108 of  the  2002  Act.
    We have a great deal of sympathy with  that  submission.   However,  an
    appellant is not on the other  hand  required  to  be  present  at  the
    hearing of  his  appeal  and  there  are  many  and  good  reasons  why
    appellants sometimes do not attend the hearing, or all of  the  hearing
    of an appeal.  An appellant properly represented by counsel  who  makes
    an informed decision in the circumstances we have given cannot properly
    complain subsequently about his absence from a  part  of  the  hearing,
    even  if  it  is  expressed  by  the  Immigration  Judge  in  terms  of
    requirement.

 6. It is often felt that absence from a hearing for part of a hearing is a
    real disadvantage  to  an  appellant.   It  ought  not  to  be  in  all
    circumstances.  Clearly an appellant not at a hearing  cannot,  in  his
    absence, give oral  evidence.   Sometimes,  however,  appeals  and,  of
    course particularly reconsiderations, do not depend on  oral  evidence:
    and in those circumstances it may well be that an  appellant,  properly
    advised, will not attend a hearing.  Where  there  is  evidence  to  be
    given in circumstances such as those we have indicated it appears to us
    that any counsel might quite properly accept  the  Immigration  Judge's
    view and quite properly make the choice which she quite  properly  did.
    After all, the appellants' position was, and no doubt  is,  that  their
    story was perfectly  credible.   They  would  not  have  been  able  to
    demonstrate the credit of their two accounts if  the  Home  Office  had
    been able to say of the son's evidence "well, of course he  says  that:
    he has just heard his mother's evidence".  In the  circumstances  which
    arose in this case the decision to allow and indeed require the son  to
    be absent during the giving of his mother's  evidence  was  a  decision
    which could only add to the force of submissions made about the  credit
    of the story.  As it happened, the Immigration Judge  took  an  adverse
    view of the credibility of, in particular, the mother's evidence.   But
    of  course  that  was  a  subsequent  judgment  by  the  judge  in  his
    determination.  At the time of the hearing Ms  White  had  the  job  of
    showing that the evidence was credible and nothing that she  did  seems
    to us to have been wrong in that context.  What we do think is wrong is
    to claim, as has been claimed in this case, after  the  result  of  the
    determination is known, that it was erroneous for the judge  to  behave
    as he did.  As we have explained it was not erroneous, because  on  the
    son's behalf counsel waived his right to be present through the  entire
    trial.

 7. That deals with the  principal  matter  of  procedure  raised  in  this
    reconsideration.  There are, however, a number of other matters raised,
    principally going to the Immigration Judge's assessment of credibility.
     In her helpful skeleton argument prepared for today's  reconsideration
    hearing Ms White has raised a number of discrete issues  attacking  the
    Immigration Judge's assessment of credibility, which is set out in some
    detail at paragraph 10 with its sub-paragraphs lettered (a) to (j).  Ms
    White's challenges go, if we may summarise  them,  to  paragraphs  (a),
    (c), (g) and (i): in other words to five of  the  ten  paragraphs.   In
    respect of two, at least, Ms White's  claim  is  that  the  Immigration
    Judge did not recognise that the area of the evidence in which  he  was
    detecting a discrepancy was an area which was not at the  core  of  the
    story of either the appellant or her son.  The amount of weight  to  be
    given to issues of credibility  and  to  questions  of  discrepancy  or
    disagreement on evidence is a matter for the Immigration Judge.  But we
    do not think that it can be too often repeated that there  is  no  rule
    that issues of credibility do not matter if they do not go to the  core
    of a claim.  If an Immigration Judge finds that he  cannot  believe  an
    appellant on matters which can be checked, he has no reason at  all  to
    believe the same appellant on matters which  cannot  be  checked.   The
    fact that the matters  in  the  first  category  are  apparently  small
    matters and the matters in the second  category  are  apparently  large
    matters does not affect that position at all.  An Immigration Judge who
    discovers that there are considerable discrepancies in an account, even
    if they go only to small matters, is entitled to say that he  does  not
    trust the appellant's word and as  a  result  that  he  does  not  make
    findings of fact that he is invited to make on the evidence as a whole.



 8. In two, at least, of  the  areas  in  which  Ms  White  challenges  the
    Immigration Judge's assessment of credibility she points out  that  the
    appellant had no reason to lie on those particular issues.  That may or
    may not be  right.   But  the  Immigration  Judge's  task  was  not  in
    principle to detect lies, it was in principle to  discover  whether  he
    had trustworthy, or  at  any  rate  potentially  trustworthy,  evidence
    before him.   If  the  evidence  was  tainted  by  discrepancies  then,
    whatever the reason for the discrepancies, he was entitled to find that
    the evidence was not evidence which he accepted.

 9. On two, at least, of the other matters on which Ms White challenges the
    Immigration Judge's assessment the basis of the challenge is  that  the
    Immigration  Judge  made  assumptions  which  might  or  might  not  be
    appropriate in relation to a difference of  culture.   Those  arguments
    have more weight and if the Immigration  Judge  had  based  his  entire
    credibility findings on judgments of  that  sort,  we  might  have  had
    little difficulty in agreeing with Ms White's submissions.  However, in
    the context of the determination as a whole, those two  points  are  of
    little importance by themselves.   There  is  no  suggestion  that  the
    Immigration Judge's views expressed in the passages to which  Ms  White
    specifically makes reference infected his judgment on the other  issues
    which he so clearly sets out in his determination.

10. One  other  area  in  which  Ms  White  challenges  the  assessment  of
    credibility relates to a difference of view between the mother and  the
    son about an area of the son's knowledge.  The  mother's  position  was
    that she had shielded difficulties from her son; the son's position was
    that he knew about them.  That is of itself, as Ms White  pointed  out,
    not a discrepancy.  But in fact the evidence taken as a whole  was  not
    merely about the mother shielding the son: the mother asserted that the
    son did not know elements which were a relatively central part  of  the
    claim which they both made.  The son, on the other hand, made it  clear
    that he did know.  That, it appears to us, is  properly  identified  by
    the Immigration Judge as a discrepancy.  There is no discrepancy in the
    mother saying that she had attempted to keep matters from her son, but,
    bearing in mind their role in the claim which they made, the fact  that
    by the time of the hearing they gave a different account of  the  son's
    knowledge was a feature of the evidence which the Immigration Judge was
    entitled to take into account.

11. Looking at the matter as a whole as we do and taking  into  account  Ms
    White's submissions so carefully made in writing and orally to  us,  we
    reach the view that the Immigration Judge's assessment  of  credibility
    was entirely open to him for the reasons, or, at any rate, very  nearly
    all of the reasons that he gives, and that there is no  material  error
    of law in  the  points  raised  by  Ms  White.   Any  error  is  of  no
    significance at all in the context of the findings as a whole.

12. The next challenge made by Ms White relates to the Immigration  Judge's
    assessment of the age of the son.   The  assessment  of  that,  in  the
    determination, reads as follows:


        "The male appellant is aware the Respondent challenges his age  and
        does not accept he is  a  minor.   The  Appellant  has  adduced  no
        evidence to support his claim to be a minor and even when  applying
        the low standard of proof I am not satisfied he is a minor."

    As Ms White has pointed out to us, partly with  our  assistance,  there
    was in fact a considerable amount  of  evidence  supporting  the  son's
    claimed date of birth of 20 April 1990.  The  fact  that  the  son  had
    stated that that was his birthday is of little  significance;  but  his
    mother also gave that date and in the course of her interview  she  had
    on a number of occasions adverted to that claimed date of birth for her
    son.  It is therefore quite wrong to say that the appellant has adduced
    no evidence to support his claim to be a  minor:  there  was  evidence.
    There was, however, quite clearly a challenge  and  as  Mr  Gulvin  had
    pointed out to us, the mother's letter of refusal  indicates  that  her
    son's date of birth is challenged; and goes on to say that if a  Social
    Services report of the age of the son is produced, the Home Office will
    accept it for the purposes of his claim and appeal.   We  do  not  know
    whether any Social Services report was ever sought: what we do know  is
    that none was produced to the Immigration Judge  hearing  this  appeal.
    As Ms White points out it is no doubt difficult to  prove  a  contested
    date of birth where  the  evidence  would  derive  from  a  country  in
    relation to which the Home Office might dispute  any  written  evidence
    subsequently provided.  This was, however, a case where  the  appellant
    had been given a clear indication of a way in which he could prove  his
    age.  He neglected to take the opportunity which was  offered  to  him.
    In those circumstances, although the Immigration  Judge  was  wrong  to
    consider that there was no evidence supporting the  appellant's  claim,
    it appears to us that it is, to say the least, extremely unlikely  that
    he could have made a finding different from that which he did make.

13. As Mr Gulvin also pointed out, however, the Immigration Judge  went  on
    effectively to deal with the son's position even if he were the age  he
    claimed.  As he indicated in his conclusions, he rejected the  mother's
    evidence.  He did not accept any of the principal facts  on  which  her
    claim was based.  He went on to say that he was not satisfied that  the
    son was a minor.  It was conceded that the  son  had  no  free-standing
    asylum claim, but the Immigration Judge went on to say that even if  he
    were under the age of 18 there was no reason why he could not return to
    Pakistan with his mother.  That, it seems to us, is sufficient to  cure
    any error of law in his approach to the evidence as to the  son's  age.
    His view was that even if the son were the age  he  claimed,  he  could
    return with his mother, who was an unsuccessful asylum claimant.

14. That takes us on to the fourth and last  part  of  Ms  White's  grounds
    which are that the Immigration Judge failed to deal properly with  what
    was said to be the son's independent claim under Articles 2  and  3  of
    the European Convention on Human Rights.  As  put  to  the  Immigration
    Judge in the skeleton argument  that  Ms  White  had  prepared  at  the
    hearing before him, the son's case depended  on  a  number  of  answers
    given by him at interview indicating that for  reasons  relating  to  a
    family dispute in respect of land and the unwillingness of  his  uncles
    to allow his father's land to descend to him rather than  to  them  and
    their families; his uncles were making threats against him and had ill-
    treated him.  The high point of that case was that the uncles had  been
    heard plotting to kill him.  The  evidence,  when  looked  at  in  more
    detail, however, does not suggest any real substance in fears that  the
    son may have had.  So far as the threats  are  concerned,  there  is  a
    clear difference in the evidence between the two accounts.  It is  said
    that one day, which may  be  as  long  ago  as  2004,  his  uncles  had
    threatened to kill him but, as the son said, they had  not  harmed  him
    since.  His mother, on the other hand, said that it was overhearing her
    husband and the uncles threatening to kill both her and  the  son  that
    had caused her to leave Pakistan.  So far as the  mother's  account  is
    concerned, it falls with all the mother's other  evidence.   The  son's
    own account must depend partly on what he heard  from  his  mother  and
    partly on his own experiences.  In so far as  he  depends  on  what  he
    heard from his mother the  claim  so  based  falls  with  the  mother's
    credibility.  His own experiences  were  that  some  time  ago  he  was
    subject to some ill-treatment and has not been ill-treated since.  That
    itself is an insubstantial basis for a present claim under  Articles  2
    and 3.

15. The Immigration Judge appears to have thought, and indeed indicates  in
    his determination,  that  the  son's  claim  stood  or  fell  with  the
    mother's.   Despite  Ms  White's  attempt  to  show   that   they   are
    independent, it appears to us that the Immigration Judge was  right  in
    the view he took.   The  only  substance  in  the  son's  claim  was  a
    substance which depended on acceptance of the mother's  evidence.   For
    those reasons we find that the Immigration Judge did not materially err
    in law and we order that  his  determination  dismissing  both  appeals
    shall stand.









                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT


