

Asylum and Immigration Tribunal

  LK (EEA Regulation 10(3) - "direct descendant" - "attending") Kenya [2008]
                                                                 UKAIT 00019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |                             |
|On 16 January 2008                            |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                       SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE ALLEN

                                   Between


                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr B Hawkin, of Counsel, instructed by Morgan Hall,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr J McGirr, Home Office Presenting Officer

(1)  Regulation  10(3)  of  the   Immigration   (European   Economic   Area)
Regulations 2006 can only properly be interpreted as applying  to  a  person
who is a direct descendant of a person as defined  in  Regulation  10(3)(a),
and who was actually attending an education course at the  prescribed  time.
(2) Acceptance on a course, even if unequivocal, is not attendance.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a national of Kenya.  She appealed to  an  Immigration
    Judge against the Secretary of State's  decision  on  25  January  2007
    refusing to grant leave to remain in the United Kingdom.  On 30  August
    2001 the appellant was granted a residence  permit  until  20  November
    2006 as a family member of an EEA national exercising Treaty rights  in
    the United Kingdom, and she  also  applied  to  extend  that  residence
    permit.  The application for indefinite leave  to  remain  was  on  the
    basis of ten years' lawful residence.

2.   Little more need be said about the application  on  the  basis  of  ten
    years' lawful residence  under  paragraph  276D  of  HC  395.   It  was
    accepted by and on behalf of  the  appellant  that,  after  her  appeal
    against refusal of an application she had made for leave to remain as a
    student was dismissed, she remained in the  United  Kingdom  unlawfully
    until her application under the EEA Regulations 2000 was  granted,  and
    she could therefore not establish ten  years'  lawful  residence.   She
    therefore had no right of appeal in that regard.

3.   Thereafter, the appeal was concerned with the  appellant's  application
    to extend her leave as the spouse of JS.  The appellant married JS, who
    is a Portuguese national, on 21 June 2001 in the  United  Kingdom.   It
    seems to have been accepted that he was  exercising  Treaty  rights  at
    that time.  Her application for leave to remain as a  spouse  was  made
    under the 2000 Regulations and was granted, as  set  out  above,  until
    November 2006.  JS returned to Portugal in April 2005, due to what  the
    appellant described as a family emergency, and he never returned.  They
    remained in contact and did not consider themselves to be separated and
    were not divorced.  The appellant had begun a  nursing  course  at  the
    University of Greenwich in May 2005 and was due to complete it in April
    2008, and had also been working as a care assistant with an  NHS  Trust
    since 13 June 2005.

4.   In oral evidence, the appellant said that she was in contact  with  her
    husband by telephone.  The family emergency was something  to  do  with
    land, and also her mother-in-law was not well.   She  herself  did  not
    speak much Portuguese, and did not go  to  Portugal  with  her  husband
    because of her studies.  As regards the situation  in  Kenya,  she  had
    visited there several times, most recently in  April  2005  before  she
    began her nursing course, and she has  five  brothers  and  her  mother
    living there.

5.   The Immigration Judge gave consideration to the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006  ("the  Regulations").   He  considered
    that, since the evidence showed that JS had left the United Kingdom  in
    April 2005,  he  was  not  "in  the  United  Kingdom"  as  required  by
    Regulation 6 where the definition of a qualified person is set out.  He
    had been referred to Regulation 10(3)(iii)(b), but noted that, although
    the appellant was now a student at the University of Greenwich, she was
    not a student at the time when her husband left the United Kingdom  and
    the documents put in showed only that she was a student on an Access to
    Nursing course in 2003 and 2004.   Documentation,  in  the  form  of  a
    letter from the University of Greenwich dated 3 November  2004,  showed
    that she had been offered a conditional place on a  nursing  course  to
    commence in May 2005, but the Immigration Judge found that there was  a
    major distinction between a prospective student who  had  been  made  a
    conditional offer of a place on a course and a student who  claimed  to
    fulfil the requirements of Regulation 10(3)(b),  namely  that  "He  was
    attending an educational  course  in  the  United  Kingdom  immediately
    before the qualified person died or ceased to be a qualified person and
    continues to attend such a course".

6.   The Immigration Judge concluded that the appellant's husband ceased  to
    be a qualified person when he left the United Kingdom, and, as she  was
    not attending an educational course in the United  Kingdom  immediately
    before her husband ceased to be  a  qualified  person,  she  could  not
    succeed.

7.   He gave consideration to an Article 8 claim also.  The  appellant  said
    that she could not join her husband in Portugal because of her  studies
    and because she does not speak much Portuguese.  The Immigration  Judge
    considered that she could return to her family in Kenya where she could
    apply to study or to use her learning and experience to find a job.  He
    did not agree with the submission that this  was  a  truly  exceptional
    case.  He thought that the appellant was fortunate not to be removed in
    1999 when her application for leave to remain as a student was refused,
    and that she had remained in the  United  Kingdom  unlawfully  for  two
    years until the date of  her  marriage.   Her  friends  could  maintain
    contact by letters, telephone calls and mutual visits, and he found, in
    the alternative, that she  had  not  shown  that  she  had  established
    private and family life in the United Kingdom, and/or  that  she  could
    not carry on such private and family life either with  her  husband  in
    Portugal or with her  mother  and  siblings  in  Kenya.   He  therefore
    dismissed the appeal.

8.   The appellant sought reconsideration  of  this  decision.   She  argued
    that there was evidence before the Immigration Judge to show  that  she
    fulfilled  the  requirements  of  Regulation  10  of  the  Regulations.
    Reference was made to the fact that, prior to her husband returning  to
    Portugal in May 2005, the appellant was undertaking a nine month course
    at the Kensington Temple London City Church's School of Leaders and had
    also completed a number of short courses with her  part-time  employer,
    the Oxleas NHS Trust.  Also, at the time of  her  husband's  return  to
    Portugal, she had already been  accepted  onto  a  three  year  Diploma
    course in Mental Health Nursing at the University  of  Greenwich  which
    commenced in May 2005, marginally after her husband's return.   It  was
    argued, as a consequence, that the appellant fell within the letter and
    the spirit of the EEA Regulations.

9.   It was also argued in the grounds that the Immigration  Judge  did  not
    deal properly with the Article 8 issue.  The appellant had lived in the
    United Kingdom for over twelve years and for only  a  relatively  short
    period of that  time  had  her  presence  been  unlawful.   The  couple
    continued to  regard  themselves  as  married  and  not  separated  and
    returning her to Kenya would be a very serious  interference  with  her
    private and family life in a country where, by definition, her  husband
    would not be able to exercise his Treaty rights.  In  the  alternative,
    if the appeal under the EEA Regulations failed, it could only be by the
    most slender of margins and such cases  were  capable  of  showing  the
    necessary exceptional circumstances, and in this regard  reference  was
    made to R (Lekstaka) v IAT and SSHD [2005] EWHC 745 (Admin).

10.  A Senior Immigration Judge considered this  application  and  concluded
    that no arguably material error of law in the  determination  had  been
    shown.  The appellant renewed her application to the High  Court,  and,
    on 2 November 2007, the judge ordered  reconsideration.   He  commented
    that the Immigration Judge was clearly  right  to  draw  a  distinction
    between a person having been conditionally accepted for  a  course  and
    actually "attending" that course.  But the Immigration Judge  had  made
    no finding as  to  whether  the  conditions  for  acceptance  had  been
    satisfied as at April 2005.  It was arguable that a literalist approach
    was not appropriate in the case of a student who had been unequivocally
    accepted on a course, particularly if it was to start imminently.   Nor
    were there any findings as to exactly when  in  April  the  appellant's
    husband left or when in May the course started and, theoretically,  the
    difference could have been as little as a day.  In addition, the  judge
    considered that there was a point as to whether the appellant's husband
    had necessarily ceased to reside in the United Kingdom on the day  when
    he left the country if he had initially left in order to  attend  to  a
    family emergency with the  intention  of  returning  shortly  and  only
    subsequently decided not to come back.  It was  arguable  that  it  was
    only at the latter date that he ceased to reside in the United Kingdom.
     As far as the judge could see, the evidence concerning the  Kensington
    Temple City Church's School of Leaders was not before  the  Immigration
    Judge.  He was unsure that there was any room for argument as to  error
    in the assessment of the Article 8 claim.  He noted, however, that  the
    Immigration Judge's reasoning was extremely brief and the  use  of  the
    language of "exceptionality" might suggest  a  wrong  approach  on  his
    part.

11.  The hearing before me took place on 16  January  2008.   Mr  B  Hawkin,
    instructed by Morgan  Hall,  Solicitors,  appeared  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant.  Mr J McGirr appeared on behalf of the Secretary of State.

12.  Mr Hawkin referred to the very close proximity between the  appellant's
    husband's departure and her starting the course and the fact  that,  as
    was suggested by the High Court judge, arguably  the  literal  approach
    was not appropriate.  With regard to the departure of  the  appellant's
    husband, this would not necessarily have caused him to fall outside the
    protection of the Regulations.  In this regard, Mr Hawkin  referred  to
    Regulation 3, which is concerned  with  continuity  of  residence,  and
    argued that in particular 3(2)(c), and also 3(2)(a) were of importance.
     This supported the view of the High Court judge that  various  matters
    might be such as not to affect continuity  of  residence.   As  regards
    Article 8, the exceptionality approach had been considered and that was
    an error of law, as had been said by the House of Lords in Huang.

13.  In his submissions Mr McGirr argued that the order for  reconsideration
    was perhaps rather generous in that the judge  had  considered  whether
    there might be an error of law and not whether it  might  be  material.
    It might be that the initial refusal by the  Senior  Immigration  Judge
    was not flawed.  The Immigration Judge had made findings at  paragraphs
    9 to 11 concerning the domestic circumstances of the appellant and  the
    findings were open to him.  The fact of an alternative argument did not
    mean the original decision was wrong in law.  The High Court judge  had
    not really taken issue with the Article 8 findings.

14.  By way of reply, Mr Hawkin argued that the fact that  the  husband  had
    physically left the country did not necessarily mean he had  ceased  to
    reside in it.  There was only  a  short  period  of  time  between  the
    husband leaving the country and the appellant embarking on her  course.
    The Immigration Judge erred at paragraph 11 of  the  determination,  in
    saying that the appellant's representative was wrong to say that  there
    was no requirement for the spouse to be present in the  United  Kingdom
    in order to be a qualified person.  It could be correct, depending upon
    the period being looked at.  It was not  correct,  as  the  Immigration
    Judge said, to state that there was no dispute that the husband  ceased
    to be a qualified person when he left the United Kingdom in April 2005.
     Even if the evidence  about  the  other  course  was  not  before  the
    Immigration Judge, there was evidence to demonstrate that she was doing
    that course and that was to be found in the bundle.

15.  I reserved my determination.

16.  It is clearly appropriate at the outset to set out the wording  of  the
    relevant parts of the Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations
    2006.  Regulation 10, insofar as appropriate, states as follows:

        "10. (3)  A person satisfies the conditions in this paragraph if-

                 (a)   he is the direct descendant of-

                     (i) a qualified person who has died;

                     (ii) a person who ceased to be a qualified person on
                     ceasing to reside in the United Kingdom; or

                     (iii) the person who was the spouse or civil partner
                     of the qualified person mentioned in sub-paragraph (i)
                     when he died or is the spouse or civil partner of the
                     person mentioned in sub-paragraph (ii); and

                 (b)   he was attending an educational course in the United
                     Kingdom immediately before the qualified person died
                     or ceased to be a qualified person and continues to
                     attend such a course."


17.  I raised at the outset of  Mr  Hawkin's  submissions  the  question  of
    whether in fact the  appellant  could  be  said  to  fall  within  this
    paragraph of  the  Regulations  at  all.   As  it  seemed  to  me,  the
    Regulation appeared to require a person, if they wished to fall  within
    Regulation 10(3), to be the  direct  descendant  of  a  person,  coming
    within one of the three sub-paragraphs to  sub-paragraph  (a),  and  to
    fulfil the educational requirement as set out at sub-paragraph (b).  As
    I understood him, Mr  Hawkin  argued  that,  though  the  drafting  was
    clumsy, the use of the word "or" at the end of Regulation  10(3)(a)(ii)
    effectively separated out sub-paragraph (a) from sub-paragraph (b).

18.  I do not agree.  It seems to me clear  that  sub-paragraphs  (i),  (ii)
    and (iii) define the three categories of person of whom a person can be
    a direct descendant  in  order  to  fall  within  the  requirements  of
    paragraph (a).  The use of the word "and" at the end  of  sub-paragraph
    (iii) can, in my view, only be seen as establishing  sub-paragraph  (b)
    as a further requirement to be satisfied in the case of  a  person  who
    has satisfied the requirements of paragraph (a) in one of the ways  set
    out in one of the various sub-paragraphs that follow.  Although, as  it
    seems to me, this is a clear point of  statutory  interpretation,  some
    further support  for  this  interpretation  can  be  found  in  Council
    Directive 2004/38/EC, from which  these  Regulations  are  derived,  at
    Article 12.  There we find the following:

        "3.   The Union citizen's departure from the host Member  State  or
             his/her death shall not entail loss of the right  of  residence
             of his/her children or of the parent who has actual custody  of
             the children, irrespective  of  nationality,  if  the  children
             residing  in  the  host  Member  State  are  enrolled   at   an
             educational establishment, for the purpose of  studying  there,
             until the completion of their studies."

19.  This seems to me to indicate the essential ambit  of  Regulation  10(3)
    in the relevant part of the  parent  Directive.   The  remarks  of  the
    Tribunal in RG (EEA Regulations - extended family  members)  Sri  Lanka
    [2007] UKAIT 00034 at paragraph  8,  albeit  in  a  somewhat  different
    context, are helpful in relation to this issue also.

20.   It  follows  from  this  that  the  appellant   cannot   satisfy   the
    requirements of Regulation 10 since  she  is  clearly  not  the  direct
    descendant of her husband.  The Regulation is not intended  to  provide
    protection to a person in the position of the appellant.

21.  Even if I am wrong in that regard, I do not, with all  respect  to  the
    judge, see how any approach  other  than  a  literal  approach  to  the
    statutory wording can  be  employed  in  this  case.   The  appellant's
    husband left the United  Kingdom  in  April  2005,  and  the  appellant
    embarked upon her course at the University of Greenwich in May 2005.  I
    do not think that a person can be said to be attending  an  educational
    course at any time before they embark upon that course, at least to the
    extent of appearing and registering for  that  course.   Some  indirect
    support for this view can perhaps be gleaned from paragraph  57  of  HC
    395 concerning the requirements for leave to enter as a student.   This
    provision goes into much greater detail than does  Regulation  10(3)(b)
    as to the various requirements which include acceptance for a course of
    study and the nature of the institution that  would  fall  within  this
    Rule, the ability and intention to follow a course as set  out  in  the
    Rule, and other provisions concerning their intentions and  ability  to
    meet the cost of the course and accommodation.  If the draftsman of the
    Regulation had wished to extend its ambit to  a  person  who  had  been
    accepted, even unconditionally, onto a course, then I can see no reason
    why that would not have been  done.   A  university  applicant  in  the
    United Kingdom who has  successfully  met  the  requirements  of  their
    university of choice by their performance at Advanced Level  could  not
    be said, between the date of acknowledgement  that  they  had  met  the
    required grades and registration at the  university,  to  be  attending
    that university.  To my mind, it makes no difference whether there  was
    even as little as a day between the appellant's husband's departure and
    her embarking upon the course.  The fact of the matter is that she  was
    not attending such a course immediately before her husband ceased to be
    a qualified person.

22.  As regards  the  question  of  whether  he  might  have  retained  some
    intention to return and therefore did not cease to reside in the United
    Kingdom, I do not consider  that  Regulation  3,  to  which  Mr  Hawkin
    referred, assists the appellant in  this  regard.   It  is  clear  from
    Regulation 3(1) that it applies for the purpose of calculating  periods
    of continuous residence in the United Kingdom under Regulation 5(1) and
    Regulation 15, neither of which is applicable to  the  instant  appeal.
    The fact that, with regard to those particular  provisions,  continuity
    of residence is not affected by periods  of  absence  from  the  United
    Kingdom, which, under Regulation 3(2)(a), do not exceed six  months  in
    total in a year or, under Regulation 3(2)(c), any one absence from  the
    United Kingdom not exceeding twelve months for an important reason such
    as pregnancy and  childbirth,  serious  illness,  study  or  vocational
    training or an overseas posting, does not seem to me to be  germane  to
    the situation in this case when there is no evidence of  any  intention
    of the appellant's husband to return shortly, having left in  order  to
    attend to a family  emergency.   The  appellant  did  not  provide  any
    evidence to that effect, and I think it would be wrong to speculate  as
    to her husband's intentions in the absence of such evidence.

23.  Therefore, even on this alternative basis, I do not consider  that  the
    appellant, on the evidence before the Immigration Judge, can be said to
    have been in a position to satisfy the requirements of Regulation 10(3)
    of the 2006 Regulations and her  situation  was  not  claimed  to  fall
    within any other provision of the Regulations.

24.  With regard to the point made in the grounds  and  referred  to  by  Mr
    Hawkin concerning the nine month course at the Kensington  Temple  City
    Church's School of Leaders, there was no evidence about this before the
    Immigration Judge, as a search of the file revealed.  Documentation has
    now been provided concerning this course.   There  is  reference  in  a
    letter from the Kensington Temple London City Church, apparently to the
    appellant, although it  is  addressed  "Dear  Student",  and  dated  28
    September 2004 welcoming her to the  new  School  of  Leaders  and  the
    Advanced School of Leaders.  There is no detail,  however,  as  to  the
    nature of the course and the extent  of  student  commitment  required.
    There is reference in a subsequent letter of 13  November  2004  to  "a
    feast of teaching,  learning  and  growing  -  in  our  regular  weekly
    classes", and a reference to examinations and  weekly  homework.   This
    documentation was  not,  however,  before  the  Immigration  Judge  and
    failure to refer to it can in no sense be said to amount to an error of
    law on the Immigration Judge's part.  There must, in any event, be some
    doubt as to whether that could amount to an educational  course  within
    the meaning of the Regulations.  Regulation 10(7) says the following:

        "(7)  In this  Regulation,  'educational  course'  means  a  course
             within the scope of Article 12 of Council Regulation (EEC)  No.
             1612/68 on freedom of movement for workers."

25.  Article 12 of Regulation (EEC) No.1612/68 states the following:

        "The children of a national of a member state who is  or  has  been
        employed in the territory of another member state shall be admitted
        to that state's general educational, apprenticeship and  vocational
        training courses under the same conditions as the nationals of that
        state, if such children are residing in its territory.


        Member states shall encourage all efforts to enable  such  children
        to attend these courses under the best possible conditions."

26.  It seems unlikely that the course at the Kensington Temple London  City
    Church's School of Leaders could be  said  to  be  one  of  the  United
    Kingdom's general educational, apprenticeship and  vocational  training
    courses, but, in any event, as I have set out above, this evidence  was
    not before the Immigration Judge and his decision cannot be said to  be
    materially in error as  a  consequence  of  failing  to  take  it  into
    account.  And, in any event, this has to be seen in the context  of  my
    findings about the inapplicability of Regulation 10  to  the  facts  of
    this case.

27.   There  remains  the  Article  8  issue.   The  High  Court  judge  was
    understandably somewhat lukewarm about this, but bore in mind that  the
    reasoning  was  extremely  brief  and  the  use  of  the  language   of
    exceptionality arguably indicated a wrong approach by  the  Immigration
    Judge.

28.  The reference to exceptionality was a response to a submission  by  the
    appellant's  representative.   The  Immigration  Judge  by  no   means,
    however, tied his decision exclusively to that point.   He  noted  that
    the appellant had remained in the United  Kingdom  unlawfully  for  two
    years until the date of her marriage, commenting that she was fortunate
    not to be removed in 1999, and noted that her  friends  could  maintain
    contact by letters, telephone calls and mutual visits.  Her husband  is
    in Portugal and her mother and five brothers are in Kenya.  The  reason
    why it seems to be suggested that family life with  her  husband  could
    not be maintained in Portugal  is  because  she  does  not  speak  much
    Portuguese and wishes to continue her studies.  Those can, in no sense,
    be properly regarded as insurmountable obstacles to family  life  being
    carried on in Portugal,  and  I  do  not  consider  that  it  would  be
    unreasonable to expect the appellant to do that.   She  has  no  family
    life in the United Kingdom, in the  absence  of  her  husband  and  her
    immediate family members, and the Immigration  Judge  was  entitled  to
    find, with regard to private life, that she could maintain  contact  by
    letters,  telephone  calls  and  mutual  visits   with   her   friends.
    Accordingly, I consider that there is no material error in the findings
    on Article 8.  I therefore conclude that, though the Immigration  Judge
    erred in considering that Regulation 10  of  the  EEA  Regulations  was
    applicable to this case,  that  was  not  a  material  error  since  he
    dismissed the appellant's appeal in that regard.  Nor did he materially
    err in dismissing the appeal under Article 8.  The decision  dismissing
    this appeal is maintained.





Signed                                  Date

Senior Immigration Judge Allen

