

                                             Asylum and Immigration Tribunal

     SM and others (Entry Clearance - proportionality) Afghanistan CG [2007]
                                                                 UKAIT 00010


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 11 August & 10 November 2006                 |On 02 January 2007         |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                       Senior Immigration Judge Drabu
                      Senior Immigration Judge Waumsley
                       Mrs M L Roe (Non Legal Member)

                                   Between

                                     SM
                                     AS
                                     MS

                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr G Hodgetts of Counsel for SM and AS;
                  Mr M Saleem of Malik & Malik, solicitors for MS


For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


There are no facilities for Afghan  nationals  to  obtain  entry  clearances
from Afghanistan or elsewhere. Where an appellant  meets  all  the  relevant
requirements under the immigration rule and but for  the  absence  of  entry
clearance he would qualify  and  the  respondent  cannot  show  that  it  is
practicable for him to obtain entry clearance, the claim may  succeed  under
Article 8 if the appellant shows,  or  (as  in  this  case)  the  respondent
conceded, that entry clearance cannot in practice  be  obtained  because  of
the lack of accessible facilities.





                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Background:

1.   The appeals of the three appellants, all  males,  were  heard  together
        with their consent. All the appellants are nationals of Afghanistan
        and have appealed against the decisions of the respondent to refuse
        to grant asylum and to give directions for removal to  Afghanistan.
        The cases raise important issues of law related to  proportionality
        in respect of Article 8 of the ECHR.

Relevant Facts in SM:

2.   SM had arrived in the United  Kingdom  clandestinely  on  or  about  20
        August 2001. He applied for asylum on 24 August 2001.  On  21  June
        2005 the respondent made the decision to refuse asylum  and  on  27
        June 2005 he decided to remove the appellant as an illegal  entrant
        by way of directions under paragraphs 8-10 of  Schedule  2  to  the
        Immigration Act 1971.

3.    His  appeal  against  the  respondent's  decision  was  dismissed   by
        Immigration Judge North following a hearing on 9 August  2005.  The
        Immigration Judge concluded that the appellant is not a refugee. In
        respect of the appellant's claim that his removal from  the  United
        Kingdom would be a disproportionate interference with his right  to
        family life as protected by Article 8 of the ECHR, the  Immigration
        Judge held that it would not be disproportionate.

4.   On the evidence that he heard and saw, Immigration  Judge  North  found
        that the appellant's marriage to a British citizen in February 2003
        is genuine and subsisting.

5.   The Immigration Judge whilst accepting  that  there  had  been  a  long
        delay in  the  decision  making  process  found  that  neither  the
        appellant nor anyone on his behalf had chased the respondent for  a
        decision. The Immigration Judge held that the  appellant's  removal
        would not be harsh on account of the delay alone.

6.   Based on the evidence of the appellant's  wife  the  Immigration  Judge
        found that she  "cannot  reasonably  be  expected  to  relocate  to
        Afghanistan with the Appellant even for a short period. It  follows
        that the Appellant's return to Afghanistan will interfere with  his
        right to enjoy family life in that he will be  separated  from  his
        wife."

7.   He went on to say, "The letters of support for the Appellant also  show
        that he has many social contacts  and  is  valued  as  a  volunteer
        advice worker with a Citizen's Advice Bureau and from those I  find
        that he has established a significant private life in  the  UK.  It
        follows that the Appellant's return to Afghanistan  will  interfere
        with his right to enjoy his private life."

8.   As to how the appellant's wife would cope in  the  Appellant's  absence
        from the UK, the Immigration Judge further said,  "I  am  satisfied
        that she entered her relationship with the Appellant knowing  there
        was a possibility of a separation. Her parents  attended  court  to
        show support for the Appellant and I am  satisfied  that  she  will
        have their support in the Appellant's temporary absence."

9.   With regard to the Appellant's private life in the UK  the  Immigration
        Judge said, "he has been occupied in voluntary work  and  has  made
        friends in the UK, there is no reason to suppose that he  will  not
        be able to do the same on his return to Afghanistan."

    10. Immigration Judge North concluded, "I find therefore that there  is
        nothing  exceptional  about  the  Appellant's  family  or   private
        circumstances  which  would  make   his   return   to   Afghanistan
        disproportionate.


    11.  In response to the argument made on the  Appellant's  behalf  that
        there are  no  facilities  for  making  an  application  for  entry
        clearance as a spouse  in  Kabul  and  that  his  application  will
        therefore need to be made from  another  country,  the  Immigration
        Judge noted that the Presenting Officer had been unable to give him
        any information as to the length of time it would take  to  make  a
        decision on an entry clearance application of the Appellant. He was
        informed by the Presenting Officer that the  Appellant  could  make
        the application through either the embassy in  Dubai  or  the  High
        Commission in New Delhi. The Immigration Judge held, "The Appellant
        has not shown why he should not be expected to do so.  He  has  not
        shown that there is any reason why he would not be able  to  travel
        to either, or that it would be unreasonable to expect him to do so.
        He has not demonstrated that there will be a significant  delay  in
        processing his application for entry clearance  as  a  spouse."  He
        dismissed the appeal on human rights grounds too.

    12. The Appellant sought and was granted an order of reconsideration on
        the sole ground that the Immigration Judge  had  erred  in  law  in
        concluding that it would not be a disproportionate interference  to
        his right to respect for private and family life under Article 8 to
        require him to go back to Afghanistan and apply from there or  from
        a designated third country (in this case Dubai or India) for  entry
        clearance as spouse, there being no facilities for issue  of  entry
        clearances in Afghanistan and the appellant needing to have a  visa
        to enter the designated third countries.

    13. The case was listed to be heard together with that  of  AS  as  the
        issue raised was common.

Relevant Facts in AS


    14. The Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom  on  9  July  2001  and
        sought asylum the same day. He was refused asylum on 31 July  2001.
        The Appellant appealed the decision on 20 August 2001. The decision
        was withdrawn as being fatally flawed and the appellant was granted
        exceptional leave to remain until 2 July 2003.  He  sought  further
        leave to remain on 6 May 2003.

    15. The respondent decided on 15 March 2005 to refuse to grant  further
        leave and to refuse to vary his leave to remain the United Kingdom.
        An appeal against the  decision  was  heard  by  Immigration  Judge
        Shanahan on 23 June and 4 July 2005 at  Stoke.  She  dismissed  his
        claim for asylum.

    16.  With  regard  to  the  Appellant's  claim  under  Article  8,  the
        Immigration Judge said, "In addition to his claim to  private  life
        the Appellant has now developed a  relationship  with  Ms  A.  They
        first met in March 2004 and commenced  their  relationship  in  May
        2004. They have chosen not to cohabit because  Ms  A  is  currently
        still married to her husband. She wishes to  divorce  him  but  has
        encountered  difficulties  because  her  husband  destroyed   their
        marriage documents  from  Pakistan.  She  is  therefore  unable  to
        commence divorce proceedings in the United  Kingdom  until  she  is
        either able to provide the marriage certificate or other  proof  of
        the marriage. She has three children aged 14, 12 and 8 years.  Form
        the evidence I am  satisfied  that  the  Appellant  and  Ms  A  are
        involved in  a  relationship  and  I  respect  their  decision,  in
        accordance with their beliefs, not to cohabit. I do not  hold  this
        against them in determining the issue of family life."

    17. She went on to find that the Appellant  has  "a  private  life  and
        something  approaching  a  family  life."  The  Immigration   Judge
        concluded, "While acknowledging that until Ms A is able to obtain a
        divorce the Appellant cannot apply under the immigration rules  for
        entry clearance as a spouse, fianc� or unmarried partner I find  on
        balance that there is nothing  truly  exceptional  as  set  out  in
        Huang,  about  this  case  to  override  the  legitimate   aim   of
        controlling immigration." She dismissed the  appeal  on  Article  8
        human rights grounds.

  18. The appellant was granted an order for  reconsideration  only  on  his
      Article 8 claim.

Relevant Facts in MS:

    19. The Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on  28  June  2000  and
        applied for asylum. Asylum was refused  on  29  May  2003  and  his
        appeal against the decision was  dismissed  on  21  November  2003.
        Permission  to  appeal  to  the  Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal  was
        refused. The appellant then applied for  leave  to  remain  on  the
        basis of his marriage on 23 February 2003.

    20. On 26 July 2005 the respondent made  the  decision  to  refuse  the
        application for leave to enter on the grounds  that  removal  would
        not place the United Kingdom in breach of its obligations under the
        Human Rights Act 1998 and to give directions under paragraph 10A of
        Schedule 2 to the Immigration Act 1971 for removal from the  United
        Kingdom. His appeal against this decision was heard by  Immigration
        Judge R Walters on 3 October 2005. He dismissed the appeal.

    21. The Immigration Judge found  that  "the  proposed  removal  of  the
        Appellant would amount to an interference with the right to respect
        for family  life"  and  that  the  interference  was  "sufficiently
        serious to engage  Article  8."  He  went  on  to  find  that  "the
        interference was in accordance with immigration  law  and  had  the
        legitimate aim of immigration control."

    22. The representatives of the parties before him agreed that there are
        no facilities for entry clearances in Kabul but the closest embassy
        which provides such a  service  is  in  Pakistan.  The  Appellant's
        representative argued that the overland journey between Afghanistan
        and  Pakistan  is  extremely  hazardous  and  dangerous   but   the
        Immigration Judge said,  "there  was  no  objective  evidence  that
        travel by public transport from Kabul to the  Pakistani  border  is
        not possible. I therefore found that the  Appellant  could  make  a
        journey to Pakistan and there apply at a British Embassy for  entry
        clearance to the UK as his wife's spouse." He held  "  I  therefore
        did not find  that  this  case  is  so  truly  exceptional  on  its
        particular facts that the imperative of proportionality demands  an
        outcome in the Appellant's favour, not withstanding that he  cannot
        succeed under the Rules following Huang's Case."

    23. The Appellant succeeded in obtaining an order  for  reconsideration
        of the decision of the Immigration Judge essentially on the grounds
        that the Immigration Judge  had  failed  to  take  account  of  the
        determination of the  Tribunal  in  MS  (inability  to  make  entry
        clearance application) Somalia UKAIT 00003 and that  in  dismissing
        the Article 8 claim the Immigration Judge had not taken any account
        of the general security situation in Afghanistan in  requiring  the
        Appellant to travel to Pakistan to seek entry clearance.

    24. On 11 August  2006  when  the  AIT  met  to  consider  whether  the
        determination of the Immigration Judge in this case was  indeed  in
        material error of law, the AIT included the two  legal  members  of
        the present panel. The AIT, after hearing arguments from Mr  Saleem
        and Mr Deller, decided to adjourn the hearing for  the  parties  to
        have the opportunity to adduce evidence on facilities available, if
        any, for nationals of Afghanistan to  obtain  entry  clearances  as
        appeared to be required of the appellant in this case.

    25. Mr Deller admitted that there was no such facility in Kabul but  he
        suggested that the appellant could obtain an entry  clearance  from
        the offices of the British Missions in Pakistan, India or Dubai.

    26. Mr Deller contested the proposition that the  burden  of  proof  in
        respect of appropriateness of removal was  upon  the  Secretary  of
        State. The AIT indicated to Mr Deller that as the decision in  this
        case was likely to  be  of  some  importance,  he  should  consider
        calling the Head of UK  Visas  to  give  evidence  at  the  resumed
        hearing, if it were the case of the respondent that  the  appellant
        and  other  Afghan  nationals  in  circumstances  similar  to   the
        appellant could obtain  entry  clearances  from  offices  of  other
        British Missions.

  27. The case was listed to be heard together with SM and AS.

The Hearing:

    28. We had before us bundles of documents filed by Mr Hodgetts  for  SM
        and AS and by Mr Saleem  for  MS.  Included  in  the  bundles  were
        skeleton arguments. Most importantly in  the  bundle  filed  by  Mr
        Saleem there were copies of the correspondence  between  UK  Visas,
        London and the British Missions in Afghanistan, India, Pakistan and
        Dubai.

    29.  Mr  Deller  quite  properly  and  correctly  conceded   that   the
        Immigration Judge North  had,  for  the  reasons  advanced  by  the
        appellant in his written grounds of appeal, made a  material  error
        of law. We need say no more on this matter.

    30. Mr Hodgetts, addressing us on the facts of SM drew our attention to
        his written skeleton argument. He said said  that  the  Immigration
        Judge having found the existence of family life in this case should
        have found on the facts before him that the Secretary of State  had
        not discharged the burden of  proof  that  it  was  appropriate  to
        remove the appellant from the United Kingdom. He said to the extent
        that the Immigration Judge had placed such burden on the  appellant
        and  concluded  that  the  burden  had  not  been  discharged,  the
        Immigration Judge had made a material error if law.

    31. Mr Hodgetts relied on paragraphs 12 and 13 of the judgment  of  the
        Court of Appeal in Miao v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 75. He said that all
        the relevant requirements of the immigration rules were met by  the
        appellant, in that the marriage  is  genuine  and  subsisting,  the
        parties intend to live together permanently and there is  no  issue
        on maintenance and accommodation.

    32. He argued that the respondent had produced no evidence to establish
        that the appellant could obtain entry clearance  from  any  of  its
        designated Missions abroad, reminding us that the designated  posts
        listed on the Foreign and Commonwealth Office Website are shown  to
        be Dubai, India (New Delhi) and Islamabad.

    33. To require the appellant to leave the United Kingdom  in  order  to
        obtain an entry clearance was in the circumstances disproportionate
        and impractical. He relied on the decisions of the IAT in EH [2005]
        UKIAT 00062 and AM [2004] UKIAT 00276 as well as the  decisions  of
        the European Commission of Human  Rights  in  Sahra  Said  Botan  v
        Netherlands (Application no. 1869/04, 12 May  2005)  and  Abdullahi
        Ibrahim Mohamed v Netherlands ( Application  no.  1872/04,  12  May
        2005). In the cases of Sahra and Abdullahi the Commission had found
        the applications admissible but the cases had not yet been  decided
        by the Court. In both the issue is whether it  is  disproportionate
        to require applicants to obtain entry  clearances  from  diplomatic
        posts in other countries.

    34. Again, Mr Deller quite properly and  correctly  conceded  that  the
        Immigration Judge had made a material error of law in his  decision
        for the reasons set out in the written grounds of appeal.  In  this
        case too therefore we need say no more on this aspect.

    35.  In  relation  to  AS,  Mr  Hodgetts  accepted  that  there  is  no
        immigration rule under which the  appellant  could  apply  for  re-
        entry. However, said Mr Hodgetts, the appellant's  application  for
        an entry clearance would not be doomed  to  failure.  He  drew  our
        attention to  the  concession  made  by  the  respondent  that  the
        appellant's partner cannot go to Afghanistan.

    36. Mr Hodgetts said that the appellant's partner is committed to marry
        the appellant but can only do so once she  gets  divorce  from  her
        husband whose whereabouts she does not know. He said that  she  has
        moved an application before the Court and the divorce  process  has
        begun. He was not able to explain though why there  had  been  such
        delay in approaching a court and when the  court  was  expected  to
        make an order.

    37. Mr Hodgetts said that in this case the Immigration Judge had made a
        number of errors in law. First his finding  "approaching  a  family
        life" was so unclear as to be  perverse.  Second,  the  Immigration
        Judge had failed to understand that  the  couple  come  within  the
        spirit if not the letter  of  the  relevant  Rules  in  that  their
        relationship is akin to marriage.  Third,  said  Mr  Hodgetts,  the
        Immigration Judge wrongly placed the burden of proof on  the  issue
        of proportionality on the appellant.

    38. Mr Hodgetts argued additionally that as there  was  no  rule  under
        which the appellant  could  qualify  to  reenter  to  continue  his
        genuine relationship with his partner, the  Immigration  Judge  had
        erred in law in upholding the respondent's decision  requiring  him
        to leave to seek permission to re-enter. Mr Hodgetts asked that the
        decision of the Immigration Judge be substituted by a  decision  to
        allow the appeal against the respondent's decision.

    39. Mr Deller argued that in this  case  there  was  no  error  in  the
        Immigrationn Judge's decision. The findings made by the Immigration
        Judge are supported by evidence and are by no means  perverse.  The
        parties are in some kind of relationship but  the  relationship  is
        not such as to come  within  the  accepted  definition  of  "family
        life".

    40. Mr Deller said that even if it had been found  that  the  appellant
        has a family or private life in the United Kingdom, it would  still
        have been open to the Immigration Judge, on the relevant  facts  of
        this case, to find that the  case  was  not  truly  exceptional  to
        engage  Article  8  of  the  ECHR  to  the  extent  of  making  the
        interference to his Article 8 (1) rights disproportionate.

    41. Mr Deller pointed our that at the date of the decision made by  the
        Immigration Judge the relationship had not existed  for  two  years
        and in any event the couple were not co-habiting. He said that  the
        appellant's inability to qualify  under  any  immigration  rule  is
        determinative or at the very least of great weight in this case  in
        the context of the balancing exercise required under  Article  8(2)
        even assuming  that  the  relationship  relied  upon  falls  within
        Article 8(1) of the ECHR. Mr Deller asked that the decision of  the
        Immigration Judge to dismiss this appeal be upheld.

    42. We agree with Mr Deller that  the  decision  of  Immigration  Judge
        Shahanan discloses no error in law. On the findings of  facts  made
        by her she was entitled to, given  the  current  case  law  on  the
        matter, conclude  that  the  decision  of  the  respondent  was  in
        accordance with the law and the  Rules  and  that  the  appellant's
        removal from the United Kingdom would not infringe his rights under
        Article 8 of the ECHR.

    43. Having found material errors of law in the cases of SM and  MS,  we
        considered the cases afresh ourselves, proceeding on the  basis  of
        findings of facts made by  the  respective  Immigration  Judges  as
        agreed to be correct by the parties.

The Law:

    44. Article 8(1) of the ECHR states:
             "Everyone has the right to respect for his private and  family
             life, his home and his correspondence."


    45. It is agreed by Mr Deller for the respondent and Mr Hodgetts and Mr
        Saleem for the appellants that the facts of the two cases  (SM  and
        MS) engage Article 8(1) of the ECHR in that the appellants have  an
        established family life in the United Kingdom.

  46. Article 8(2) of the ECHR states:
             "There shall be no interference by a public authority with the
             exercise of this right except such as is  in  accordance  with
             the law and is  necessary  in  a  democratic  society  in  the
             interests of national security, public safety or the  economic
             well-being of the country, for the prevention of  disorder  or
             crime, for the protection of health  or  morals,  or  for  the
             protection of the rights and feeedoms of others."

    47. Mr Hodgetts and Mr Saleem argue that in the cases of SM and  MS  it
        is for the Secretary of State to show that the interference in  the
        exercise of the right to family life is in accordance with the  law
        and is necessary for all or one of the reasons specified in Article
        8(2) of the ECHR. Mr Dellor argued, rather faintly, that the burden
        of proof remains with the appellant throughout and that it  is  for
        the appellant to prove that the interference is disproportionate.

    48. In this context we are assisted by two decisions which  were  cited
        to us. First, the decision of the IAT in EH [2005] UKIAT 00062. The
        Tribunal chaired by Mr Justice Ouseley said in paragraph 20 of  the
        determination:

             "Ms Sigley endeavoured to deal with the second point as to the
             ability of the Appellant to travel to Amman  by  reference  to
             the burden of proof which she said lay upon him  to  make  out
             his case. We do not accept the way she put it. We accept  that
             it is for the Appellant to show that Article 8 is engaged  and
             that the action of the Secretary of State would interfere with
             it. The Secretary of state then shows that the interference is
             lawful and is in pursuance of  the  interests  of  immigration
             control. It is  then  for  the  Appellant  to  show  that  the
             interference is disproportionate to that interest."


         Mr Deller confirmed that the decision of the IAT in EH had not been
         appealed and represented good law.


         In Chengjie Miao v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ  75,  Lord  Justice  Sedley
         after citing Article 8 (1) and (2) of the ECHR said in Paragraph  9
         of his decision:


              "The Immigration judge, having found that the first paragraph
              of the article was engaged, set out a series of consequential
              questions.  Uncontentiously,  he  found  that  removal  would
              interfere with the appellant's family life to an extent which
              would  necessarily  engage  article  8.   He   held,   again,
              uncontentiously, that any such removal would be in accordance
              with the law. He then posed the following two questions:
                  . Is the interference necessary in  a  democratic  society
                    for the prevention of disorder or crime?
                  . If so,  is  the  interference  with  the  right  of  the
                    appellant to respect for family life  and  private  life
                    posed by the decision under appeal proportionate to  the
                    legitimate end sought to be achieved?.


         In Paragraph 10, Lord Justice Sedley  said,  "This  approach  over-
         elaborates the issue arising under art. 8(2). Once the  article  is
         engaged by a substantial but lawful derogation from the respect due
         to family life, the remaining question is whether the impugned  act
         is necessary in a  democratic  society  for  one  of  the  purposes
         specified in the Convention. The  specified  purposes  relevant  to
         immigration control are ordinarily the economic well-being  of  the
         country and the protection of the rights and  freedoms  of  others.
         (Disorder and crime  are  more  likely  to  matter  in  deportation
         cases). But the Strasbourg court has wisely avoided the  making  of
         political judgments about  what  democratic  societies  should  and
         should not be doing by using the concept of  proportionality  as  a
         surrogate: a democratic society does not use its lawful  powers  so
         as to interfere disproportionately with individuals' human  rights.
         It is by this means that proportionality enters art 8 (2)."


         In Paragraph 11  he  said,  "It  follows  that  the  first  of  the
         immigration judge's two final  questions  was  unnecessary,  partly
         because it postulated the  wrong  Convention  purposes  but  mainly
         because it raised no  issue  that  was  not  raised  in  the  final
         question."
         Paragraph 12 of the  decision  states,  "The  latter  question  was
         described by immigration judge as involving 'the balancing exercise
         which is the essence of proportionality' requiring him  to  'accord
         due weight to competing interests'. This may be right as far as  it
         goes, but it is not all. The assessment of proportionality is not a
         simple weighing of two cases against each  other.  It  arises  only
         when the claimant has established that he enjoys a protected  right
         which is threatened with violation: at that point the burden shifts
         to the state not only to show that the step is lawful but that  its
         objective is sufficiently important to  justify  limiting  a  basic
         right; that it is sensibly directed to that objective, and that  it
         does not impair the right more than is necessary. The last of these
         criteria commonly requires an appraisal of the relative  importance
         of the state's objective and the  impact  of  the  measure  on  the
         individual. When you have answered such questions you  have  struck
         the balance."

    49. In the determination of the two cases (SM and MS)  we  respectfully
        follow the principles set  out  by  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  its
        decision in Miao v SSHD as quoted above.

    50. For the appellants it is argued that the  burden  of  proof,  on  a
        point of practicality relating to the making of an entry  clearance
        application in circumstances where there is no  visa  post  in  the
        country of return, lies on the Secretary of State. It is  submitted
        that  the  Secretary  of  State  (the  respondent)  has  failed  to
        establish that making an application for entry clearance in one  of
        the  designated  posts  outside  of  Aghanistan  is  a  practicable
        proposition. Drawing attention to the evidence before us Mr  Saleem
        and Mr Hodgetts said that no such  facilities  exist  anywhere  for
        Afghan nationals - not in India, not in Pakistan and not in Dubai.

    51. We were taken through letters that had been sent by Malik &  Malik,
        solicitors for MS to: 1) UK Visas, FCO, London on  30  August  2006
        (Pages 27, 28 and 29 of the bundle);  2) British Embassy, Kabul  on
        4 October 2006 (Pages 40 to 42 of the bundle); 3)  British  Embassy
        Dubai dated 4 October 2006 (pages 43 to 45 of the  bundle)  and  4)
        British High Commission, New Delhi,  India  dated  4  October  2006
        (Pages 47 to 49 of the bundle).

    52. We were impressed by the care taken  by  Malik  and  Malik  in  the
        letters referred to in presenting full facts neutrally and  in  the
        use of appropriate language to assist in facilitating a prompt  and
        considered response. By the date of the hearing the only  responses
        received had been from the UK Visas  and  the  British  Embassy  in
        Dubai. The absence of responses from India and  Pakistan  were  not
        material in the light of the information set out in the letter from
        UK Visas.

    53. In his letter of 10 October 2006, Chris Stimpson, the Deputy  Head,
        Visa Customer Services states as follows:
              i. Entry Clearance must always be obtained prior to travel  to
                 the UK. Applications for entry clearance  from  individuals
                 of any nationality cannot be submitted while the  applicant
                 is in the United Kingdom.
             ii. Even where  applications  can  be  made  online  or  via  a
                 courier, the applicant should be in the country  where  the
                 application is  lodged,  as  they  may  be  called  for  an
                 interview at the Visa Section at short notice.
            iii.  Entry  Clearance   applications   (including   those   for
                 settlement) are  currently  not  accepted  by  the  British
                 Embassy in Kabul.
             iv. Islamabad has been designated the relevant visa section for
                 applications from Afghanistan. There are no specific  Entry
                 Clearance Officers designated to assess  applications  made
                 by Afghan nationals.
              v. The Governments of Pakistan and Afghanistan  do  not  allow
                 passports to be sent across international borders.
             vi. Applications from Afghanistan should be  submitted  through
                 Gerry's FedEx office in Peshawar.
            vii. Applicants do not  have  to  submit  the  application  form
                 themselves, but unless there are  compelling  circumstances
                 that dictate otherwise,  applicants  should  collect  their
                 passports in person.
           viii. Afghan Express Ltd represents FedEx in Afghanistan but  due
                 to constraints on sending passports across the border  they
                 do not accept applications for visas for the UK.
             ix. If an Afghan national  is  normally  and  legally  resident
                 outside of Afghanistan, they can apply for entry  clearance
                 in their country of residence.

         No assertion is made in this letter that Afghan  nationals  seeking
         entry clearance for  settlement  in  the  United  Kingdom  who  are
         returned to Afghanistan can apply in Dubai or New Delhi, India. The
         only designated post  according  to  the  letter  is  Islamabad  in
         Pakistan.


54.  Mr Deller raised no issues on the contents of this letter  nor  did  he
        raise any points on the correspondence  which  brought  about  this
        evidence.  We  make  no  criticism  of  Mr  Deller  but   we   feel
        disappointed that the respondent appeared not to be  fully  engaged
        in adducing relevant evidence which by its nature and  its  origin,
        it was reasonable to expect the respondent to adduce.

55.  We rely on the contents of the letter from the UK Visas and from it  we
        find as follows:
        (i)       There are no facilities for issue of entry clearances  in
        Afghanistan.
        (ii)      Afghan nationals resident  in  Afghanistan  who  wish  to
             apply for entry clearances will have  to  travel  to  Peshawar,
             Pakistan to make the application  and  deposit  the  same  with
             FedEx.
         iii) The applicants will have to remain  in  Pakistan  until  such
              time as their applications are considered.
          iv) The applicants may be called for interview in which case they
              will need to present themselves before  the  entry  clearance
              staff in Islamabad.
           v) No indication is given as to the length of time it  may  take
              for applications  for  entry  clearances  for  settlement  by
              Afghan nationals is given.
          vi) With regard to the safety of travel between the two countries
              the letter states, "We cannot comment on whether it  is  safe
              for an applicant to travel to the British High Commission  in
              Islamabad from Afghanistan and how much it would cost."


    56. It is reasonable to assume that Afghan nationals require  visas  to
        enter Pakistan and that they have no unfettered right to  enter  or
        leave Pakistan. The respondent has produced  no  evidence  to  show
        that the nationals of Afghanistan can safely and/or lawfully travel
        to Pakistan without having obtained visas to enter Pakistan.

    57. We also bear in mind  the  current  Travel  Advice  on  Afghanistan
        issued by the FCO. Whilst accepting that the Advice  is  meant  for
        British nationals and not persons of other  nationalities,  we  see
        force in the argument advanced by Mr Saleem that all human life  is
        precious and that the Advice is also based on assessment of  danger
        faced by all and not just by those  with  British  nationality.  We
        note though that the appellants are spouses of British citizens and
        they are being expected to travel to Afghanistan. However we accept
        that in assessing the practicability and reasonableness  of  travel
        from Kabul to Peshawar or Islamabad, the FCO Travel Advice  is  not
        determinative. A more complete and reliable picture is set  out  in
        the CIOS report. Also the report of the Secretary  General  to  the
        United Nations dated 11 September 2006 which is on pages 77  to  85
        of the appellant's bundle (MS) paints a picture of great insecurity
        and turmoil in most of Afghanistan with the Taliban in  resurgence.



    58. We remind ourselves of Paragraphs 21 to 23 of the determination  in
        EH (Palestinian - entry  clearance-  proportionality)  Iraq  [2005]
        UKIAT 00062.

    59. Mr Justice Ouseley said in paragraph 21 " But where  the  point  at
        issue is one which goes to the extent  and  nature  of  the  public
        interest involved in immigration control, it is for  the  Secretary
        of State to make out this point. It is  the  Secretary  of  State's
        contention that the interests of the system of immigration  control
        require this man to make an application for entry clearance in  his
        country of habitual residence and to return there for that purpose.
        It is implicit at least in that contention that  the  Secretary  of
        State contends that the FCO provides  the  facility  and  that  the
        Appellant would not be prevented by  the  authorities  of  Iraq  or
        Jordan from applying. It is  for  him  to  make  out  his  implicit
        contention rather than for the appellant to show the contrary....."

    60. In paragraph 22 of the decision in EH it  is  said,  "It  does  not
        inevitably follow from  the  fact  that  the  making  of  an  entry
        clearance application may well not be  a  practicable  proposition,
        that it is disproportionate to return someone. It is a factor which
        goes into the balance. But the force of the  relevant  interest  of
        immigration control in an orderly  system  of  entry  clearance  is
        weakened where no application for entry clearance  can  practicably
        be made, in a category of those  contemplated  by  the  Immigration
        Rules. Its effect depends on the  interests  which  are  interfered
        with by removal."

    61. We have taken due account  of  the  decisions  of  the  IAT  in  MS
        (inability to make  entry  clearance  application)  Somalia  [2005]
        UKIAT 00003 and KJ (Entry  Clearance  -  Proportionality)  Iraq  CG
        [2005] UKIAT 00066.



Findings & Conclusions:

    62. We find as a fact that the appellants in MS and  SM,  nationals  of
        Afghhanistan, cannot safely and lawfully travel to Pakistan without
        getting visas from Pakistan authorities to obtain Entry  Clearances
        as spouses from Islamabad to continue their well established family
        lives in the United Kingdom.

    63. In the circumstances we find that  in  these  cases  there  are  no
        queues for entry clearances that the appellants can join. Therefore
        the argument that by allowing them to remain in the United  Kingdom
        would be seen as legitimising queue jumping is misconceived.

    64. We also find as a fact common to both cases (MS and  SM)  that  but
        for the  requirement  to  have  entry  clearances,  the  appellants
        qualify to remain in the  United  Kingdom  as  spouses  of  persons
        present and settled in  the  United  Kingdom.  In  other  words  if
        required to make applications for entry clearances  they  would  in
        all probability be successful.

    65. We respectfully agree  with  Mr  Justice  Ouseley  as  he  said  in
        Paragraph 24 of his determnination in EH , "If an  entry  clearance
        was not likely to succeed  on  its  merits,  we  would  regard  any
        impracticability in the making of such an  application  in  a  very
        different light. It would be perverse in general to regard that  as
        a reason for not insisting on the maintenance of the  substance  of
        immigration control."

    66. Having taken account of the  submissions  made  by  Mr  Deller  who
        conceded the merits of the appeal in  SM  and  mounted  no  serious
        argument in respect of the merits of the appeal in MS and those  of
        Mr Saleem and Mr Hodgetts, we have concluded that  the  removal  of
        the appellants would be disproportionate for the  reasons  we  have
        given.

    67. In the circumstances  we  find  that  the  decisions  made  by  the
        respondent in respect of SM and MS would violate  their  Article  8
        rights protected by ECHR and are not in accordance with the Law and
        the Rules. Their appeals are allowed.

    68. With regard to the case of AS we have concluded for  reasons  given
        earlier that the decision of  the  Immigration  Judge  was  not  in
        material error of law and must therefore stand.

    69. As Lord Justice Sedley said in paragraph  13  of  his  judgment  in
        Chengjie Miao  v  SSHD  [2006]  EWCA  Civ  75,  "In  the  field  of
        immigration, the removal of someone who has no right to be here  is
        generally self-justifying: it requires no additional  reasoning  to
        establish that their removal is both lawful and necessary  for  the
        purposes recognised by the Convention.........It is only  in  cases
        where the Rules operate entirely against him - that a  freestanding
        proportionality case may occasionally arise under art.8,  requiring
        independent proof  of  circumstances  sufficient  to  outweigh  the
        policy imperatives: see Huang v Home Secretary  [2005]  3  WLR  488
        Para56, per Laws LJ."

    70. The appellant in AS on the facts found  by  the  Immigration  Judge
        Shanahan did not establish on the required standard  of  proof  the
        existence of family life in the United Kingdom  and  therefore  his
        claim failed on the first hurdle. Assuming that he has  a  kind  of
        family life that engages Article 8(1), he is not likely to  succeed
        in getting an entry clearance as there is no rule  under  which  he
        can qualify to enter. The impracticability of being able to seek an
        entry clearance does not assist him. Further we  do  not  find  the
        case to have any truly exceptional features.

    71. On the evidence before us we have  found  that  there  are  at  the
        present time no  accessible  facilities  for  Afghan  nationals  to
        obtain entry clearances  from  Afghanistan  or  elsewhere.  In  the
        circumstances it cannot be right for the respondent to assert  that
        they must obtain entry clearances when in fact it is impossible for
        them to do so.

    72. In view of what we have said in paragraphs 64 and what was said  by
        Mr Justice Ouseley in EH which we  respectfully  follow,  where  it
        emerges on the facts that it is not practicable for an appellant to
        obtain entry clearance and the appellant otherwise  meets  all  the
        relevant requirements of the immigration  rules,  the  claim  under
        Article 8 succeeds. The respondent cannot be found to discharge the
        burden of proof if he does not  provide  an  otherwise  meritorious
        appellant the facility to apply for an entry clearance.

    73. In cases where practicability of obtaining  entry  clearance  is  a
        serious issue, it is strongly recommended that the AIT  make  clear
        and reasoned findings on the merits of the claim  under  the  Rules
        before determining the practicability issue. For the  avoidance  of
        doubt we repeat it is for the respondent to prove  that  accessible
        facilities for obtaining entry clearance are in place.







Senior Immigration Judge Drabu


                                  APPENDIX


          SM, AS, MS and Secretary of State for the Home Department


     1. United Nations, The Situation in Afghanistan and its implications
        for peace and security dated 11/09/2006

     2. Five Years after their removal from power: Taliban are back -
        Senlis Council News Release 5 September 2006.

     3. Afghanistan: Five years later by Stephen Zunes, 13 October 2006.
        FPIF
        Policy Report


     4. British High Commission, Islamabad Travel Advice of Afghanistan -
        30 October 2006

     5. UK Visas - British Embassy P O Box 65, Dubai, United Arab Emirates
        - 10 October 2006

     6. UK Visas, King Charles Street, London - Letter from Deputy Head
        Customer Services of 10 October 2006.



