
[pic]

Lama (video recorded evidence -weight - Art 8 ECHR) [2017] UKUT 00016 (IAC)


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |              Decision & Reasons     |
|                                      |Promulgated                          |
|On 14 December 2016                   |              On 21 February 2017    |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                  THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY, PRESIDENT

                                   Between

                                TSERING LAMA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation

For the Appellant:        Mr T  Hodson,  of  counsel,  instructed  by  Elder
             Rahimi Solicitors
For the Respondent:       Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting  Officer



   i) Video recorded evidence from witnesses  is  admissible  in  the  Upper
      Tribunal. Its weight will vary according to the context.


  ii) Alertness among practitioners and  parties  to  the  Upper  Tribunal's
      standard pre-hearing Directions and compliance therewith are crucial.




 iii)  There are no hard and fast rules as to what constitutes  family  life
      within the compass of Article 8 ECHR.


  iv) A person's value to the community is a factor which  may  legitimately
      be considered in the Article 8 proportionality balancing exercise.

                                  DECISION

Introduction

 1. By this decision is remade the decision of the First-tier Tribunal (the
    "FtT") which, by earlier decision of this Tribunal  promulgated  on  18
    October 2016, was set aside on account of error of law.


Framework of this appeal

 2. The Appellant is a national of Nepal, born on 19 December 1989 and  now
    aged 26 years.   The  origins  of  this  appeal  are  traceable  to  an
    application made by the Appellant to the Respondent, the  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department (the  "Secretary  of  State"),  dated  04
    February 2015.  In the decision which ensued, this is described  as  an
    application "for leave to remain in the United Kingdom on the basis  of
    private life in the UK".


 3. The Secretary of State's decision is in two parts.  In the first  part,
    consideration  was  given  to  whether  the   Appellant's   application
    satisfied any of the material requirements of the  discrete  Article  8
    regime contained in the Immigration Rules (the  "Rules"),  specifically
    paragraph 276 ADE.  The decision maker concluded that  the  application
    did not satisfy the requirements of the Rules.  The second part of  the
    Secretary of State's decision is rehearsed under the  rubric  "Decision
    on Exceptional Circumstances".  It states:


         "It has also been considered whether the  particular  circumstances
         set out in your application  constitute  exceptional  circumstances
         which, consistent with the right to respect for private and  family
         life contained in Article 8 ......, might warrant a grant of  leave
         to remain in the UK outside the  requirements  of  the  Immigration
         Rules.  In support of your claim, you state you receive money  from
         relatives or friends [sic] who give you money  when  needed.   This
         arrangement could continue, the money could be transferred  to  you
         overseas and would provide financial support  to  you.  Furthermore
         you   have stated that you  have  established  a  wide  network  of
         friends in the UK however [sic] these friendships  in  the  UK  can
         continue  from  overseas  via  modern  methods  of   communication.
         Furthermore, the option is open to your friends  to  visit  you  in
         Nepal.  It has therefore been decided that there are no exceptional
         circumstances in your case.  Consequently   your  application  does
         not fall for a grant of leave outside the rules."




      FtT Decision


 4. The grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal ("FtT")  are  also  in
    two  parts.   The  first   is   couched   in   diffuse,   general   and
    unparticularised terms.  The second, entitled "Statement of  Additional
    Grounds", repeats the defects in the first and additionally, includes a
    series of bare assertions.


 5. The FtT made three principal conclusions.  First, the Appellant's  case
    could not succeed under  the  Rules  (paragraph  276  ADE)  as  he  was
    considered  to  have  continuing  ties  to  Nepal  and  had  failed  to
    demonstrate very significant obstacles to  his  reintegration  in  that
    country.  Second, the Tribunal concluded that the Appellant had  failed
    to demonstrate any family life.  Third, the Tribunal concluded that  it
    would "... pay  no  regard  to  the  private  life  the  Appellant  has
    established in the United Kingdom, with Mr 'R' or with the  community".
    Mr R is the person upon whom the Appellant's  case  has  at  all  times
    centred: see infra.  The appeal was dismissed accordingly.


      Error of law decision


 6. Next, by its decision dated 18 October 2016, this Tribunal decided that
    the decision of the FtT must be set aside by reason of  error  of  law,
    reasoning thus:


         "It is not clear why the Judge found that she would pay  no  regard
         to the private life the Appellant  had  established.   The  private
         life of the Appellant ought to have been  weighed  in  the  balance
         when conducting a proportionality exercise.  The Judge clearly  had
         found that the Appellant had established a private life. Whilst the
         fact that alternative care would  be  available  [to  Mr  R]  is  a
         relevant factor (and therefore consideration of this issue  by  the
         Judge was not an error of law), it does not lead  inexorably  to  a
         finding that the Appellant's right to respect for his private  life
         would be outweighed by other factors such as effective  immigration
         control."


    In summary, the decision of the FtT was infected by material  error  of
    law as it "...  did not undertake an adequate proportionality balancing
    exercise".

New Evidence

 7. One evidential tranche of the Appellant's case is composed of a  series
    of statements of assorted friends and supporters (nine in total) and  a
    petition type document.  This evidence is illuminated by the  following
    extract from a letter from the Appellant's  solicitors  provided  three
    working days in advance of the hearing:


         "...  The names of the persons who have provided a video  statement
         in this appeal are .... [nine persons are named] ..... Mr 'PS' will
         be attending the hearing to give evidence ....


         The statements made are all broadly along the  same  lines  as  the
         petition attached to Mr 'PS's' statement, namely each  person  sets
         out who they are, how they know  the  Appellant  and  'Mr  R',  how
         important the Appellant is to Mr R and to his ability  to  continue
         with his acting career in particular and the likely impact on  both
         if his appeal is dismissed."

 8. The Upper Tribunal's directions to the parties, dated 25  August  2016,
    included the standard paragraphs drawing attention to  the  powers  and
    procedures of the Upper Tribunal relating to  the  reception  of  fresh
    evidence (see the  Appendix  to  this  judgment).   These  include  the
    following cautionary statement:


         "A failure to comply with Rule 15(2A) will be regarded as a serious
         matter and may result  in  fresh  or  further  evidence  not  being
         considered by the Tribunal."


    This is followed by a series of ancillary  paragraphs  giving  detailed
    directions relating to fresh  evidence  applications.   These  standard
    Directions, substituting a predecessor, were introduced  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal in February 2016.  They are appended hereto for the  attention
    of parties and practitioners generally.

   9. Following the  Upper  Tribunal's  supplementary  directions  dated  07
      December  2016,  the  information  and  intentions  intimated  in  the
      aforementioned solicitor's letter  emerged.   It  is  timely  to  draw
      attention to rule 5(1) and  (2)(g)  and  rule  6,  together  with  the
      definition of "hearing" in rule 1(3) of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper
      Tribunal) Rules 2008 and, of course, the overriding objective.:

  10. Practitioners are also reminded  of  Upper  Tribunal  Immigration  and
      Asylum Chamber Guidance Note No 2 of 2013 relating to the reception of
      evidence by video link and,  in  particular,  [4]  thereof.   Finally,
      adherence to standard Direction number 6(vi) must  become  a  priority
      for every practitioner.  It is in these terms

         "Both parties shall, at latest, five  working  days  prior  to  the
         scheduled hearing of the  appeal,  contact  the  Tribunal  for  the
         purpose of confirming that all  bundles  and  any  other  materials
         considered by the FtT and/or as directed above, are  available  for
         distribution to the Judge/s and taking any other appropriate  steps
         to this end."

    One of the virtues of adhering to this discrete direction  is  that  it
    establishes dialogue in the immediate pre-hearing phase which  has  the
    potential to expose  that  certain  necessary  steps  and  preparations
    remain outstanding.




  11. Ultimately, the Respondent's position regarding  the  reception  of  a
      substantial volume of new evidence by recorded  video  was,  properly,
      one of neutrality.  The  Tribunal  ruled  that  the  new  evidence  be
      admitted.

    Evidence by video recording: weight


12. The question arises concerning the  weight  to  be  given  to  evidence
    adduced by video recording.  The Upper Tribunal's competence to receive
    evidence via this medium is not in dispute. Rule 15 provides:


        "15. - Evidence and submissions


         (1)  Without restriction on the general powers in rule 5(1) and (2)
             (case  management  powers),  the  Upper  Tribunal   may   give
             directions as to-


             (a)   issues on which it requires evidence or submissions;


             (b)   the nature of the evidence or submissions it requires;


             (c)   whether the parties are permitted or required to provide
                  expert evidence,  and  if  so  whether  the  parties  must
                  jointly appoint a single expert to provide such evidence;


             (d)   any limit on the number of witnesses  whose  evidence  a
                  party may put forward, whether in relation to a particular
                  issue or generally;


             (e)  the manner in which any evidence or submissions are to be
                  provided, which may include a direction  for  them  to  be
                  given-


                  (i)  orally at a hearing; or


                  (ii)  by written submissions or witness statement; and


             (f)   the time at which any evidence or submissions are to  be
                  provided.


         (2)  The Upper Tribunal may-


             (a)   admit evidence whether or not-


                  (i) the evidence would be admissible in a civil  trial  in
                       the United Kingdom; or
                  (ii) the evidence was available  to  a  previous  decision
                 maker; or


             (b)   exclude evidence  that  would  otherwise  be  admissible
                  where-


                  (i)  the evidence was not provided within the time allowed
                      by a direction or a practice direction;


                  (ii) the evidence was otherwise provided in a manner  that
                      did  not  comply  with  a  direction  or  a  practice
                      direction; or


                  (iii)     it  would  otherwise  be  unfair  to  admit  the
                      evidence.


         (2A) In an asylum case or an immigration case-


             (a)  if a party wishes the Upper Tribunal to consider evidence
                 that was not before the  First-tier  Tribunal,  that  party
                 must send or deliver a notice to the Upper Tribunal and any
                 other party-


                  (i)   indicating the nature of the evidence; and


                  (ii)  explaining why it was not submitted  to  the  First-
                      tier Tribunal; and


             (b)  when considering whether to admit evidence that  was  not
                  before the First-tier Tribunal, the  Upper  Tribunal  must
                  have regard to whether there has been  unreasonable  delay
                  in producing that evidence.


         (3)  The Upper Tribunal may consent to a witness giving, or require
             any witness to give, evidence on oath, and may  administer  an
             oath for that purpose."


    In considering the question of weight, the temptation  to  prescribe  a
    set of rigid rules must be resisted.   The  single,  guiding  principle
    must be that the weight to be attributed to all evidence, including the
    evidence of witnesses who do not attend the hearing and whose testimony
    is adduced by witness  statements  or  video  recording  or  comparable
    mechanism, will vary according to the nature of the  evidence  and  the
    context. it will always be necessary to take  into  account  that  such
    evidence  has  been  untested  by  the  conventional  means  of   cross
    examination  and  judicial  questioning,   particularly   (though   not
    invariably) where it is contested in whole or in part.  In this respect
    evidence by video link is to be contrasted.  Furthermore, the customary
    judicial assessment of a  witness's  demeanour  will  be  significantly
    affected.   The  technical  quality  of  the  recording  will  also  be
    material.


13. Tribunals should attempt to satisfy themselves  that  the  evidence  is
    uncorrupted. Alertness to signs such as reading from a prepared text or
    being prompted by another person will be essential.  Considerations  of
    this  kind  highlight  the  lack  of  customary  judicial  control  and
    oversight when evidence is adduced in this way.



The Decision Remade


14. As noted above, the protagonists in this appeal are the  Appellant  and
    Mr R.  As already recorded, the Appellant is a national of  Nepal,  now
    aged 26.  His presence in the United Kingdom, which has  at  all  times
    been lawful, dates from January 2010 when he was granted leave to enter
    as a Tier 4 General Student.  This was followed by several  extensions.
    His application to the Secretary of State for further leave  to  remain
    in the United Kingdom was made timeously.  His case has  at  all  times
    been  based  on  Article  8  ECHR,  the  reference  point   being   the
    relationship which has developed between  Mr  R  and  him.   The  facts
    recounted in the summary which follows below are uncontroversial.


15. The Appellant duly pursued various courses of  study,  between  January
    2010 and December 2014.  He has  obtained  a  MBA  and  an  accountancy
    qualification.  If permitted to remain in the United Kingdom,  he  will
    resume an unfinished accountancy course  with  a  view  to  securing  a
    practitioner's qualification.


16. Mr R is a native of Ireland who has been living in England during  most
    of his life.  Prior to suffering a catastrophic accident  in  2005,  he
    had lived alone.  He is an  actor  of  some  repute  and  continues  to
    practice his profession, albeit intermittently and within the limits of
    his physical condition.  Mr R's health and his disabilities and  needs,
    both physical and emotional, coupled with  his  relationship  with  the
    Appellant, lie at the heart of this appeal.


17. The subject of Mr R's health  and  disabilities  is  addressed  in  the
    October 2016 report of a therapist  based  at  the  University  College
    London.  In brief compass, Mr R suffered a spinal cord injury  in  2005
    rendering him quadriplegic.  His circumstances are  summarised  in  the
    following terms:


         "Mr R lives in a fully adapted ground floor property with  a  carer
         funded from direct payments.  Mr R is an  actor  and  continues  to
         work with assistance from his carer to  access  his  workplace  and
         public transport .....  [he] has a powered, standing chair at  home
         which was funded by the Actor's Benevolent Society .....


         [He is]  dependent  on  carer  to  manage  initial  bed  transfers,
         transfers to shower chair and lower body washing and dressing ....


         [He is]  dependent  on  carer  to  access  community  in  a  manual
         chair....


         [He] does not have full active extension in his fingers  (worse  in
         left hand) and is unable to grasp or release items without  relying
         on wrist extension or flexion to simulate a grip and release ...."

     Various measures to address Mr R's  deteriorating  hand  function  were
devised.




18. A September 2016  report  from  Mr  R's  general  medical  practitioner
    provides the following information:


         "Mr R has had deteriorating symptoms (in particular loss of use  of
         his hands) over some years ...  which is common after  spinal  cord
         injury.  In addition to  the  spinal  cord  injury  Mr  R  has  the
         following long term medical conditions:


    . Ulcerative colitis with ileostomy and stoma bag.


    . Long term in-dwelling catheter.


    . Recurring urinary tract infections (which have made him very unwell at
      times).


    . Previous bladder stone.


    . Multiple myeloma and cryoglobulinaemic vasculitis ....


    . Grade 4 pressure areas on sacrum  (extremely  painful)  which  require
      regular dressing and ...  regular turning over night ....


    . Recent admission to hospital with sepsis following  development  of  a
      chest infection."




    The report continues:


         "....  He has come to rely on [the Appellant] to help him with  his
         physical and emotional needs .....  [The Appellant] fully undresses
         him and uses the required equipment to get him into and out of bed,
         he also turns him regularly at night to aid healing of his pressure
         sores.  He manages Mr R's drug  therapy  regime.   He  empties  and
         changes his ileostomy bag and empties his catheter bag."

     The report also draws attention to the issue of emotional support:

         "In addition to this [the  Appellant]  provides  emotional  support
         which Mr R tells me he cannot do without, especially as he  has  no
         family in the UK."




19. These reports also  disclose  that  the  nursing  support  which  Mr  R
    receives from the State consists of visits by a  District  Nurse  three
    times weekly for dressing his pressure sores and once monthly to change
    his catheter.   With  the  exception  of  six  monthly  reviews  by  an
    Occupational Therapist, Mr R receives no other  state  funded  support,
    therapeutic or otherwise.


20. I turn to consider the role of the Appellant in Mr  R's  life.   Having
    begun his studies in the United Kingdom in  2010,  the  Appellant  soon
    befriended Mr R through his part time employment and  their  friendship
    grew.  At this stage Mr R was becoming increasingly  less  independent.
    From mid-2011 the Appellant was  a  tenant  in  Mr  R's  home  and,  in
    parallel  with  Mr  R's  increasing  dependency,   their   relationship
    developed.  Mr R had (and still has)  a  paid  carer,  attending  every
    morning and providing services during some two  hours.   The  Appellant
    gradually assumed the role of Mr R's  carer  outside  these  hours  viz
    during most of the  day,  seven  days  weekly  and  arrangements  which
    accommodated his studies were devised.


21. The Appellant has been Mr R's primary carer during  a  period  of  some
    five years.  In his evidence to the Tribunal, Mr R testified  that  the
    Appellant provides him with "a  huge  amount"  of  physical  care.   He
    described him as "irreplaceable".  In his  witness  statement  he  says
    that the Appellant:


         "...    has proved  to  be  exceptionally  caring,  thoughtful  and
         dedicated to helping me manage ... he is like a son to me ....   We
         have become a small family unit ....  [He] is  superb  in  offering
         help ...  not least when panic attacks result from my  reaction  to
         antibiotics.  He has also proved to be  invaluable  and  so  caring
         when he undertakes quite intimate care in emergency situations ....


         With his caring support and affectionate  company,  mentally  I  am
         happy and healthy ....


         He is as irreplaceable as a son or other close relation or  partner
         might be."

     On the issue of alternative care arrangements, the Appellant states:

         "I do not believe I could adjust now to trying to find  replacement
         helpers; and even if I could  there  would  not  be  the  emotional
         support that [the Appellant] provides me.  For him not to  be  here
         would be for me (without exaggeration) devastating."




22. It is unnecessary to dilate on the  details  of  the  arrangements  and
    relationship between the Appellant and Mr R.  The core of the appeal is
    grasped from the summaries and extracts above.


23. The nature, strength and profundity of the bond between  the  Appellant
    and Mr R are apparent from the supporting evidence of a large  cast  of
    friends  and  professional  colleagues.   This  evidence  is  in   both
    documented and video recorded form. It is encapsulated in the following
    passage in the witness statement of Mr Pigott-Smith, who  attended  the
    appeal hearing:


         "If T is obliged to leave, J will be finished: neither he  nor  the
         State can afford to furnish  the  kind  of  personal  care  that  T
         provides.  This applies primarily to J's personal life, but  losing
         T would also affect J's professional life - effectively, I  suspect
         it would finish it.  T understands J's professional needs: he knows
         about backstage life and pressure."

     ["T" and "J" denote the Appellant and Mr R respectively.]



24. This evidence is supplemented by a letter signed by  approximately  100
    people which contains the following passages:


         "J is an actor, much loved and widely admired within the profession
         ....


         As J's condition worsened, T gradually assumed the  role  of  carer
         and their relationship has developed into one of  great  friendship
         and inter-dependence.   T  currently  performs  all  J's  intimate,
         personal and home care ....


         Financial savings to the NHS  are  not  the  point,  but  they  are
         considerable ...


         Refusing to give up his career, J has valiantly continued  to  work
         as  an  actor,  offering  real  inspiration   to   other   disabled
         performers.  In order to keep this part of his life  alive,  he  is
         totally dependent on T who has developed an  understanding  of  the
         unusually high, specific demands of acting work.   Without  T,  J's
         career would undoubtedly be over."

    The witness statement of the paid carer who attends Mr R for two  hours
    every morning contains the following passage:


         "As J is prone to ill health which is unpredictable, T has been  at
         his side all the time.  Therefore, their  emotional  attachment  is
         very deep and there is also a great level of trust between them.  J
         needs a live-in carer, so without T's constant care, J will be lost
         leaving his life in disarray, which will greatly affect his ability
         to work again."

The Applicable Law

25. The starting point is that the Appellant is unable to secure  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom through  the  medium  of  the  Immigration
    Rules ("the Rules").  His case is squarely based on  both  the  private
    and family life dimensions of Article 8 ECHR.  In contemporary parlance
    the immigration status pursued by him is sought "outside" or  "outwith"
    the Rules.


26. The interplay between Article 8 ECHR and the Article 8 regime contained
    in the Immigration Rules (the "Rules") has been clarified by the recent
    decision of the Supreme Court in Hesham Ali v Secretary  of  State  for
    the Home Department [2016] UKSC 60.   First,  the  Court  restated  the
    principle that the Rules are a statement of executive  policy  and  are
    not black letter law.  Per Lord Reed, at [17]:


         "The Rules are not law .... but a statement  of  the  Secretary  of
         State's administrative practice ...


         Nevertheless, they give effect to the policy of  the  Secretary  of
         State, who has been entrusted by Parliament with responsibility for
         immigration control  and  is  accountable  to  Parliament  for  her
         discharge of her responsibilities in this vital area.  Furthermore,
         they are laid before Parliament, may be the subject of  debate  and
         can be disproved under the negative resolution procedure.  They are
         therefore  made  in  the  exercise  of  powers  which   have   been
         democratically conferred and  are  subject,  albeit  to  a  limited
         extent, to democratic procedures of accountability."


    Next, Lord Reed emphasised that in Huang v Secretary of State  for  the
    Home Department [2007] UKHL 11,  the  House  of  Lords  formulated  the
    correct approach in these terms:


         "An applicant's failure to qualify under the rules is, for  present
         purposes, the point at which to begin, not  end,  consideration  of
         the claim under Article 8.  The terms of the rules are relevant  to
         that consideration, but they are not determinative."


    Per Lord Bingham at [6].




27. Lord Reed continues, at [46]:


         "It is the duty of appellate  tribunals,  as  independent  judicial
         bodies, to make their own  assessment  of  the  proportionality  of
         deportation in any particular  case  on  the  basis  of  their  own
         findings as to the facts and their understanding  of  the  relevant
         law.  But, where the Secretary of State has adopted a policy  based
         on a general assessment of proportionality, as in the present case,
         they should attach considerable weight to that assessment ..."


         [My emphasis.]


    Continuing, Lord Reed states, at [49]:


         "It is necessary to  feed  into  the  analysis  the  facts  of  the
         particular case and the  criteria  which  are  appropriate  to  the
         context and, where a Court is reviewing  the  decision  of  another
         authority, to give such weight to the judgment of that authority as
         may be appropriate."


    This is followed by a helpful summary of the correct  approach  to  the
    proportionality balancing exercise in the  particular  context  of  the
    deportation of foreign offenders: see [50].




28.  Finally,  the  Supreme  Court  reviewed  the  "complete  code"  thesis
    contained in MF (Nigeria) [2014] 1 WLR 544, highlighting the  error  in
    the concept that the Rules alone govern appellate decision making.   In
    the judgment of the Court, this issue is addressed most fully  by  Lord
    Wilson, who endorsed unreservedly the "general rule" formulated by  the
    Court of Appeal in [43] -  see  [66]  -  and,  at  [80],  rejected  the
    "complete code" notion in pithy terms:


         "It is one thing to suggest that the Secretary of State's rule  398
         is relevant to the weight which the Tribunal  should  give  to  the
         public interest ....


         But it is another  thing  altogether  to  suggest  that  the  rules
         provide the  legal  framework  within  which  the  Tribunal  should
         determine the appeal."




29. There being no element of deportation in the present case, the test  to
    be applied is that of "compelling  circumstances":  see  Haleemudeen  v
    SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 558, at [44] and more emphatically Rhuppiah v SSHD
    [2016]  EWCA  Civ  803,  at  [44],  together  with  the  discussion  in
    Treebhawon and Others (NIAA 2002 Part  5A  -  compelling  circumstances
    test) [2017] UKUT 00013 (IAC), at [43] - [47].  At [43], this  Tribunal
    adverted to:


         "......  the  imperative   ....    of   identifying   clearly   the
         characteristics and conduct of the person against whom  removal  or
         deportation action is proposed."




30. At this juncture I address the discrete question -  one  of  law  -  of
    whether there exists, within the compass of Article 8 ECHR, family life
    vis-�-vis the Appellant and Mr R.  There is no  definition  of  "family
    life" in Article 8 itself.  Nor is any definition to be  found  in  the
    now extensive jurisprudence, both domestic and European.   The  absence
    of such definition is  consistent  with,  and  characteristic  of,  the
    elastic nature of the rights protected by Article 8.


31. This issue was reviewed to some extent in the recent  decision  of  the
    Court of Appeal in PT (Sri Lanka) v Entry  Clearance  Officer,  Chennai
    [2016] EWCA Civ 612.  The Court began its review with what has come  to
    be regarded  as  the  leading  authority  in  this  field,  Kugathas  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2003] EWCA Civ 31.  In that
    case, the Court,  at  [14],  concurred  with  the  formulation  of  the
    Commission in S v United Kingdom [1984] DR 196:


         "Generally, the protection of family life under Article 8  involves
         co-habiting dependants, such as, parents and their dependent, minor
         children.  Whether it extents to other relationships depends on the
         circumstances of the particular case."

         [The emphasis is mine.]

    In the same passage, the Commission employed the linguistic formula  of
    "further  elements  of  dependency,  involving  more  than  the  normal
    emotional  ties".   The  appeal  in  Kugathas  failed.   Notably,   the
    consideration  that  there  was  no  blood  relationship  between   the
    Appellant and one of the three members of the "family  unit"  involved,
    namely his sister in law, was not ranked an obstacle to  the  existence
    of family life.




32. Strikingly, in PT (Sri Lanka) the Court of Appeal highlighted the  need
    for a "fact sensitive approach": see [26].  Notably, the  Court  quoted
    without demur the assessment  of  "dependency"  in  Kugathas  at  [17],
    referring to the argument that a finding of family life does not entail
    an absolute requirement of dependency:


         "That is clearly right in the economic sense.  But if dependency is
         read down as meaning 'support', in the personal sense, and  if  one
         adds, echoing the Strasbourg jurisprudence, 'real'  or  'committed'
         or 'effective' to the word 'support', then it represents in my view
         the irreducible minimum of what family life implies."


     [my emphasis]

    Thus, at its heart, family life  denotes  real  or  committed  personal
    support between or among the persons concerned.  Such persons need  not
    necessarily be related by blood and, in that sense, are not a family in
    the traditional or  conventional  senses.  However,  they  are  readily
    embraced by one of the dictionary definitions of  "family",  namely  "a
    group of things that are alike in some way".  Mere likeness is not,  of
    course, sufficient for Article 8 purposes.  The "likeness", in  Article
    8 terms, is constituted by committed support, emotional bonds and, very
    frequently, a strong sense of duty.




33. In harmony with my comment about Article 8 in [30] supra, the case  law
    is replete with statements which are the antithesis of hard edged rules
    or absolute principles.  This is illustrated  by  the  terms  in  which
    Baroness Hale expressed herself in  a  short  concurring  judgement  in
    Beoku-Betts v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2008]  UKHL
    39, at [4]:


         "The right to respect  for  the  family  life  of  one  necessarily
         encompasses the right to respect for the  family  life  of  others,
         normally a spouse or minor children, with whom that family life  is
         enjoyed."


         [My emphasis.]


    Thus, in the Strasbourg jurisprudence, family life  has  been  extended
    beyond  relationships  of  blood,  marriage  and  adoption  (Clayton  &
    Tomlinson, The law of Human Rights, 2nd ed, 13.148)




34. The next ingredient in the legal framework is the public  interest.  In
    every Article 8 proportionality balancing exercise, it is essential  to
    begin by identifying the public interest in play: per  Lord  Thomas  at
    [83] and, more clearly, per Lord Kerr at [165] in Hesham Ali.   Indeed,
    this approach is reflected in the  new  Part  5A  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (the "2002 Act").  At the apex of  this
    discrete statutory regime, Parliament has proclaimed, in  section  117B
    (1):


         "The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the public
         interest."


    This public interest, with  its  various  ingredients,  is  the  public
    interest engaged in the present case.  It provides the  starting  point
    in the proportionality balancing exercise.



My Findings and Conclusions


  35. I have outlined in [14] - [24]  above  the  salient  features  of  the
      evidence.  Both the Appellant and Mr R testified at  the  hearing  and
      were cross examined.  They were also subjected to appropriate judicial
      questioning.  I find no hint  of  invention  or  exaggeration  in  the
      evidence adduced and none was suggested by the  Secretary  of  State's
      representative.  The core factual elements  of  the  Appellant's  case
      have been clearly established. I make findings of fact accordingly.


  36. Based on those findings, I consider firstly the  question  of  whether
      there is family life between the Appellant and Mr R.  I  can  identify
      no legal obstacle to an affirmative  finding  on  this  issue.   Their
      relationship  is  characterised  by  profound  bonds  of   friendship,
      support,  respect  and  dependency.   Furthermore,  as   regards   the
      Appellant, there is a clear sense of duty.  I  consider  it  important
      not to view dependency through an inappropriately narrow lens.   I  am
      satisfied that the element  of  dependency  in  this  relationship  is
      mutual.  It is  both  of  the  emotional  (bilaterally)  and  physical
      (unilaterally) variety.  The abundance of documentary  evidence,  some
      of which I have highlighted above, bears  eloquent  testament  to  the
      quality, potency and profundity of this relationship.


  37. My finding that there is family life between the Appellant  and  Mr  R
      might be viewed by some as  controversial.   It  is  not,  however,  a
      necessary pre-condition of this appeal succeeding, given that there is
      no dispute that the Appellant has a highly developed private  life  in
      the  United  Kingdom,  the  elements  and   components   whereof   are
      significantly based on his relationship with Mr  R.   The  Appellant's
      private life extends beyond that  relationship  to  encompass  matters
      such as his involvement in charitable activities, about which there is
      uncontested documentary evidence.  Thus, irrespective of  whether  one
      views the Appellant's case through the prism of family life or private
      life or a combination  of  both,  the  ultimate  question  of  law  is
      unaffected, namely whether the impugned decision of the  Secretary  of
      State represents a disproportionate interference.


  38. Disregarding those provisions of Part 5A of the 2002 Act which are  of
      no  relevance  to  the  present  context,  I  give   effect   to   the
      legislature's  instruction   to   have   regard   to   the   specified
      considerations in the following way:


      i) The public interest in the  maintenance  of  effective  immigration
         controls is engaged: section 117B (1).


     ii) It is not disputed that the Appellant is a capable English speaker,
         with the result that the public interest which is engaged in  cases
         where the person concerned does not possess this ability  does  not
         arise: section 117B (2).


    iii) I find that the Appellant is financially independent and is  likely
         to remain so indefinitely, with the result that the public interest
         which would otherwise be engaged does not arise: section 117B (3).


     iv) It is not disputed that the Appellant has  at  all  material  times
         been lawfully present  in  the  United  Kingdom.   However,  it  is
         incontestable that his immigration status, detailed in [14]  above,
         was precarious throughout.  Thus it qualifies for  the  attribution
         of little weight. I consider that the Appellant's case lies at  the
         upper  end  of  the  notional  "little  weight"  scale:  see   Kaur
         (children's best interests/public interest interface)  [2017]  UKUT
         00014 (IAC) at [25].




39. At this stage of the analysis, I remind myself that I  am  entitled  to
    take into account considerations other than those specified in  section
    117B.  This follows from the words in parenthesis - "(in particular)  -
    in section 117A (2).  This, I observe, is one  of  the  themes  clearly
    identifiable in the Hesham Ali decision.  This is  not,  of  course,  a
    freewheeling exercise.  Rather, any additional considerations which the
    tribunal may legitimately evaluate must be material.  This  I  consider
    an elementary principle.
40. In preparing the balancing exercise scales,  certain  discrete  factual
    issues arise for  consideration.   First,  I  accept  that  Mr  R  will
    probably be the recipient of some form of substituted care  service  in
    the event  of  the  Appellant's  departure  from  the  United  Kingdom.
    However, it is appropriate to emphasise that the  evidence  bearing  on
    this issue is non-existent.  In particular, the Secretary of State  has
    adduced no evidence about the likely form of enhanced state funded care
    and attention, if any, which might be available  in  such  eventuality.
    Given the complexities of the laws, discretions and policies which this
    issue engages,  I  take  care  to  avoid  speculation.  The  evidential
    doctrine of judicial notice has no purchase in this  discrete  context.
    Given the state of the evidence, it is not possible for me to make  any
    finding more extensive than that R, at  most,  may  benefit  from  some
    modest increase in the very limited  state  funded  services  which  he
    receives at present.


41. Next, I find that the Appellant is not  irreplaceable,  in  the  narrow
    sense that Mr R, with the assistance of others,  self-funded  or  State
    sponsored, may be able to find a  substitute  carer.   However,  taking
    into account the nature and longevity of  the  relationship  which  has
    developed and having regard to Mr R's advanced  years  and  progressive
    disabilities, I consider that the Appellant  is  irreplaceable  in  the
    broader, more nuanced and emotional sense.  Linked to this,  I  readily
    find that the arrangements  involving  the  Appellant  and  Mr  R  will
    continue indefinitely and will not be terminated until Mr R  reaches  a
    stage where independent living is no longer  medically  and  physically
    possible. Mr R's motivation and determination are admirable.


42. Next, I readily find that the  departure  of  the  Appellant  from  the
    United Kingdom will almost certainly signal the end of  Mr  R's  acting
    career. In this context I  consider  it  legitimate  to  weigh  in  the
    balancing exercise the factor described in UE (Nigeria) v Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2010] EWCA Civ 975 as "[loss  of]  value
    to the community in the United Kingdom ....  loss of  public  benefit":
    see [30] and [33].  The evidence clearly establishes that, through  his
    lifelong acting career, Mr R has made a significant contribution to the
    arts and, consistent with his physical  and  medical  limitations,  has
    continued to do so.  One noteworthy, discrete feature of  what  he  has
    achieved during the past eleven (quadriplegic) years of  his  life,  is
    the inspiration provided to other disabled  actors.   As  noted  in  UE
    (Nigeria), a factor of this kind is unlikely  to  be  decisive  in  the
    majority of cases.  That is true of the present case: it does not  tilt
    the balance in the Appellant's favour.   However,  it  is  one  of  the
    building blocks in the proportionality balancing exercise.


43. Thus, to summarise, the Appellant is an immigrant  with  an  impeccable
    immigration history who (disregarding any question of family life)  has
    a highly developed private life in the United Kingdom;  is  financially
    independent;  speaks  and  writes   perfect   English;   has   had   an
    indispensable role in the life of an elderly, acutely  disabled  United
    Kingdom national for several years; and whose continued involvement  in
    Mr R's life perpetuates the significant (in the sense of  greater  than
    minimal) contribution which Mr R, through  his  acting,  makes  to  the
    community in general and to the cohort of disabled people  in  society.
    Viewed through an  artificially  narrow  lens,  the  Appellant  can  be
    substituted in Mr R's life.   However,  in  qualitative  and  emotional
    terms, he is irreplaceable.


44. On  the  other  side  of  the  scales  is  the  public  interest.   The
    Appellant's case is not one involving  illegal  entry,  unlawful  over-
    staying, benefits or passport fraud, illegal working or criminality  of
    any kind.  Thus, within the framework of Part 5A of the 2002  Act,  the
    public interest pitted against him,  though  intrinsically  strong  and
    possessing the additional imprimatur of Parliamentary endorsement, does
    not have the increased potency which applies to cases of the kind  just
    noted.  In short, the public interest in play is  rooted  in  the  long
    established "population control" right of sovereign states, namely  the
    right (in this case) to select those who, having lawfully  entered  and
    remained on its territory on finite terms, can lawfully continue to  do
    so.


45. As emphasised in recent decisions such  as  Treebhawon  and  Kaur,  the
    crucial task for courts and tribunals in every proportionality exercise
    is to prepare the scales correctly in law.  This  involves  identifying
    all  material  facts  and  factors,  disregarding  everything  that  is
    immaterial (or illegitimate) and forming a balanced  view,  giving  due
    respect to the executive's formulation of the public interest  viz  the
    legitimate aim in Article 8(2) terms.  Correct self-direction in law is
    also, self-evidently, an indispensable requirement.


46. Balancing the main facts  and  factors  identified  above  against  the
    strong public interest in  play,  I  conclude  that  the  Secretary  of
    State's refusal to grant indefinite leave to remain  to  the  Appellant
    does interfere disproportionately with the right to respect to  private
    life guaranteed to the Appellant and Mr R under  Article  8  ECHR,  via
    section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.  I consider that  the  special,
    unique and compelling features of  the  relationship  and  arrangements
    under scrutiny combine to outweigh the public  interest.   This  is  my
    evaluative  assessment  in  this  highly  unusual  and  intensely  fact
    sensitive cases.  The public interest must yield in the circumstances.

47. As this decision demonstrates the judgement to be made in cases of this
    genre is  never  clear  cut  and  is  frequently  positioned  in  close
    proximity to the notional borderline.  The fusion  of  immigration  law
    and human rights law produces such cases with some regularity.


Conclusion

48. The appeal is allowed accordingly.









                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY

          PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER


                                                     Date:  21 February 2017
                                    [pic]
                                  APPENDIX

                                 DIRECTIONS

Note: In these  directions,  "Appellant"  means  the  party  (including  any
representative) who has been granted  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
Tribunal against the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  (the  "FtT")  and
"Respondent" means any other person (including any representative)  who  was
a party before the FtT.

   1. These Directions of the Upper Tribunal ("the Tribunal") apply in  this
      case in which permission to appeal has been  granted.   They  must  be
      followed  unless  varied,  substituted  or  supplemented  by   further
      directions.

   2. The parties are  reminded  that  any  failure  to  comply  with  these
      directions may result in the Tribunal making an adverse order pursuant
      to its power under Rule 10 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
      Rules 2008 ("the Rules").

   3. These Directions seek to give effect to the requirement in Rule  2  of
      the Rules to deal with cases fairly and justly and all  other  aspects
      of the overriding  objective.   The  parties  are  reminded  of  their
      obligation pursuant to Rule 2(4) to help the Tribunal to achieve  that
      objective and to co-operate with the Tribunal generally.

   4. There is a presumption that, in the event  of  the  Tribunal  deciding
      that the decision of the FtT is to be set aside as erroneous  in  law,
      the re-making of the decision will take place  at  the  same  hearing.
      The fresh decision will normally be based on the evidence  before  the
      FtT and any further evidence admitted (see [5] below),  together  with
      the parties' arguments. The parties must be  prepared  accordingly  in
      every case.

   5. The Tribunal is empowered to permit new  or  further  evidence  to  be
      admitted in the re-making of a  decision.   In  any  case  where  this
      facility is sought the parties must comply with Rule 15(2A)  which  is
      in these terms:

           In an asylum case or an immigration case -

              a) if a party wishes the Upper Tribunal to consider  evidence
                 that was not before the First-tier  Tribunal,  that  party
                 must send or deliver a notice to the  Upper  Tribunal  and
                 any other party -

                   i) indicating the nature of the evidence; and

                  ii) explaining why it was not submitted to the  First-tier
                      Tribunal; and

           (b)     when considering whether to admit evidence that was  not
                 before the First-tier Tribunal,    the Upper Tribunal  must
                 have regard to whether there has been unreasonable delay in
                 producing that evidence.

      A failure to comply with Rule 15(2A) will be  regarded  as  a  serious
      matter  and  may  result  in  fresh  or  further  evidence  not  being
      considered by the Tribunal.

   6. The following timetable has been set for this appeal:

           i) If the Respondent wishes to provide a  response  pursuant  to
              Rule 24 the time limit for doing so is  one  month  from  the
              date of these Directions. If the Respondent  decides  not  to
              provide a response, this must be notified in writing  to  the
              Tribunal and the Appellant within the same time limit.

          ii) If a response is provided pursuant to (i) above the Appellant
              must provide any reply within ten  working  days  before  the
              hearing of the appeal at latest.

         iii) Any notice by the Respondent pursuant to Rule 15(2A) must  be
              sent  with  any  Rule  24  response  within  the  time  limit
              specified in (i) above  or  with  the  notification  that  no
              response is proposed.

          iv) Any notice by the Appellant pursuant to Rule 15(2A)  must  be
              sent   ten working days before the hearing of the  appeal  at
              latest.

           v) All notices pursuant to Rule 15(2A) must be accompanied by an
              indexed and paginated bundle of documents, including all  the
              material  that  was  before   the   FtT   together   with   a
              supplementary indexed and paginated bundle  of  the  proposed
              new evidence or where feasible, an extended  version  of  the
              FtT bundle.

          vi) Both parties shall, at latest five working days prior to  the
              scheduled hearing of the appeal, contact the Tribunal for the
              purpose  of  confirming  that  all  bundles  and  any   other
              materials considered by the FtT and/or as directed above  are
              available for distribution to  the  judge/s  and  taking  any
              other appropriate steps to this end.

   7. Where a skeleton argument is directed by the  Tribunal  or  considered
      appropriate by a party this will be filed and  served  no  later  than
      three clear working days before the scheduled  hearing  date  together
      with copies of any relevant authorities.

   8. Any request for the services of an interpreter must  be  made  to  the
      Tribunal in writing, at latest seven days in advance of the  scheduled
      hearing date.

   9. The parties will receive written notification of the hearing  date  in
      due course.  All hearings in the Tribunal are listed  at  10.00  hours
      unless otherwise notified.

[pic]

B Dawson
Principal Resident Judge                         Dated:
