
ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL

                    EA (Section 85 (4) explained) Nigeria [2007] UKAIT 00013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard                   at:                   Field                    House
     Date of Hearing: 8 August 2006
                                       Date of Promulgation: 30 January 2007
                                   Before:


 Mr C M G Ockelton, Deputy President of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
                        Senior Immigration Judge Warr
                      Senior Immigration Judge Batiste

                                   Between

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the Appellant:           Ms M Yagnik, instructed by Remar & Co.
Solicitors
For the Respondent:          Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer

The effect of s85(4) of the 2002 Act (as expounded  in  LS  (Gambia)  [2005]
UKAIT 00085) is not to make the  Tribunal  a  primary  decision-maker.   The
focus must always be on the  decision  actually  made  in  response  to  the
appellant's application.   An  in-country  appellant  does  not  succeed  by
showing that he meets the requirements of the Immigration Rules at the  date
of the hearing.  He can succeed only by showing that  the  application  that
he made would be successful at the date of the hearing.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is the reconsideration of the appeal of the appellant,  a  citizen
    of Nigeria, against the decision of the respondent on 7  February  2006
    refusing to vary his leave in order to enable  him  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom as a student.

 2. He had leave to enter for twelve months on the usual  terms  applicable
    to a student.  He was  subsequently  granted  leave  to  remain  on  30
    November 2005 in order to study for a degree course in accountancy  and
    finance at London Metropolitan University.  He did not in fact continue
    his studies at London Metropolitan University.  He began a course at an
    institution called Anfell College.  On 23 November 2005 he applied  for
    leave to remain in order to continue his  studies  for  a  Bachelor  of
    Science degree in computer science at Anfell College.   Anfell  College
    closed  in  December  2005.   On  7  February  2006   the   appellant's
    application was refused,  the  ground  of  refusal  being  that  Anfell
    College was not, on that date,  on  the  Department  of  Education  and
    Skills' Register of Education and Training Providers.  Further, as  the
    college had closed, the Secretary of State was not satisfied  that  the
    appellant was enrolled on a course of study meeting the requirements of
    the Immigration Rules.  The appellant  thereupon  (although  having  no
    permission from the respondent to do so)  began  a  course  at  Holborn
    College, an institution that he  had  attended  previously.   He  began
    studies for a three year accountancy degree.  There is  no  doubt  that
    Holborn College is on the Register.

 3. Before the Immigration Judge it was submitted on the appellant's behalf
    that, because he met the requirements of the Immigration Rules  on  the
    date of the hearing, he was entitled to the benefit of  s85(4)  of  the
    2002 Act as interpreted in LS (Gambia) [2005] UKAIT 00085, and that his
    appeal should be allowed although he did not meet the  requirements  of
    the Rules at the date of the decision.  The Immigration Judge wrote  in
    her determination as follows:

      "I accept the respondent's submissions that, as  Anfell  College  was
        not registered with the Department for Education and  Skills  [the]
        application was bound to fail as the appellant was unable  to  meet
        all the criteria of paragraph 57 of HC 395.  The  decision  of  the
        Secretary of State was thus correct.  I  do  not  accept  counsel's
        argument  that  the  appellant's  subsequent  enrolment  at  London
        Metropolitan University [sic: no doubt Holborn college is intended]
        retrospectively fulfilled the requirements of Rule 57.  At the time
        of decision the Secretary of State was correct."

 4. The grounds of reconsideration raise the  same  point  in  relation  to
    s85(4) and LS (Gambia) as was raised before the Immigration Judge.

 5. Section 85(4) is as follows:

        "On an appeal under section 82(1) or 83(2) against a  decision  the
        Tribunal may consider evidence about any  matter  which  it  thinks
        relevant to the substance of the decision, including evidence which
        concerns a matter arising after the date of the decision."

      Section 85(5) provides, by way of contrast,  that  an  appeal  against
    entry clearance or a certificate of entitlement (that is to say, an out-
    of-country appeal) is to be  decided  by  reference  only  to  evidence
    relating to the circumstances at the date  of  the  decision.   As  the
    Tribunal pointed  out  in  LS  (Gambia)  s85(4)  applies,  without  any
    difference of wording, to asylum  and  human  rights  appeals  and  in-
    country immigration appeals.  It follows that, under the 2002 Act, they
    are governed by the same principles so  far  as  the  admissibility  of
    evidence is concerned: that is what s85(4) is about.

 6. But the evidence is only admissible in so far as the Tribunal thinks it
    "relevant to the substance of the decision".  That phrase is important.
     It is not the evidence's relevance to the  appellant's  claim  or  his
    application that is in question: it is its relevance  to  the  decision
    that was actually made.  It may be the case that, as has been suggested
    a number of times in the Court of Appeal, the issue of whether a person
    is a refugee at any particular time is "one composite question"; but  a
    decision on a matter under the Immigration Rules is a decision  on  the
    detailed eligibility of an individual by reference  to  the  particular
    requirements of the Rule in question in the context of the  application
    that that person has made.

 7. It is thus not open to an appellant to argue simply that, on  the  date
    of the hearing, he meets the requirements of the Immigration Rules.  He
    can succeed only if he shows that the decision that was  made  was  one
    which was not in accordance with the Immigration Rules.  Section  85(4)
    allows him to show that by reference to evidence of matters  postdating
    the decision itself, and it may well be that the  effect  is  that  the
    question for the Tribunal in an in-country case is whether the decision
    can be justified as a correct one at the date of the hearing.  But that
    does not mean that the Tribunal is  the  primary  decision-maker.   The
    Tribunal's task remains  that  of  hearing  appeals  against  decisions
    actually made.  The correct interpretation of s85(4)  is  perhaps  best
    indicated by saying that the appellant cannot succeed by  showing  that
    he would be granted leave if he made an application on the date of  the
    hearing: he can succeed only by showing that he would be granted  leave
    if he made, on the date of the hearing, the same  application  as  that
    which resulted in the decision under appeal.  The subsection  does  not
    permit an appellant to change his case under the Immigration Rules  for
    being allowed to remain in the United Kingdom.  (That  is,  of  course,
    without prejudice to the fact that  s84(1)  may  allow  the  appeal  to
    succeed on different grounds entirely.)

 8. We have expressed our views on this issue in deference to  the  grounds
    and  because  we  gather  that  the  effect   of   s85(4)   is   widely
    misunderstood.   In  our  view  the  Immigration  Judge  in  this  case
    materially  erred  in  law  by  apparently  rejecting  the  sub-section
    altogether and asking herself whether the appellant could  be  regarded
    as having "retrospectively fulfilled the conditions of Rule 57".   That
    was not the question.  The question was whether the evidence  available
    to the Immigration Judge showed that, at the date of the  hearing,  the
    specific application to study  at  Anfell  College  should  be  granted
    rather than refused.

 9. In those circumstances  we  would  normally  go  on  to  make  our  own
    determination allowing or dismissing the appeal on its merits.  At  the
    hearing before us, however, it appeared that there is a difficulty.  As
    soon as the appellant realised  that  Anfell  College  had  closed,  he
    supplemented his application by letter indicating that  he  now  sought
    leave to remain in order to study at Holborn College rather than Anfell
    College.  Mr Avery was able to confirm that the letter was now on file:
    it was posted on 30 January and  received  in  the  Home  Office  on  2
    February, some days before the decision was made.  It is  evident  that
    it had not reached the file in time, and so the decision related solely
    to Anfell College without  taking  account  of  the  amendment  to  his
    application that the  appellant  had  submitted.   Mr  Avery  willingly
    conceded that the decision was bad: the  Secretary  of  State  had  not
    taken into account all the materials in the application as a whole.

10. In those circumstances the appropriate decision is that the appellant's
    application remains outstanding, awaiting  a  lawful  decision  by  the
    Secretary of State.  We substitute a decision allowing the  appellant's
    appeal on those terms.






                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT
                                                                   Date:

