
WW (EEA Regs. - civil partnership) Thailand [2009] UKAIT 00014

Asylum and Immigration Tribunal


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |                             |
|On 9 February 2009                            |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                      SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE P R LANE
                        SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE GILL

                                   Between

                                     WW
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P. Ward, Solicitor, James & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S. Ong, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

In regulation 10 of the Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations
2006, "termination" of a civil  partnership  means  formal,  not  de  facto,
termination.  The  length  of  a  civil  partnership  for  the  purposes  of
regulation 10 is determined by reference to the  period  during  which  that
partnership has formally existed and thus excludes any period  during  which
the parties were in a relationship prior  to  the  formation  of  the  civil
partnership under the 2004 Act.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    What follows is the determination of the Tribunal.  The  appellant,  a
    citizen of Thailand  born  on  19  February  1977,  was  most  recently
    admitted to the United Kingdom on 26 April 2007 as an EEA family member
    on a family permit valid until 25 October 2007.  On  12  June  2007  he
    applied to the respondent for a residence card  as  confirmation  of  a
    right of residence under European Community law as the civil partner of
    an EEA national exercising Treaty rights in the United Kingdom.  It  is
    common ground that the appellant's civil partner is, in fact, a citizen
    of Switzerland who, by reason of the EC-Switzerland Agreement  on  Free
    Movement of Persons, falls to be treated as an EEA national.

2.     On  3  September  2008  the  respondent   refused   the   appellant's
    application.  In the accompanying letter setting out  the  reasons  for
    refusal, the respondent stated that she was not satisfied that the  EEA
    national was currently exercising Treaty rights in the United  Kingdom.
    The respondent's enquiries had disclosed that the EEA national  was  no
    longer employed by the company referred to  in  the  application.   The
    appellant appealed against that decision, on the grounds that he was  a
    member of the family of an EEA national  and  had  retained  rights  of
    residence in the United Kingdom; and that the appellant's removal would
    violate article 8 of the ECHR.

3.    On 17 November 2008 the appellant's appeal was heard at  Taylor  House
    by  an  Immigration  Judge,  who  dismissed  it  in   a   determination
    promulgated on 24 November.  On 11 December 2008 reconsideration of the
    Immigration Judge's decision was ordered  under  section  103A  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, on the application of the
    appellant.

4.    The following facts were found by the Immigration Judge  and  are  not
    contentious.  The appellant and his Swiss  national  partner  commenced
    their relationship in Thailand shortly  after  5  December  1998.   The
    couple cohabited in Thailand and a number of other countries, including
    Switzerland.  In 2001 the appellant's partner sponsored him for studies
    in the United Kingdom and for around twelve months from  February  2002
    they lived together at an address in Hove, East Sussex.  From  February
    2003 until August 2007 they lived together in Brighton and, thereafter,
    Worthing.  They separated in April 2008, when the  appellant's  partner
    left the United Kingdom for Thailand.   According  to  the  appellant's
    statement of 13 October  2008,  he  understands  that  his  partner  is
    working in China, Indonesia and other countries in that area.

5.    The couple had, however, entered into a formal  civil  partnership  in
    Brighton on 3 February 2006 under the Civil Partnership Act  2004.   In
    the  light  of  the  events  just  described,  however,  the  appellant
    instituted proceedings for the dissolution of  the  civil  partnership.
    At the date of the Immigration Judge hearing the appellant was awaiting
    an acknowledgement of service from his partner,  then  said  to  be  in
    Thailand.

6.    It is common ground that, if he is  to  succeed  in  his  appeal,  the
    appellant must bring himself within  the  scope  of  regulation  10  or
    regulation 15 of the Immigration (European Economic  Area)  Regulations
    2006.  Although the grounds of appeal to the Tribunal raised article  8
    of the ECHR, the Immigration Judge found against the appellant on  that
    ground.  The appellant sought  to  challenge  the  Immigration  Judge's
    findings on article 8 but the  Senior  Immigration  Judge  who  ordered
    reconsideration found that this ground of appeal was not  arguable  and
    Mr Ward did not seek to pursue it at the reconsideration  hearing.   In
    any event, we find that the Immigration Judge's analysis and  reasoning
    at paragraphs 38 and 39 of the determination disclose no material error
    of law.  The appellant's article 8 case was based on his  private  life
    in the United Kingdom, which  consisted  of  having  friends,  a  home,
    hobbies and interests, as well as the fact  that  he  is  a  practising
    homosexual.  The Immigration Judge found that there was no evidence  to
    demonstrate that the appellant's private life could not continue to  be
    carried on in Thailand, from where he could remain in  touch  with  his
    United  Kingdom  friends  "by  modern  means  of  communication".   The
    appellant and his partner had  been  able  to  carry  on  a  homosexual
    relationship in Thailand.  The Immigration Judge also  noted  that  the
    former partner "has now formed a  relationship  with  someone  else  in
    Thailand, this being of a same sex nature".

7.      The Immigration Judge noted at paragraph  21  of  the  determination
    that Mr Ward sought to rely on a letter of 10 July 2002 from  the  Home
    Office to Messrs Clifford Chance,  in  which  it  was  stated  that  an
    unmarried partner of an EEA national  could  rely  on  the  immigration
    rules relating  to  the  admission  etc.  of  unmarried  partners  (now
    paragraph  295A  et  seq.).  The  Immigration   Judge   rejected   that
    submission, on the basis that the appellant  could  not  bring  himself
    within the terms of the rules. The appellant did not seek to  challenge
    this finding in the application for reconsideration  and,  although  Mr
    Ward referred us to the Clifford Chance letter, he did not seek to rely
    upon it. In any event, both at the date of  the  decision  appealed  in
    this case and subsequently, the parties were not  living  together  and
    the partner was not present in the United Kingdom.

8.    The relevant provisions of regulation 10 of the 2006  Regulations  are
    as follows:-

        "10.-(1) In these Regulations, 'family member who has retained  the
               right of residence' means  ...a  person  who  satisfies  the
               conditions in paragraph ...(5).


        ...


        (5)      A person satisfies the conditions in this paragraph if -


               (a)     he ceased to be  a  family  member  of  a  qualified
                    person on the  termination  of  the  marriage  or  civil
                    partnership of the qualified person;


               (b)     he was residing in the United Kingdom in  accordance
                    with these Regulations at the date of the termination;


               (c)     he satisfies the condition in paragraph (6); and


               (d)     either -


                    (i)      prior to the initiation of the proceedings  for
                        the  termination  of  the  marriage  or  the   civil
                        partnership the marriage or  civil  partnership  had
                        lasted for at least three years and the  parties  to
                        the marriage or civil partnership had resided in the
                        United Kingdom for at  least  one  year  during  its
                        duration;


                    ...


        (6)      The condition in this paragraph is that the person -


               (a)     is not an EEA national but would, if he were an  EEA
                    national, be a worker, a self-employed person or a self-
                    sufficient person under regulation 6..."

9.    Mr Ward rightly acknowledged that each of sub-paragraphs  (a)  to  (d)
    of regulation 10(5) had to be complied with in order for  a  person  to
    satisfy  its  conditions.   As  a  matter  of  ordinary   language,   a
    requirement, for example, to do X, Y and Z is a requirement to do X and
    Y and Z.  In this regard, there is nothing  remotely  problematic  with
    regulation 10(5).

10.   Mr Ward also accepted that for the appellant's  case  to  come  within
    regulation 10 depended upon his being  able  to  show  that  the  civil
    partnership in question had terminated.  The Immigration  Judge  found,
    at  paragraph  25  of  his  determination,  that  "The  termination  of
    the...civil partnership" meant "not the de  facto  termination  of  the
    civil partnership but the termination of the same by operation  of  law
    such as an order for dissolution  or  the  death  of  [the  appellant's
    partner].  Neither of these matters  have  been  evidenced."   Mr  Ward
    criticised  this  finding.   He  submitted  that,  as   a   matter   of
    interpretation, the reference in regulation 10(5) to the termination of
    the civil partnership should be construed as  a  reference  to  its  de
    facto termination and that, to interpret  it  as  had  the  Immigration
    Judge would lead to unsatisfactory  states  of  affairs  where  formal,
    legal termination did not take place at all or was delayed, and the EEA
    national ceased to be a "qualified person" as defined in regulation  6;
    for example, as here, by leaving the United Kingdom.

11.   Like the  Immigration  Judge,  we  are  unable  to  accept  Mr  Ward's
    submission on this issue.  The fact that  "termination"  in  regulation
    10(5) means the formal termination of the marriage or civil partnership
    concerned is put beyond doubt by article 13 of   Directive  2004/38/EC,
    to which the 2006 Regulations were intended to  give  effect.   Article
    13.1 of the Directive  refers  to  "divorce,  annulment  of  the  Union
    citizen's marriage or termination of his/her registered partnership" as
    not affecting the right of residence of his/her family members who  are
    nationals of a Member State.   Article  13.2  provides  that  "divorce,
    annulment of marriage or  termination  of  the  registered  partnership
    referred to in point 2(b) of article 2 shall not  entail  loss  of  the
    right of residence of a Union citizen's  family  members  who  are  not
    nationals of a Member State" where certain  conditions  are  satisfied.
    The first of these is that -

        "(a)      prior  to  initiation  of  the   divorce   or   annulment
             proceedings  or  termination  of  the  registered   partnership
             referred to in  point  2(b)  of  Article  2,  the  marriage  or
             registered  partnership  has  lasted  at  last   three   years,
             including one year in the host Member State."

12.   The references in article 13 to divorce and annulment  put  it  beyond
    doubt that the reference to termination of the marriage  in  regulation
    10(5) means nothing less than divorce or annulment.  There  can  be  no
    rational basis for treating termination of registered partnerships  any
    differently.  We do not consider that any difficulties  that  might  be
    faced by those within the hypothetical class identified by Mr Ward come
    anywhere near compelling us to depart from the  clear  wording  of  the
    Directive.

13.   So far as regulation 10 is concerned, this finding is  destructive  of
    the appellant's appeal.  The Immigration Judge, nevertheless, held  the
    appellant could not satisfy the requirements of regulation 10(5)(d)(i),
    in that, prior  to  the  initiation  of  termination  proceedings,  the
    appellant's civil partnership had not lasted for at least three  years.
    Mr Ward accepts that this is so,  if  what  is  measured  is  only  the
    duration of the "formal" civil partnership.  However, his submission to
    the Immigration Judge - and to us -  was  that  regulation  10(5)(d)(i)
    must be read as relating in the present case to the period during which
    the appellant and his partner had been living together as  partners  in
    the United Kingdom.

14.    Mr  Ward  acknowledged  that  this  submission  involves  drawing   a
    distinction between, on the one hand, a marriage and, on the  other,  a
    civil partnership formed by  registration  under  the  2004  Act.   His
    justification for this stance was that  if  the  provision  is  not  so
    construed  on  the  particular  facts  of  the  appellant's  case,  the
    appellant would suffer impermissible discrimination by reason of  being
    a homosexual.  Had the appellant been heterosexual and of  a  different
    sex from his partner, the couple  could,  and  would,  have  formalised
    their relationship by means of marriage, at  a  far  earlier  point  in
    their relationship.  As the  appellant  said  in  paragraph  3  of  his
    statement:-

        "It was not legally possible for us to enter  into  any  meaningful
        form of civil partnership, civil union or civil partnership like  a
        marriage in Thailand,  Switzerland  or  the  United  Kingdom  until
        December 2005 when civil partnerships were created  in  the  United
        Kingdom.  If we had been able to do so before  this  date  then  we
        would have entered into a civil partnership  soon  after  the  year
        2000,  probably  in  2001.   We  finally  entered  into   a   civil
        partnership together in Brighton on 3 February 2006."

15.   Paragraph 3 of the partner's statement is in similar terms.   Mr  Ward
    criticised the Immigration Judge's finding on this issue, at  paragraph
    22 of the determination, where he found that "the Directive is  looking
    towards the present and the future and not the past.  Had  it  intended
    to embrace the past it could clearly have so specified  within  any  of
    its preamble or formal Articles but it does not do so."  Mr  Ward  drew
    our attention to paragraph 6 of Schedule 4  to  the  2006  Regulations,
    which provides that "any period during which a person  carried  out  an
    activity or was resident in the United Kingdom in accordance  with  the
    2000 Regulations shall be treated as a period during which  the  person
    carried out that activity or was resident  in  the  United  Kingdom  in
    accordance with  these  Regulations  for  the  purpose  of  calculating
    periods of activity and residence under these Regulations".

16.   Although Mr Ward  acknowledged  that  the  2000  Regulations  did  not
    recognise civil partnerships and did not enable a person who was in  "a
    durable relationship"  with  an  EEA  national  to  be  treated  as  an
    "extended family member" - as is now the case with the 2006 Regulations
    - he relied on paragraph 6 of Schedule 4 in order to  demonstrate  that
    the Immigration Judge had been wrong to say what he did in paragraph 22
    of  the  determination.   Mr  Ward  urged  us  to  construe  regulation
    10(5)(d)(i) in the manner contended for by the appellant  in  order  to
    eradicate the discrimination which would otherwise arise on  the  facts
    of this case.  He drew our attention to recital (31) of the  Directive,
    whereby  "Member  States  should  implement  this   Directive   without
    discrimination between the  beneficiaries...on  grounds  such  as  sex,
    race,  colour,  ethnic  or  social  origin,  genetic   characteristics,
    religion or beliefs, political  or  other  opinion,  membership  of  an
    ethnic  minority,  property,   birth,   disability,   age   or   sexual
    orientation".

17.   We are not persuaded that regulation 10(5)(d)(i) has  to  be  read  in
    such a way as to encompass not just the period  during  which  a  civil
    partnership within the meaning of the 2004 Act  has  subsisted  between
    the appellant and his  partner  but  also  some  earlier  period.   The
    inherent  practical  difficulty  in  the  submission   is,   in   fact,
    demonstrated in paragraph 3  of  the  statement,  where  the  appellant
    speaks of a mutual intention to have entered into a  civil  partnership
    "soon after the year 2000, probably in 2001"; whereas his partner  says
    that if "we had been able to do so lawfully prior to this date then  we
    would have done so soon after  the  year  2000".  How  is  a  court  or
    tribunal  to  decide  on  the  strength  of  such  evidence  when   the
    "partnership" actually commenced?

18.    Quite apart from this matter, however, we do not  consider  that  the
    Directive and its Preamble can properly be said  to  require  any  such
    retrospective application.  We  have  no  specific  information  as  to
    whether each of the Member States has  broadly  similar  provision  for
    civil partnerships, such as is contained in the 2004 Act. The fact that
    this  is  apparently  not  the  case  is,  however,  indicated  by  the
    definition of "family member" in article 2(2), whereby that  expression
    means:-

        "(a)     the spouse;


          (b)     the partner with whom the Union citizen has  contracted  a
          registered partnership, on the  basis  of  the  legislation  of  a
          Member State, if the legislation of the host Member  State  treats
          registered  partnerships  as  equivalent  to   marriage   and   in
          accordance  with  the  conditions  laid  down  in   the   relevant
          legislation of the host Member State."

 19.  If, in view of this, recital (31) was intended to have  anything  like
    the effect alleged by Mr Ward, one would have expected the Directive to
    have dealt with the positions of heterosexual and homosexual couples in
    a radically different way from that actually adopted.

20.    Mr Ward claimed to find support in regulation 2  for  his  submission
    that one should look at the substance of the relationship as  a  whole,
    rather than just the civil partnership. Regulation 2  provides  that  a
    "'spouse' does not include a  party  to  a  marriage  of  convenience".
    However, the fact that the legal partnership of marriage,  which  might
    otherwise found a basis for residence rights, is not to do so if it  is
    a sham in no way diminishes the requirement to demonstrate such a legal
    partnership. In other words, marriage is a necessary but - in the light
    of regulation  2  -  not  a  sufficient  condition  for  success  under
    regulation 10.

21.   Before the Immigration Judge, the appellant  sought  alternatively  to
    rely on regulation 15(1)(b), which provides:-

        "15.-(1) The following persons shall acquire the right to reside in
               the United Kingdom permanently -


               ...


               (b)     a family member  of  an  EEA  national  who  is  not
                    himself an EEA national  but  who  has  resided  in  the
                    United Kingdom with the EEA national in accordance  with
                    these  Regulations  for  a  continuous  period  of  five
                    years."

22.    Mr  Ward  did  not  pursue  the  regulation  15   argument   at   the
    reconsideration hearing; rightly so, in our view.  Despite the terms of
    paragraph 6 of Schedule 4 to the 2006 Regulations,  to  which  we  have
    already referred,  it  is  clear  that  the  appellant  cannot  satisfy
    regulation 15(1)(b) because, at least until 30  April  2006  (when  the
    2006 Regulations came into force), the appellant was  not  residing  in
    the United Kingdom in accordance with those  Regulations  or  with  the
    2000 Regulations, which, as we have seen, did not  make  provision  for
    persons in the position of the appellant.  Although full details of the
    appellant's immigration history are not before us, it appears that  for
    a significant period the basis of his leave to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom was his status as a student.  In any event, prior to the advent
    of the 2006 Regulations, his entitlement to be here did not rest in EEA
    law upon his relationship with his partner.

Decision

23.   The  determination  of  the  Immigration  Judge  does  not  contain  a
    material error of law and we accordingly order that it shall stand.


Signed


Senior Immigration Judge P R Lane



