

                       Asylum and Immigration Tribunal



 SA (Entry clearance application in Jordan - proportionality) Iraq CG [2006]
                                                                 UKAIT 00011



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS





|Heard at Newport (Columbus House)        |Determination Promulgated|
|On 7 December 2005                       |On 19 January 2006       |
|Prepared 7 December 2005                 |                         |




                                   Before

                 Mr H J E LATTER (Senior Immigration Judge)
                     Mr N J OSBORNE (Immigration Judge)


                                   Between



                                  Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                 Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Miss S Latimer of the Immigration Advisory Service
For the Respondent: Mr B Bruten, Home Office Presenting Officer

In the light of evidence  now  available  the  Tribunal  is  satisfied  that
generally it is not disproportionate to a legitimate aim  within  article  8
(2) to require an Iraqi national to return to Iraq and travel to  Jordan  to
make an application for  entry  clearance.   There  is  significant  further
evidence  to  show  that   the   guidance   in   KJ   (Entry   Clearance   -
Proportionality) Iraq CG [2005] UKIAT 00066 no longer applies.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.             This  is  the  reconsideration  of  an   appeal   against the
      respondent's decision made on 16 January 2005 to remove the  appellant
      as an illegal entrant. His appeal against this decision was originally
      heard by an immigration  judge,  Mr  K.R.  Doran,  on  18  July  2005.
      Reconsideration was ordered on 17 August 2005.

Background

2.         The appellant is a  citizen  of  Iraq  from  Kirkuk.  He  made an
      illegal entry into the United Kingdom on  19  December  2003  claiming
      asylum on arrival. His application was refused on 5 February 2004.  An
      appeal against this decision was dismissed by an adjudicator on 11 May
      2004. The appellant married on 24 July 2004. His wife is a citizen  of
      Iraq resident in this country. The appellant made an  application  for
      leave to remain on this basis but this was refused for the reasons set
      out in the reasons for refusal letter dated 14 January 2005.

3.         The appellant had based his claim for  asylum  on  his membership
      of the Ba'ath Party and his alleged persecution in Iraq as  a  result.
      He said that his father had been a senior member of the party and  had
      pressured him into joining in 1995. He  said  that  he  had  become  a
      senior member of the Ba'ath Party in 2001. He had been responsible for
      arresting draft evaders. For  this  reason  he  had  developed  a  bad
      relationship with both the local  Kurdish  and  Arab  communities.  He
      claimed that his father had been killed by the PUK despite an  amnesty
      the PUK had declared for Ba'ath Party members. The appellant then fled
      to a friend's home before leaving Iraq with the help of an agent on 20
      April 2003. He travelled to Turkey where he  remained  until  December
      2003 and then came to the United Kingdom.

4.         The Adjudicator who heard the  appellant's  asylum  appeal  on 11
      May 2004 did not find him to be a credible witness. He disbelieved the
      appellant's account and described his claim as opportunistic.  He  did
      not accept that the appellant had ever been a  member  of  the  Ba'ath
      Party and found that he could return to Kirkuk.


5.         When the appellant arrived in this  country  he  was  married. He
      had a wife and two children who remained in Iraq. He divorced his wife
      in Iraq by Talaq in about May 2004 and married his present wife on  24
      July 2004. He then made the application for further leave to remain on
      this basis. The respondent's refusal letter refers to  the  guidelines
      in DP3/96 for dealing with marriage applications from those  who  have
      overstayed. The appellant's case did not fall within that guidance  as
      his marriage on 24 July 2004 did not predate by two years the  service
      of notice of liability to removal. The respondent refused to  exercise
      his discretion outside the  concession,  concluding  that  there  were
      insufficient compassionate circumstances to justify such a course.  It
      was the respondent's view that removal would not  be  disproportionate
      to a legitimate aim. It was asserted that it would be  reasonable  for
      the appellant's wife to accompany him on return to Iraq. He could make
      an application for entry clearance. There  would  be  no  interference
      with their family life. This assertion was withdrawn  at  the  hearing
      before the immigration judge. It was accepted that  it  would  not  be
      reasonable for the appellant's wife to return with him. The respondent
      conceded that the appellant had established a private and family  life
      but asserted that any  interference  by  requiring  the  appellant  to
      return to Iraq to make an application for entry clearance would  be  a
      proportionate exercise of immigration control.

The hearing before the Immigration Judge

6.         On the basis of this concession, the judge  said  that  the  sole
      issue for him was whether or not the case was so  exceptional  on  its
      particular facts that the imperative of  proportionality  demanded  an
      outcome in the appellant's favour notwithstanding that he had no claim
      to remain in the United Kingdom under the existing Immigration  Rules.
      He found that the appellant, then aged 33, had married his wife on  24
      July 2004 at a time when his wife was  aware  that  he  had  no  legal
      status to remain in this country. He had two children from  his  first
      marriage in Iraq who lived with his mother  there.  He  described  the
      appellant as a healthy individual who may suffer from asthma  but  was
      not receiving ongoing treatment of either a psychological or  physical
      nature. He did not wish to return to Iraq to make an  application  for
      entry clearance under the rules as he and his wife did not wish to  be
      separated. The appellant also believed that if he returned to Iraq  he
      would suffer the same fate as his father who he  maintained  had  been
      killed by the PUK following the ending of the war in Iraq in 2001.

7.         The judge held that the circumstances of  the  appellant  in  the
      United Kingdom on a personal  basis  did  not  amount  to  exceptional
      circumstances of the kind envisaged by the Court of  Appeal  in  Huang
      [2005] EWCA Civ 105. The appellant's belief that he would  suffer  the
      same fate as his father if returned to Iraq could not  come  into  the
      equation as his  claim  had  been  comprehensively  dismissed  by  the
      Adjudicator at the appeal hearing in April 2004. There was no  further
      evidence to suggest that those finding should be  reconsidered  within
      the terms set out in Devaseelan [2002] UKIAT 00702.

8.           The  judge  said  that  the   only   factor   requiring further
      consideration was whether the appellant could travel from  Iraq  to  a
      neighbouring country  to  make  an  application  for  entry  clearance
      without adverse consequences or a violation of his  human  rights.  He
      referred to the  Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal  determinations  in  MN
      (Entry clearance facilities - availability) Iraq  [2004]  UKIAT  00316
      and HC (Availability of entry clearance facilities) Iraq [2004]  UKIAT
      00154 where the Tribunal held  that  the  possibility  of  any  danger
      involved in travelling from  Baghdad  to  Iran  did  not  establish  a
      reasonable likelihood that an appellant could  not  make  the  journey
      without adverse consequences sufficient to amount to  a  violation  of
      his human rights. These decisions were  contrasted  with  the  country
      guidance determination in KJ (Entry clearance - proportionality)  Iraq
      CG [2005] UKIAT 0066 which concluded, primarily  on  the  basis  of  a
      letter from the UNHCR written  in  January  2005,  that  the  evidence
      showed that it could not  be  argued  that  it  was  proportionate  to
      require an appellant to return to Iraq to apply  for  entry  clearance
      from a neighbouring country because of the dangers  in  travelling  by
      road or flying to another country.

9.         The judge took into  consideration  a  letter  from  the  British
      Embassy in Amman dated 20 March  2005  which  said  that  between  the
      period April and October 2004, 3,301 applications were made in  Jordan
      by Iraqi nationals for entry clearance to the United Kingdom and  that
      between October 2004 to mid-March 2005 3,399  such  applications  were
      made.  The  embassy  was  expecting  to  see  a  massive  increase  in
      applications during the summer period. The letter referred to the fact
      that road travel  between  Baghdad  and  Amman,  Damascus  and  Beirut
      remained  uninterrupted.  Royal  Jordanian  and  Syrian  Airways  flew
      regular services into Baghdad and Gulf Airways also operated regularly
      into Dubai. Those travelling from northern Iraq would  usually  travel
      across into Syria as the fastest and most convenient route.  It  would
      be easier for an Iraqi national holding a UK travel document to  enter
      Syria than Jordan.

10.      On the basis of this information the judge was satisfied  that  the
      dangers of travelling to Amman were not as real  as  supposed  in  the
      UNHCR letter of January 2005 and that the circumstances had changed to
      the extent that it was now proportionate to remove an  Iraqi  national
      to make such an application. He commented that many thousands had been
      doing so either in Jordan, Dubai or Syria. On this  basis  the  appeal
      was dismissed.

The grounds of application for a review

11.       In  his  grounds  the  appellant  says  that  the  details   about
      travelling from Baghdad to Jordan and Syria  were  not  provided.  The
      Home Office representative  had  not  produced  these  at  court.  The
      grounds go on to argue that Baghdad is not safe. The road from Baghdad
      is but not Baghdad itself. There had been bomb attacks  and  it  would
      not be safe for the appellant  to  return  and  make  an  application.
      Reconsideration was ordered by the  Senior  Immigration  Judge  on  17
      August 2005.  He  commented  that  it  was  arguable  that  there  was
      discordance between the contents of the letter of 20 March  2005  from
      the British Embassy in Amman and the travel  advice  concerning  Iraqi
      attacks in the grounds of appeal which was of clear relevance  to  the
      judge's assessment of risk on return. He added that the Tribunal would
      expect the parties to provide as much up-to-date evidence as  possible
      at the hearing. The appellant was strongly  advised  to  obtain  legal
      representation.

The error of law

12.      At the hearing before us, the appellant  was  represented  by  Miss
      Latimer of the Immigration Advisory Service.   She submitted a  bundle
      of documents (A) indexed and paginated  1-34.  Mr  Bruten  produced  a
      bundle (R) paginated 1-17. Miss Latimer submitted that the  judge  was
      wrong to distinguish the case of KJ on the basis of  the  letter  from
      the embassy in Amman produced by the respondent at  the  hearing.  The
      judge had not properly dealt with the risks identified in KJ.  He  had
      failed to take into account the  travel  advice  from  the  Foreign  &
      Commonwealth Office issued on 26 July 2005. We asked Miss Latimer what
      was meant by the assertion at the beginning of the  grounds  that  the
      details about travelling from Baghdad to Jordan  and  Syria  were  not
      provided at the hearing. She  said  that  her  instructions  from  the
      appellant were that the letter had been referred to at the hearing and
      only subsequently provided to the appellant. We note that there  is  a
      copy of a letter on the appeal file dated 19 July 2005 written by  the
      Presenting Officer to the appellant and his wife enclosing a  copy  of
      the letter dated 20 March 2005.

13.      Mr Bruten submitted that the determination  did  not  disclose  any
      material error of law. The judge had looked at  the  country  guidance
      case of KJ. He had been entitled to distinguish it in the light of the
      letter 20 March 2005. Circumstances had changed. Taking  into  account
      the further evidence, the judge had been  entitled  to  conclude  that
      removal  would  be  proportionate.  There  was  no  reference  in  his
      determination to the Foreign Office travel advice but even if that had
      been before him it would not have affected his decision.  He  was  not
      able to say whether the letter of 20 March 2005 had been  produced  at
      the hearing.

14.      We must consider firstly whether there has been  a  material  error
      of law. When ordering reconsideration  the  Senior  Immigration  Judge
      commented that it was arguable that there was discordance between  the
      contents of the  letter  of  20  March  2005  and  the  travel  advice
      concerning Iraq attached to the grounds of appeal.  We  are  satisfied
      that the point which concerned him was whether the travel  advice  had
      been taken into account.  The judge has identified in paragraph  5  of
      his determination the documentation produced both  by  the  respondent
      and the appellant. The only document produced by the appellant  was  a
      skeleton argument prepared on his behalf dated 7 June 2005. This is  a
      letter from the appellant's wife. It is not altogether clear from  the
      appeal  file  when  the  documents  relating  to  travel  advice  were
      submitted.   However,  they  relate  to  advice  from  the  Foreign  &
      Commonwealth Office updated 27 June 2005, still  current  at  26  July
      2005 and from the British Embassy in Amman updated 5 July 2005,  still
      current at 25 July 2005.  The  documents  also  appear  to  have  been
      downloaded from the internet on 26 July 2005. They are annexed to  the
      grounds of appeal against the judge's decision. For these  reasons  we
      are satisfied that these documents were not in fact put  in  front  of
      the judge at the hearing and it follows that he did not err in law  by
      failing to take them into account.

15.      However, it is also argued that evidence was  referred  to  at  the
      hearing which was only subsequently served on the  appellant.  In  his
      determination the judge said that  the  respondent  'now  produces'  a
      letter from the Embassy in Amman dated 20 March 2005. It is not  clear
      from the determination or the record of proceedings whether the letter
      was produced at the hearing or referred to and subsequently  produced.
      But it is clear that the day after the hearing the Presenting  Officer
      sent a copy of the letter to the  appellant  with  a  covering  letter
      saying 'Please find enclosed the letter that was referred  to  in  the
      hearing by the Home Office representative'.  Whether  the  letter  was
      produced on the day or referred to and then supplied the following day
      to the judge and the appellant, we are satisfied  that  the  appellant
      did not have a proper opportunity of dealing with the  points  raised.
      He was unrepresented at the hearing. The only purpose of supplying him
      with the letter would be to enable him to respond to the  points  made
      in that letter. His response in  fact  came  in  his  application  for
      review and we are satisfied that because he  was  supplied  with  this
      letter,  he then obtained the  travel  advice  from  the  Foreign  and
      Commonwealth Office and the embassy in Amman, which he submitted  with
      his application for  review.   We  are  satisfied  that  there  was  a
      procedural irregularity at the hearing which caused unfairness as  the
      letter dated 20 March 2005 was produced at a very late  stage  in  the
      hearing and the  appellant  did  not  have  a  proper  opportunity  of
      responding to it before the determination was issued. The  letter  was
      clearly  material  as  it  formed  the  basis  on  which   the   judge
      distinguished the guidance in KJ.

16.      We are therefore satisfied that there was an error of  law material
      to the determination.

Submissions on whether the appeal should be allowed or dismissed

17.      We went on to consider whether the  appeal  should  be  allowed  or
      dismissed. We referred the parties  to  two  recent  Court  of  Appeal
      judgments, R v Secretary of State [2004] EWCA Civ 1328, and ZT  [2005]
      EWCA Civ 1421. Mr Bruten produced copies of Huang, Dbeis  [2005]  EWCA
      Civ 584, and SM and Others (Kurds - protection - relocation)  Iraq  CG
      2005 UKIAT 00111. Both representatives indicated that they were  ready
      to proceed with their submissions.

18.      Mr Bruten submitted that the determination in KJ had been based  on
      the evidence in the UNHCR letter of January  2005.  The  Tribunal  had
      held on the basis of that evidence that it would not be  proportionate
      to require an appellant to return to  Iraq  for  entry  clearance.  Mr
      Bruten submitted that there was now further evidence not only  in  the
      letter of 20 March 2005 but also in a further letter at R1-2 from  the
      British Embassy in Amman dated 16 June 2005. The Embassy had  received
      a  large  number  of  applications   from   Iraqi   nationals.   These
      applications did not take long to process. There were now more flights
      between Baghdad, Amman and Damascus. Those  travelling  from  northern
      Iraq could travel into Syria and then on to Jordan. There would be  no
      need for them to use Highway 10, the route considered at length in the
      UNHCR letter of January 2005. The appellant would not have to use this
      route. He referred to SM and to its findings that  there  would  be  a
      sufficiency of protection in the KAA. It could not be argued that  all
      travel in Iraq was so dangerous  that  Article  3  would  be  engaged.
      Proportionality was a very  high  test.  This  was  confirmed  by  the
      judgments of the Court of Appeal particularly in ZT and Dbeis. Even if
      there was an interference with the appellant's private and family life
      his situation could not be described as truly exceptional.

19.        Miss  Latimer  submitted  that  there   were   very   real travel
      difficulties. It was unreasonable to expect the appellant to travel to
      Amman to make an application for entry clearance. The  current  travel
      advice from the Foreign  and  Commonwealth  Office  at  A9-14  advised
      against all travel to Baghdad and its adjacent provinces. The security
      situation remained dangerous and road travel in Iraq was described  as
      highly dangerous. The appellant could only  make  an  application  for
      entry clearance by undertaking a serious risk to his  own  health  and
      safety.

20.      The appellant said that he wished to add something.  He  would  not
      be able to return to Iraq in safety. He could not go  back  to  Kirkuk
      because of what had happened in the past. He would be at risk of being
      arrested. He said that he was 100% certain  he  would  be  killed.  He
      loved his wife and did not wish to leave her.

The law

21.      The issue for us to consider is whether removing the  appellant  to
      Iraq would be a breach of his rights under Article  8.   A  number  of
      separate issues arise. These were identified in  by  Lord  Bingham  in
      Razgar [2004] UKHL 27. In a removal case based on Article  8  grounds,
      the Tribunal must identify whether there is private or family life and
      whether the interference will have  consciences  of  such  gravity  as
      potentially to engage the operation of Article  8  and  amount  to  an
      interference. We must also consider whether such  interference  is  in
      accordance with the law and necessary for one of the  legitimate  aims
      identified in Article 8(2) and finally  whether  the  interference  is
      proportionate to the legitimate public end sought to be achieved.   In
      Razgar when considering the  issue  of  proportionality  Lord  Bingham
      said:


      'A decision taken pursuant to  the  lawful  operation  of  immigration
      control will  be  proportionate  in  all  save  a  small  minority  of
      exceptional cases, identifiable only on a case by case basis.'

22.      The issue of proportionality was considered  further  by  the Court
      of Appeal in Huang where the court  held  that  an  immigration  judge
      should allow an appeal  against  removal  or  deportation  brought  on
      Article  8  grounds  only  if  he  concluded  that  the  case  was  so
      exceptional  on  its  particular  facts   that   the   imperative   of
      proportionality  demanded  an  outcome  in  the   appellant's   favour
      notwithstanding that the appellant had no claim under the  Immigration
      Rules.  The fact that this is a high test has been emphasised  by  the
      Court of Appeal in a number of recent judgments  including  ZT,  Dbies
      and R.

Tribunal authorities relating to travelling from Iraq to Jordan to  make  an
application for entry clearance.

23.      In HC the Tribunal held that it was a viable  option  for  an Iraqi
      citizen to travel to Jordan to apply for entry clearance and that  the
      difficulties involved did not make a  decision  by  the  Secretary  of
      State to remove disproportionate. That appeal considered the  evidence
      available as at 30 March 2004. The position was looked at again by the
      Tribunal in MN as at September  2004.  No  evidence  was  produced  to
      persuade the Tribunal that it would be appropriate to take a different
      view from HC. Taking into account the totality of the evidence  before
      it, the Tribunal found that even if there were  insuperable  obstacles
      to the family travelling to Iraq, it would not be disproportionate  to
      the right to family life for the appellant to be required to return to
      his own country where appropriate facilities existed at the embassy in
      Jordan for making an application for entry clearance. This  issue  was
      considered again in KJ in February  2005.  The  Tribunal  had  further
      evidence in a letter from the  UNHCR  written  in  January  2005.  The
      Tribunal accepted that the road from  Amman  to  Baghdad  was  unsafe.
      There were numerous risks to passengers  including  insurgent  attacks
      and vehicle ambushes. There were random checkpoints manned by militia,
      bandits and unpaid police.  No  official  United  Nations  travel  was
      allowed on this road for  security  reasons.  This  letter  said  that
      travelling on this road represented hardship beyond description. As to
      the safety of air travel, it was the understanding of the  UNHCR  that
      Royal Jordanian Airlines was the only  airline  flying  into  Baghdad.
      Most people chose not to fly. For those who did choose  to  travel  by
      air, as the road between Baghdad International Airport and the  centre
      of the city was known as ambush alley, international personnel had  no
      choice but to use military helicopters to get to and from that airport
      from the fortified green zone. In  the  light  of  this  evidence  the
      Tribunal found that it was not proportionate to require the  appellant
      to return to Iraq to apply for entry clearance.

Further evidence on travelling from Iraq to Jordan

24.      There is now further  evidence  available  firstly  in  the  letter
      dated 20 March 2005 from the British Embassy in Amman. This says  that
      road travel between Baghdad and Amman,  Damascus  and  Beirut  remains
      uninterrupted and the most common way of travel for  Iraqi  nationals.
      Royal Jordanian and Syrian Airways fly regular services into  Baghdad.
      Gulf Airways also operate regularly into Dubai. Those travelling  from
      northern Iraq would usually travel across Syria  as  the  fastest  and
      most convenient route down to Amman. It was easier for Iraqi nationals
      holding UK travel  documents  to  enter  Syria  than  Jordan.  It  was
      believed that other airlines  were  considering  opening  routes  into
      Baghdad and Basra in the future.

25.      In a further letter dated 16 June 2005 from the British  Embassy in
      Amman it is reported that applications for entry clearance are  not  a
      lengthy process. The  embassy  offers  a  same  day  service  for  all
      applications and usually aims to make a decision  on  the  day.  Iraqi
      nationals routinely travel by road directly  from  Baghdad  to  Amman.
      There are service taxis running regular routes from  Amman,  Damascus,
      Baghdad and Beirut. People travelling from northern Iraq often  go  by
      Syria. There are regular flights between Baghdad, Amman  and  Damascus
      and there are understood to be air services between Basra and the UAE.
      The embassy does not routinely ask which route has been used by  Iraqi
      nationals as that would be obvious from the  border  stamps  in  their
      passports. The embassy is not able to give a time period for how  long
      Iraqi nationals have been in Jordan before submitting applications  as
      it depended upon the  people's  individual  circumstances.  For  those
      coming expressly to make an application it was usually within  two  or
      three days of their arrival. Iraqis could  make  applications  without
      necessarily returning to Iraq given the turnaround for straightforward
      applications. It was a matter for the Jordanian authorities  how  they
      implemented their border control and immigration polices but usually a
      foreign national would be given entry for a  two-week  period  in  the
      first instance. If staying longer an extension was normally  given  to
      enable a stay of up to three months. At the end of  this  period  they
      could apply for a further three-month period  after  which  they  must
      leave or obtain a residence permit. In practice,  this  was  simply  a
      matter of crossing over the border to Syria, then returning to  enable
      the whole process to begin again.

26.      The Tribunal  was  also  referred  to  evidence  at  R3  that Iraqi
      Airways intended to launch a service three times a week between  Amman
      and the northern Iraqi Kurdish city of Erbil via  Baghdad.  There  are
      also plans to start a regular flight between Amman and Basra.

27.      We have also been referred  to  the  travel  advice  issued  by the
      Department of State at A7-8. The Department of State  strongly  warned
      US citizens against travel to Iraq which remained very  dangerous.  It
      refers to credible information that  terrorists  are  targeting  civil
      aviation. All vehicular travel  in  Iraq  is  described  as  extremely
      dangerous. It is reported that there have  been  numerous  attacks  on
      civilian vehicles  as  well  as  military  convoys.  The  Foreign  and
      Commonwealth travel advice current  as  at  3  December  2005  advises
      against all travel to Baghdad and the adjacent provinces of Basra  and
      Maysan. The security situation is described as dangerous  and  in  the
      light of recent events in Basra, it is said  there  is  likely  to  be
      increased tension and a risk of further attacks  against  British  and
      other foreign nationals. The report from the Refugee Council  confirms
      that the UNHCR has until recently not  promoted  voluntary  return  to
      Iraq. In its advisory note on Iraqi returns on 27 September  2005,  it
      noted that the security situation had generally  deteriorated  between
      January and August 2005. It maintained its advice that there should be
      no forcible returns to southern or central Iraq. Highway 10, the major
      road running from the Jordanian border,  is  described  a  notoriously
      dangerous road.

28.      We were also referred to the country guidance  determination  of SM
      where the Tribunal after a full review of the  evidence  came  to  the
      conclusion that the authorities in the KAA were capable  of  providing
      protection as a matter of law under the Refugee  Convention  and  that
      they were in fact able to provide a sufficiency of protection  against
      Islamic extremists and terrorists.

Consideration of the issues as they relate to the appellant

29.        The  first  issue  to  consider  is  whether  the   appellant has
      established that removal would be an interference with  his  right  to
      respect for his private and family life. He has  established  that  he
      has family life in this country. We are not satisfied on the basis  of
      the  evidence  before   us   that   the   appellant's   marriage   was
      opportunistic. The letters on  the  file  from  the  appellant's  wife
      appear to be genuine and heartfelt. They refer to the  fact  that  the
      appellant and his wife have a happy marriage and the appellant's  wife
      describes herself as deeply  grief-stricken  at  the  thought  of  the
      appellant having to return  to  Iraq.  Removal  would  clearly  be  an
      interference  in  the  sense  that  there  would  be   an   inevitable
      interruption in  the  appellant  and  his  wife  being  able  to  live
      together. However, the interference must  have  consequences  of  such
      gravity as potentially to engage the operation of Article 8. As Sedley
      LJ commented in paragraph 42 of ZT, the relative ease with  which  one
      could usually establish a failure of respect for a person's private or
      family life made the demonstration of  proportionality  under  Article
      8(2) commensurately easier. He said that in the ordinary case there is
      no particularly high threshold for entry into Article 8. He  expressed
      some concern about the  relationship  between  Lord  Bingham's  second
      stage, referring to  the  interference  having  consequences  of  such
      gravity as to potentially engage the operation of Article  8  and  his
      fifth stage, proportionality. We are satisfied that there may be  some
      interruptions of family life which would be of such  limited  duration
      that they could not reasonably be described as an interference. If  an
      application for entry clearance could  be  made  within  a  matter  of
      weeks, it may be that there  would  be  no  interference  or  lack  of
      respect  with  an  appellant's  right  to  family  life  but  if   the
      application is prolonged or fraught with other dangers, there would be
      an interference.

30.      We are satisfied, and it is not in dispute,  that  any interference
      would be in accordance with the law as the  appellant  is  an  illegal
      entrant and has no other right to remain in this country. It would  be
      in pursuit of a legitimate public aim, the prevention of  disorder  or
      crime. The Secretary of State is entitled to maintain and enforce  the
      Immigration Rules.

31.      We now turn to the issue of proportionality.  Removal  was regarded
      as disproportionate in KJ on the basis that the evidence  showed  that
      it was unsafe to travel either by road or air to Jordan from Iraq. The
      Tribunal summarised its conclusions as follows:

      '17. Mr Hussain argued that the travel  dangers  referred  to  by  the
      UNHCR in graphic terms; the appellant's inability to pay to  fly;  the
      fact that he is a non-Arab speaking Kurd; that, as a  Kurd,  he  would
      need to return to Baghdad, then get himself somewhere where  he  could
      safely stay until such time as he was able to  arrange  to  travel  to
      Amman; all combine to establish that it would be  disproportionate  to
      expect the appellant to return to Iraq in order  to  apply  for  entry
      clearance as a spouse.
      18. We are persuaded that Mr Hussain is correct. It is  primarily  the
      letter from the UNHCR which has persuaded us  of  that.  The  evidence
      shows that those who fly between Baghdad and Amman are  diplomats  and
      businessmen. It is also clear that many of those get to the airport by
      helicopter from a secure area. The dangers of the road are  much  more
      explicit in this correspondence than previously.
      19. Mrs Giltrow did not seek to argue that there  is  any  alternative
      mission to which it  would  be  less  hazardous  to  apply  for  entry
      clearance.
      20. In our view it cannot be argued that it could be proportionate, in
      the circumstances which have  been  set  out  above,  to  require  the
      appellant to return to Iraq to apply for entry clearance.'

32.      The evidence before us  shows  a  different  picture.  There  is no
      doubt as to the general dangers in Iraq as set  out  in  the  warnings
      from the Foreign and Commonwealth Office and the US  State  Department
      against travelling. The security situation  including  the  fact  that
      insurgents are targeting the international forces  there  as  well  as
      Iraqi interests associated with the Iraqi Transitional  Government  is
      well documented. However, the  evidence  is  clear  from  the  British
      Embassy in Amman that  many  applications  are  being  made  by  Iraqi
      nationals. According to the letter dated 20  March  2005  road  travel
      between Baghdad and Amman, Damascus and Beirut remains  uninterrupted.
      The UNHCR letter of January 2005 dealt specifically with the road from
      Amman to Baghdad. The fact that this road continues to be dangerous is
      confirmed by the Foreign and Commonwealth Office advice which  at  A11
      said that attacks frequently occurred on the main supply  routes  into
      Iraq, particularly the Baghdad-Amman Highway.  However,  according  to
      the letter of 16 June 2005, Iraqi nationals routinely travel  by  road
      directly from Baghdad to Amman. There are service taxis and  the  cost
      is around $25 for a seat. If someone wants more space they can pay for
      extra seats. Although there are clearly dangers, we are not  satisfied
      in the light of this evidence that the dangers are so  extensive  that
      it is unreasonable to expect the appellant to make  the  same  journey
      being made regularly by others seeking entry clearance.

33.      We are also satisfied that this is not the only route by  which the
      appellant can reach Amman. The letter of 20 March 2005 refers  to  the
      fact that those travelling from northern  Iraq  would  usually  travel
      across into Syria as the fastest and most convenient route. It is also
      easier for Iraqi nationals holding UK travel documents to enter  Syria
      than Jordan. There are now more air flights than when the UNHCR letter
      was written. We accept that there are regular flights between Baghdad,
      Amman and Damascus. There are also air services between Basra and  the
      UAE. There are proposals for flights between Amman  and  the  northern
      Iraqi city of Erbil via Baghdad. The fact  that  applications  can  be
      made in Amman is evidenced by the numbers. Between April  and  October
      2004 there were 3,300  applications  from  Iraqi  nationals  and  from
      October 2004 until March 2005 3,399.

34.      The appellant is from Kirkuk. He has continued  to  assert  that he
      would not be safe in the KAA because of what has happened in the  past
      but his assertions in that respect were considered and comprehensively
      rejected by the adjudicator who heard his asylum appeal. There  is  no
      further evidence which would justify that issue being reopened. It has
      not been argued that returning the appellant to Iraq in the  light  of
      those findings would amount to a breach of Article 3 and  we  are  not
      satisfied that the general risk of violence  because  of  the  current
      situation in Iraq can lead to a finding that the appellant would be at
      risk of a breach of Article 3 by requiring him to return and travel to
      Jordan to make an application for entry clearance.

35.      We remind ourselves that proportionality is a  high  test  and that
      the appellant must show that his circumstances are truly  exceptional.
      There  is  no  particular  feature  about  his   circumstances   which
      distinguish him from any other Iraqi citizen who is required  to  make
      an entry clearance application before  entering  the  United  Kingdom.
      Even if the  requirement  to  make  an  application  from  abroad  can
      properly be categorised as an interference with his  family  life,  we
      are not satisfied that his circumstances can  be  described  as  truly
      exceptional such as to make removal  disproportionate.  As  Sedley  LJ
      said in ZT,

            '... The underlying message of N and Razgar, and of  Ullah  too,
      is that the ECHR is  neither  a  surrogate  system  of  asylum  nor  a
      fallback for those who have otherwise no right to remain here.  It  is
      for particular cases which transcend their class in respects which the
      Convention recognises.'

36.      For the reasons we  have  given,  we  are  not  satisfied  that the
      appellant's case falls within this category.



Decision

37.      For the reasons identified,  we  are  satisfied  that  the original
      Tribunal made a material error of law but having reviewed the evidence
      for ourselves, we nevertheless dismiss the appeal.





                                                               H.J.E. Latter
                                                    Senior Immigration Judge

                                  APPENDIX

               Background materials placed before the Tribunal

    - Iraq Country Report April 2005


    - Letter from FCO 10 March 2004


    - Letter from British Embassy Amman 20 March 2005


    - Letter from British Embassy Amman 16 June 2005


    - Iraq Development Programme re Amman-Erbil flights


    - FCO UK Embassies Overseas, Kuwait, Syria, UAE, Turkey.


    - FCO Travel Advice 26 July 2005


    - British Embassy Baghdad Travel Advice 26 July 2005


    - British Embassy Amman Travel Advice 25 July 2005


    - Travel Warning US Dept. of State 6 December 2005


    - FCO Travel Advice 3 December 2005


    - Refugee Council Briefing November 2005


    - Radio Free Europe/ Radio Liberty Report 30 November 2005


    - British Embassy Baghdad Visa Services Information 3 December 2005



Approved for electronic transmission

