

Asylum and Immigration Tribunal

            AB (Protection -criminal gangs-internal relocation) Jamaica CG
                             [2007] UKAIT 00018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|on 19 December 2006                             |On 22 February 2007        |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       Senior Immigration Judge Storey
                      Senior Immigration Judge McGeachy
                              Mrs M E McGregor

                                   Between

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:         Miss B Asanovic, Counsel, instructed by Wilson &
Co.
For the Respondent:        Miss R Brown, Home Office Presenting Officer

The authorities in Jamaica are  in  general  willing  and  able  to  provide
effective protection. However, unless reasonably likely to be admitted  into
the Witness Protection programme, a person targeted by a criminal gang  will
not normally receive effective protection in his home area.
Whether such a person will be able to achieve protection by relocating  will
depend on his particular circumstances, but the evidence  does  not  support
the view that internal relocation is an unsafe  or  unreasonable  option  in
Jamaica in general: it is a matter for determination on the  facts  of  each
individual case.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The appellant is a citizen of Jamaica aged 26. She arrived in the  UK  in
November 2001 as a visitor. On 23 November  2004  she  claimed  asylum.  Her
daughter, who is a dependant in this appeal and is now aged 12,  had  joined
her in the UK in July 2002. In a determination  notified  on  29  July  2005
Immigration Judge Tiffen allowed her  appeal  on  asylum  and  human  rights
grounds against a decision of 23 May 2005 refusing to grant her  asylum  and
giving directions for her removal.

2. The immigration judge found that  the  appellant  had  given  a  credible
account: in the summary of it which follows we use fictitious initials.  She
accepted that the appellant began a relationship with F, an area  leader  of
a criminal gang in his area, when she was  fourteen.   She  became  pregnant
soon after. On occasions F would punch her and she would be  bruised.  After
she gave birth to her daughter in 1994, she moved  in  with  F.  We  do  not
identify where  the  appellant  lived  precisely,  but  it  was  within  the
Kingston  Metropolitan  Area  (hereafter  "KMA").  His  occasional  beatings
continued. She was scared of him. He would sometimes disappear  and  on  one
occasion he was gone for two-and-half years and she heard  he  had  been  in
prison. During this time his friends checked up on her.  Even so, she  began
an affair with G and fell pregnant.   F  found  out  about  this  whilst  in
prison and one of his fellow  gang  members  delivered  a  letter  from  him
threatening to kill her, the baby and G.   The appellant and  G  decided  to
separate and let him raise their child with his mother's help. When  F  came
out of prison he tried to rape the appellant and  continued  to  be  violent
against her; threatening her with a gun on one occasion. She was too  afraid
to go to the police as she believed F would learn she had informed  on  him;
also  she  did  not  think  they  would  do  anything.  Around  1999/2000  F
disappeared and the appellant heard from neighbours that  he  was  suspected
of having killed a rival area gang leader from the same  gang  -  which  she
thought must be the One Order gang. The appellant never saw him again.

3. A couple of weeks after he had left, two men came to  her  house  wanting
to know where F was. They slapped and hit her,  accused  her  of  lying  and
threatened to kill her.  They also warned  her  not  to  go  to  the  police
saying that they would know if she did.  The appellant was scared.  She  and
her daughter left the house and moved in with  her  grandmother,  who  lived
relatively close by. About a week after, they tracked her down. They  forced
her into a car and took her to the  coast  where  they  raped  and  sexually
abused her and also hit her. When they left her  they  said  they  were  not
finished with her. A man stopped his car and took her to her  grandmother's.
 She went to hospital that night and had  stitches  and  was  treated  as  a
precaution for gonorreah. Her grandmother was frightened for  her  and  sent
her and her daughter to a friend who lived in  a  rural  area,  about  forty
five minutes drive away. She stayed there for several months but did not  go
out and was too scared to even sit on the veranda.  She heard that the  gang
members kept harassing her grandmother. Her  grandmother  raised  the  money
for her to flee Jamaica in November 2001.  Her  daughter  followed  in  July
2002.   The appellant was traumatised and did not  discuss  her  experiences
with anyone in the UK until she claimed asylum.

4. In assessing whether the appellant's experiences would place her at  real
risk of persecution the immigration judge found, largely on the basis of  an
expert report of Mr O.Hilaire  Sobers  (hereafter  "Mr  Sobers"),  that  the
Jamaican authorities did not provide a sufficiency of protection.    Turning
to the appellant's particular circumstances Mr Sobers stated:

         "20. Although this appellant  did  not  make  any  reports  to  the
         police she believed that  to do so would be of  no  use  and  could
         lead to her being suspected of being  an  informer  is  objectively
         supported by  the  background  material.  To  report  the  domestic
         violence would have meant that the appellant would have had to name
         the perpetrator who would then inflict further violence because  of
         her informing against him. Similarly to report the gangs would have
         been of little use as the background material shows  that  criminal
         gangs operate with impunity. I find that  the  Jamaican  government
         are unable to offer a sufficiency of protection  to  women  against
         domestic violence and against being targeted by criminal gangs."

5. The immigration judge went  on  to  find  that  the  appellant  had  been
persecuted for a Convention reason,  "namely  women  who  are  perceived  as
informers and who are unprotected by the state." There is, she  stated,  "an
insufficiency of protection in Jamaica for such a social group".

6. At paragraph 23 the immigration judge stated that the appellant  did  not
have a viable internal relocation alternative:

         "23. The  respondent's  representative  has  raised  the  issue  of
         internal flight as an alternative to international protection.  The
         court report refers to migratory crime and  that  victims  of  gang
         directed crime are unable to internally  relocate  within  Jamaica.
         The report by Mr Sobers in the case of Atkinson  also  states  that
         "simply put relocation will  neither  eliminate  nor  substantially
         reduce the  risk  of  harm  from  gang  reprisal".   The  appellant
         attempted to relocate but whilst she was staying with a  friend  of
         her grandmother's, she was unable to go out even on to the  veranda
         and  would  require  social  and  economic  support  which  is  not
         available to her. I find that the  appellant  would  be  unable  to
         relocate in Jamaica and it would be unduly  harsh for a lone female
         with a young child to have to do so."


7. The respondent sought and obtained on order  for  reconsideration.   This
resulted in a decision of a panel notified on 30 January 2006  finding  that
the Immigration Judge had materially erred in law. Senior Immigration  Judge
King's reasons were as follows:

         "1. The IJ misunderstood the nature and effect  of  Atkinson.  That
         decision was one about certification only as was made clear by  the
         Tribunal in NR Jamaica [2005] UKIAT 0008, a determination which was
         served by post on 12 July and received on 13 July. The IJ  made  no
         reference to that. NR if read would have given clearer guidance  on
         that issue.


         2. The IJ failed to  indicate  upon  what  objective  evidence  the
         decision was made and/failed to  consider  properly  the  objective
         evidence presented. Miss Ahluelia submitted that the IJ  relied  on
         the evidence of Mr Sobers which was cited by the  court in Atkinson
         with approval [paragraphs   24-33-34-40-55  of  Atkinson].  It  was
         submitted that paras 6.200, 6.202, 6.206, 6.123  and  5.93  of  the
         CIPU supported Mr Sobers.  Miss Brown  suggests  that  5.59,  5.70,
         5.77-80, 8.52-100, 5.105 and 6.16 of the CIPU indicated that  there
         was a sufficiency of protection.  CIPU Report April 2005  was  more
         recent and at least ought to have been considered. Particularly  in
         the light of NR, I find failure to consider material evidence or to
         make a proper assessment.


         3.  IJ applied Atkinson and finds Convention reason  on  the  basis
         that the appellant is wanted as an informer or  perceived  informer
         [Para 22].  Such is to fundamentally misunderstand  the  nature  of
         the case. She is wanted by the gang not as an informer but  because
         she may know the whereabouts of her boyfriend  for  whom  they  are
         looking.


         We find there to be no basis upon which a Convention  reason  under
         the [Refugee] Convention can be established.


         4.  It is submitted that the decision on Article 8 shall  stand  as
         it was not challenged by the respondent in  the  grounds.   It  was
         allowed because of the finding that the appellant falls under  1951
         Convention. It is tainted by a fundamentally flawed finding.


         5.   The  above  amount  to  material  errors  of   law   requiring
             reconsideration."


8. (NR (Gang warfare-Witness-Risk on return) Jamaica [2005] UKIAT 00008,  we
should note was a case heard in September 2004  by  a  Tribunal  chaired  by
Deputy President Ockelton). On 21 June 2006 the hearing was adjourned so  as
to give the  appellant's  representatives  the  opportunity  to  have  their
country expert, Mr Sobers, comment on the respondent's new  submission  that
the gang which the appellant said she feared (the One Order gang)  had  been
dismantled. It was also directed that whilst the findings of  fact  made  by
Immigration Judge Tiffen relating to the  appellant's  past  experiences  in
Jamaica were to stand, the appellant's  representatives  had  permission  to
adduce more recent written evidence from the appellant so  long  as  it  did
not relate to her past  experiences.   Permission  was  also  given  to  the
appellant's representatives to argue the existence of a  Refugee  Convention
ground, albeit it was emphasised that this would not preclude the  panel  at
the resumed hearing from deciding the particular social  group  (PSG)  issue
could no longer arise for legal reasons.

9. On 8 September 2006, by which time an addendum report from Mr Sobers  had
been submitted, a  memorandum  was  sent  to  the  parties  seeking  further
comments from the appellant's country expert in  the  light  of  the  recent
country guidance case, JS (Victims  of   gang  violence  -  sufficiency   of
protection) Jamaica CG [2006]  UKAIT  00057.  Whilst  the  country  expert's
supplemental report had noted the existence of this case, it  had  not  made
specific comment on its main points. The memorandum added:

         "It would also assist the present hearing   if  O.  Hilaire  Sobers
         could clarify whether he has had any connection with  organisations
         in which Miss Y. Sobers  (whose  report  was  examined  in  JS)  is
         involved".

10. [The Tribunal in JS, we interject at this point,  had  questioned  Ms  Y
Sobers' objectivity.] As we  shall  see,  Mr  Sobers  did  respond  to  this
memorandum in the form of commentary on JS, but in it he  made  no  response
as to his connection with organisations in which his mother is involved.  At
the eventual hearing of the case on 9 December  2006  Miss  Asanovic  sought
permission to call the appellant as a witness with a view to her being  able
to update her  circumstances  by  reference  to  her  supplementary  witness
statement  dated  21  August  2006.    Miss  Brown  pointed  out  that  this
statement did not strictly adhere to the terms of the Tribunal direction  of
21 June 2006 which had stipulated that her further evidence  should  not  be
about her past experiences.  In  particular   she    pointed  out  that  the
reference in that statement to one motive of the   gang  members  who  raped
her  (in 1999)  being "to mark her in order to shame  her"  was  an  illicit
attempt to reopen the findings made by the Immigration Judge. Miss  Asanovic
said that it was not the intention of the appellant  in  this  statement  to
give  fresh  evidence  about  past  events,  rather  her  statement   simply
contained  evidence  which  had  been  elicited  in  response  to  questions
prompted by references in the background evidence to  the  use  by  Jamaican
criminal gangs of rape as a  "weapon of war". Miss Asanovich said  that  all
she proposed to do was get the appellant to adopt her recent  statement  and
then tender her for cross-examination. We ruled that  we  would  permit  the
appellant to give evidence relating to her recent statement  and  be  cross-
examined on it, leaving until our determination to decide whether we  should
consider all aspects of the appellant's recent evidence: we return  to  this
matter below.

11. In  her  recent  statement  whose  contents  she  said  were  true,  the
appellant stated, inter alia, that:

         "I have been gang raped by members of a gang  because  of  what   F
         did. This means that I was forced to perform sexual acts  which  no
         decent woman is supposed to do of her own  free  will.   The  whole
         reasons for rape were to mark  me  and  shame  me  as  well  as  F.
         Therefore, everybody is told about this. I can never be nice  again
         after I  have been  battered ... There is a special name for a gang
         raped woman ... "batchi-daly" or "battery-daly"  ...  Once  a  gang
         rape happens and it is known, you are prey to all men".

12. Her statement went on to give two examples of women  she  knew  who  had
been raped by gangs, who found they were raped again and again  and  treated
as a  "skettel"  or "easy woman". One of the women had a young daughter  who
had also been  sexually  abused.   The  appellant  said  that  if  she  were
returned to Jamaica she  would  kill  herself.   She  feared  not  just  for
herself, but for her daughter.  She had started treatment  to  talk  through
her past experiences, but stopped it because  she  found  talking  about  it
very hard.  She was still not able to work or live a  normal  life.  If  she
returned to the house of her grandmother's friend, the  people  there  would
see her as being involved with a gang and she could not  send  her  daughter
to school.  If F was around he would  want  to  have  his  revenge  for  her
having taken his daughter or he might take her daughter  away.    She  still
speaks to her grandmother regularly. Her grandmother has said  people  still
talk about her and ask questions.  Often others there say she  was  battered
and think badly of her. Some had asked if she had gone away because she  had
informed on a gang.

13. She had been told by a relatives and  neighbours  that  the  rival  gang
member F had killed was an area leader of the One Order  gang  and  that  it
was members of this gang that had  raped  her.  She  knew  F  supported  JLP
(Jamaica Labour Party) and she thought he was a  member  of  the  One  Order
gang too.  She believed the people from the gang whose leader F  had  killed
would not have forgotten her.   She did not accept that the One  Order  gang
no longer existed. She mentioned an  incident  whilst  visiting  Brixton  in
London where her sister had told her someone they passed in the  street  was
from One Order in Spanish Town.  At most  she  believed  that  some  of  the
gangsters may have changed their gang names.

14. In examination-in-chief  the  appellant  said  that  not  long  ago  her
grandmother had told her over the telephone that F had recently  been  shot,
albeit he was not dead.  In  cross-examination she  accepted  that  she  had
not previously mentioned the gang who raped her "marking  and  shaming"  her
or her fear of being attacked by others, but said that,  if  she  had   been
asked more specific questions, that is what she would  have  said.  She  had
not told the police about the rape because she was   scared.  Asked why,  if
she went back anyone would know she had been gang raped in  1999,  she  said
people had kept talking about it,   so  her  shame  in  this  way  has  been
carried around.  Asked why, over five or six years  later,  she  would  have
problems, she said the gang members would still  want  to  harm  her  again.
She had not had trouble when she went to stay at her grandmother's  friend's
house.  Her grandmother did not want her in her own house.  Apart  from  her
grandmother she had no family or relatives to turn to. Her  grandmother  had
seen her brother but she (the appellant) did not know where he lived and  he
had gone away and not come back.

15. In re-examination the appellant said she had not had  contact  with  her
brother since last in her grandmother's  house;  even  then  he  was  always
going away.


Relevant legal framework
16. In deciding  this  case  we  have  to  apply  the  new  legal  framework
established by  the Refugee or Person in Need  of  International  Protection
(Qualification) Regulations SI 2006/2525 (the "Protection Regulations")  and
the  Statement  of  Changes  in  Immigration  Rules,  Cm6918  (the  "amended
Immigration  Rules").  Together  these  implement   EU   Council   Directive
2004/83/EC on minimum standards for the qualification and  status  of  third
country nationals or  stateless  persons  as  refugees  or  as  persons  who
otherwise need international protection and the content  of  the  protection
granted, OJ L304/12 of 30.9.2004 (hereafter "the Directive").  Regulation  5
defines "Acts as Persecution" as follows:

      "(1) In deciding whether a person is a refugee an act  of  persecution
must be:
      (a) sufficiently serious by its nature or repetition as to  constitute
      a severe violation of a basic human right, in particular a right  from
      which derogation cannot be made under Article 15 of the Convention for
      the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms; or
      (b) an accumulation of various measures, including a  violation  of  a
      human right which is sufficiently severe as to affect an individual in
      a similar manner as specified in (a)"


17. Regulation 5(2) gives a number  of  example  of  the  forms  an  act  of
persecution may take, including "(a) an act of physical or mental  violence,
including an act of sexual violence".

18. The new Regulations and Rules also identify the right of a person to  be
considered as  to  his  or  her  eligibility  for  humanitarian  protection.
Paragraph 339 C (in its first part) provides:


   " A person will be granted humanitarian protection in the United  Kingdom
   if the Secretary of State is satisfied that:
     (i) he is in the United Kingdom or has arrived at a port  of  entry  in
   the United Kingdom;
     (ii) he does not qualify as a refugee as defined in regulation 2 of The
   [Protection] Regulations 2006;
     (iii) substantial grounds have been shown for believing that the person
   concerned, if he returned to the country of return,  would  face  a  real
   risk of suffering serious harm and is unable, or,  owing  to  such  risk,
   unwilling to avail himself of the protection of that country; and
     (iv) he is not excluded from a grant of humanitarian protection".

19. The same paragraph in its second part  gives  a  definition  of  serious
harm:

   "Serious harm consists of:
    (i) the death penalty or execution;
   (ii) unlawful killing;
   (iii) torture or inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment of a person
   in the country of return; or
   (iv) serious and individual threat to a  civilian's  life  or  person  by
   reason of indiscriminate  violence  in  situations  of  international  or
   internal armed conflict".

 20. The Protection Regulations also set out,  inter  alia,  definitions  of
actors  of  persecution  or  serious  harm  (regulation  4)  and  actors  of
protection (regulation 4).  Regulation 4 in its material parts states:

   " 1) In deciding whether a person is a refugee or a person  eligible  for
   humanitarian protection, protection from persecution or serious harm  can
   be provided by:
    (a) the State; or
    (b)  any   party   or   organisation,   including   any   international
    organisation, controlling the  State  or  a  substantial  part  of  the
    territory of the State.
   (2)Protection shall be regarded as generally  provided  when  the  actors
   mentioned in paragraph 1(a) and (b) take reasonable steps to prevent  the
   persecution or suffering of serious harm by operating an effective  legal
   system for the detection, prosecution and punishment of acts constituting
   persecution or serious harm, and the person mentioned  in  paragraph  (1)
   has access to such protection.
   ..."


21. This is word-for-word the text of Article 7 of the Directive   save  for
introductory words in Regulation  4(1)   "shall  be  regarded"  (instead  of
"is") and in Regulation 4(2)   the  omission  of  the  phrase  "inter  alia"
immediately before "by operating").

22. The amended Immigration Rules (Cm6918) contain among  other  provisions,
paragraph 339K, which deals with the approach to past  persecution,  in  the
following terms:

   "339K. The fact that a person has already been subject to persecution  or
   serious harm, or to direct threats of such persecution or such harm, will
   be regarded as a serious indication of the person's well-founded fear  of
   persecution or real risk of suffering serious harm, unless there are good
   reasons to consider that such persecution or serious  harm  will  not  be
   repeated".


23. Also pertinent  to  this  appeal  is  paragraph  339O  headed  "Internal
Relocation". This states:

   (i) The Secretary of State will not make:
    (a) a grant of asylum if in part of the  country  of  origin  a  person
    would not have a well founded fear of being persecuted, and the  person
    can reasonably be expected to stay in that part of the country; or
    (b) a grant of humanitarian protection if in part  of  the  country  of
    return a person would not face a real risk of suffering  serious  harm,
    and the person can reasonably be expected to stay in that part  of  the
    country.
   (ii) In examining whether a part of the country of origin or  country  of
   return meets the requirements in (i) the Secretary of State, when  making
   his decision on whether to grant asylum or humanitarian protection,  will
   have regard to the general circumstances prevailing in that part  of  the
   country and to the personal circumstances of the person.
   (iii) (i) applies notwithstanding technical obstacles to  return  to  the
   country of origin or country of return."


24. We remind ourselves at this point that by  virtue  of  the  revised  AIT
Practice Directions, 8 November 2006, we are  obliged  (as  from  9  October
2006) not only to consider the appellant's asylum and human  rights  grounds
of appeal. We also have to treat her grounds  of  appeal  as  including  the
ground that the decision of the respondent was contrary to  the  Immigration
Rules relating to eligibility for humanitarian protection.

25. Where below we refer to "risk" or "real risk", this is to be  understood
as an abbreviated way of identifying respectively: (1)   whether  on  return
there  is  a  well-founded  fear  of  being  persecuted  under  the  Refugee
Convention; (2)   whether  on  return  there  are  substantial  grounds  for
believing that a person would face a real risk  of  suffering  serious  harm
within the meaning of paragraph 339C of the amended Immigration  Rules;  and
(3)  whether on return there are substantial grounds for  believing  that  a
person would face a real risk of being exposed to a real risk  of  treatment
contrary to Article 3 ECHR.

Leading UK cases
26. In our view the definition given  in  regulation  4  of  the  Protection
Regulations closely mirrors that contained in leading cases,  in  particular
Horvath [2001] 1 AC 459 and Bagdanavicius [2005] UKHL 38.  The  most  recent
summary of relevant principles is contained in the Court of Appeal  judgment
in Bagdanavicius [2003] EWCA Civ 1605. Although superseded by the  House  of
Lords judgment, the summary given by Auld LJ at paragraph 55  of  the  Court
of Appeal judgment  remains  a  faithful  reflection  of  case  law  on  the
protection issue. Insofar  as  is  relevant  it  states  [missing  citations
added]:


      "Asylum claims ...
      4)   Sufficiency of state protection, whether from state agents or non-
      state actors, means a willingness and  ability  on  the  part  of  the
      receiving state to provide through its legal system a reasonable level
      of protection from ill-treatment of which the claimant for asylum  has
      a well-founded fear; Osman[v United Kingdom 1999] 1 FLR 193], Horvath,
      Dhima [[2002] Imm AR 394].
      5) The effectiveness of the system provided is to be  judged  normally
      by its systemic ability  to  deter  and/or  to  prevent  the  form  of
      persecution of which there is a risk, not just punishment of it  after
      the event; Horvath, Banomova [[2001] EWCA Civ 807], McPherson  [[2001]
      EWCA Civ 1955] and Kinuthia [[2001] EWCA Civ 2100].
      6) Notwithstanding systemic sufficiency of  state  protection  in  the
      receiving state, a claimant may still  have  a  well-founded  fear  of
      persecution if he can show that the authorities know or ought to  know
      circumstances particular to his case giving rise to  his fear, but are
      unlikely  to  provide  the  additional   protection   his   particular
      circumstances reasonably require;  Osman.


      Article 3 claims ...
      7) The same principles apply to claims in removal  cases  of  risk  of
      exposure to Article 3 ill-treatment in the receiving state,  and  are,
      in general, unaffected by the approach  of  the  Strasbourg  Court  in
      Soering[(1989) 11 EHRR 439]; which, on its  facts,  was,  not  only  a
      state-agency case at the highest  institutional  level,  but  also  an
      unusual and exceptional case on its facts; Dhima, Krepel and Ullah.
      8) The basis of an article 3 entitlement in a removal case is that the
      claimant, if sent to the country in question, would be at  risk  there
      of Article 3 ill-treatment.
      9) In most, if not all, Article 3 cases in this context the concept of
      risk has the same or closely similar meaning to that  in  the  Refugee
      Convention of a "well-founded fear of persecution,  save  that  it  is
      confined to a risk of Article 3 forms  of  ill-treatment  and  is  not
      restricted to conduct with any particular motivation or  by  reference
      to the conduct of the claimant: Dhima, Krepel; Chahal[(1994)  18  EHRR
      CD 193].
      10) The threshold of risk required to engage Article 3 depends on  the
      circumstances of each case, including the magnitude of the  risk,  the
      nature and severity of the ill-treatment risked, and whether the  risk
      emanates from a state agency or non-state actor; Horvath.
      11) In most, but not necessarily all, cases  of  ill-treatment  which,
      but for state protection, would engage Article 3, a risk of such  ill-
      treatment will be more readily established in state agency cases  than
      in non-state actor cases - there is a spectrum of circumstances giving
      rise to such risks spanning the two categories, ranging from breach of
      a duty by the state of a negative duty not to inflict Article  3  ill-
      treatment to a breach of a duty to  take  positive  protective  action
      against such  ill-treatment by non-state actors;   Svazas[[2002]  EWCA
      Civ 74].
      12)  An  assessment  of  the  threshold  of  risk  applicable  in  the
      circumstances to engage Article 3 necessarily involves  an  assessment
      of the sufficiency of state protection to meet  the  threat  of  which
      there is such a risk - one cannot  be  considered  without  the  other
      whether or not the  exercise  is  regarded  as  'holistic'  or  to  be
      conducted in two stages:  Krepel[2002] EWCA Civ 1265], Svazas.
      13) Sufficiency of state protection is not necessarily a guarantee  of
      protection from  Article  3  ill-treatment  any  more  than  it  is  a
      guarantee  of  protection  from  an  otherwise  well-founded  fear  of
      persecution in asylum cases - nor, if and to the extent that there  is
      any difference, is it eradication or removal of risk  of  exposure  to
      Article 3 ill-treatment; Dhima, McPherson, Krepel.
      14) Where the risk falls to be judged  by  the  sufficiency  of  state
      protection, that sufficiency is judged, not according  to  whether  it
      would eradicate the real risk of the relevant harm, but  according  to
      whether it is a reasonable provision in the circumstances;  Osman.
      15) Notwithstanding such systemic sufficiency of state  protection  in
      the receiving state, a claimant may still  be  able  to  establish  an
      Article 3 claim if he can show that  the  authorities  there  know  or
      ought to know particular circumstances likely to expose him to risk of
      Article 3 ill-treatment;  Osman.
      16) The approach is the same whether the receiving country  is  or  is
      not a party to the ECHR,  but  in  determining  whether  it  would  be
      contrary to Article 3 to remove a person to that country,  our  courts
      should decide the factual issue as to risk as if ECHR standards  apply
      there - and the  same  applies  to  the  certification  process  under
      Section 115(1) and/or (2) of the 2002 Act."

 27. In considering the proper approach to the issue of internal  relocation
we have also to apply the principles set out in the recent  House  of  Lords
judgment in Januzi [2006] UKHL 5 which adopts the criteria now contained  in
paragraph 339O but also contains more detailed guidance.

Leading UK cases on the issue of sufficiency of protection in Jamaica
28. Given the central importance to this case  of  examining  the  issue  of
sufficiency of  protection  in  Jamaica,  it  will  assist  if  we  identify
previous cases which have covered this issue, particularly those relying  in
part on the expert evidence of Mr Sobers.  In  MacPherson  [2001]  EWCA  Civ
1955 Sedley LJ rejected an argument that the  civil  remedies  of  the  kind
evidently provided by Jamaica's Domestic Violence Act 1995 were  not  enough
to meet the state's positive obligation under Article 3 ECHR. He stated:
   "21. In my judgment neither Article 3 nor the jurisprudence of the  Court
   of  Human  Rights  on  the  positive  obligation  of  states  to  protect
   individuals from other individuals goes as far as  Ms.  Farbey  contends.
   What matters is that protection should be practical  and  effective,  not
   that it should take a particular form. Indeed, to insist  on  the  latter
   might very well be to frustrate the former. What perhaps matters more  is
   the standard of protection which the state is  expected  to  afford.  The
   higher the standard, the less the individual will have  to  establish  in
   order to show non-compliance with it. Our attention  has  been  drawn  in
   this regard to the formulation in HLR v. France (1997) 26 EHRR 29"
29. In a concurring judgment Arden LJ stated:
   "32. There are two points which I wish to add about what an appellant has
   to show in these circumstances to discharge the  onus  of  proof  to  the
   requisite standard. First, in the light  of  the  Domestic  Violence  Act
   1995, it is not, in my judgment, enough for the appellant  to  show  that
   the sanctions imposed for offences against the person under the  criminal
   law of Jamaica were ineffective. In the context of domestic  violence,  a
   state can provide effective measures of a different nature...
   ...
   35. I see no reason in principle why suitably-crafted provisions  of  the
   civil law should not have the requisite degree of deterrence as  much  as
   provisions of the criminal law. It all depends on the  circumstances  and
   the nature of the provision."
30. Her judgment went on to stress  that  Article  3  requires  a  state  to
provide machinery to deter a violation  of  that  article  which  attains  a
satisfactory degree of effectiveness.
31. To be "effective" for the purposes  of  Article  3  measures  must,  she
wrote at paragraph 38, be:
    "... those which attain an adequate degree of efficacy in  practice  as
    well as exist in theory. If the appellant were  able  to  show  to  the
    requisite standard of proof that the remedies provided under the law of
    Jamaica against domestic violence  are  unlikely  to  be  an  effective
    deterrent, in my judgment she would have shown that  her  removal  from
    the United Kingdom to Jamaica would violate her rights under Article  3
    of the European Convention on Human Rights."
32. However, because argument was not addressed to the question  of  whether
the  measures  taken  by  the  Jamaican  authorities  were  "effective"   in
practice, the Court of Appeal remitted the appeal.
33. In A [2003] EWCA Civ 175 the Court of Appeal considered the  case  of  a
Jamaican woman who fled Jamaica after having been branded an informer  by  a
criminal gang in the Tivoli Gardens area of Kingston. Unlike  the  IAT  (who
had dismissed the appellant's  appeal)  the  Court  had  before  it  further
expert reports including ones from  Dr  Sives,  Ms  Yvonne  Sobers  and   Mr
Sobers. They noted that according to Mr  Sobers  these  criminal  gangs  and
their operations are not confined to  the  so-called  garrison  communities,
and that he instanced cases where gunmen have been  "exported",  as  he  put
it, to  other  areas  to  terrorise  various  groups  of  people,  including
suspected  informers.  He  emphasised,  they  noted,  that  the  dons   have
developed networks throughout the island of Jamaica.
34. Keene LJ noted:
    "29. All these reports, therefore, are  consistent  with  one  another.
    These opinions are, at least in the case of Mr Sobers' and Ms  Sobers'
    reports, supported by examples and illustrations. There  is  no  expert
    evidence to the contrary."
35. In deciding to allow the appellant's appeal, Keene LJ explained:
      "30. Of course, I bear in mind the fact stressed by Mr Clarke that the
      appellant did survive in Jamaica for nearly four years after informing
      on the gang member to the police and that it is now some  eight  years
      since she gave that information to the police. Nonetheless, the  fresh
      evidence is compelling and, in my judgment, sufficiently establishes a
      real risk that sooner or later, wherever the appellant located herself
      in Jamaica, the Tivoli Gardens gang would be likely to  find  her  and
      seek revenge. The evidence that as recently as April 2001 the  don  of
      that gang refused to forgive her and to allow her to  return  to  that
      community is consistent with the expert evidence and is  credible.  Of
      course, she might survive somewhere on the island. It is by  no  means
      certain that she would be killed. But it does not have to be for these
      purposes. It is enough that there is a real risk to her  life  if  she
      were to be sent back.
      31. Moreover, even if the appellant did  manage  to  find  a  locality
      where for a time she could survive,  the  evidence  also  demonstrates
      that she would be very vulnerable there without friends  or  relatives
      and, given the  high  levels  of  unemployment  in  Jamaica,  probably
      without a job. Ms Sobers in her report points out  that  there  is  no
      social welfare safety net in Jamaica and that  the  family  and  local
      community normally provides a measure  of  security  for  such  women.
      Separated from such family and local support, the appellant  would  be
      extremely vulnerable.
      32. Having read these reports it seems to me that they show that there
      would be a considerable risk  of  a  repetition  of  the  [appellant's
      experiences of ill-treatment]."
36. The year 2003 also saw  three  other  cases  involving  Jamaica  in  the
higher courts. As summarised in the following year  by  Scott  Baker  LJ  in
Atkinson [2004] EWCA Civ:
      "28. In R (Brown) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2003]
      EWHC 2045 Admin Crane J held that the Secretary of State was  entitled
      to certify his  conclusion  that  relocation  offered  sufficiency  of
      protection outside Kingston  on  the  facts  of  that  case.  He  did,
      however, say that leaving aside the question of  relocation  he  would
      have held that the Secretary of State was not entitled on the evidence
      presented to conclude that there was  sufficiency  of  protection  for
      human rights purposes in relation to the protection of  informers  and
      suspected informers. This case does, however, seem to me to have  been
      very fact specific on both points. In the present case  there  is  the
      unchallenged evidence of Mr Sobers.
      We were referred briefly to R (Gibson) v Secretary of  State  for  the
      Home Department [2003] EWHC  1919  Admin  where  leave  to  apply  for
      judicial review of  the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  to  include
      Jamaica on the "white list"  (that  is  those  countries  included  in
      section 94(4) of the 2002 Act to which removal would  not  in  general
      involve a serious risk of persecution or breach of human  rights)  was
      refused. The court in that case does not, however, appear to have been
      invited to consider any expert evidence.
      30. The final case to which I make brief  mention  is  R  (Britton)  v
      Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2003]  EWCA  Civ  227  in
      which the Court of Appeal remitted the case to the IAT to consider the
      sufficiency of  protection  issue.  It  had  neither  dealt  with  the
      appellant's evidence nor given reasons for  its  decision.  Tuckey  LJ
      said at para 20:
         "The fact that the law enforcement and security forces  in  Jamaica
         are over-zealous does not mean that they exert  effective  control.
         Nor does  the  fact  they  use  armed  response  when  apprehending
         criminal suspects. The CIPU report which we have seen does refer to
         gang violence in Jamaica, particularly in Kingston and the police's
         ability to control it. It may be  that  on  consideration  of  that
         material it can properly be concluded that there is sufficiency  of
         protection. But neither the special adjudicator nor the  IAT  refer
         to that part of the report in their decisions, or appear,  to  have
         given it any consideration in the light of the appellant's evidence
         to which I have referred. "
37. That brings us to the case of Atkinson [2004] EWCA Civ 846 itself.
Scott Baker LJ stated:
      "22. In the present case, therefore, the question is whether the state
      of Jamaica is both willing and able to provide  reasonable  protection
      to the appellant. The evidence does not raise  any  real  doubt  about
      willingness to provide such protection:  the  real  focus  is  on  its
      ability to do so. The difficult question is where  to  draw  the  line
      that defines what an appropriate standard is. It is  not  enough  that
      some individuals will  be  failed  by  the  state's  criminal  justice
      system, not enough that the state has not been effective  in  removing
      risk. There has in my judgment to be a systemic failure  that  relates
      at the very least to a category of  persons  of  whom  the  individual
      under consideration is one. In this case the focus is on informers  or
      perceived informers or those who in some way are  the  target  of  the
      gangs or the dons who head them. In my view it is  no  answer  that  a
      state is doing its incompetent best if it nevertheless falls below the
      appropriate standard. One has to ask whether the state is  failing  to
      perform its basic function of protecting its citizens. Does  the  writ
      of law run or not?"
38. In analysing the A case Scott Baker LJ observed:
    "24. In the Court of Appeal there was  additional  evidence,  including
    from Mr Hilaire Sobers, the same distinguished expert whose evidence is
    before the court in the present case. In short his  evidence  was  that
    the power and influence of the dons who head the gangs extends over the
    whole island and the appellant would be at substantial risk of harm  if
    returned to any part of Jamaica. Hit men could be hired for  as  little
    as �100 sterling and it would be difficult for  Ms  A  to  conceal  her
    Tivoli Gardens origins.
    25. Keene LJ, with whom Peter Gibson and May LJJ agreed,  said  he  was
    persuaded that the removal directions given by the Secretary  of  State
    would involve a breach of Ms A's human rights. Articles  2  and  3,  he
    pointed out, are absolute rights. A  contracting  state,  such  as  the
    United Kingdom, will be in breach of the ECHR if it expels or removes a
    person to a state where there is a real risk to that person from people
    who are not public officials. Removal of Ms A would be in breach of her
    human rights because there was a real risk both  to  her  life  and  of
    Article 3 treatment from the Tivoli Gardens gang and from others within
    Jamaica. Mr Sobers' evidence was that these criminal  gangs  and  their
    operations are not confined to the  so-  called  garrison  communities.
    Gunmen have been "exported" to other areas to terrorise various  groups
    of people  including  suspected  informers.  The  dons  have  developed
    networks throughout the island of Jamaica."
39. Against this background Scott Baker LJ considered that:
    "33. The  issue  is  not  in  my  view  however  whether  the  Jamaican
    authorities have the willingness to deal with the problem  but  whether
    they have shown the ability to do so. The decision letter it should  be
    noted was written just four or five  months  after  the  November  2002
    initiatives. The question is whether these  initiatives  have  had  the
    success that the Secretary of State  suggests.  The  evidence  suggests
    that, at least on one view, they have not.
    34. We have had the advantage of two additional reports from Mr  Sobers
    that postdate the judge's decision. Mr  Sobers  in  his  report  of  20
    October 2003 refers not only to clear deficiencies in  the  initiatives
    but also to the chronic institutional weaknesses of the Jamaican police
    force and the contrasting strengths of the  typical  Jamaican  criminal
    gangs. The implicit assumption in the Home Office's analysis  that  the
    balance of power favours the Jamaican authorities, he says,  is  wrong.
    Criminal networks in Jamaica  continue  to  act  with  almost  complete
    impunity in inflicting reprisals upon persons like  the  appellant  who
    have offended them. He says he strongly rejects the assertions  of  the
    Home Office that  the  latest  initiatives  have  led  to  any  or  any
    substantial improvement in the capacity of the police or  the  military
    to protect citizens like the appellant from threats from  reputed  gang
    members. The new initiatives are largely quantitative in nature and  do
    not address the qualitative dimensions of  Jamaica's  crime  phenomenon
    particularly the symbiosis between organised crime and politics. Whilst
    it is true that the November 2002  crime  plan  theoretically  aims  at
    dismantling criminal gangs, he is not aware of any fundamental  changes
    in (a) the capacity of the police to accomplish this or (b) the linkage
    between crime and politics/civil society. The problems associated  with
    organised crime are  deeply  entrenched  in  Jamaican  polity  and  are
    unlikely in his view to be resolved in the short term.
    35. Mr Sobers has produced a further report dated 25 May 2004. In it he
    picks up on various points made in the respondent's skeleton  argument.
    He says that the thrust of his opinion is not so much the  capacity  of
    the Jamaican authorities to eliminate or insulate  the  threat  to  the
    appellant,  but  the  impotence  of  the  Jamaican  state  to   provide
    protection. He emphasises his conclusion that there does not  currently
    exist in Jamaica any reasonable system of protection. Indeed,  he  says
    that the capacity of the state in this regard may well have  diminished
    even further since the preparation  of  his  principal  opinion,  given
    Jamaica's worsening rate of violent crime and recent developments  with
    respect to the Jamaican police force. He says that  the  violent  crime
    has increased rather than diminished in 2004. At a press conference  on
    8 April 2004 the Commissioner of Police  stated  that  there  were  277
    murders in the first three months of 2004,  69  more  than  during  the
    first three months of 2003. Another 110 people were  killed  in  April.
    The deputy police commissioner is reported as saying that the  increase
    in the crime rate has not been met by a commensurate increase in police
    resources to deal with it.  Mr  Sobers  also  refers  to  various  news
    reports emphasising the continuing nexus between politics and crime."
40. In deciding that the certification threshold had not been  crossed,  his
lordship added:
    "37. In my judgment there is force in Mr  Drabble's  criticism  of  the
    Secretary of States certification and of the judge's decision to uphold
    it. It is clear that there has been a long-standing and endemic problem
    in Jamaica and the state authorities ability to overcome it.  There  is
    no doubt about willingness to tackle the problem. It is another matter,
    however whether effective steps have been taken  to  achieve  the  bare
    minimum required to provide reasonable  protection  for  informers  and
    perceived informers who find  themselves  in  situations  such  as  the
    appellant.
    ...
 1. I am far from saying that the appellant will necessarily succeed on  an
    appeal to an adjudicator, but it seems to me that the present  evidence
    raises, at the very least, a serious question on whether the  state  of
    Jamaica provides a sufficiency of protection to informers or  perceived
    informers in the category of  the  appellant.  On  one  view  at  least
    Jamaica has not shown a reasonable ability to resolve the  problem  and
    provide the basic protection required."
41. On the issue of internal relocation, Scott Baker  LJ  noted  that  in  a
recent report Mr Sobers had  said:  "Simply  put,  relocation  will  neither
eliminate nor substantially reduce the risk of harm to (the appellant)  from
gang reprisals."
42. Further on he noted:
      "49. In his earlier report of 29 October 2003 Mr Sobers  had  made  it
      clear that his reason for this conclusion was primarily the small size
      of Jamaica and the trans-geographic power and reach of criminal  gangs
      in the island. The fact that Jamaica is only 4,400 sq miles  makes  it
      difficult, if not impossible, for someone to conceal their identity at
      least for any length of time. Strangers, says Mr Sobers, attract  more
      attention in small communities. He also  points  out  that  successful
      relocation requires  social  and  economic  support  which,  for  most
      Jamaicans, is  limited  or  absent.  Jamaica  has  no  state-sponsored
      welfare system. It is difficult or impossible to relocate without  the
      independent means to do so or access to  private  social  or  economic
      support. Jamaica remains a highly violent  society  driven  by  strong
      enduring impulses for retribution.  Those  who  offer,  or  appear  to
      offer, support to targets of reprisal almost invariable become targets
      themselves. Few, if any, are willing to put their lives  on  the  line
      for a target like the appellant. The judge did not of course have  the
      more recent reports of Mr Sobers. He did,  however,  have  that  of  6
      August 2003 prepared for the case of  Brown  which  spoke  in  similar
      terms, albeit terms that were less specific to the  appellant's  case,
      on the issue of relocation.
      50. The judge also had before him a report from Amnesty  International
      of 8 September 2001 but made no reference to the following passage  at
      p 3:
           "Those  who  inform  the  police  either  of  alleged   criminal
           activities within the communities or of their own experiences of
           crime would be likely to be viewed as informers and could expect
           rough local 'justice' for going against  the  local  social  and
           political order. Given the extent to which  influence  of  local
           leaders extends beyond the confines of individual garrisons, and
           the fact that outsiders are immediately  identifiable  in  close
           communities such as those that exist in Jamaica, they  would  be
           unlikely to be able to find safe haven in another  area  of  the
           same political persuasion. If they moved into  the  opposition's
           area they would similarly be at risk  of  violence.  They  would
           also bring a risk of violence to those who  sheltered  them  and
           would obtain little effective assistance from the police."
    Or that at p 11:
           "Being an informer, being suspected of  being  an  informer,  or
           being a relative or associate of an informer would also place  a
           person at extreme risk of violence outside  their  own  garrison
           community."
           Or that at p 12:
           "The ability of a person to successfully relocate within Jamaica
           could be expected  to  be  dependent  on  a  range  of  factors,
           including their status as an informer, origins from a PNP or JLP
           community,  their  socio-economic  status,  sexuality,  familial
           connections with local community and other factors.
           Amnesty international is concerned that a person of the  profile
           given in Mr Atkinson's asylum  account  would  not  be  able  to
           successfully relocate within Jamaica and would face the risk  of
           human rights violations if enforcibly returned."
        1. These passages all seem to me to be consistent  with  the  three
           reports from Mr Sobers. In my  judgment  certification  was  not
           justified on the relocation issue. It has to be  borne  in  mind
           that for the relocation issue to become a live one  there  is  a
           presupposition that there is no sufficiency  of  protection  for
           Article 3 purposes in the appellant's home community.  I  simply
           cannot accept that in  such  circumstances  his  arguments  that
           internal relocation is not  a  viable  alternative  are  clearly
           unfounded."
43. Scott Baker LJ concluded:
         "The subsidiary question of  internal  relocation  likewise  raises
         issues that should not,  on  the  material  before  us,  have  been
         rejected as clearly  unfounded.  Accordingly  in  my  judgment  the
         appeal should be  allowed,  the  application  for  judicial  review
         should succeed and the Secretary of State's certification should be
         quashed."
44. There are also two  current  Tribunal  country  guidance  cases.  In  DW
(Homosexual Men - Persecution-Sufficiency of Protection) Jamaica  CG  [2005]
UKAIT 00168 the Tribunal found that in a range of circumstances there  would
be  an  insufficiency  of  protection  in  Jamaica  for   homosexuals:   see
paragraphs 78-80. In reaching  that  conclusion  they  attached  significant
weight to a report by Mr Sobers of 16 September 2005.

45. Since the Immigration Judge heard the appellant's case  (in  July  2005)
the Tribunal has issued a further CG case, JS, notified  on  21  July  2006.
This  decision  took  into  account  a  wide  range  of  background  country
materials, including the Home Office  COI  report  of  October  2005.    The
Tribunal also considered an expert report dated 30 September 2005 from  Miss
Y. Sobers and her addendum report dated 15 September 2006.  At paragraph 61-
66 it concluded that her report and addendum  "could  not  be  described  as
consistently objective  and  unbiased"  and  that  "we  could  place  little
reliance upon the opinions expressed by her". The  Tribunal  summarised  its
general findings as follows:

         "There is clear evidence that in general the Government of  Jamaica
         is not only willing, but also able to  provide  through  its  legal
         system a reasonable level  of  protection from ill-treatment to its
         citizens who fear criminal acts in Jamaica and to  those  who  fear
         retribution for testifying against criminals."

46. Points of particular relevance to us which  we  derive  from  the  above
survey in particular are the following. First of all that whilst the  higher
courts  and  the  Tribunal  have  found  Mr   Sobers   an   impressive   and
"distinguished" expert, there has been  no  real  challenge  raised  to  his
evidence in the cases concerned. In this case, however, the  respondent  has
challenged his evidence and it is incumbent on us to  evaluate  how  helpful
this evidence is, when placed side by  side  with  all  the  other  evidence
before us. Secondly, except in the case of A,  the  Court  of  Appeal  cases
have been concerned with issues of  arguability,  rather  than  the  merits.
Thirdly, even in A they  eschewed  reaching  any  firm  conclusions  on  the
general issues of sufficiency of protection in Jamaica, focussing rather  on
the issue of whether  protection  would  be  available  for  the  appellant.
Fourthly MacPherson, A and Atkinson  have helpfully delineated a  number  of
relevant legal  principles  to  be  applied  when  assessing  the  issue  of
sufficiency of protection in the Jamaican context: we shall return to  these
below. Fourthly, so far as the Tribunal in its two latest  country  guidance
case is concerned, although prepared to accept that certain categories  such
as homosexuals in a range of circumstances  may  be  at  risk,  it  has  not
accepted the main tenets of Mr Sobers' reports as regards  insufficiency  of
protection in Jamaica generally.


The background evidence
47. It will assist if we summarise the main items of background evidence  we
had before us: for a full list see the Appendix.

Home Office COI Report, November 2006
48. In addition to the CIPU reports the  immigration  judge  considered,  we
had produced to us a further Home  Office  report  dated  30  November  2006
(hereafter COI Report). We set  out  its  contents  in  some  detail  as  it
usefully incorporates references to other recent  reports,  including  those
from the US  State  Department,  Amnesty  International  and  Jamaicans  for
Justice.  It describes the country's total  population  being  estimated  in
July 2006 as 2,758, 124.  Although  the  country  is  aid  to  have  serious
economic and social problems its political system is said  to  be  "stable".
The most  serious  economic  problems  are  said  to  be  high  unemployment
averaging 15.5%, rampant under employment, growing debt  and  high  interest
rates (6.01).  The current  ruling  party  is  the  PNP  (People's  National
Party).   March 2006 saw the inauguration  of  a  new  Prime  Minister,  Mrs
Simpson Miller, who took over from the incumbent  PM,  P.J.  Patterson,  who
had been in power for the past fourteen years.    However, the  other  large
political party, the Jamaica Labour Party (JLP),  secured  control  of  most
municipal councils as a result of the June 2003 local elections (4.02, 3.12-
3.14).

49. The COI report notes a number of sources which refer to crime rates  and
homicide figures. It mentions  a  3  January  2006  report  by  The  Jamaica
Observer stating:


     "With a record high of nearly 1,700 homicides  last  year  [2005]  and
    Jamaica's emergence at the top of the work ranking for capita  murders,
    homicide figures, being closely followed  here,  are  under  increasing
    scrutiny".


50. In the section covering Crime the report states that  since  2005,  when
the number of homicides increased to 1,669, statistics reported  by  Jamaica
Gleaner showed a 25% decline in murders since the start of 2006.  The  rates
for serious crimes such as robberies, breaking and larceny also fell  during
the most recent period (down from 4.392 during January-July  2005  to  3,743
in the same period in  2006). At  8.02   reference  is  made  to  a  Jamaica
Gleaner piece dated 25 August 2006 in which National Security  Minister,  Dr
Peter Phillips credited the drop in crime  to  intelligence-driven  work  by
the Jamaica Constabulary  Force  (JCF),  particularly   Operation  Kingfish,
which he noted as  having a significant impact since  its  establishment  in
late 2004.

Gang Violence
51. On gang violence the report cites sources  describing  many  inner  city
areas as being controlled by well-armed gangs trafficking in  narcotics  and
guns.  Community youth gangs are said to account for  20-25% of   homicides.
Certain parishes are described as  battle  zones  between  warring  factions
consisting of gangs with connections to the two main political parties.  The
One Order gang is described as being connected to the JLP and  the  Klansman
gang as being connected  with  the  PNP.  However,  the  report  notes  that
Operation Kingfish had had a significant impact on reducing the  control  of
major gangs.

56. The COI Report records the  US  State  Department  Report  for  2005  as
noting that:

    "... in recent elections voters living in   "garrison  communities"  in
    inner city areas dominated by  one of the two major, political  parties
    often  faced  substantial  influence  and  pressure  from   politically
    connected gangs and young men hired by political parties, which impeded
    the  free exercise of their right to vote" (15.01).

57. However the report also mentions the  Bertelsmann  Transformation  Index
(BTI),  a  global  ranking  that  analyses  and  evaluates  development  and
transformation in 199 countries. It identified  garrison  communities  as  a
"by-product of political tribalism" which had declined significantly in  the
1990s.  During the time covered by  the  report,  twelve  out  of  sixty  of
Jamaica's constituencies were classified as garrison communities to  varying
degrees (15.04 - 15.05).

The One Order Gang
58. As regards the One Order  gang,  the  report  notes  that  it  had  been
conducting a turf war with the Klansman gang  for  control  of  the  Spanish
Town area (which is within the KMA) after the  killing  of  One  Order  gang
leader Oliver "Bubba" Smith. In 2004 there had also  been  internal  feuding
over who should succeed him.  On 5 November  2005  the  Jamaica  Information
Service quoted a broadcast by National Security Minister Dr  Philips  saying
that Operation Kingfish  had  arrested  some  235  persons  in  relation  to
murders, firearms, drugs and ammunition, had apprehended 32  wanted  persons
and  had  dismantled  or  seriously  disrupted  major   criminal   networks,
including the "Gideon Warriors", the "One Order"  and"  Klansman"  gangs  in
Spanish town.  A 29 January  2006 item from the Jamaican Gleaner  had  noted
that the  head of  Operation Kingfish, ACP Hinds,  believed  that  the   One
Order organisation   was "gradually disintegrating" following the arrest  of
several members in the mid-2005s, and the  consequent  migration  of  others
outside of the parish (Spanish Town), with some even going abroad.  At  para
8.17 the Report notes, however, that:

    ".. an article dated 6 September 2006 stated that following the  deaths
    of their leaders, both the One Order  and  Klansmen  gangs  were  in  a
    "phase of restructuring". The report also noted that gangs  had  spread
    out into suburban neighbourhoods, instilling fear  into  some  smaller,
    quieter communities".

59. Paragraph 8.18 mentions a further shooting in  early  February  2006  of
the alleged head of the One Order gang, Andrew 'Bunnyman' Hope.

Impunity
60. Note is also taken in the November 2006 COI report of  serious  problems
identified by the US State Department  Report  for  2005,  namely:  unlawful
killings committed by  members  of  the   security  forces;   mob  violence;
vigilante killings  of  those  suspected  of  breaking  the  law;  abuse  of
detainees and prisoners by police and prison guards;  poor prison  and  jail
conditions;  continued  impunity  for  police   who   commit   crimes;    an
overburdened judicial  system  and  frequently  lengthy  delays  in  trials;
violence and discrimination  against  women;  trafficking  in  persons;  and
violence against suspected  or known  homosexuals.  Also  cited  is  Amnesty
International's  2006  report  covering  2005  and  highlighting   continued
reports of police brutality and  saying  that  168  people  were  killed  by
police (7.01. - 7.02).  At paragraph  9.01, however, it is noted:

    "On the 1 June 2006 the National Security minister,  Dr  Peter  Philips
    disclosed the recent achievements made  by  the  Internal  Affairs/Anti
    Corruption Division of the Professional Standards Branch (PSB)  of  the
    Jamaica  Constabulary  force  (JCF).   43  police  officers  have  been
    arrested on charges of misconduct with one  conviction,  and  40  cases
    against officers are currently before the courts.  Since its  inception
    PSB's anti-Corruption Division has been pursuing  an  aggressive  anti-
    corruption drive aimed at ensuring incidents of police misconduct  were
    dealt with promptly and with transparency. (Jamaica Information Service
     1 June 2006)"

61. By contrast, the US State Department Report for 2005 had  described  the
JCF as generally ineffective in the face of a  rapidly  increasing  rate  of
killings.  The perception of corruption and impunity within the  forces  was
said  to  be  a  serious  problem,  with  human  rights  groups  identifying
systematically poor investigative procedures and weak oversight mechanisms.

State protection
62. The COI Report states that  police  resources  are  seen  as  deficient,
although government, under pressure from  the  private  sector,  has  sought
overseas help in the fight against crime and violence, including  some  high
profile secondments from Scotland Yard.

63. Commentary is also given on the Witness Protection  Programme  begun  in
1995 but given a statutory basis by the Justice Protection Act, 2001.  On  1
July 2005 the  Jamaican  Information  Service  described  is  as  solid  and
effective.  ACP Williams also stated: "We have not had a witness who  is  on
the programme and who remains on the programme, injured, killed or  hurt  in
any way".  The Jamaican FCO described anyone who wants to testify  in  court
and fears for his/her life as eligible for the programme. Almost 400  people
are said to have participated in the programme since  1997.   Other  sources
are less positive.  A Jamaican Observer report says that the  programme  has
only had limited success.

64. As regards women, the Report cites Amnesty International's 22 June  2006
report, entitled Sexual Violence against Women  and  Girls  in  Jamaica,  as
stating that even being seen at a police station  may  give  rise  to  fears
that someone is an "informer" and that most sexual violence  in  communities
in Jamaica goes unreported because women are fearful of the  retaliation  of
gang members. Paragraph 9.20 notes the following  quote  from  this  report:
"Approximately 32% of all  homicides  in  Jamaica  are  reprisal-based,  and
women are increasingly targeted as informers."

65. The same AI report  is  noted  as  viewing  violence  against  women  in
Jamaica persisting:

    "because the state is failing to tackle discrimination  against  women,
    allowing social and cultural attitudes which  encourage  discrimination
    and  violence.   Shortcomings  in  national  legislation  do  not  deal
    adequately with marital rape,  incest  or  sexual  harassment,  thereby
    encouraging impunity and leaving women without the  protection  of  the
    law.
    Discrimination is entrenched and often exacerbated in  the  police  and
    criminal justice system. Women and adolescent girls are rarely believed
    by the police, so have little confidence in  reporting  crimes  against
    them. Evidence is often not sought effectively  or  professionally  and
    witnesses are rarely protected ...


    The rate of sexual violence women in  Jamaica  is  very  high,  and  is
    accompanied by spiralling levels of  community  violence  and  homicide
    throughout the island ...".

66. However, it is noted in the COI Report that in December 2004  Parliament
passed the  Domestic Violence (Amendment) Act  2004,  inter  alia   widening
the category of persons who may  apply for  a  protection  order  and   that
there is draft  legislation to provide for a law against sexual  harassment.
The Senate is said to be seeking to reform laws on rape,  incest  and  other
sexual offences. In December 2005  Parliament  ratified  the  Inter-American
Convention on the   Prevention,  Punishment  and  Eradication  of   Violence
against Women (23.13).  Whilst violence against  women  was  widespread  and
the police were still generally reluctant  to  intervene,  the  government's
Bureau of Women's  Affairs  operated  crises  hot  lines  and  shelters  and
managed a public  education  campaign  to  raise  the  profile  of  domestic
violence  (23.21).   The  COI  report  also  notes  the  launch  of  Women's
Incorporated in October 2005, a project to assist and support abused  women,
including  a  crisis  shelter  and  a  twenty-four  hour  hotline.   Women's
Incorporated is noted as being  an  NGO  which  runs  the  only  established
shelter in the island for battered women (23.26).   The  COI  report  states
that whilst there is no societal pattern of abuse of  children,  reports  of
sexual abuse were common , including by inner city  gang  leaders  (24.22  -
24.24).

OGN December 2006
67. The respondent's  bundle  also  included  the  Home  Office  Operational
Guidance Note (OGN) on Jamaica for December 2006. In its section  on   "Main
categories of claims" it has a subsection headed Criminal Gang Violence.  It
concludes at paragraph 3.6.10:

    "For claimants who fear or who  have  experienced  ill-treatment  as  a
    result of criminal gang violence in Jamaica there is, in the  light  of
    the  ongoing  initiatives  by  the  Jamaican  Government,   a   general
    sufficiency of protection".

68.  The  initiatives  referred  to   included   Operation   Kingfish,   the
Commissioner of Police's February  2006 8-point action plan, which  included
a "crime hot spot secretariat " within the   JCF,  the  establishment  of  a
Major Investigation   Taskforce  (MIT)  in  Kingston  and  St  Andrews,  the
ongoing work of the  Witness Protection Programme and  an  aggressive  anti-
corruption Division of the JCF's Professional Standards  Branch.

69. The OGN also considers at 3.7.9 that it is:

    "practicable  for  claimants  who  may  have  a  well-founded  fear  of
    persecution in one area to relocate to other  parts  of  Jamaica  where
    gang violence is less prevalent and where they would not have  a  well-
    founded fear and,  except  where  the  circumstance  of  an  individual
    claimant indicate otherwise, it would not be  unduly  harsh  to  expect
    them to do so."


70. The OGN also contains a  subsection  at  3.8  on  "Victims  of  domestic
violence". Whilst acknowledging that violence against women  is  widespread,
the  OGN concludes that:

    "... there is a general sufficiency protection available to victims  of
    domestic violence through enforcement  of  legislative  provisions  and
    availability of governmental and non-governmental advice, and legal aid
    and counselling. There is no evidence to suggest  that  involvement  of
    the abuser with a criminal gang would prevent the claimant from gaining
    protection although consideration needs to be given to  the  individual
    circumstances of an applicant's claim."

71. The OGN also considers that it would be:


   "... practicable for claimants [at risk of domestic violence] to relocate
   to other parts of Jamaica to escape domestic violence  and  except  where
   the circumstances of an individual claimant indicate otherwise,  it would
   not be unduly harsh to expect then to do so."

US State Department Reports
72. Although the latest Home Office COI conveniently subsumes references  to
other major reports in its summary, we should mention here several  passages
from the US State Department Report for 2005.  One is noted by Asanovich  in
her helpful skeleton as follows:

    "In a culture where it is widely believed that informers will die, some
    criminal trials were dismissed because witnesses failed to come forward
    because of threats and intimidation. Some of  those  who  came  forward
    qualified  for  the  witness  protection  programme  but  many  refused
    protection or violated the conditions of the  programme"  (USDoS  March
    2005).


73. Later on it is stated that "The lack of an effective witness  protection
program led to the dismissal of a number of cases involving  killings".  The
same report also stated that in October the UN Commissioner on Human  Rights
released the report of the UN Special Rapporteur on Extrajudicial,  Summary,
or Arbitrary Executions, which stated that the country had  an  unacceptably
high number of questionable police shootings and should hold more  policemen
accountable for their actions. Mention is made  of  the  JCF  continuing  an
initiative of "community policing" to address the problem  of  long-standing
antipathy  between  the   security   forces   and   many   poor   inner-city
neighbourhoods. The Police Federation is noted as having conducted  training
programmes for policemen on citizens' rights. In the section  on  women  the
Report stated that rape was illegal and carried a penalty of up to 25  years
imprisonment with hard labour. Although  during  the  year  (2004)  reported
incidents of rape decreased by 8%, NGOs stressed that the vast  majority  of
rapes were not reported. During the year in Kingston/St Andrews  there  were
208 arrests for sex  crimes,  of  which  50  cases  went  to  court  and  25
ultimately were convicted and sentenced.

    Press items
74. The appellant's bundles included a significant number  of  press  items.
One dated 16 June 2005  from  HJT  Research  News  Reporting  Service  gives
details of the high number of murders for the first half of  2005.  It  also
deals with Operation Kingfish noting:

    "Both the Jamaica Observer and the Jamaica Gleaner report that national
    security minister Phillips said Operation Kingfish has so far cost  the
    country approximately $50 million. 'In addition we  have  been  getting
    assistance from our international partners in the  form  of  personnel,
    equipment,  training  and  intelligence  which  we   estimate   to   be
    approximately $150 million'..."

75. The respondent submitted an 11 November 2006  report  from  the  Jamaica
Gleaner stating that statistics for 2006 continued to show that murders  and
other relevant crimes had declined.  It stated:

    "ACP Hinds also achieved much success  this  year  ahead  of  Operation
    Kingfish. Many who were weary  of  another  crime-fighting  task  force
    subjected Operation Kingfish to intense criticism upon its formulation.
     Close to the end of the  year,  however,   the  success  of  Operation
    Kingfish has silenced most critics ..."


76. The respondent also adduced a 1 December  2006  item  from  the  Jamaica
Gleaner which records the Commissioner for Police describing measures  being
taken to tackle some crime problems in St James and other  inner-city  areas
- establishing of task forces, a review of the deployment and  effectiveness
of  police  community  partnerships  and  community  policing  and  vigorous
pursuit of police  personnel  involved  in  corrupt  activities.   Alongside
these long term measures he mentions the use of bounties  afforded  for  the
capture of "most  wanted"  individuals,  which  had  led  to  one  important
success in  St James.

The expert evidence
77. The immigration judge, in finding that the  Jamaican  authorities  could
not afford sufficient protection against gang violence, drew  heavily  on  a
report by Mr Sobers, dated 25 May 2004:

    "... indicat[ing] clear deficiencies in the initiatives by the Jamaican
    government and also chronic institutional weaknesses of  the   Jamaican
    police force and the  contrast in strength  of  the   typical  Jamaican
    criminal gangs. Criminal networks  in  Jamaica  continue  to  act  with
    almost compete impunity in inflicting reprisals upon persons  who  have
    offended them. A report by Mr Sobers of  25  May  2004  refers  to  the
    impotence of the  Jamaican state to provide protection and  that  there
    does  not  currently   exist  in   Jamaica  any  reasonable  system  of
    protection (paragraph  11(7))."

78. As this is a second stage reconsideration, however, we are  required  to
consider the current situation and take account  also  of  the  most  recent
evidence. In order to assist the  Tribunal  in  this  task  the  appellant's
representative have commissioned further reports from Mr Sobers.

79. In these reports Mr Sobers' reports describe him  as  a  barrister  with
considerable knowledge of Jamaica and its criminal  justice  system.    From
1998-9 he was Executive Director of the  Independent  Jamaican  Counsel  for
Human Rights. In 1994 he established an  NGO  called  Brother's  Keepers  to
promote opposition to crime and violence in Jamaica.  He  has  over  fifteen
years experience in appearing as counsel in  both  the  civil  and  criminal
courts of Jamaica up the level of the Court of Appeal.  He  represented  the
Public Defender's panel of attorneys in the Commission of Inquiry  into  the
West Kingston violence in 2001.

 80. He has given  legal  advice  on  numerous  legal/human  rights  issues,
including  through   the   media.    He   has   provided   voluntary   legal
advice/assistance   to   Families   Against   State    Terrorism,    Amnesty
International and Jamaicans for Justice. He  is  a  certified  mediator  for
over six years.  He has acted as a human  rights  consultant  to  diplomatic
missions. He was specifically consulted by the British  High  Commission  in
Kingston in early 2001 regarding the effectiveness of the domestic  violence
legislation in preventing/deterring spousal abuse.  He is an ad hoc  adviser
to  Amnesty International's Caribbean desk and  to  Human  Rights  Watch  in
respect of its  1999  report,  "Nobody's   Children:  Jamaican  children  in
police detention and government institutions." He has given expert  evidence
in a Californian court on spousal/domestic abuse in  Jamaica.  Between  1999
and May  2002, he was a weekly  columnist  with  the  Jamaica  Observer  Ltd
(Sunday  Observer), writing principally on human  rights  issues.    Between
March 2001 and December 2002 he was a Chevening  Scholar  from  Jamaica  and
was awarded an LLM. degree in Law in development  with  distinction  by  the
University of  Warwick in England, his  elections  being  Human  Rights  and
Criminal Justice. He is currently co-writing a book with his  mother,  Ms  Y
Sobers on selected cases of killings by police of civilians.

81. Mr Sobers' first report dealing with this appellant's case is  dated  14
March 2006.  Much of it reiterates points already made  in  the  reports  he
submitted  to the Court of  Appeal in  A [2003] EWCA Civ 175,  in   Atkinson
and to the Tribunal in DW (Homosexual men -  persecution  -  sufficiency  of
protection) Jamaica [2005] UKAIT  00168, as well as  in  his  25  May   2004
report.

82. His report says that in Jamaica there is no  sufficiency  of  protection
afforded  by  the  authorities  against   criminal   gang   violence.    The
authorities are unable to protect its population and  he  even  doubts  that
there is a willingness on their part to protect.  He  describes  Jamaica  as
having the worst crime rate in the Caribbean and one  of  the  worst  murder
rates in the world.  The  majority  of  violent  crimes  (roughly  80%)  are
committed in the Kingston Metropolitan Area (KMA). If  proper  records  were
kept of missing persons, the true murder rate may well be, he says,  higher.


83. Mr Sobers writes that Jamaica's high  rate  of  violent  crime  reflects
substantially on the ineffectiveness of the JCF to protect  the  population.
 Institutionally the model of policing in Jamaica is extremely  militaristic
and  reactive  in  its  approach  to  crime   control,   emphasising   armed
intervention as opposed to less confrontationist approaches  like  community
policing.  A  further  institutional  complication  is  that  there   is   a
significant shortage of police officers  and  the  police  generally  suffer
from a lack of resources. In addition the police have a reputation  for  the
use of excessive force; most police officers are  simply  not  trained;  the
police force has a serious problem of  corrupt  officers,  to  be  found  at
almost all levels. There is also said to be  a  level  of  police  collusion
with some gangs and gang leaders.

84. Quantitatively, argues Mr  Sobers,  none  of  the  various  crime  plans
introduced by the government has made  any  substantial  difference  to  the
rate of violent crime in  Jamaica.  There  was  an  "intelligence  deficit".
This had led to the recruitment of  a  senior  Scotland  Yard  detective  in
March 2005.

85. Many government  pronouncements  about  combating  crime  could  not  be
accepted uncritically. Only lip service is paid to community  policing.  The
perception of  ineffectiveness  has  manifested  itself  in  the  increasing
number of ordinary citizens taking the law into their own hands through  mob
killings. He writes:

    "12.6  Against  this  quantitative  and  qualitative  background,   the
    Jamaican government has had little success  in  reducing  crime  levels
    despite numerous announcements of plans and initiatives  to  deal  with
    the problem. In  summary  the  government  has  invested  far  more  in
    militaristic  solutions  than  intelligence  driven   solutions,   with
    predicable results.  Further, the government  routinely  announces  new
    initiatives against crime, none of which have proved effective.


    The overall ineffectiveness of the police is perhaps reflected  by  the
    significant expression of the private security industry in Jamaica over
    the past decade according  to  the    Economic  and  Social  Survey  in
    Jamaica (ESSJ) 2004, the number of private security officers  is  close
    to double the number of   available police officers.  Private  security
    is extremely expensive. It does not represents a  feasible  option  for
    [the appellant], a person of limited means.


    In my experience abuse of power and  unprofessionalism  in  the  police
    reflects a cultural norm, which is supported  by  a  deeply  entrenched
    pattern of impunity."

86. In Mr Sobers' view there is an "asymmetrical balance of  power"  between
the police on the one hand and  organised  crime  on  the  other,  with  the
latter having the upper hand. The problems associated with  organised  crime
are deeply entrenched  in  the  Jamaican  polity  and  are  unlikely  to  be
resolved in the short term.

87. Criminal gangs/narco-criminals in Jamaica, he states,  continue  to  act
with almost complete impunity in  inflicting  (or  threatening  to  inflict)
""reprisals" on persons who  "offend" them.

88. As regards risk to women from violence,   including  domestic  violence,
Mr Sobers cites the US State Department Report 2004 summary:

    "Social and  cultural  traditions  perpetuate  violence  against  women
    including spousal abuse.  Violence against women  was  widespread,  but
    many women were reluctant to acknowledge or report  abusive  behaviour,
    leading to wide variations in estimates of its extent."

89. In high crime areas gangs are  believed  to  be  deliberately  targeting
women. Gang-rape is termed "battery".  According to a UNDP National  Report,
March 1999 by the  Inter-Agency  Campaign  on  violence  Against  Women  and
Girls, gang-rape is meted out as a punishment to a woman - usually  a  young
girl from the community who is deemed to have stepped out of line.   Women's
Media Watch has said Jamaica was now seeing incidents of  "reprisal  rapes".
Rapes are seriously underreported  by  their  victims.    Whilst  there  are
domestic law provisions designed to protect against  domestic  violence  (in
particular the Domestic Violence  Act  1995)  and  violence  generally  (The
Offences Against the Person Act), these  provide  only  limited  support  to
victims. Women in high crimes area who live in a context of  high  rates  of
interpersonal and community wide violence are most vulnerable, and,  at  the
same time, least likely to receive relief.  The institutional  framework  is
also vitiated by traditional dismissive attitudes of the police to  domestic
and sexual violence. There have been reported  incidents  of  police  raping
girls or women. The island's resources for helping women who are victims  of
domestic violence are very limited,  notwithstanding  Jamaica  now  being  a
party to the Convention on the Prevention of Punishment and  Eradication  of
Violence Against Women.

90. In relation to internal relocation, Mr Sobers states:

    "93. The effects of 'garrisonisation'  are  not  confined  to  garrison
    communities. According  to Dr Mark Figueroa, "[t]his political  culture
    extends well beyond the boundaries of the communities which  have  been
    under the tight  control  of  politicians,  their  thugs  and/or  local
    enforcers".

91. He does not consider relocation within Jamaica to escape domestic  abuse
and/or violence a feasible option for most Jamaican women, since  relocation
"require[s] social and  economic  support,  which  for  most  Jamaicans,  is
limited or absent".  He believes that the small size of Jamaica (44,000  sq.
miles) makes is "difficult if not impossible to  conceal  one's  whereabouts
indefinitely, if at all".   Jamaica's well-developed network  of  roads  and
telecommunications means that information  flow  between  urban  communities
and the remotest parts of Jamaica can be  accomplished  with  a  minimum  of
effort.    Criminal  gangs,  he  adds,  are  generally  well-organised   and
resourced,  with  highly  developed  networks  of  intelligence/information.
"Given all of these factors, it is  extremely  difficult  for  a  victim  of
abuse to remain undetected by any persistent abuser". He considers  that  in
a small country like  Jamaica,  relocating  to  so-called  "less  dangerous"
areas can actually increase the visibility of a target,  and  therefore  the
risk:

    "Ultimately, it should be understood that  violent  crime  in  Jamaica,
    while centred in urban areas like  the   KMA,  is  trans-geographic  in
    reach and effect".

92.  As  regards  the  appellant's  particular  circumstances,   Mr   Sobers
describes the One  Order  gang  as  "one  of  the  most  dangerous  criminal
organisations operating in Jamaica":

    "Like  many  criminal  gangs  in  Jamaica,  it  has   known   political
    connections in this instant with the Opposition (JLP).  The  One  Order
    gang operates out of Spanish Town (part of  the  KMA  located  in   St.
    Catherine), but it has also spread its criminal network  into  May  Pen
    (in the neighbouring parish of  Clarendon [he  cites  a  May  22,  2004
    article from Jamaica Gleaner].  The criminal networks in these types of
    communities, while cradled in political  tribalism, have resolved  into
    fairly autonomous groups deeply involved in violence, as well as  trade
    in illegal firearms and illicit drugs. The gang operates in the context
    of "garrison politics".

93. He considers that the appellant's fear that her life would be in  danger
has some objective basis having regard to the rate of  reprisal/gang-related
killings (which account for up to 50% of homicides in Jamaica). The  threats
to her are further amplified  because  she  is  female  and  therefore  more
vulnerable to violence in the context of prevailing attitudes in the  police
and in the community.

94. In the light of his view that internal relocation is  not  a  reasonable
option for most victims who are targeted by gangs, Mr Sobers states that:

    "I see no basis for supposing [the  appellant's]  relocation  to  other
    areas in Jamaica would ultimately  eliminate  a  well-founded  fear  of
    persecution by either a persistent abuser [her fear of F] or a criminal
    gang [F's associates and members of the rival gang who assaulted her]."

95. We turn to Mr Sobers' Supplemental Report dated October 31, 2006,  which
is primarily  intended  as  his  comment  on  the  recent  Tribunal  Country
Guidance case, JS.

96. Mr Sobers' report first take issue with JS's findings that the  Jamaican
state provides a reasonable level of  protection  to  its  citizens  and  is
achieving a "significant level of success" in  prosecuting  perpetrators  of
crimes (paragraph  72) and  that  there  is  a  "sea  change"  in  attitudes
(paragraph  73).  He states:

    "There are numerous examples of  citizens  contacting  the  police  and
    being left vulnerable either because of the  tardiness or complete lack
    of response they encounter".

 97. He then gives four examples, drawn from reports in the Jamaica  Gleaner
or Jamaica Observer dealing with non-response to a  rape  victim  (April  7,
2005), unreliability of the  "119"  emergency  phone  service  (February  6,
2006), lack of police response to provide security  for  a  St.  Catherine's
Parish  council  meeting  (January  5,  2006)  and  an  undated  account  by
"Economic commentator", Mr Earl Borthey about inadequacies  of  policing  in
his "small rural hamlet".  He cites a letter to the editor of  the  Jamaican
Gleaner for 28 October, 2006 "which,  in  my  opinion,  accurately  reflects
both the Jamaican public's experience of the  JCF  and  view  of  the  crime
situation".    Next  he  highlights   police   priority   being   given   to
investigating case where there is a specific suspect and police strategy  in
high crime areas being to focus more on containment than investigation.   He
goes on to doubt the utility of the crime statistics issued  by  the  police
for 2006:

    "The focus of comparing specific months and on comparing the 2006  date
    only with the corresponding period in  2005, does  not  allow  for  any
    useful analysis of the crime rate".


98. Whilst accepting that the number of murders for  Jan-Oct  2006  is  less
than obtained in 2005, he considers that 2005 was clearly  an  extraordinary
year in relation to murders  committed  and  that  the  general  pattern  of
murder in Jamaica  "remains  exceedingly  high".   He  also  criticised  the
figures for not including missing and unaccounted persons. He sees  no  sign
of an improvement in the police's  murder  clear  up  rate  and  doubts  the
reliability of the criteria used for "clear-up".

99. As regards the Witness Protection programme, Mr Sobers describes  it  as
"prosecution-driven" and although in the period 1995-2005 it  had  protected
just over 1000 witnesses, in the same period well over 11,500  murders  were
committed. He states that the programme  still  lacks  funding  and  suffers
from distrust as a result of allegations of interference by a  high  ranking
police officer. He says its limited utilisation in  the  past  suggests  its
limited availability.  Mr  Sobers  contrasts  government  claims  about  the
effectiveness of the  Witness  Protection  programme  with  an  undated  and
unsourced report of a family of a man murdered  before  giving  evidence  in
court who in April 2005 said he had chosen not to use the scheme because  it
would have meant going to  a  remote  place.  By  reference  to  a  Jamaican
Observer editorial from  August  and  September  2006,  he  highlighted  JCF
complaints that they have insufficient resources to do  their  job  and  the
imbalance between reported climes  and  actual  crimes.   He  describes  the
police successes, such as the Major Investigations Task force  for  Kingston
and St. Andrew and the Grant's Pen  community  policing  initiative,  as  in
danger of being undermined because of the shortage  of  resources.  Although
recognising that the Jamaican government has called  in  Scotland  Yard  and
the Royal Canadian Mounties Police (RCMP) in response to  public  outcry  at
select instances of possible extrajudicial killings by  the   JCF,  neither,
he says, have been asked to  investigate  corruption  in  the   JCF.   Other
agencies active in investigating police corruption  and  impunity  are  also
said to be woefully under-financed.

100. At paragraph 29 of his report Mr Sobers summarises matters as follows:

    "I  repeat  the   general   statement   that   underpins   my   opinion
    initiatives/announcements by the Jamaican government in relation to the
    control    of    crime     and     improvements     in     the     JCF.
    Announcements/initiatives by the Jamaican government do not reflect  'a
    sea change in attitudes'. More often than not, in the experience of the
    Jamaican public, implementation falls short".

101. The next report of Mr Sobers we have to consider  is  his  supplemental
report of 17 August 2006  which is largely devoted  to   commentary  on  the
Home Office April  2006 COI Report.

102. This report states that the JCF has adopted a number  of  controversial
positions on the publication of its crime statistics  during  2004/2005;  he
refers to concealment and obfuscation of data and also  inconsistent  dates.
He considers that whilst murder rates for 2006 are drawn  on  2005  figures,
there was no real improvement as compared with  2004.   The  overall  trend,
he says, is a steady increase.

103. Mr Sobers questions government claims to have dismantled  or  disrupted
criminal gangs. Whilst accepting that a number of  gang  leaders  have  been
killed or arrested or convicted, Mr Sobers considers the evidence  that  the
gangs themselves have been dismantled  less  certain.  In  communities  like
Spanish Town, rivalry between members of the  One  Order  and  Klansmen  has
increased since the death of former One Order gang leader in February  2006.
The earlier death of the Klansmen leader in October  2006  had  made  little
difference to the operation of the gangs, according to residents of  Spanish
Town interviewed on 1 December 2005.  He  then  chronicles  reports  in  the
local press during 2006 of incidents in Spanish Town on 30 March,  April  4,
9 April, 26 April, 5 May and 3 June. The situation, he writes,  is  mirrored
in Trench Town and South St. Andrew and "increasingly similar problems  have
been reported in the towns in rural parishes  (particularly  Montego  Bay)".
He writes:

    "In my opinion, the elimination  of  specific  gang  leaders,  while  a
    positive development, does not necessarily indicate the dismantling  of
    the gangs temporarily under their control. The information coming  from
    the police themselves suggests that gangs like the One Order are  still
    very much in operation. The social and political   contexts that led to
    the formation of these gangs has not changed, and arguably had worsened
    in many communities.
    ...
    These communities are significantly conditioned  by  garrison  politics
    [he cites the Kerr Report on Political Tribalism,  1997 and the  Report
    of National  Committee on Crime and  Violence,  October  2001]  and  an
    interconnected (and powerful) drug culture.  Jamaica's  elevated  crime
    levels generally owe a lot to the   foregoing  factors,  together  with
    others, such as  protracted economic hardships which have  denied  many
    citizens the opportunity to earn a livelihood or to have  a  meaningful
    existence.  In a relatively poor country, illicit income from the  drug
    trade and extortion (of business/the construction industry)  contribute
    substantially to the   'economics'  of  garrison  communities.  In  the
    Jamaica context the cocktail of violent crime,  garrisonism  and  these
    illicit activities is inordinately powerful."


104. Mr Sobers also comments on the April COI  report's  references  to  new
initiatives  for  crime  control.  These  have  not  led,  he   writes,   to
substantial reduction in crime levels and some announcements  and  proposals
go unimplemented i.e. to  increase  the   number  of  police  from  8,500  -
10,000, to make more resources available to the police and  to  bodies  with
responsibility  for  investigating  complaints  against   the   police.   He
concludes that:


    "[t]he chronic institutional weakness of the Jamaican police  force  and
   the contrasting strength of organised criminality in Jamaica points to  a
   balance of power that does not favour the Jamaican authorities."


105. He adds:

    "Criminal gangs narco/criminals in Jamaica continue to act with  almost
    complete impunity in inflicting (or threatening to inflict) 'reprisals'
    on young persons who  'offend' them. The infliction of reprisals may be
    permitted merely by a perception that the victims are a threat to their
    activities.


    The problems associated with organised crime are deeply  entrenched  in
    the Jamaican polity, and are unlikely  to  be  resolved  in  the  short
    term."


106. Mr Sobers then turns to the issue of risk to the appellant.  He  states
that he does not consider the appellant would be at risk because she had  in
the past been a rape victim. However, he thinks it "very possible  that  her
association with a One Order gang member  may  mean  that  she  is  seen  as
responsible for her gang rape".  Noting that the appellant was raped by  men
looking for F in connection with his shooting of one  of  their  associates,
he considers that she and her daughter are still at risk  "[t]o  the  extent
that [F] is still remembered and targeted by the gang members".  As well  as
risk from such gang members he considers she is also  likely  to  face  risk
from F, given his history of sexual and domestic violence to her.   He  also
states:

    "most importantly [she] will be labelled a  "deportee"  -  one  of  the
    thousands of Jamaicans returned from the UK, USA and Canada.  In  spite
    of the fact that many are  deported  for  immigration  violations,  the
    perception among nearly all Jamaicans is that  they  were  involved  in
    crime. Deportees face problems of discrimination and  ostracism;   most
    are unable to seek employment because of their status".

107. He cites in support of this statement the  Jamaica  Observer,  16  July
2006.

108. He does not consider the appellant would be eligible  for  the  Witness
Protection  programme, as on his interpretation it only covers  crimes  that
have occurred after 2001.  Even if that were not the case the fact that  the
rape incident occurred over  5  years  ago,  would  mean,  he  states,  that
prosecution would be unlikely.

109. In a letter dated 14 December 2006, Mr Sobers responds  to  a  question
about whether gang violence is confined to garrison communities. He writes:

    "Gang violence is not confined to garrison communities. At present, the
    crime situation in several areas of Montego Bay (St James), as well  as
    Mountain View, Red Hills Road (both in the KMA) is  deteriorating.  The
    places in question are in the inner-city  but  they  are  not  garrison
    communities as described in my previous report. As with organised crime
    everywhere, the casualties of gang violence are typically going  to  be
    those who are either directly or indirectly involved with the gang.  In
    that respect, gang violence is naturally going to be limited  to  areas
    where gangs do operate. However, gangs  operate  in  nearly  all  urban
    centres in Jamaica; and a place like Montego Bay  has  between  sixteen
    and eighteen operational gangs (according to the Minister  of  National
    Security - December 1, 2006). In effect, gang violence could be said to
    be "limited" to inner-city urban areas in Jamaica. That  suggests  that
    violence is a feature of every parish and of every centre of employment
    in the society."

Women's Media Watch opinion, 13 September 2006
110. Also submitted by the appellant's representatives was a "Statement"  on
the appellant's case written by Judith Wedderburn  of  Women's  Media  Watch
(WMW). As well as describing the  work  of  WMW,  her  statement  says  that
traditional  gender  ideologies  of  male  dominance  and   aggression   are
entrenched in institutions and practices throughout Jamaica.  Jamaica  being
a small society, people are likely to know about the  appellant's  case  and
the persons involved ("especially if the alleged offender and victim are  in
the same community, as is often the case". Women who have been  raped  often
face  being  ostracised  from  the  community.  She  is  then  "marked"   or
"labelled" and not able to integrate.  Apart  from  one  shelter  run  by  a
women's  non-government  organisation  (Women's  Crisis  Centex)  which   is
severely limited by lack of resources, there are no shelters or safe  places
to provide support and protection for  rape  victims.   There  is  a  strong
culture of revenge. Eliminating gang leaders has not led to the  dismantling
of gangs. The appellant stands a real chance of being  seen  as  a  "battery
doll" [target for gang rape] if she returns to Jamaica and may very well  be
targeted for further attacks. If the appellant returns she is not likely  to
qualify for witness protection. Ms Wedderburn quotes from a report  entitled
"Blood, Bullets and Bodies" by Imani Tafari-Ama stating that  research  data
shows a direct correlation between the ongoing turf  conflicts  between  men
and the material and gender  subordination  of  women  compounded  by  their
vulnerability to domestic and social violence and  sexual  abuse.  The  gang
rape of women is now another sinister aspect of the current spate  of  urban
conflicts.

The medical evidence
111. The immigration judge made no reference  to  or  any  findings  on  the
appellant's medical history.  However, it would appear she did  have  before
her at least one report,  from  Dr  Michael  Seear.  The  latter  is  not  a
qualified psychiatrist but is  a  medical  practitioner  with  a  particular
interest in psychotherapy. His first report says he examined  the  appellant
on 12 July 2005.  Some of his report (which details his  assessment  of  her
past experiences and  physical  and  mental  condition  in  the  context  of
assessing her credibility), is no longer relevant here, as  the  appellant's
credibility as to past events has now been accepted.  He  diagnoses  her  as
suffering from Post Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD)  and  Major  Depressive
Episode. He finds her significantly traumatised.  He considers that  if  she
is returned to Jamaica she will be at risk of rapid deterioration.  On  page
5 (A9) he notes:

    "she said that she wishes she were dead but does not think  of  suicide
    'because I love my daughter too much'."

112. Dr  Seear's next report is dated 11 April  2006. This  was  not  before
the immigration judge.  He found no  evidence  of  any  improvement  in  her
mental and emotional state since his first meeting with her. He repeats  his
opinion that if returned to Jamaica  she  would  be  likely  to  deteriorate
because of her fear of being there.

113. There is also before us a "Follow-up" report by Dr Michael Seear  dated
5 August 2006.  He considers she suffers from vulnerability, depression  and
distress. She has a sense of loathing and disgust in response  to  the  rude
and demeaning way Jamaican men speak to her. It is his view that her  return
to Jamaica could lead in the direction of self-harm:

    "She does not really take to psychiatry and a therapeutic approach that
    would help is ideally one of being in an appropriate environment and an
    environment which would assist  her  in  going  through  a  process  of
    spontaneous recovery. This occurs when a  PTSD patient feels  that  she
    is in a safe place and for her not be in the  UK  would  be  much  more
    favourable in terms of the  prognosis of her PTSD  than  if  she   were
    sent to Jamaica, where a fairly rapid  deterioration  would   be,  with
    respect, quite likely."

114. In an Addendum of 15 August  2006  Dr  Seear  reiterates  that  she  is
traumatised and depressed and that "[h]er case is  a  psychiatric  case,  in
view of her suicidal risk and severity of her  distress."  He  believes  she
should be under psychiatric supervision and  urges  that  she  discuss  that
with her GP.   He notes that the file of reports on  her  psychiatric  state
is  sizeable  "indicative  of  a  patient  with  a  considerable  burden  of
psychiatric problems".

Submissions
115. On the general issue of whether the Jamaican authorities were  able  to
afford a sufficiency of protection in particular from  gang  violence,  Miss
Brown urged us to take a similar view to that reached in JS.  Whilst in  the
past government initiatives had  had  little  or  no  effect,  the  evidence
indicated that there were significant improvements in respect of  the  major
crime rate, tackling crime and combating police corruption. As  regards  the
expert evidence of Mr Sobers, she asked us to bear in mind that he  had  not
been subject to cross-examination on any of his reports  by  the  UK  courts
and tribunals. On behalf of the respondent she now wished to  challenge  the
efficacy  of  his  reports  in  a  number  of  respects.  116.  His  use  of
statistics, she said, raised certain  doubts  about  his  methodology.    He
gave no basis for his view that the Witness Protection  programme,  although
it began in 1995, would not be available  in  respect  of  crimes  committed
before  2001.   Mr Sobers had been specifically asked to clarify the  nature
of his political and professional  relationship  with  his  mother,  Miss  Y
Sobers, whose reports had been criticised in JS.   He had failed to  do  so.
His reports showed a consistently negative approach to the Jamaican  police,
as illustrated by his refusal to acknowledge any  real  improvement  in  the
statistics dealing with major crimes  which  showed  a  reduction  over  the
2004-2006 period.   Despite Mr Sobers describing a serious  lack  of  public
confidence in the police, the evidence  showed  that  there  had  been  some
positive responses,  e.g. as a result of  Operation  Kingfish.   Despite  Mr
Sobers' negative view of the  Witness  Protection  programme,  the  evidence
was that over a ten year period no one had been "lost" to it.

117. As regards whether  the  Jamaican  authorities   were  able  to  afford
sufficient  protection  against  domestic  and  sexual  violence    directed
against  women, she urged us to find that the OGN conclusions  were  correct
on this issue and Mr  Sobers' "one- sided" treatment  did  not  establish  a
general insufficiency of protection for such women.

118. In relation to the issue of whether  there  was  a  Refugee  Convention
ground of particular social group (PSG) in this case, Miss  Brown  urged  us
not to go behind Senior Immigration Judge King's  preclusion  of  it.   Rule
45(4)(f) clearly gave the Tribunal power  to  remit  issues  and  the  point
raised by Miss Asanovich was not an obvious  one.   JS  had  considered  and
rejected the proposition that women in Jamaica were a  PSG.  Mr  Sobers'  21
August 2006 report had said that  no  particular  stigma  attached  to  rape
victims. She did not dispute that a  family  could  be  a  PSG  but  it  was
unlikely the appellant would be perceived as a member of F's family.

119. As regards the particular circumstances of  the  appellant's  case  and
her fear of persecution, Miss Brown urged us to  find  that  there  were  no
valid reasons for considering there would be a reoccurrence  of  attacks  on
her by gang members. There had never  been  any  suggestion,  prior  to  the
hearing before us, that the appellant would be perceived as responsible  for
the gang rape she suffered. It was strange that her evidence about  "marking
and shaming" had  never  been  put  forward  before  today.   The  appellant
appears to have been able to spend some considerable time, possibly as  long
as two years, in Jamaica without further  incident.    The  appellant's  new
evidence about F's very recent resurfacing was  too  convenient,  given  she
had heard nothing from him since 1999/2000.   In any event  there  had  been
no contact from  him,  nor  had  he  sought  contact.   There  would  be  no
constitutional reason for the gang members who attacked her in 1999/2000  to
target her further. It was not reasonably likely anyone would know what  had
happened to her (except  her  grandmother).   Even  if  the  appellant  were
considered to be at risk in her home area, she would have a viable  internal
relocation alternative.  She had had no problems in the area where  she  had
stayed in the house of a friend of her grandmother's. She had a  grandmother
and brother in a position to help her arrange alternative locations.  As  to
the medical evidence, it was clear, applying the principles set  out  in   J
[2005] EWCA Civ 629 that the medical evidence even taken at its highest  did
not show a real risk of  treatment  contrary  to  Article  3.    There  were
mental health facilities in Jamaica. As  regards  Article  8,  she  had  not
shown exceptional circumstances.

120. Our summary of Miss Asanovich's submission can be a little shorter,  as
considerable parts of  it  simply  reiterated  points  made  in  Mr  Sobers'
reports, which we have already  summarised  in  considerable  detail.   Miss
Asanovich submitted that in respect of the general issue of  sufficiency  of
protection, in particular against gang violence, it was  not  disputed  that
the Jamaican authorities showed willingness;  the  only  issue  was  whether
this  translated  into  ability.  As  regard  Mr   Sobers'   political   and
professional relationship with Miss Y Sobers, he has always  disclosed  that
she is his mother.  They are  collaborating  on  a  book  about  killing  of
civilians by police officers together. It was no secret  his  mother  had  a
cousin shot by the police in  2001.   The appellant did  not  rely  on  Miss
Sobers' evidence, only Mr Sobers'.   His credentials  should  be  considered
as beyond reproach.  He had been a human rights activist since 1998 and  was
involved with a number of Jamaican NGOs and  had  contributed  to  Jamaicans
for Justice work, which the  COI report gave as one of its sources.  He  had
been used as a consultant by the British High Commission and as  an  ad  hoc
adviser by Amnesty International. He provided legal assistance to a  diverse
range of agencies. He was not biased. His evidence had been accepted by  the
Court of Appeal in  Atkinson and by the Tribunal in DW, being  described  in
the latter at paragraph 43-46 as a  "distinguished  and  reputable  expert".
His reports for  this  case  showed  a  sound  methodology  and  a  balanced
approach. His reports, taken together with the most recent Home  Office  COI
Report for November 2006, showed that the conclusions  reached  in  JS  were
unsustainable.  He was perfectly correct to maintain that  the  murder  rate
was still extremely high and that the authorities  had  yet  to  deliver  on
their promises to address the failure in their protective  functions.  There
was  scant  evidence  of  any  real  action  being  taken   against   police
corruption.  it  was  clear  that  the  inner-city  areas  continued  to  be
dominated by a "garrison culture". The larger gangs are still  connected  to
the major political parties. It was important  to  note  that  the  evidence
showed that narco-criminal gangs operated  with  almost  complete  impunity.
32% of  all  homicides were now gang-based.

121. There was not enough money and resources for the police  to  carry  out
thorough government initiatives.  The agencies set up to  handle  complaints
were  under-funded.  Mr  Sobers'  criticisms  of  the   Witness   Protection
Programme were well supported.

122. In relation to the position of women who were victims of  violence,  it
was important to have regard to the recent evidence submitted  from  Women's
Media Watch (WMW).

123. As to the issue of whether there was Refugee Convention reason, it  was
Robinson obvious in the light of the House of  Lords  clarification  of  the
law in K and Fornah [2006] UKHL 46 both for the Tribunal to  reconsider  the
issue and for it find that the appellant had two separate  bases  for  being
treated as a member of  a PSG: one,  by  virtue  of  being  a  women  (or  a
subgroup comprised of women raped in reprisal actions  by  criminal  gangs),
and two, by virtue of being a member of a family whose principal member,  F,
faced violent reprisal by rival  gang  members.

124. As regards the appellant's suicide risk, she had twice (once in  court,
once to her barrister), expressed a suicide intention seeing it as a way  of
her daughter not suffering a similar fate.  Dr Seear's views were  based  on
having seen the appellant on four occasions.

125. As regards internal relocation, there was evidence that criminal  gangs
were mobile and the population and size of Jamaica was relatively small.

 126. In the appellant's case the period she spent in the rural  area  where
her grandmother's friend lived should be seen as only "several months",  not
two years. When at the home of her grandmother's friend  she  had  not  left
the house. The appellant's fears were of the  One  Order  gang  and  of  the
police. Whilst it was not intended to encroach on  the  immigration  judge's
findings of fact, the  appellant's  recent  mention  of  being  "marked  and
shamed" by her rapists was  a proper response to questions  prompted  by  Mr
Sobers' most recent reports, which the Tribunal  had  asked  for.  When  she
said she was marked, that was in relation to her  own  experiences  and  her
subjective view was objectively sustainable in  the  light  of  the  Amnesty
International  and the WMW reports and in particular the latter's  reference
to "battery dolls".

Our Assessment
127. Inevitably in the context of the evidence in this case we have  largely
to focus on the reports of Mr Sobers. That  is  not  to  say  that  we  have
ignored the summaries  we  have  before  us  of  other  expert  reports  (as
produced in the Court of Appeal case of A, for example), some of which  have
expressed similar views to his, but we take the  great  reliance  placed  by
representatives on reports from him (both in  previous  cases  and  in  this
case) to reflect the belief that his embody the  strongest  expert  evidence
in support of their arguments.  The efforts on the part of  the  appellant's
representatives to obtain up-to-date expert evidence  has  focussed  largely
on Mr  Sobers.  It  is  appropriate,  therefore,  that  we  begin  with  our
evaluation of his evidence. Mr Sobers'  expertise  on  matters  to  do  with
Jamaican society and politics and in particular its criminal justice  system
is considerable.  He  has  been  described  as  a  distinguished  expert  in
important cases before the Court of Appeal and the Tribunal.

128. There are many excellent qualities manifested by his  various  reports.
It most respects he seeks to base his  observations  on  a  wide  spread  of
sources, ranging from major country reports (US  State  Department  reports)
to reports produced by Jamaican government and  non-governmental  bodies  as
well as reports in the Jamaican press. To some extent this  does  result  in
some overlap since when we  read  reports  from  Amnesty  International  and
Jamaicans for Justice, for example, we  have  to  bear  in  mind  that  they
themselves  derive  their  views  in  part  from  his  ad  hoc  advice   and
contributions. He properly  exercises  caution  when  evaluating  the  press
releases  from  the  government-run   Jamaican   Information   Service   and
statements from ministers and senior policemen. He draws  on  his  own  wide
experience as a human rights campaigner  in  Jamaica.  We  are  disappointed
that Mr Sobers' eschewed comments requested by us designed  to  clarify  his
professional relationship with his mother Ms Yvonne  Sobers  (whose  reports
were  criticised  in  JS  and  specific  concern  was  expressed  about  her
leadership of an NGO called "Families Against State  Terrorism").  It  would
appear he has been closely involved with her in  research-related  projects,
in particular in co-writing a book dealing with police killings in  Jamaica;
we note he has also assisted Families  Against  State  Terrorism  by  giving
voluntary legal advice. However, we do not consider that we should  take  an
adverse view of his apparent close involvement with her. Nor do we  see  any
basis for assuming anti-police bias on his part on the basis  (suggested  by
Ms Brown) that his mother had a cousin killed by the police or that  he  and
his mother are co-writing a book about police killings of civilians. So  far
as we are concerned, he is to be taken  as  an  expert  doing  his  best  to
perform his duty to the court.

129. It remains however that we have to examine his reports in  the  context
of the evidence which is before us.  Furthermore, in contrast to the  higher
courts in the aforementioned  cases(and  the  Tribunal  in  DW),  where  his
evidence was unchallenged, we have to address the challenges now raised.

130. It is also important to emphasise, at the  outset,  that  our  task  is
different from that of Mr Sobers.   We have to assess the evidence so as  to
decide whether the appellant has shown that  her  removal  would  place  the
United  Kingdom  in  violation  of  its  obligations   under   the   Refugee
Convention, the EU Qualification Directive or the Human  Rights  Convention.
   We emphasise this point because it seems to us  that  in  large  part  Mr
Sobers' assessment of the key issues depend on  different,  less  stringent,
criteria.   To give one illustration, Mr Sobers  is  adamant  that  internal
relocation, in order to avoid risk of targeting  criminal  gangs,  would  be
unreasonable because, inter alia, Jamaica does not  have  a  social  welfare
system. That may well be the case, but as clarified by the  House  of  Lords
in Januzi, unreasonableness or undue hardship under the  Refugee  Convention
as well as under Article 3 of the ECHR can only   be shown if there  is,  in
the particular circumstances of the individual's case,  a  real  risk  of  a
violation of a basic non-derogable human right:  see Januzi [2006] UKHL.  Mr
Sobers is not to be criticised for the fact that does not always  adopt  and
apply the same criteria: he is not and does not purport to be an  expert  in
asylum or asylum-related human rights law. But it is an important  point  of
distinction we have to keep in mind.

131. Separately, however, there are certain respects in  which  we  find  Mr
Sobers' reports deficient. It is unfortunate that he was not able to  attend
the hearing as requested and in that way for us  to  see  how  his  evidence
stood up to cross-examination - although we appreciate there may  well  have
been very good reasons to do with travel, commitments and finances. We  must
make do with his written reports.  Whilst  he  cautions  against  uncritical
acceptance of government and police sources (e.g. The  Jamaican  Information
Service) he does not always exercise the  same  caution  when  it  comes  to
reliance  on  press  reports  and  anecdotal  evidence  or  on  reports   by
campaigning organisations such as Jamaicans for Justice  which  are  written
in an iconoclastic style. It also worries us that for many of his  arguments
reliance is placed wholly or mainly on anecdotal evidence  in  the  form  of
press reports. We note that Mr Sobers' past employments include  working  as
a columnist on the Jamaica Observer Ltd's Sunday Observer for two years.  We
have no examples of the style of his work in that capacity,  but  if  it  is
journalistic that would be  entirely  appropriate.  But  when  it  comes  to
writing expert reports, we would have expected greater effort  on  his  part
to rely less heavily on references to  press  reports  detailing  individual
incidents and greater appreciation of the fact that the  Jamaica  press  may
not always be balanced and impartial. His use of press reports  is  also  at
times unbalanced. When it suits his viewpoint he  is  happy  to  cite  press
cuttings with unqualified approval (e.g. reports  stating  that  the  police
are failing in their fight against  crime),  yet  when  they  contain  items
which  do  not   support   his   viewpoint   (e.g.   the   Jamaica   Gleaner
acknowledgement of  the  successes  of  Operation  Kingfish  which  appeared
before Mr Sobers' last letter) he appears to  accord  them  no  weight.  Too
often it is impossible  to  tell  whether  the  incidents  he  mentions  are
intended as a small  sample  (in  which  case  one  would  expect  at  least
reference to where  the  reader  can  find  fuller  data)  or  near-complete
coverage of incidents: for example when giving his response  to  JS  in  his
October 31, 2006 Supplemental Report, he states  that  there  are  "numerous
examples of citizens contacting  the  police   and  "being  left  vulnerable
either  because  of  the  tardiness  or  complete  lack  of  response   they
encounter". Yet the examples he then gives are limited to four.

132. Whilst   Mr  Sobers'  reports  mostly  seek  to  present  all  relevant
evidence on the issue with which we are concerned, we do consider there  are
several aspects which reduce somewhat the weight we are able to  give  them.
Miss Brown contended that he  consistently  approached  the  evidence  about
crime and violence in Jamaica from a fixed negative stand point. We  do  not
agree with that criticism in full: in particular we think that for  in  many
respects (albeit not all)  his reports take pains to identify all  available
evidence, even items which on their  face  do  not  support  his  viewpoint.
However, we  think  his  opinions  on  certain  issues  do  betray  a  fixed
viewpoint.   For example, his  reports written during the   2004-March  2006
period attribute the failure of the  Jamaican police to  effectively  combat
rising crime, to, inter alia, a reactive  militaristic  approach  (which  he
contrast with an "intelligence-led" approach  and a lack of  training).  His
March 2006 report states that the  government  "has  invested  far  more  in
militaristic solutions than intelligence driven solutions".    Yet,  as  his
last two reports record, and as the latest  COI  report  for  November  2006
indicates, the police have taken  significant  steps  to  introduce  a  more
intelligence-led  approach,  to  deploy  more  community  policing  and   to
introduce police training.  Operation Kingfish, still ongoing,  is  a  major
example of this intelligence-led approach and  has  plainly  resulted  in  a
number of significant arrests and detentions. The HRT Research  item  of  16
June 2005 submitted by the  appellant's  representatives  records  both  the
Jamaica Observer and the Jamaica  Gleaner  as  reporting  national  security
minister Phillips saying  that  so  far  Operation  Kingfish  had  cost  the
country $50 million and that financial  assistance  from  overseas  partners
for personnel, equipment and training  and  intelligence  was  estimated  as
amounting to approximately $150  million.  By  any  standards  thee  figures
suggest substantial investment in intelligence-driven solutions.

133. Mr Sobers also makes much in his most recent reports of the failure  by
the government to increase the number of police  from  8,500  to  10,000  as
they announced they would; yet it is clear from earlier reports he  produced
for the Court of Appeal cases that the police have been given new  resources
from time to time  and  he  has  produced  no  evidence  to  show  that  the
government has reneged on its  intention  and  efforts  to  increase  police
numbers. Given the financial assistance provided  by  overseas  governments,
including the UK to help the government tackle crime,  it  is  odd  that  he
should attach significant weight to such a contingent point of fact.  It  is
not at all clear to  us  that  Mr  Sobers  ever  recognises  that,  even  if
problems of effectiveness remain, the character of policing in  Jamaica  has
changed  and  that  the  police  are  no  longer  accurately  described   as
institutionally "extremely" militaristic and reactive in approach: see  e.g.
his March 2006 Report. This brings us back to our concern about  Mr  Sobers'
reports appearing to reflect a fixed viewpoint.

134. A similar difficulty afflicts Mr Sobers'  analysis  of  Jamaican  crime
statistics. Whilst we think he is right to emphasise that crime  figures  in
the last 5 years are considerably higher than in the previous  5  years,  we
do not accept that he is right to insist that the latest  figures  represent
no real improvement because 2005 (when the crimes figures  soared  to  their
highest ever) was "an extraordinary year".  As  Ms  Brown  correctly  noted,
even disregarding 2005, there was a reduction in the serious crime  rate  in
2006 as compared with 2004. Whilst we see some force  in  his  criticism  of
the Tribunal in JS for describing recent  developments  in  Jamaica's  fight
against crime as a "sea-change", equally it seems to us he is  too  dogmatic
in characterising any reduction in the crime rate as meaningless.

135. We also find that his reports sometimes show  a  lack  of  perspective.
For instance, a persistent theme of his  reports  is  that  the  culture  of
"garrisonism" is  not  confined  to  the  garrison  communities  within  the
Kingston Metropolitan Area (KMA), but is island-wide and that criminal  gang
violence has become "trans-geographic in reach and effect".  Yet on his  own
figures, the crime statistics for areas outside the KMA  are  extremely  low
by comparison (the KMA accounts for 80% of serious crimes).  In  his  letter
of December 14 he reminds us that:

     "[a]s with organised crime everywhere, the casualties of gang violence
    are typically going to be those who are either directly or indirectly
    involving with the gang. In that respect, gang violence is naturally
    going to be limited to areas where gangs do operate".

136. Moreover, although he does refer in all  his  reports  to  gangs  being
able to operate island wide and to have networks, he fails to refer  to  any
evidence showing that outside inner city areas they have achieved  any  kind
of hold over local communities or imperilled basic law and order. He  refers
to some individual examples of gangs operating outside  their  "turfs",  but
is unable to give any  empirical  evidence  to  show  that  such  activities
amount to a consistent pattern. This is not in our view a  trifling  matter.
What he has asserted in his reports  for  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  A  for
example is in general terms.  Gang  leaders  were  said  to  have  developed
networks throughout the island. His opinion on this point was  clearly  seen
as very significant to the Court of Appeal thinking in A.  It  also  appears
to have influenced the assessments made by local and international  NGOs  on
this same issue. It is an opinion he has been expressing  for  a  number  of
years. Yet when his reports for the A case and  other  cases  are  examined,
nowhere is there any attempt to substantiate this opinion  by  reference  to
crime statistics  relating  to  non-KMA  areas  or  by  reference  to  other
research-based sources. All  we  appear  to  have  are  a  small  number  of
individual incidents (and isolated references such as that to the number  of
gangs in Montego Bay being 16-18). There are  it  is  true  similar  general
statements found in some of the established reports, but on the face of  the
evidence, it seems to us to be a classic example of what COI analysts  refer
to as "roundtripping": one source  repeating  another  source  who  in  turn
repeats the same source - which at the end of the trail  relies  on  just  a
small number of incidents.

137. We find Mr Sobers' latest opinions, as expressed in his  letter  of  14
December 2006 particularly revealing of his method of reasoning.  In  it  he
seeks to refute the suggestion that gang violence is  confined  to  garrison
communities. He explains that gangs operate in nearly all urban  centres  in
Jamaica by instancing the Montego Bay area which has, he says,  between  16-
18 operational gangs. He concludes: "In effect, gang violence could be  said
to be 'limited' to inner-city urban areas  in  Jamaica.  That  suggests,  he
says,  that" violence is a feature of every parish and of  every  centre  of
employment in the society". Yet in support of his conclusion that gangs  are
to be found not just within the garrison communities but  in  every  parish,
he cites just one example outside the KMA: Montego Bay. The reader  is  left
in the dark as to what evidence there is regarding  gang  activity  and  its
scale in all the other inner city areas outside the  KMA  and  Montego  Bay.
Nowhere does he acknowledge either that on his own analysis here gangs  have
no significant presence in the non-inner city urban areas  or  rural  areas.
We find it very difficult to reconcile what he says here with  what  he  has
consistently stated in his earlier reports about gangs having "migrated"  or
having an organised presence island-wide.


138. We also discern lack of perspective in Mr Sobers'  frequent  references
to criminal gangs being able to operate  islandwide  with  "almost  complete
impunity". Nowhere does Mr Sobers explain how such a claim  can  be  squared
with the evidence, which he  himself  notes,  that  the  Witness  Protection
programme, since 1995 has been able to protect 1,000 persons without  losing
anyone. Potentially that means criminal gangs have not been able to  operate
with complete impunity in some 1,000  cases.  Even  if  we  take  the  lower
figure found elsewhere in the background evidence  (e.g.  the  Jamaican  FCO
figure of 400 since 1997) and even if we entirely accept  that  the  Witness
Protection programme has sometimes not  been  made  available,  that  is  an
extremely significant number of people.

139. We consider that at best the evidence he  presents  only  supports  the
view than organised criminal gangs have a dominant presence within  garrison
communities and a significant presence in other urban centres and  that  the
larger gangs are sometimes able to carry out reprisals  throughout  Jamaica.



140. A related  lack  of  perspective  accompanies  his  references  to  the
conflict in Jamaica between the government and police on the  one  hand  and
the organised criminal gangs on the other as demonstrating an  "asymmetrical
balance of power" with gangs having  the  upper  hand.   On  its  face  this
phraseology blurs important distinctions.  Plainly,  even  if  the  conflict
between the authorities of Jamaica on the one hand  and  organised  criminal
gangs on the other is of this  nature  in  some  inner  city  areas  of  the
capital which are garrison communities, it is  not  the  case  that  outside
those areas these gangs have any significant power  base  or  represent  any
significant countervailing force to that of the government. Even in  Montego
Bay he does not suggest that that  is  the  case.  Further,  even  confining
focus to the capital as a whole, it is  still  plainly  not  the  case  that
organised criminal gangs are vying with  the  authorities  for  control:  at
most they exercise or vie for control only in certain  (garrison  community)
areas.  That is not to say that in other areas of the  city  crimes  do  not
occur or criminal gangs do not carry  out  crimes  or  that  criminal  gangs
cannot from time to time stage operations disruptive  of  the  life  of  the
capital city generally; but to suggest  as  Mr  Sobers'  reports  do,  that,
there exists any   kind of balance of Jamaican-wide - or even just Kingston-
wide  -  power in favour of criminal gangs is simply not borne  out  by  the
evidence he himself relies on.

Sufficiency of protection
141. When analysing the issue of sufficiency of protection it is  imperative
to bear in mind that in general if a person cannot establish a real risk  of
serious  harm,  the  question  of  whether  there  is   a   sufficiency   or
insufficiency of protection against that harm does not arise:  see  Horvath.
As emphasised by the Court of Appeal and House of  Lords  in  Bagdanavicius,
there will often be an evidential overlap between the two issues, but it  is
nonetheless valid to recognise that they are two separate analytical steps.

142. We took care earlier to set out the main  propositions  established  by
leading cases because we think  they  highlight  several  points  which  are
important for disposal of this appeal.

143. First, in  asylum-related  appeals,  statements  about  sufficiency  of
protection are not statements about whether protection  can  be  universally
provided - i.e. to  all  citizens  without  exception.  As  the  wording  of
regulation  4  of  the  Protection  Regulations  (and  Article  7   of   the
Qualification Directive) denotes, they are about the  system  of  protection
and whether under  that  system  protection  can  "generally"  be  provided.
Second, the test  of  protection  is  a  practical  one.  For  there  to  be
effective  protection  it  is  not  necessary  that  there  be  an  absolute
guarantee of protection; effective protection does not mean the  elimination
of all risk. Third, the test is one  which  focuses  on  whether  protection
within the  state  is  factually  available:  protection  can  be  generally
afforded without any restriction on the type or form of  protection  or  its
sources, save for the requirement of an effective legal system.  Whilst,  as
the wording of regulation 4 underlines,  for  there  to  be  an  ability  to
protect there is a  requirement  that  there  must  be  an  effective  legal
system, there is not a requirement that serious crime levels  most  be  kept
within a specified level. With record-high crime  levels  being  a  frequent
feature of many leading democratic states, it would  be  surprising  if  the
ability of the authorities to  protect  in  such  states  were  seen  to  be
disproved simply by reference to soaring crime  figures.  Further,  although
requiring deterrence (the detection,  prosecution  and  punishment  of  acts
constituting  persecution  or  serious  harm)  the  test  does  not  confine
protection afforded by the legal system to the system of criminal law:  That
is important because, as Sedley and Arden LJs observe, civil laws (e.g. non-
molestation  injunctions)  can  play  a  part  in  the  overall  system   of
protection.  Each of these observations is important to bear in mind in  the
Jamaican  context.  Fourth,  as  noted  by  Auld  LJ  at  paragraph   6   of
Bagdanavicius:

    "Notwithstanding  systemic  sufficiency  of  state  protection  in  the
    receiving state, a claimant may  still  have  a  well-founded  fear  of
    persecution if he can show that the authorities know or ought  to  know
    circumstances particular to his case giving rise to his fear,  but  are
    unlikely  to  provide  the   additional   protection   his   particular
    circumstances reasonably require; Osman."

144. In Dhima, Auld J (as he  then  was)  made  much  the  same  point  when
stating:

    "...what is critical is a combination of a willingness and  ability  to
    provide protection to the level that can reasonably be expected to meet
    and overcome the real risk of  harm  from  non-state  agents.  What  is
    reasonable protection in any case depends, therefore, on the  level  of
    the risk,  without  that  protection  for  which  it  has  to  provide"
    (emphasis added).

145. Does the above summary  of  relevant  legal  principles  assist  us  in
assessing the two issues of sufficiency of protection in Jamaica in  general
and the issue of sufficiency of protection for specific classes  of  persons
facing a real risk of serious harm  from  criminal  gangs  (e.g.  informers,
homosexuals, female victims of domestic  violence)?   We  consider  that  it
does.

146. We do not find that the factual nature of the  test  of  protection  is
one which Mr Sobers properly factors in to his assessment  of  effectiveness
of protection. He places much emphasis on the fact  that  the  police  being
under-strength and under-resourced means that in Jamaica there is a  general
insufficiency of protection.  On his own account, as contained in his  March
2006 report, the number of employees  in  Jamaica  working  in  the  private
security industry is double that of  the  police  force  (said  to  be  some
8,500).  He justifiably makes the point that  the  private  security  sector
essentially serves corporate interests and the rich and  powerful  and  does
not assist ordinary Jamaicans, at least those who are poor. Be  that  as  it
may, however, it cannot  justifiably  be  said  that  the  private  security
sector plays no significant role in bolstering the overall  ability  of  the
state to protect its citizenry, enabling, for example, police  resources  to
be less stretched than they  otherwise  would.   Yet  Mr  Sobers'  exclusive
focus on the protective role of the police  overlooks  that.  Similarly,  in
the context of considering the problem  of  domestic  violence  directed  at
women, whilst Mr Sobers carefully notes the role of the  civil  law  in  the
working of the domestic violence legislation, it is not clear to us that  he
takes adequate account of that when assessing  the  vulnerability  of  women
from domestic violence.

147. Mr Sobers considers that lack of protection by the  Jamaican  state  of
its citizens is demonstrated by its inability to contain a gradual  rise  in
the serious crime figures.   From  his  reports  and  other  sources  it  is
incontrovertible that Jamaica has  a  very  serious  problem  with  criminal
gangs. And it is clearly not a  purely  domestic  problem,  since  there  is
strong evidence of the involvement of international syndicates  involved  in
drug running and gun running. However, as  already  emphasised,  we  do  not
consider that the state of the serious crime figures can be taken as a  sole
indicator of  whether  Jamaica  affords  sufficient  protection  within  the
meaning of the Refugee  Convention  (see  regulation  4  of  the  Protection
Regulations).   It seems to us that a range  of  other  facts  must  play  a
part, including other  social,  political  and  economic  indicators.   That
again is of some importance in the Jamaican context because the evidence  we
have suggests that in political and  socio-economic  terms  Jamaica  is  far
from being considered a country in crisis or failing to  perform  the  basic
functions  of  a  state.    The  COI  Report  for  November  2006  describes
Jamaica's  political  system  as  stable.  Despite  the  problems  described
concerning ("symbiotic") involvement  of  some  members  of  the  two  major
political parties with organised crime, there is no suggestion that  Jamaica
is not a functioning parliamentary democracy. Although it is  said  to  have
unemployment at a rate or  15.5%,  rampant  underdevelopment,  growing  debt
and high interest rates, it is not seriously suggested that  these  problems
are as bad as they are in a good number  of  other  third  world  economies.
None of the above is intended to belittle the size of the political,  social
and economic problems that beset current-day  Jamaica.   But it is  intended
to highlight the point that although on  serious  crime  indicators  Jamaica
performs extremely badly, this is not matched by its  performance  in  terms
of other relevant indicators.  Not to have regard to a range  of  indicators
is to fail to consider the issue of sufficiency  of  protection  in  Jamaica
the round.

148. Even confining ourselves to the effectiveness of the  criminal  justice
system, we return to the point we made earlier when giving our views  on  Mr
Sobers' reports:  even  if  criminal  gangs  have  the  ability  to  operate
countrywide, the evidence clearly indicates  that  it  is  only  inside  the
garrison communities in the KMA, that the gangs pose a major threat  to  law
and order. As the Bertelsmann Transformation Index (BTI), a  global  ranking
that analysis and evaluates development and transformation in 199  different
countries, noted in its 2006 Report, only twelve out of sixty  of  Jamaica's
constituencies were clarified as garrison  communities  to  varying  degrees
and except in these constituencies "[t]he state's monopoly  on  the  use  of
force in Jamaica is widely secured" (emphasis added).

149. Another factor which Mr Sobers places  considerable  emphasis  upon  in
support of his view that the Jamaican state does  not  sufficiently  protect
its citizenry is the extent of  police  misconduct  and  corruption  in  the
police force. Once again we can straightaway  accept  that  police  impunity
and corruption are serious problems. However whilst the figures for the  use
of lethal force by the  police  are  alarming  (180  deaths  in  2005),  the
evidence appears to indicate that a very significant number  of  those  took
place in the context of police  operations  against  organised  crime  gangs
within  these  garrison  communities.  It  is  not  suggested  that  it   is
considered a major problem outside these communities. So far  as  corruption
generally is concerned, Transparency International's Corruption  Perceptions
Index (CPI) 2005 recorded Jamaica's CPI score as 3.6. The CPI Score  relates
to perceptions of the degrees of corruption as seen by business  people  and
country analysts  and  ranges  between  10  (highly  clean)  and  O  (highly
corrupt) (see COI Report, 18.03).   Jamaica's score is  not  in  the  highly
corrupt range. Moreover, even Mr Sobers' own references taken as a whole  do
not suggest that the range of anti-corruption initiatives  relating  to  the
police have  simply  been  window-dressing.  In  the  light  of  the  latest
evidence,  e.g.  that  for  2006,  forty-three  police  officers  have  been
arrested on charges of misconduct,  with  one  conviction  and  forty  cases
currently before the courts. Taken as a whole we  find  that  the  most  the
evidence shows is that, despite  significant  efforts,  the  government  and
police are not doing well in overcoming the corruption problem.

150. In short, the evidence does not bear out  Mr  Sobers'  contention  that
there is Jamaica a  general  insufficiency  of  state  protection.  On  this
matter we reconfirm the guidance given in JS.

Protection against criminal gang violence
151. We turn to consider whether, even though generally willing and able  to
protect its citizenry, the Jamaican  authorities  can  protect  persons  who
face a real risk of persecution or serious harm  or  treatment  contrary  to
Article 3 of the ECHR in  the  form  of  targeting  by  criminal  gangs.  Mr
Sobers' reports say they cannot.

152. So far as persons facing such targeting who live  within  the  garrison
communities to be found  in  the  KMA,  we  think  the  evidence  Mr  Sobers
presents, and that contained in the background  materials,  is  strong.  The
resources that criminal gangs can draw  on in order to  carry  out  violence
on their own turf on in other gang-controlled areas is well- illustrated  by
the  2005 US State Department  Report  which  referred  to  the  "well-armed
gangs"  trafficking in narcotics and  guns  "control[ing]  many  inner  city
communities".   Such gangs are said to be "often ...  equipped  better  than
the police force and [to  have]  conducted  coordinated  ambushes  of  joint
security  patrols"  (COI,   8.08).  Within  the  garrison  communities  gang
leaders (sometimes in alliance with local party leaders) can often act  with
impunity, although they have to vie for power  with  other  "dons"  or  gang
leaders.  Whilst  the  authorities  through  Operation  Kingfish  and  other
initiatives appear able to disrupt these gangs, the evidence does  not  show
that they have dismantled them: within these areas the gangs  appear  to  be
still largely in control.

153. As far as the ability of these gangs to  operate  outside  the  KMA  is
concerned, however, the evidence is far  from  being  one-way.  There  is  a
considerable section of the evidence  indicating  that  the  major  criminal
gangs, even though they lack a power base outside their  own  "turf"  areas,
do have the wherewithal to carry out revenge attacks  or  reprisal  killings
against  persons  whom  they  have  a  serious  and  specific  interest   in
targeting. Counterposing that, however, is very strong  evidence  indicating
that they have failed to get their way in respect of  anyone  who  has  been
admitted into the state's Witness Protection programme.  The  contrast  with
well-known historical examples of criminal gangs in the past  century,  e.g.
the Mafia in the United States, who for several  decades  in  the  twentieth
century at  least  were  on  a  significant  number  of  occasions  able  to
"eliminate" or otherwise harm witnesses,  is  striking.  In  our  view  this
evidence shows that the Jamaican state has both the willingness and  ability
to protect in cases where  persons  will  be  admitted  into  their  Witness
Protection programme. We acknowledge that this programme  has  shortcomings,
for example, lack of resources and a lack of coverage of all those  involved
in criminal trials as  witnesses.  However,  its  record  so  far  is  still
extremely impressive.

154. (In our view this evidence also casts  considerable  doubt  on  whether
informers as a class can be seen as unable to receive effective  protection.
If they are able in significant numbers to enter  this  programme,  then  it
would appear in broad terms that their protection can be  secured.  However,
we lack evidence on this and the precise issue of protection  for  informers
is not raised by the particular facts of this case.)

155. Nevertheless, we recognise that  apart  from  the  safety-net  of  this
programme, there does appear to be a protection gap.  For  persons  targeted
by gangs who are not reasonably likely to be admitted into  this  programme,
we think the evidence adduced by Mr Sobers and  others  strongly  points  to
them not being able to secure protection from the  authorities  through  the
range of normal protective  functions  carried  out  by  the  authorities  -
unless they can internally relocate without being at real risk of  detection
by their persecutors.

156. This brings us to Mr Sobers' views on internal relocation.

Internal relocation
157. The language of Mr Sobers' reports does not appear to wholly  rule  out
that internal relocation may be an available  option  for  some  individuals
(e.g. those  with  wealth,  see  e.g.  paragraph   134  of  his  March  2006
Report). However  for  the  most  part  he  dismisses  it  in  view  of  the
following: the fact that Jamaica is a relatively small  island;  that  there
is a reasonably well developed  network  of  roads  and  telecommunications;
that persons relocating will be seen as stranger who  stand  out;  and  that
there is a lack of a social welfare safety net. Some of these factors go  to
the  issue  of  continuing  risk  of  persecution,  some  to  the  issue  of
reasonableness.

158. As regards the  former,  Mr  Sobers  considers  that  the  first  three
factors mean that it would be  extremely  difficult  for  a  person  who  is
targeted by a gang or a "persistent abuser" to remain undetected. We do  not
consider that this view is borne out by the evidence. Whilst  that  evidence
does bear out that the criminal gangs, at least the  major  ones,  are  well
organised and have considerable resources as well as networks, these  appear
to be very largely concentrated within their own areas  or  "turfs".   There
is nothing at all to suggest that they keep records or have  any  system  of
information-storing or information-sharing beyond ad hoc discussions. It  is
important also to bear in mind that criminal gangs cannot be  considered  as
some kind of collective monolith,  because we are told that  much  of  their
time is spent fighting each other for control of the markets in drugs,  guns
and prostitution. Even assuming that in every  part  of  Jamaica  there  are
persons who have connections with or work for organised gangs, the  evidence
does not show that such persons are generally familiar with or know who  the
sought enemies of these gangs are.  In our view it is not reasonably  likely
they would be told to look out  for  specific  individuals  except  in  high
profile cases. Further it is clear in our view that the day-to-day world  of
criminal gangs is constantly changing with those involved in gangs  reacting
to opportunities and events taking place around them.

159. We do not consider  that  the  evidence  even  establishes  that  where
criminal gangs have particular enemies whom  they  mark  out  for  reprisal,
they are generally able to track them down and carry out their  revenge.  We
revert here to the facts and figures we have about  the  Witness  Protection
programme. On Mr Sobers' own figures, some 1,000 people have  been  assisted
by this programme since 1995 and he does not dispute the government's  claim
that no one has been "lost" to the programme.  It is  noted  that  sometimes
those who go  into  the  programme  are  placed  abroad,  but  this  is  not
described as the norm.  Not only are these facts indicative  that  witnesses
can be protected, but it also suggests that a significant number of  persons
at risk of reprisals have been able  to  relocate  within  Jamaica,  without
being detected or at least subject to reprisal.

160. Mr Sobers places emphasis upon persons who move  into  communities  for
the first time being  seen  as  strangers  and  standing  out.  The  Amnesty
International  reports  have  emphasised  that  the  range  of  factors   of
relevance would be whether persons would be identified  as  JLP  or  PNP  by
reference to their home  area.  However,  even  if  these  observations  are
correct, we do not find that such visibility is reasonably likely to  result
in their identity and whereabouts being relayed back to  criminal  gangs  in
any organised way. There is simply no evidence to suggest the  existence  of
infrastructures of this type.

 161. We accept Mr Sobers' evidence  about  Jamaica's  developed  system  of
transport networks and telecommunications and the fact  that  Jamaica  is  a
relatively small country. At the same time, its size  is  not  significantly
different from  a number of countries where UNHCR and  national  courts  and
Tribunals have accepted that internal relocation  may in at  least  a  range
of cases be viable (e.g. Kosovo, which has an area of 5,000  square  miles).
Significant parts of Jamaica are known as  "the country"  and  are  markedly
rural.

162. We accept that the considerations which Mr Sobers highlights  are  very
relevant factors when examining the viability of internal relocation in  any
particular case, but so too, in our  view,  must  be  the  question  of  the
accessibility  to  any  particular  individual  of  the  Witness  Protection
programme. It seems to us that it will be very important in  Jamaican  cases
concerned with protection against a real risk of serious harm from  criminal
gangs, to first of all  analyse whether the  individual  concerned  will  be
able to receive assistance from this programme. Assuming  it  is  decided  a
person on return will be admitted into  this  Programme,  then  we  consider
that the evidence overwhelmingly indicates that they will  thereby  be  able
to avoid any real risk of detection: we remind ourselves  that  no  one  has
been "lost" to the programme so far. So  far  as  the  likely  economic  and
social conditions faced by those within the  Programme,  whilst  we  do  not
rule out that unusual individual circumstances may make it unreasonable  for
them to be admitted into the programme, there is  nothing  to  suggest  that
programme participants are generally exposed to destitution or unduly  harsh
living conditions.


163. When we refer to persons being "admitted" into  the  programme,  we  do
not believe that the test can be what the individual's  preferences  are  or
whether there are hardships that will be involved (e.g. having to  live  for
at least some period of  time  in  difficult  circumstances).  The  test  is
simply whether, if they sought access to it, they would be admitted to it.

164. What, however, would be the position of  a  person  who  would  not  be
admitted to the Witness Protection programme? Here the first question to  be
asked is whether it is reasonably likely they will be  traced  and  targeted
in their new place of residence. As already indicated, we  do  not  consider
that, except in high profile cases, such persons would face a real  risk  of
being detected by criminal gangs based within the KMA  or  other  inner-city
urban areas. But each case will turn on its own facts.

165. Even if it is decided there is  no  real  risk  of  such  detection,  a
person may still face a real risk, by virtue of  it  being  unreasonable  or
unduly harsh for him to relocate: see paragraph 339O of  HC395  as  amended.
Here, however, it must be borne in mind that the criteria identified by  the
House of Lords in Januzi are stringent. It will not suffice that  there  may
be a lack of social welfare support combined with other  difficulties:  what
matters is whether such a move will result for the  individual  in  question
in destitution or other forms of violation of a nonderogable human right.

166. We would re-emphasise at this point that what we have  just  delineated
about insufficiency of protection for those unlikely  to  be  accepted  into
the Witness Protection Programme, only becomes germane in a  case  where  it
has first been established that a criminal gang's  behaviour  poses  a  real
and serious threat to an individual. In order to show  that  such  a  threat
exists, it will not suffice  to  show  that  a  criminal  gang  dislikes  an
individual or even that it has made threats of violence: it has to be  shown
that the gang has a real intent to inflict the threatened serious  harm  and
to carry out its threats.   We shall  return  to  the  importance  of  these
considerations  when  we  turn  to  examine   the   appellant's   particular
circumstances.

Particular social group (PSG)
  167.  Ms  Asanovich  sought  to  rely  on  K  and  Fornah.  However,   any
consideration of this issue  now has to be undertaken within the  new  legal
framework established under the Protection  Regulations.   We  mention  this
because obiter remarks by Lord Bingham and  Lord  Brown  appear  to  suggest
that the Qualification Directive provision, Article 9, on  which  Regulation
6 is closely based, can be read disjunctively so that a person qualifies  as
a member of a PSG if he can show either "an innate characteristic..."  or  a
"...distinct identity...", even though the wording  of  that  Article  would
appear in its ordinary meaning to require a person  to  show  both.  The  UK
implementing provision also uses apparently conjunctive language.

168. At regulation 6 so far as is relevant it is stated:


    "(1) In deciding whether a person is a refugee:
    ...
    (d) a group shall be considered  to  form  a  particular  social  group
    where, for example:
    (i) members of that group share an innate characteristic, or  a  common
    background that cannot be changed, or share a characteristic or  belief
    that is so fundamental to identity or conscience that a  person  should
    not be forced to renounce it, and
    (ii) that group has  a  distinct  identity  in  the  relevant  country,
    because it is perceived as being different by the surrounding society;
    (e) a particular social group might include a group based on  a  common
    characteristic of sexual orientation but sexual orientation  cannot  be
    understood to include acts considered to be criminal in accordance with
    national law in the United Kingdom;
    ...".


169. Regulation 5(3) states that "An act of persecution  must  be  committed
for at least one of the reasons in Article 1(a) of the Geneva Convention".

170. However, we do not need to decide this issue  here,  since  we  do  not
consider it necessary in this case to make any  findings  on  the  issue  of
whether women (or some subgroup of women)  in  Jamaica  are  a  PSG  (either
under regulation 6(1)(d)(i) on its own or under regulation 6(1)(d)  (ii)  on
its own or under both).   In view of the findings we go on to  make  on  the
appellant's case, no Convention reason issue arises in her case,  since  (as
we  shall  come  to)  she  has  not  established  a  well-founded  fear   of
persecution. In any event we see no valid reason to go behind  the  findings
made by the panel who adjourned this case for second stage  reconsideration.
  Miss Brown is plainly right that the Tribunal has the power to  limit  the
issues  to  be  dealt  with  on  second  stage  reconsideration:   see  Rule
45(4)(f)(iv) of the 2005 Procedure  Rules.  Further,  we  see  no  Robinson-
obvious basis for re-examining the  PSG issues created by  the  opinions  of
the House of Lords in  K  and  Fornah.   We  doubt  that  women  in  Jamaica
constitute a particular social group, in view of the fact that by and  large
they enjoy the same civic rights as men and do not face  any  general  legal
or societal discrimination. But  even  if  we  are  wrong  about  that,  the
existence of such a  group  or  sub-group  in  Jamaica  is  far  from  being
something dictated by the principles  in  K  and  Fornah.   Their  lordships
confirmed the principle established in Shah and Islam [1999] 2 AC  629  that
whether women are a PSG would depend heavily on  the  conditions  prevailing
in the country concerned.

171. We leave open whether a sub-group of Jamaican women, namely  women  who
are victims of sexual violence and/or domestic violence, constitute  a  PSG.
We  recognise  the  force  of  the  assessment   by   Mr   Sobers,   Amnesty
International and Women's Media Watch, among  others,  of  the  difficulties
women in Jamaica face from sexual violence and domestic  violence.  However,
Miss Asanovich's contention that such a group is a PSG is  weakened  in  our
view by Mr Sobers' evidence elsewhere,  which  states  that  women  are  not
targeted because they are victims of rape; at the very  least  this  opinion
creates difficulties in showing that, even if there were such a  PSG,  there
would be a causal nexus between that group and the persecution feared.

172. Plainly a family in Jamaica is capable of forming a  PSG.  However,  on
the facts in this case we also doubt whether the appellant could qualify  as
a member of a PSG of this kind: she  has  long  ceased  to  enjoy  any  real
family existence with F and the only real link that remains is that  he  has
fathered her first child. The only basis for her being a member of a  family
would be if she were facing persecution for that reason, because he and  his
associates saw her and her daughter as his  property;  in  other  words  the
group would be purely defined by the persecution. Once  again,  however,  we
do not need to decide this question, for reasons already given.

The appellant's case
173. We note at the outset that on the particular facts of this case  it  is
no longer contended that the appellant  would  be  at  real  risk  of  being
perceived as an informer: that matter was clarified by the Tribunal  in  the
first-stage reconsideration. Although there are passing references to it  in
her skeleton argument Ms Asanovich did not seek to raise it  afresh  in  her
submissions before us and we see no valid reason for  reviving  this  as  an
issue now.

174. Turning to the significance of the appellant's recent evidence  in  her
latest statement and in her oral testimony before us about her  rape  having
"marked and shamed" her, we agree with Miss Brown that it  is  significantly
different in emphasis  from  her  previous  evidence  about  the  gang  rape
incident. However,  we  are  prepared  to  proceed  on  the  basis  of  this
evidence. In our view, it adds  very  little  to  the  evidence  as  to  the
objective situation faced by rape  victims,  but  it  does  provide  further
insight into the appellant's subjective state of mind.

175. The first question we must address is whether the appellant  has  shown
she would be at risk of persecution: in  what  follows  what  we  say  about
persecution applies equally to the issues of   serious harm under  paragraph
339C of the amended Immigration Rules  and  of   ill-treatment  contrary  to
Article 3 of the ECHR.

176. We accept that the appellant has shown past persecution: that  entitles
her to have her case succeed unless there are valid reasons to consider  she
would not face a repetition of that persecution: see paragraph 339K  of  the
amended Immigration Rules.

 177. Nevertheless, we do not consider the appellant would be a  target  any
more for members of the gang who attacked her in 1999/2000.  To  begin  with
it must be recalled that her case is not one about a  person  being  pursued
by the One Order gang per se. F himself was a member of the One  Order  gang
and his killing of another area leader was only said to have been  taken  up
by (four) members of the gang from that area. It must also be recalled  that
the interest of these area gang members in her at the time was because  they
believed she knew the whereabouts of F. We find it highly unlikely, even  if
they were to re-encounter the appellant, that they would any longer see  her
as being able to  give  any  information  about  his  whereabouts.   On  the
appellant's own evidence F has continued to live in  Jamaica  for  the  past
six years or so and, even if (which is  far  from  clear)  he  had  been  in
hiding for some time, he has recently been  known  to  have  been  shot  and
wounded. If those area gang members still wished to target  him  they  would
surely pursue recent leads,  not  ones  over  6  years  old.   Although  the
appellant's  evidence  was  that  for  a  while  after  she  had  left   her
grandmother's house and gone to stay with a friend of her grandmother  at  a
rural  area  some  45  minutes  away,  members  of  this  gang  visited  her
grandmother from time to time,  she  did  not  mention  that  continuing  in
recent years. According to Mr Sobers, although we think he goes  beyond  the
evidence in saying that criminal gangs have organised networks  island-wide,
the  One  Order  and  Klansman  gangs  are  well  organised  and  have  good
intelligence. If that is so, then it is not reasonably likely  that  someone
like the appellant who has been off the scene for a long time,  would  still
be of adverse interest to them as a means of locating F.

178. We do accept, nevertheless, that if she  returned  to  her  home  area,
which is we remind ourselves, an area within the KMA, there would be a  real
risk that her return there would be communicated to F.   Whilst  we  do  not
consider that the authorities in Jamaica are  generally  unable  to  protect
against domestic violence, it is reasonably likely if she went back  to  her
grandmother's home that F would learn of her return. We are  just  persuaded
also that, by virtue of her subjective fears and her traumatised state,  she
would not be able to seek the protection of the police and so would  not  be
able to benefit from  available  assistance  under  the  Witness  Protection
programme: we do not find it reasonably likely that she would  approach  the
police in order to be admitted to it. We accept therefore  that  inside  her
home area she would face a real risk of persecution  at  his  hands  or  the
hands of his associates again, sooner or later.

179. However, we do not consider that the appellant would face a  real  risk
of persecution if she relocated to another part of Jamaica.  We  note  first
of all that she was able to stay without incident  for  several  months  (it
may indeed have been a longer period) in the area  where  her  grandmother's
friend lived, a rural area relatively close to her  home  area.   We  accept
that during  this time the appellant did not go out,  but  it  remains  that
her grandmother had felt confident enough to leave  her  there  rather  than
trying to arrange for her to leave  Jamaica  straightaway  or  move  further
away from the KMA. Even when the appellant left, her daughter stayed in  the
same place for a significant period of time, some eight months.  Second,  we
come back to the point that in our view the gang members who pursued her  in
1999/2000 because they thought she knew the whereabouts  of  F,  would  have
known for some time that she was off the scene.  It is open to  considerable
doubt that they would still have revenge against F in their  minds,  as  the
evidence suggest that the activities of  gangs  are  highly  contingent  and
dependent on rapidly changing events. If, however, they have  continued  the
search for vengeance against F, it may possibly be they or their  associates
have been killed or imprisoned or  have  exacted  their  vengeance  on  some
other members of F's local section of the One Order gang. We simply  do  not
know: but it is certainly not a  case  where  the  evidence  demonstrates  a
reasonable degree of likelihood that there  are  gang  members  who  have  a
still-pressing intention to exact revenge against F. Third, we  consider  it
at best a remote  risk  F  would  locate  the  appellant  and  her  daughter
outside her home area. Her grandmother has shown in the past that she  would
not divulge any information about the appellant's whereabouts;  it  has  not
been suggested that she and  her  husband  were  subjected  to  any  threats
directed against them if they did not divulge the  appellant's  whereabouts;
and that is not likely to change. We know nothing about F's activities  over
the past six years, save that he has recently been involved  in  a  shooting
incident. As already noted, there is no recent evidence of his gang  members
still continuing to visit the grandmother to enquire  about  the  appellant.
If  F  has  not  been  in  prison,  he  may  well  have  engaged  in   other
relationships.   Again we simply do not know, but it is far from  being  the
type of  case  where  the  evidence  demonstrates  a  reasonable  degree  of
likelihood  that  there  is  a  single-minded  persecutor  waiting  for  the
appellant to return so he can renew his persecution. Further,  there  is  an
absence of any real evidence to show that  members of  the  section  of  the
One Order gang whose leader F killed  have contacts  all over  Jamaica   who
would know to look out for this particular appellant. In such  circumstances
we find it very unlikely anyone locally in another  part  of  Jamaica  would
convey information back to these men. Jamaica is a relatively small  country
but having a population of around 2.8 million people, it is far  from  being
akin to one interactive community where everyone gets to know  who  everyone
else is. This is not a case either where the appellant would  be  under  any
type of duty to disclose to anyone her unhappy history with members of  this
gang or her connections with F. For a long time she did  not  even  disclose
it to her sister in the UK.

180. There remains the question of whether, even if the appellant would  not
face a continuing risk of persecution, it would be  unreasonable  or  unduly
harsh in her case to expect her to relocate.

181. Here there are competing considerations. Mr Sobers has  emphasised  his
belief that she would be without a social welfare safety  net.  We  are  not
persuaded that this is a major consideration. For one thing, the  background
evidence does not appear to back up this  part  of  Mr  Sobers'  assessment.
Paragraph  27.03 of the COI Report November 2006 states:

    "Residents of Jamaica  may benefit from  various  Social  Security  and
    Welfare provisions, which are aimed at specific  target  groups.  Those
    provisions  include  Public  Assistance  services  for  the  aged,  the
    disabled  and  the  destitute,  the  Food  Stamp  Programme  for  those
    nutritionally at  risk,  and  the  Kerosene  Programme  targeting  poor
    familiars following  the removal of the subsidy  on  domestic  kerosene
    ..."

182. We  also  note  that  the  appellant  was  able  to  receive  financial
assistance in the past from her grandmother (with leaving the  country)  and
we see no reason to think, six years later that the grandmother  (with  whom
she keeps in  touch)  would  be  unable  to  assist  if  the  appellant  was
threatened by economic hardships.

183. In any event, the test we have to apply is not whether there  would  be
a lack of social welfare support, but whether in  the  appellant's  and  her
daughter's particular circumstances there would be virtual destitution:  see
Januzi.

184. A further consideration in  the  appellant's  case  is  her  vulnerable
psychological state. Dr Seear has expressed his concerns about  her  ability
to  cope  with  life  back  in  Jamaica,  given  her  subjective  fears  and
anxieties.  We note that Jamaica does have facilities  for  treating  people
with mental health problems:  see COI Report, 26.46-26.52. Further,  we  are
not persuaded that her psychological condition is  sufficiently  serious  in
itself to result in a real threat of inhuman or degrading treatment. As  the
Court of  Appeal   has emphasised in J, the threshold for establishing  such
a real risk in a  foreign case is high. The principal  reasons  advanced  by
Miss Asanovich for thinking the appellant's situation would  engage  Article
3 was what her doctor now said about her risk of suicide.  However,  we  are
able to attach only very limited weight to the medical report  of  Dr  Seear
in this regard.  In his latest report (15 August  2006)  he  refers  to  the
appellant being at real risk of suicide, but fails to  explain  why  he  had
not seen such a need to exist in  his  earlier  reports  on  her  condition:
indeed in his 14 July 2005 Report he had expressly  recorded  the  appellant
as saying she would not act on any suicidal impulses out of concern for  her
daughter's welfare and he  nowhere  said  he  took  a  different  view.  The
appellant has not sought psychiatric help and on  Dr  Seear's  analysis  her
ongoing anxieties  centre  primarily  around  possible  return  to  Jamaica,
fluctuating depending on how imminent she thinks that is.  Dr Seear  may  be
an experienced medical practitioner, but he is not  a  psychiatrist  and  in
the absence of any proper explanation for why he previously saw  no  suicide
risk, we do not think his report, carries much weight. We also bear in  mind
that Dr Seear is not a country expert and insofar as he  purports to give  a
risk assessment of how she would fare on return he bases himself  very  much
on the objective truth of what the appellant has told him about the  general
circumstances prevailing in Jamaica.

 185. We have not as yet made any comment on Mr Sobers' reference in his  31
October 2006 report concerning the risk the appellant would face  by  virtue
of being labelled as a "deportee".  As far as we are aware his  sources  for
this consist in just one or two press cuttings: we have already  made  clear
why such sources have their limitations. In any event, on  their  face  they
refer to principally male  returnees  who  are  widely  perceived  as  being
involved in criminality either in Jamaica or aboard  or  both.  We  consider
that we should exercise great caution before treating  this  as  a  distinct
risk factor.

186.  In  assessing  the  appellant's  situation  we  have  borne  in   mind
throughout that she faces return to Jamaica along  with  her  daughter.   So
far as the daughter's  situation  is  concerned,  we  do  not  consider  her
position as a young girl would place her at real risk of serious harm:   the
evidence does not show that young Jamaican girls are generally  at  risk  of
serious harm in the form of sexual violence.  We do not think risks  arising
from her particular circumstances are very different than they are  for  the
appellant. We accept that  F knows he has a daughter by the  appellant,  but
we have not found it reasonably likely - given  the  viability  of  internal
relocation - that  F will come to learn of the return of the  appellant  and
his daughter's whereabouts (even assuming he  has  not  moved  on  to  other
relationships).

187. Even considered cumulatively we do not think that the  appellant's  and
her daughter's  circumstances,  as  we  have  identified  them,  would  make
relocation an unduly harsh or unreasonable option for them.

188. Miss Asanovich also sought to argue that the appellant's appeal  should
be allowed on Article 8 grounds, even if we decided to  dismiss  the  asylum
(and humanitarian protection) and Article 3 grounds.  However  her  argument
in respect of Article 8  were  replicas  of  her  arguments  in  respect  of
Article 3.   Bearing in mind the high threshold that exists  in  respect  of
Article 8  claims based on  the  right  respect  for  private  life  (Razgar
[2004] UKHL  27), as further analysed by the Tribunal in  WK  [2006]  UKAIT,
we see no reason to conclude  that the appellant meets that  threshold.

189. For the above reasons we conclude:

    The Immigration Judge materially erred in law.


    The decision we substitute is to  dismiss  the  appellant's  appeal  on
    asylum grounds, on humanitarian protection grounds and on human  rights
    grounds.






Signed                              Date

Dr H H Storey, Senior Immigration Judge
Appendix: List of Background Materials Before the Tribunal[1]

Kerr Report on Political Tribalism,  1997 (extracts)
Report of National Committee on Crime and Violence, October 2001 (extracts)
Human  Rights  Watch,  "Nobody's  Children:  Jamaican  children  in   police
detention and government institutions", 1999 report (extracts)
UNDP National Report by the Inter-Agency Campaign on violence Against  Women
and Girls (extracts), March 1999
US State Department Report 2004
US State Department Report  2005
CIPU Report, April 2005
Amnesty International Report on Jamaica, 25 May 2005
COI Request response, 5 August 2005
CIPU Report, October 2005
COI Request response, 10 October 2005
COI Request response, 7 December 2005
US State Department Report, 2006
CIPU Report, April 2006
Amnesty International report, "Sexual Violence against Women  and  Girls  in
Jamaica", 22 June 2006
Bertelsmann Transformation Index (BTI, 2006 Report (extracts)
Women's Media Watch opinion, 13 September 2006
Home Office COI Report, November 2006
Home Office Operational Guidance Note (OGN) on Jamaica for December 2006

Various press and media cuttings





-----------------------
[1] By  "extracts" below is meant references contained in other listed
materials.

