
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

VA (Solicitor's non-compliance: counsel's duties) Sri Lanka [2017] UKUT
00012 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                |                  Given orally on       |
|                                    |20/12/16,                               |
|On 20 December 2016                 |transcribed & edited                    |
|                                    |Promulgated on 05 January 2017          |
|                                    |                                        |
|                                    |                                        |


                                   Before

                THE PRESIDENT, THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAINI

                                   Between

                                     VA
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation

For the Appellant:     Ms S Jegarajah, of counsel, instructed by Linga & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


   i) Counsel's duty is owed to the client. It does not extend to  defending
      non-compliant instructing solicitors.


  ii) It is for non-compliant instructing solicitors to defend themselves by
      proactively arranging their attendance before the tribunal in
      appropriate circumstances.

                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


 1. The Upper Tribunal strives to provide a  professional  service  to  the
    public.  From time to time it is prevented from doing so by the conduct
    of legal representatives.  This Tribunal in this elderly case has  been
    repeatedly frustrated in its attempts to bring  the  proceedings  to  a
    conclusion.  In a spate of cases in my lists during the  past  month  I
    have drawn attention to the default of legal representatives.   I  have
    done so in strong but measured terms.  In one of my orders  which  will
    now be published as  a  reported  decision  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  I
    referred to the disgraceful circumstances  prevailing:  see  Ahmed  and
    Others (sanctions for non-compliance) [2016] UKUT  00562  (IAC).   That
    description applies, I regret to say, fully to the present appeal.

 2.  The  Tribunal  was  blackmailed  in  this  case  by  the   Appellant's
    representatives on a previous date, 14 July 2016.  The  order  of  that
    date is attached. This  is  aptly  described  as  "blackmail",  in  the
    figurative sense, because while the  Tribunal  could  have  refused  to
    adjourn the hearing and insisted upon proceeding, this was in  truth  a
    theoretical possibility only given the virtual inevitability  that  any
    constitution of the Tribunal would have given paramount  importance  to
    the Appellant's right to a fair hearing - in this discrete  context,  a
    professionally prepared and properly presented hearing.

 3. The Tribunal  has  been  blackmailed  again  today.  This  requires  no
    elaboration.

 4.   In  the  recently  reported  decision  in  Shabir  Ahmed  and  Others
    (sanctions for non-compliance)  [2016]  UKUT  00562  (IAC),  the  Upper
    Tribunal  has broadcast to  the  legal  profession  that  it  will  not
    hesitate to have recourse to the full panoply of powers at its disposal
    to prevent this kind  of  shameful  event  materialising.   That  order
    reminds the profession, as I do once again  today,  that  those  powers
    include the initiation of contempt of court proceedings,  wasted  costs
    orders and the publication of rulings of this kind  on  the  Tribunal's
    website.  This Tribunal will take steps to ensure that  today's  ruling
    once transcribed becomes a reported judgment and has the  dissemination
    which that entails.

 5. I note that the firm of solicitors on record  for  the  Appellants  has
    been representing them during most of the  history  of  these  appeals.
    There is no representative  of  that  firm  in  attendance  at  today's
    hearing.  Given the  circumstances  prevailing,  this  is  inexcusable.
    Given the  events  of  14  July  2016,  the  recurrence  of  comparable
    egregious professional default almost defies belief.

 6. The principal solicitor in the firm in question will attend  in  person
    before the Upper Tribunal at 9.45 tomorrow to explain the whole history
    of these proceedings.  His attendance will be preceded  by  sending  to
    the Upper Tribunal a comprehensive  witness  statement  addressing  all
    material issues in the history  of  these  proceedings.   That  witness
    statement will be received by 9 o'clock tomorrow morning.**

 7. Meantime the Tribunal succumbs to the blackmail which today's state  of
    affairs entails and adjourns the hearing.  All those who have  attended
    this court room, and there  are  quite  a  few  people  involved,  have
    suffered the grave inconvenience  of  being  here  today  for  no  good
    reason, coupled with  still  further  delay  in  finalisation  of  this
    litigation.

 8. This case will be relisted for hearing on the first available  date  in
    January 2017.  That date I hasten to add could be as early as  3  or  4
    January, subject to the availability and convenience of  the  Tribunal.
    Needless to  say  there  will  be  no  question  of  conveniencing  the
    Appellant's representatives in any way.   I will take steps  to  ensure
    that if necessary adjustments are made to other  lists  to  bring  this
    case back before the Tribunal not later than week commencing 09 January
    2017.

 9. The main message which this ruling rebroadcasts will, if necessary,  be
    repeated in future cases.  The Upper Tribunal will not hesitate to have
    recourse to all powers at its disposal with a view to ensuring that its
    process  is  not  misused  and  in  the  interests  of  furthering  the
    overriding objective.  There are no winners in the circumstances  which
    have materialised, twice, in this appeal. The biggest  losers  are  the
    litigants.

10. While there are, I trust, many lessons to be learned, I would highlight
    one in particular.   Where  solicitors  default  in  their  conduct  of
    proceedings,  whether  by  non-compliance  with  procedural  rules   or
    practice  directions  or  specific  case   management   directions   or
    otherwise, it forms no part of instructed counsel's duty to defend  the
    instructing solicitor.  The misconception to the contrary  was  evident
    in the present case and  has  manifested  itself  in  others.   Counsel
    represent  their  client:  they  do  not  represent  their  instructing
    solicitor.

11. Counsel must also be  alert  to  the  inevitability  of  a  penetrating
    judicial enquiry in  cases  where  professional  default  of  the  kind
    manifesting itself in this appeal  occurs.   It  would  be  prudent  of
    counsel to proactively ensure that  the  instructing  solicitor  is  in
    attendance at the hearing in such cases.  Taking into  account  what  I
    have said about the true nature of counsel's duty,  the  Tribunal  will
    not expect to hear from Counsel - unless  personally  implicated  -  in
    circumstances of this kind. Rather, the solicitor  having  carriage  of
    the case, must, proactively and fully equipped, attend.

12. In this context, it is appropriate to draw attention  to  the  Code  of
    Conduct in the Bar Standards Handbook (2nd ed), Part  2B  ("  The  Core
    Duties" and Part 2C ("The Conduct Rules") especially. All of  counsel's
    duties  in  this  key  publication,  as  formulated  are  owed  to  the
    court/tribunal  and  client.  Tellingly,  there  is   no   mention   of
    instructing solicitors.

    **Addendum

13. The solicitor concerned, as directed, attended the following  day.   An
    explanation was  provided.   While  this  qualified  for  a  degree  of
    sympathy, it did nothing to allay the  Tribunal's  concerns  about  the
    conduct of this appeal throughout.

                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY
                                             PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER

                                                      Date: 20 December 2016
