
      IH (s.72; 'Particularly Serious Crime') Eritrea [2009] UKAIT 00012

                       ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Field House                    Dates of Hearing: 12 February,
                                             3 and 9 September 2008

                                   Before

      Mr C M G Ockelton, Deputy President of the Asylum and Immigration
                                  Tribunal
                        Senior Immigration Judge Lane
                       Senior Immigration Judge Grubb

                                   Between

                                     IH
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Draycott instructed by Paragon Law
For the Respondent:    Mr P Patel instructed by the Treasury
                       Solicitors

The presumptions in s.72 of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum
Act 2002 that  in  the  circumstances  specified  a  person  has  been
convicted by a final judgment of a "particularly  serious  crime"  for
the purposes of Art  33(2)  of  the  Refugee  Convention  if  read  as
irrebuttable are inconsistent with Art 21.2 of  the  EU  Qualification
Directive (Council Directive 2004/83/EC) which  gives  effect  to  the
autonomous international meaning of Art 33(2) as part of EU law.  As a
consequence,  the  presumptions  in  s.72  must  be  read   as   being
rebuttable.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Eritrea who was born on 1 April 1973.  He
    is of mixed ethnicity: his father  was  Eritrean  and  his  mother  was
    Ethiopian.  The Appellant is married to  an  Ethiopian  citizen.   They
    have a daughter.  It seems that the Appellant's wife and  daughter  are
    currently living in Eritrea.   The  Appellant  arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom on 6 April 2004 and claimed asylum which was refused on 2  June
    2004.  The Appellant was consequently refused  leave  to  enter.   That
    decision was, however, subsequently withdrawn.  On  12  December  2005,
    the Appellant was convicted of sexual assault on a female  contrary  to
    s.3(1) of the Sexual Offences Act 2003.  He was sentenced to 21  months
    imprisonment and required to sign the  Sex  Offenders  Register  for  a
    period of 10 years.  The Trial Judge recommended that the Appellant  be
    deported. On 30 June 2006, the Respondent decided to make a deportation
    order against the Appellant under s.3(6) of the  Immigration  Act  1971
    which (by amendment on 4 October 2006) specified removal to Eritrea  or
    Ethiopia.

 2. Although it was accepted that the Appellant had been  in  the  Eritrean
    military, the Respondent rejected the Appellant's account  of  what  he
    claimed had happened to him whilst in the military which, it was  said,
    gave rise to a risk of  persecution  or  serious  ill-treatment  if  he
    returned.  In addition, on the basis of the Appellant's  conviction  in
    the UK under s.3(1) of the Sexual Offences  Act  2003,  the  Respondent
    concluded that the Appellant, even if a refugee, could nevertheless  be
    returned by virtue  of  Art  33(2)  of  the  Refugee  Convention  which
    provides that the non-refoulement provision in Art 33(1) does not apply
    if the individual has been convicted of a "particularly serious  crime"
    and he "constitutes a danger to the community".  Applying s.72  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (hereafter "the 2002 Act")
    and the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (Specification  of
    Particularly Serious Crimes) Order (SI 2004/1910) (hereafter "the  2004
    Order"), the Respondent  concluded  that  the  Appellant  was  presumed
    firstly to have been convicted of a 'particularly  serious  crime'  and
    secondly that he constituted a danger to the community  which  had  not
    been rebutted on the evidence.  The  Respondent  issued  a  certificate
    under s.72 of the 2002 Act that the presumptions in s.72(4) of that Act
    applied.

 3. The Appellant appealed against the Respondent's decision to deport  him
    on a number of grounds.  He claimed to be a refugee  (alternatively  to
    be entitled to humanitarian protection).  He also relied upon Article 3
    of the ECHR and para 364 of HC 395.  It was argued that Art  33(2)  did
    not apply to the Appellant and that the 2004 Order was ultra  vires  as
    there was no power to make it under s.72 of the 2002 Act because it was
    incompatible with Art 33(2).

 4. Following a hearing on 14  December  2006,  the  Tribunal  (Immigration
    Judge P J M Hollingworth  and  Dr  Chaudhry)  (hereafter  "the  Panel")
    dismissed the Appellant's appeal on all grounds.  The Panel  found  the
    Appellant not to be credible  and  rejected  his  account  of  what  he
    claimed happened during his military  service  in  its  entirety.   The
    Panel did not accept that in 1998,  whilst  in  the  military,  he  was
    accused of being a spy and had been detained for 6 months in prison and
    suffered injury as a result of ill-treatment because he had  criticised
    senior  officers  at  a  military  meeting.   The  Panel  rejected  the
    Appellant's claim that in February 1999 he was  released  and  rejoined
    the fighting at the front.   Also, the Panel rejected his claim that in
    April 2000 he was again detained in prison after he had questioned  his
    wife's deportation to Ethiopia but that 11 days later he escaped  after
    the guards fled  when  the  area  was  captured  by  Ethiopian  troops.
    Further the Panel rejected the Appellant's account that, following  his
    escape, he travelled the 120-130 kilometres to Sudan by foot in 3  days
    where he stayed between May 2000 and April 2004 when he came to the UK.
      The Panel also concluded that the Appellant had failed  to  establish
    that he had left Eritrea illegally and thus  he  was  not  at  risk  on
    return on that basis.   For  those  reasons,  the  Panel  rejected  the
    Appellant's claim under Article 3 of the  ECHR.   In  relation  to  the
    Appellant's reliance upon the Refugee Convention, the Panel agreed with
    the Secretary of State's certificate under s.72 that  the  presumptions
    in subsection (4) applied and thus  dismissed  the  appeal  on  refugee
    grounds.  The Panel concluded that s.72 and the 2004  Order  (which  it
    held it had no jurisdiction to decide was ultra vires) applied  to  the
    Appellant and that therefore  the  non-refoulement  obligation  in  Art
    33(1) of the Refugee Convention did not  apply  because  the  Appellant
    fell within Art 33(2).

 5. The Appellant sought, an order for reconsideration, which  was  granted
    by Senior Immigration Judge Goldstein on 11 May 2007.

      Outline of the Issues

 6. We heard oral argument over 3 days in February and September 2008.  The
    parties also put before us extensive  skeleton  arguments  and  written
    submissions, the final one of which was received by the Tribunal  on  5
    November 2008.  We are grateful to the parties for the care and  detail
    in which they presented their submissions.

 7. Mr Draycott, who represented  the  Appellant,  challenged  the  Panel's
    decision to dismiss the appeal on  the  refugee  ground  and  that  the
    Appellant's removal would not breach Art 3 of the  ECHR.   We  did  not
    understand Mr Draycott directly to challenge the  Panel's  decision  in
    respect of para 364 of the  Immigration  Rules.   We  do  not  consider
    separately  in  any  detail  the  Appellant's  claim  for  humanitarian
    protection because that will stand or fall with our decision in respect
    of the refugee claim.   Mr Draycott made  two  principal  arguments  in
    support of his contention that the Panel had materially erred in law in
    dismissing the appeal.

 8. First, Mr Draycott submitted that the Panel was wrong in law  to  apply
    the 2004 Order to the Appellant.  The 2004 Order is ultra vires,  there
    being no power in s.72 of the 2002 Act to make  an  Order  inconsistent
    with Art 33(2) of the Refugee Convention.  Because the combined  effect
    of s.72 and the 2004 Order is that  certain  offences  are  irrebutably
    presumed to be 'particularly serious crime[s]',  the  2004  Order  (and
    s.72  itself)  is  incompatible  with  the  'autonomous'  international
    meaning of Art 33(2).   The enabling power  in  s.72  has  to  be  read
    subject to the requirement that it will be exercised consistently  with
    Art 33(2).  He submitted that the Tribunal has jurisdiction  to  decide
    that the 2004 Order is ultra vires.   Further,  Mr  Draycott  submitted
    that the 2004 Order (and perhaps even s.72  of  the  2002  Act  itself)
    could not stand in the face of Art 21 of Council Directive  2004/83/EEC
    "on minimum standards for the qualification and status of third country
    nationals or stateless persons as refugees or as persons who  otherwise
    need  international  protection  and  the  content  of  the  protection
    granted"  (hereafter the "Qualification Directive")  which  imposes  on
    all EU Member States a non-refoulement obligation in the exact terms of
    Art  33(2)  and  so  through  EU  legislation  gives  effect   to   the
    'autonomous' meaning of Art 33(2).

 9. Secondly, Mr Draycott submitted that the Panel's decision in respect of
    Art 3 of the ECHR should be set aside.  The Panel erred in reaching its
    adverse credibility finding that  led  it  to  reject  the  Appellant's
    account of what happened to him in, and  which  caused  him  to  leave,
    Eritrea.   Mr Draycott subjected the Panel's reasoning  on  credibility
    to a detailed critique which, he submitted, showed that the  Panel  had
    materially erred in law.

10. Mr Patel, who represented the Respondent, essentially took  a  contrary
    stance on each of these issues.   His  principal  submission  was  that
    there is no international 'autonomous' meaning to be given to Art 33(2)
    which the Tribunal could apply.  The proper meaning to be given to  the
    phrase "particularly serious crime" is a matter for the domestic law of
    each Contracting State which meant in the UK the legislative provisions
    in s.72 of the 2002 Act and the 2004 Order.  In any event, even if that
    were wrong, the Tribunal has to apply the regime in s.72 and  the  2004
    Order as it has no power to hold the 2004 Order to be ultra vires.   In
    relation to credibility, Mr Patel submitted that the  Panel's  decision
    should stand.

11. We deal with the issues raised  in  this  appeal  under  the  following
    headings: (I) The Legal Framework; (II) Article 33(2)  of  the  Refugee
    Convention; (III) Compatibility of the 2004 Order  and  s.72  with  Art
    33(2);  (IV)  Ultra  Vires  and  Incorporation;  (V)  Art  21  of   the
    Qualification Directive; (VI) Credibility.

      The Legal Framework

      1. The Refugee Convention

12.  The  relevant  provision  in  the  Refugee  Convention  dealing   with
    refoulement is Art 33 which provides as follows:

        "1.  No Contracting State shall  expel  or  return  ('refouler')  a
        refugee in any manner whatsoever to the  frontiers  of  territories
        where his life or freedom would be threatened  on  account  of  his
        race, religion, nationality,  membership  of  a  particular  social
        group or political opinion.


        2. The benefit of  the  present  provision  may  not,  however,  be
        claimed  by  a  refugee  whom  there  are  reasonable  grounds  for
        regarding as a danger to the security of the country  in  which  he
        is, or who, having  been  convicted  by  a  final  judgement  of  a
        particularly serious crime, constitutes a danger to  the  community
        of that country."

13. Art 33 applies to any individual who establishes that he is  a  refugee
    as defined in Art 1A(2) of the Refugee Convention  (R  v  Secretary  of
    State for the  Home  Department,  ex  p  Sivikumaran  [1988]  AC  958).
    Article 33(1) sets out the basic obligation of a Contracting State  not
    to refoule (return) a refugee to his own  country  where  his  life  or
    freedom would be at  risk  for  one  or  more  of  the  so-called  five
    'Convention  reasons'.   That  obligation  is  not,  however,   without
    exception.  Art 33(2) disapplies that obligation where, inter alia, the
    refugee has been convicted of a "particularly serious crime" and, as  a
    result, "constitutes a danger to  the  community"  of  the  country  of
    refuge.  It was not disputed before us  that  the  Secretary  of  State
    bears the burden of proof in respect of matters relied upon to bring an
    individual within Art 33(2).

14. The syntax of Art 33(2) is a little tortuous.  It creates two different
    grounds for an exception to the Art 33(1) obligation:  (a)  "danger  to
    the security" of the country; and (b)  conviction  of  a  "particularly
    serious crime" and a resultant "danger to  the  community".   At  first
    blush it might be thought that for Art 33(2) to bite there  has  to  be
    established "reasonable grounds" to regard an individual as  a  "danger
    to the community".  But, in fact,  the  structure  of  Art  33(2)  only
    engages  that  phrase  ("reasonable  grounds")  in  cases   where   the
    individual is said to  be  a  "danger  to  the  security"  of  the  UK.
    Otherwise - as in a situation such as arises in this appeal -  it  must
    be established that  the  individual  was  in  fact  convicted  of  the
    "particularly serious crime" and that he is in fact a  "danger  to  the
    community"; reasonable grounds alone for so concluding will not suffice
    (SSHD v TB (Jamaica) [2008] EWCA Civ 977, at [38] per  Stanley  Burnton
    LJ).

      2. The Qualification Directive

15. The wording of Art 33 is in all material respects reproduced in Article
    21.2  of  the  Qualification  Directive.   This  is  important  to  the
    Appellant's argument because it is accepted for the  purposes  of  this
    appeal by both parties that Art 21 has direct effect and thus,  to  the
    extent that it is inconsistent with s.72 or the 2004  Order,  it  takes
    precedence over any inconsistent domestic legal provision.  Because  of
    the legal effect of EU law, this would avoid any difficulties faced  by
    the Appellant in  making  good  the  argument  that  the  Tribunal  has
    jurisdiction to hold the 2004 Order to be ultra vires.  It would simply
    be unlawful to seek to remove the Appellant if that would  be  contrary
    to Art 21 of the Qualification Directive and to  the  extent  possible,
    the UK domestic law should be interpreted to  avoid  such  a  conflict.
    Article 21 is in these terms:

        "Protection from refoulement


        1.        Member  States  shall  respect  the  principle  of   non-
        refoulement   in        accordance   with    their    international
        obligations.

        2.  Where not prohibited by the international obligations mentioned
        in       paragraph 1, Member States may refoule a refugee,  whether
        formally       recognised or not, when:


                 a) there are reasonable grounds for considering him or her
                    as a danger to the security  of  the  Member  State  in
                    which he or she is present; or
                 b) he or she, having been convicted by a  final  judgement
                    of a particularly serious crime, constitutes  a  danger
                    to the community of that Member State.


        3.  Member States may revoke, end or refuse to renew  or  to  grant
        the      residence permit of (or to) a refugee to whom paragraph  2
        applies."

16. A similar provision is contained  in  Art  14.4  of  the  Qualification
    Directive allowing Member States to revoke,  end  or  refuse  to  renew
    refugee status.  (Art 14.5 also applies a similar provision  where  the
    individual's refugee status has not yet been recognised.)   Mr Draycott
    placed some reliance upon Art 14 but, in  truth,  it  adds  nothing  of
    substance to the Appellant's case which, in this regard  at  least,  is
    founded squarely upon the non-refoulement provision in Art  21.2.   For
    this reason we need say no more about Art 14.4.

17. Mr Draycott placed reliance upon Art 21.2 (but not  Art  21.1)  of  the
    Qualification  Directive.   He  submitted  that  the  'non-refoulement'
    provision in Art 21.1 is not intended to reflect Art 33 of the  Refugee
    Convention.  It was accepted by  the  parties  that  the  reference  to
    "international obligations" in Art 21.1  is  not  a  reference  to  the
    Refugee Convention but rather to such other  obligations  binding  upon
    the particular state preventing removal or return  of  the  individual,
    for example in the case of the UK Art 3 of the ECHR or, as suggested by
    Mr Draycott, Art 3 of the Convention against Torture and  Other  Cruel,
    Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (1990) to which the UK  is
    a party.  That interpretation is borne out in the contrast made in  Art
    20.6 and 20.7 of the Qualification Directive where reference  is  made,
    respectively, to "limits set out by the Geneva Convention" and  "limits
    set out by international obligations".  It is, however, accepted by the
    parties that Art 21.2 is intended to reflect Art 33 and, in  particular
    in Art 21.2(b), the relevant part of Art 33(2) which is relied upon  by
    the Respondent  to  permit  the  Appellant's  refoulement.   Where  the
    parties differ is as to the meaning - and  thus  the  effect  upon  the
    Appellant - of Art 33(2) which is thereby incorporated into EU law.

      3. The Immigration Rules

18. We should  also,  albeit  briefly,  refer  to  the  Immigration  Rules,
    Statement of Changes in Immigration Rules (HC 395).  Paragraph 334 sets
    out the  criteria  for  the  grant  of  asylum  status.   The  negative
    criterion in para 334(iv) reflects the situation where Art 33(1)  does,
    but Art 33(2) does not, apply:

        "334. An asylum applicant will  be  granted  asylum  in  the  Unted
        Kingdom if the Secretary of State is satisfied that: ....


        (iv) ...having been convicted by a final judgment of a particularly
        serious crime, he does not constitute [sic] danger to the community
        of the United Kingdom."


19. Paragraph 339A(x) of the  Immigration  Rules  sets  out  an  equivalent
    provision for revocation of, or refusal to renew, refugee status.

      4. Section 72 of the 2002 Act

20. We now turn to s.72 of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
    2002, which came into effect  on  10  February  2003.    Section  72(1)
    provides that:

        "(1) This section applies for the purpose of the  construction  and
        application of Article 33(2) of the Refugee  Convention  (exclusion
        from protection)."

21. Leaving aside  the  arguably  mistaken  reference  to  "exclusion  from
    protection", which is more apt to describe the exclusion provisions  of
    Art 1F of the Convention, s.72 provides the UK domestic law  means  for
    interpreting  and  applying  the  exception  to   the   non-refoulement
    obligation in Art 33(2) of the Refugee Convention.  So far as  relevant
    s.72 provides as follows:

        "72.     Serious Criminal


          2) A person shall be presumed to have been convicted  by  a  final
             judgment of a particularly serious crime and  to  constitute  a
             danger to the community of the United Kingdom if he is -


                 a) convicted in the United Kingdom of an offence, and
                 b) sentenced to a period of imprisonment of  at  least  two
                    years.


     3) A person shall be presumed  to  have  been  convicted  by  a  final
        judgment of a particularly serious crime and to constitute a danger
        to       the community of the United Kingdom if -


                 a) he  is  convicted  outside  the  United  Kingdom  of  an
                    offence,
                 b) he is sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at  least
                    two years, and
                 c) he could have been sentenced to a period of imprisonment
                    of  at  least  two  years  had  his  conviction  been  a
                    conviction in the United Kingdom of a similar offence.


          4) A person shall be presumed to have been convicted  by  a  final
             judgment of a particularly serious crime and  to  constitute  a
             danger to the community of the United Kingdom if -


                 a) he is convicted of an offence specified by order of  the
                    Secretary of State, or
                 b) he is convicted outside the United Kingdom of an offence
                    and the Secretary of State certifies that in his opinion
                    the offence is similar to an offence specified by  order
                    under paragraph (a).


          5) An order under subsection (4) -


                 a)    must be made by statutory instrument, and
                 b)    shall be subject  to  annulment  in  pursuance  of  a
                    resolution of either House of Parliament.


          6) A presumption under subsection (2), (3) or (4)  that  a  person
             constitutes a danger to the community  is  rebuttable  by  that
             person.

          7) A presumption under subsection (2), (3) or (4) does  not  apply
             while an appeal against conviction or sentence -

                 a)    is pending, or
                 b)    could be brought (disregarding the possibility of  an
                    appeal out of time with leave).


          8) Section 34(1) of the Anti-terrorism,  Crime  and  Security  Act
             2001 (c. 24) (no need to consider gravity of fear or threat  of
             persecution) applies for the purpose of considering  whether  a
             presumption mentioned in subsection (6) has been rebutted as it
             applies for the purpose of considering whether Article 33(2) of
             the Refugee Convention applies.


         (9)      Subsection (10) applies where -


                 a) a person appeals under section 82, 83 , 83A or  101  of
                    this Act or under section 2 of the Special  Immigration
                    Appeals Commission Act 1997 (c. 68) wholly or partly on
                    the ground that to remove him from or to require him to
                    leave  the  United  Kingdom  would  breach  the  United
                    Kingdom's obligations under the Refugee Convention, and
                 b)    the Secretary of State  issues  a  certificate  that
                    presumptions under subsection (2), (3) or (4) apply  to
                    the person (subject to rebuttal).


    10) The Tribunal or Commission hearing the appeal -


                 a)    must begin substantive deliberation on the appeal  by
                    considering the certificate, and
                 b)    if in agreement that  presumptions  under  subsection
                    (2), (3) or (4) apply (having  given  the  appellant  an
                    opportunity for rebuttal) must dismiss the appeal in  so
                    far as it relies on the ground specified  in  subsection
                    (9) (a)."


22. Importantly  for  our  purposes,  ss.72(2)  and  (4)  provide  that  an
    individual  shall  be  presumed  (i)  to  have  been  convicted  of   a
    "particularly serious crime"; and (ii) to be a danger to the  community
    of the UK if he is convicted of an offence in the UK and  sentenced  to
    at least 2 years' imprisonment (s.72(2)) or is convicted of an  offence
    specified by order of the  Secretary  of  State  (s.72(4)).    (Section
    72(3) deals with convictions abroad and is not relevant here.)

23. Pursuant to s.72(5), the Secretary of State made the 2004  Order  which
    came into force on 12 August 2004.  Schedules  1  to  6  to  the  Order
    specify a substantial number of criminal offences in England and Wales,
    Northern Ireland and Scotland for the purposes of s.72(4).   The  range
    of offences is vast covering, for example, crimes relating to  the  use
    and possession of chemical, biological or  nuclear  weapons,  involving
    controlled drugs,  crimes  of  dishonesty,  criminal  damage,  offences
    against the person, public order offences, firearms offences and sexual
    offences.  The latter includes in Sched 2, para 2 the offence of sexual
    assault in s.3(1) of the Sexual Offences Act 2003 which is, of  course,
    the crime of which the Appellant was convicted.

24. Section 72(6) provides that the presumption that a person constitutes a
    danger to the community is rebuttable.  Section 72 does  not,  however,
    appear on its face to allow a person to rebut the presumption  that  an
    offence for which he was convicted and sentenced to at least  2  years'
    imprisonment or which is  contained  in  an  Order  made  by  statutory
    instrument under s.72(5) is a "particularly serious crime".   This  was
    assumed to be the position  by  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  SSHD  v  TB
    (Jamaica) [2008] EWCA Civ 977, at [37]  per  Stanley  Burnton  LJ.   Mr
    Draycott relies upon the irrebuttable nature of this presumption  as  a
    central part of his argument that the 2004 Order is ultra vires.

25. The presumptions in s.72 apply in all cases, where applicable, heard by
    the Tribunal (SSHD v TB (Jamaica) [2008] EWCA  Civ  977,  at  [29]  per
    Stanley Burnton LJ).  However, s.72(9) and (10) create a mechanism that
    may be invoked by the Secretary of State which affects  the  Tribunal's
    process when  deciding  asylum  appeals.   Section  72(9)  permits  the
    Secretary of State to issue a certificate that the  presumptions  under
    the relevant subsection of s.72 apply.  When this is done, as it was in
    this case, s.72(10) requires the  Tribunal  to  determine  whether  the
    presumptions do in fact apply to the asylum appeal  and,  if  they  do,
    dismiss the appeal.  The effect is to alter  the  normal  (and  perhaps
    more natural) way of dealing with a case: first, deciding  whether  the
    individual is a refugee; and secondly, only if he is, deciding  whether
    notwithstanding that  he  may  still  be  refouled  because  Art  33(2)
    applies.  In cases where a certificate is  issued  under  s.72(9),  the
    refoulement issue is decided first and only if it does  not  apply  can
    the Tribunal consider whether the  individual  is  in  fact  a  refugee
    because he has a well-founded fear  of  persecution  for  a  Convention
    reason.   Of course, in practice the evidence and any  risk  on  return
    would need to be considered in order to decide whether the individual's
    return would breach Art 3 of the ECHR.  The decision of  the  Panel  in
    this appeal is one such example.  Section 72(10) does not prevent this,
    but does prevent the Tribunal from  making  a  finding  that  he  is  a
    refugee albeit one who can be refouled.

      Article 33(2) of the Refugee Convention

26. Mr Draycott submitted that there is an  'autonomous'  or  international
    meaning that must be  ascribed  to  the  phrase  "particularly  serious
    crime" in Art 33(2) with which the regime in s.72 and the 2004 Order is
    inconsistent.  That submission  is  crucial  to  the  Appellant's  case
    before us.  If that is not so, there is no valid basis for  challenging
    the Panel's application of Art 33(2) through the interpretative lens of
    s.72 and the 2004 Order.  It was  not  contended  in  the  Grounds  for
    Review or before us that the  Panel  were  wrong  to  conclude  on  the
    evidence that the Appellant was a "danger to the community".

      1. Autonomous Meaning?

27. Mr Patel's submission on behalf of the Respondent is a  straightforward
    one: the Appellant's challenge  cannot  succeed  because  there  is  no
    autonomous international meaning which the Tribunal can  apply  to  the
    phrase "particularly serious crime" in Art 33(2).   The  interpretation
    of Art 33(2) and its application is, Mr Patel submitted, a  matter  for
    the Contracting States through the mechanism  of  their  domestic  law.
    That argument is, with the greatest respect, hopeless.  It  might  have
    been possible to argue that an individual phrase, such as 'particularly
    serious crime', should not be taken in isolation from its context,  and
    that the search should be only for the autonomous international meaning
    of the (whole of the) treaty provision under examination.  But Mr Patel
    did not argue that, and, as will be apparent from the authorities to be
    cited shortly, courts charged with the interpretation of Art 33(2) have
    indeed taken this phrase separately and have contrasted its effect with
    that of other phrases in the paragraph.   It  follows  that  even  that
    more refined argument would have been equally hopeless  in  respect  of
    the particular words with which we are concerned.

28. The Refugee Convention is a treaty binding in international law between
    the Contracting Parties.  (We deal later with  Mr  Draycott's  argument
    that it has also been incorporated into our domestic law or forms  part
    of EU law.)  As a consequence, Art 33(2) must be  interpreted  in  good
    faith in accordance with the ordinary meaning to be given to its  terms
    in their context and in the light of its object and  purpose  (see  Art
    31(1) of the Vienna Convention on the  Law  of  Treaties  (1980)  (Cmnd
    7964)).


29. In so doing, the domestic courts of a Contracting State, including  the
    Tribunal, must strive to give Art 33  of  the  Refugee  Convention  its
    independent  and  autonomous  international  meaning.    The  point  is
    indisputable and can be illustrated by the House of Lords' decision  in
    R v SSHD ex p Adan and Aitseguer [2001] 2 AC 477.  The House  of  Lords
    was concerned with the  proper  interpretation  of  Art  1A(2)  of  the
    Refugee Convention and whether its protection  extended  to  those  who
    feared persecution by third parties, and not by the State, in their own
    country or who feared indirect  refoulement,  i.e.  return  by  another
    'safe' country to face persecution in their own  country.   In  holding
    (by a majority of 4-1) that these cases  fell  within  Art  1A(2),  the
    House of Lords sought and applied what Lord Steyn called the "one  true
    interpretation" of Article 1A(2) of the Refugee Convention (at  p.518).
    In his speech Lord Steyn explained the correct interpretative  approach
    as follows (at p.515):

        "...the enquiry must be into the meaning of the Refugee  Convention
        approached as an international instrument created by the  agreement
        of contracting states as opposed to regulatory regimes  established
        by  national  institutions.  It  is  necessary  to  determine   the
        autonomous meaning of the relevant treaty provision. This principle
        is part of the very alphabet of customary international law."

    And then (at p.517):

        "It follows that, as in the case of  other  multilateral  treaties,
        the  Refugee  Convention  must  be  given  an  independent  meaning
        derivable from the sources mentioned in arts 31 and 32 and  without
        taking colour from distinctive features of the legal system of  any
        individual contracting state. In principle therefore there can only
        be one true interpretation of a treaty. If there is disagreement on
        the meaning of the Refugee Convention, it can be  resolved  by  the
        International Court of Justice: art 38. It has, however, never been
        asked to make such a ruling. The prospect of  a  reference  to  the
        International Court of Justice is remote. In practice it is left to
        national courts, faced with a material disagreement on an issue  of
        interpretation, to resolve it. But in  doing  so  it  must  search,
        untrammelled by notions of its national legal culture, for the true
        autonomous and international meaning of the treaty. And  there  can
        only be one true meaning."

30. That approach was accepted by the other Law Lords in the majority  (see
    Lord Slynn of Hadley at p.509, Lord Hobhouse of Woodborough at  pp.529-
    30 and Lord Scott of Foscote at  p.531).    Of  course,  it  remains  a
    question,  to  which  we  shall  return,  what  impact,  if  any,  such
    autonomous meaning, if inconsistent with the regime  in  s.72  and  the
    2004 Order, can have on the UK's statutory regime.  For the present, it
    suffices to recognise the interpretative task which must be  undertaken
    in this appeal.  For these reasons, we  reject  Mr  Patel's  submission
    that Art 33(2) should not be afforded an autonomous  meaning.   On  the
    contrary, we must strive to find that meaning in  accordance  with  the
    relevant principles of interpretation.  We  cannot  give  Art  33(2)  a
    purely UK-centred interpretation any more than the House  of  Lords  in
    Adan and Aitsiguer could give Art 1A(2) such a domestic interpretation.



31. We would, however, make two points.  First, we agree  with  Mr  Patel's
    submission to this extent: in the absence of  a  binding  international
    ruling on the meaning of "particularly serious crime", it  is  for  the
    domestic courts of each country to  seek  and  apply  the  'autonomous'
    meaning of Art 33(2).   But in doing so, as the  House  of  Lords  made
    plain in Adan and Aitsiguer, the domestic courts are seeking  the  "one
    true meaning".  That was also, it seems to us, the underlying  approach
    (albeit less explicitly articulated) adopted by the House of Lords in T
    v Immigration Officer [1996] AC 742 when  determining  the  meaning  of
    "serious  non-political  crime"  in  Art  1F(b)  of   the   Convention.
    Secondly,  it  may  be  that  there  is  no  definitive   international
    definition of particular offences that fall within  Art  33(2).   After
    all, unless the substantive international criminal  law  is  to  define
    what is a "crime" for the purposes of Art 33(2) - and it has  not  been
    suggested to us that Art 33(2) is so limited - at least  that  part  of
    the phrase "particularly serious crime" must involve  recourse  to  the
    domestic criminal law  of,  presumptively  one  would  anticipate,  the
    country of refuge.  Likewise in T, a majority of the Law Lords rejected
    the view (accepted by Lord Mustill in T) that the word "crime"  in  the
    Convention phrase "serious non-political crime" in Art 1F(b)  envisaged
    conduct "recognised as criminal by the common consent of nations".   It
    may well be, therefore, that the  'autonomous'  meaning  of  Art  33(2)
    entails a wider recourse to the domestic law of the relevant Contacting
    State in defining what is  a  "particularly  serious  crime"  than  was
    necessary in the case in Adan and Aitsiguer.   We will return  to  this
    argument below.

32. Mr Draycott referred us to a number of sources which he relied upon  to
    establish the autonomous meaning of Art 33(2) which, he  submitted,  is
    inconsistent with that  in  s.72  and  the  2004  Order,  and  is  more
    favourable to the Appellant.  We consider  these  materials  under  the
    following five headings (a) UNHCR  Comments;  (b)  Parliamentary  Joint
    Committee on Human Rights; (c) Academic Literature; (d)  Overseas  Case
    Law; (e) Domestic Case Law.

      UNHCR

33. Mr Draycott relied upon the UNHR's paper, The Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002  (Specification  of  Particularly  Serious  Crimes)
    Order 2004,  UNHCR  Comments  (November  2004).    At  page  2  of  the
    document, the UNHCR comment on the application of Art 33(2):

        "Article 33(2) applies to refugees who become an extremely  serious
        threat to the country of asylum  due  to  the  severity  of  crimes
        perpetrated by them in the country of asylum.  It aims  to  protect
        the safety of the country of refuge and hinges  on  the  assessment
        that the refugee in question poses a major actual or future threat.
         For this reason  the  Article  33(2)  mechanism  has  always  been
        considered as a measure of last resort, taking precedence over  and
        above the application of criminal sanctions and  justified  by  the
        exceptional threat posed by the individual - a threat such that  it
        can only be countered by removing the person from  the  country  of
        asylum, including, if necessary, to the country of origin."

34. In relation to the definition  of  "particularly  serious  crime",  the
    paper continues at page 3:

        "UNHCR recognises that the term "serious crime" may have  different
        connotations in different legal systems.  In UNHCR's understanding,
        the gravity of the crimes should be  judged  against  international
        standards, not simply by its categorisation in the  host  State  or
        the nature of the penalty.  Crimes  such  as  petty  theft  or  the
        possession for personal use of illicit  narcotic  substances  would
        not meet the threshold of  seriousness.   Examples  of  a  "serious
        crime", inter alia, include murder, rape, arson and armed  robbery.
        Certain other offences could be  considered  serious  if  they  are
        accompanied by the use of deadly weapons, involve serious injury to
        persons, or there is evidence of serious habitual criminal conduct.
         Factors to be considered include the nature of the act, the actual
        harm inflicted, the form of procedure used to prosecute the  crime,
        and whether most jurisdictions would consider the act  in  question
        as a  serious  crime.   The  qualification  "particularly  serious"
        indicates that only crimes of a particularly serious nature  should
        be considered egregious enough to warrant an exception to the  non-
        refoulement principle."

35. At page 4, the UNHCR paper continues:

        "...it is generally understood that a 'serious crime' is a  capital
        or a very grave crime normally punished with long imprisonment...."

36. Applying this, the UNHCR paper concludes that  the  range  of  offences
    contemplated by s.72 and the 2004 Order as  constituting  "particularly
    serious crime[s]" is incompatible with the Art  33(2)  of  the  Refugee
    Convention  as  representing  "a  particularly  low  threshold  for  an
    exception to refoulement to apply".

37. The UNHCR paper also takes issue with  the  presumptions  enshrined  in
    s.72 that a particular crime is a "particularly serious crime"  and  on
    the basis of  that  conviction  an  individual  is  a  "danger  to  the
    community".   These provisions, in the UNHCR's view,  are  inconsistent
    with the Refugee Convention's requirement that refoulement should  only
    follow a consideration of the individual's circumstances.  At pages 4-5
    this is said:

        "Importance of individual assessment and proportionality

        A judgement on the potential danger to  the  community  necessarily
        requires an examination of the circumstances of the refugee as well
        as   the   particulars   of   the   specific   offence.    Relevant
        considerations include whether  the  refugee  may  be  regarded  as
        incorrigible in light of prior convictions for grave offences,  and
        the  prospects  for  the  refugee's  reform,   rehabilitation   and
        reintegration into society.  Where the  refugee  has  responded  to
        rehabilitative measures, or where there are  indications  that  the
        refugee can be reformed, Article 33(2) should not apply because the
        potential threat to the community would have  been  (or  could  be)
        removed.  Other relevant considerations would include the refugee's
        behaviour while serving his earlier sentence, the  fact  that  they
        are released on parole,  and  the  refugee's  co-operation  in  the
        reform programs.

        The particulars of the offence are crucial pointers as  to  whether
        the convicted refugee poses or is likely to pose a  danger  to  the
        community.  UNHCR is very concerned more generally that Section  72
        NIAA  provides  for  a  presumption  that  an  offence  is   deemed
        "particularly serious" exclusively on  the  basis  of  a  custodial
        sentence of two years or more.  This is not appropriate inasmuch as
        it completely excludes  from  judicial  consideration  the  overall
        context  of  the  offence,  including  its  nature,   effects   and
        surrounding circumstances, the  offender's  motives  and  state  of
        mind,  and   the   existence   of   extenuating   (or   aggravating
        circumstances).  In UNHCR's view, it is imperative that  contextual
        factors such as these should be  considered  carefully  if  Article
        33(2) is to be properly applied.

        With respect to proportionality, UNHCR has  consistently  advocated
        for the need to weigh up the gravity of the offence for  which  the
        individual appears to be responsible against  the  consequences  of
        refoulement.   In  UNHCR's  view,  the  proportionality   text   is
        necessary in order to ensure that the exceptions applied in  manner
        consistent with the overriding humanitarian object and  purpose  of
        the 1951 Convention.  Although the concept  of  proportionality  is
        not expressly mentioned in the 1951 Convention, it is a fundamental
        principle  in  international   human   rights   and   international
        humanitarian law (for example, in the jurisprudence of the European
        Court  of  Human  Rights,  as  well  as  in  the  context  of   the
        International Covenant  on  Civil  and  Political  Rights).   UNHCR
        therefore recommends that proportionality considerations  be  taken
        into account when reaching a decision  leading  to  application  of
        Article 33(2)."

38. Whilst much of the UNHCR's remarks is directed to the  "danger  to  the
    community" requirement in Art 33(2), there is strong support  here  for
    the  "contextual"  assessment  of  whether  a  crime  is  "particularly
    serious" based upon a range of factors concerned  with  the  individual
    and the nature of his past criminal offending.

39. The UNHCR also considers (at p.5) that the shift of the burden of proof
    brought about by the presumptions in s.72 (particularly in  respect  of
    whether the individual is a "danger to the community") is  incompatible
    with  the  Refugee  Convention  although  no  authority  is  cited   to
    substantial the proposition:

        "Burden of Proof

        It is a general principle of law  that  the  burden  of  proving  a
        particular fact falls upon the party asserting it.  In the case  of
        Article 33(2), the burden of proof is on the State  to  prove  that
        one  or  several  convictions  are  symptomatic  of  the  criminal,
        incorrigible nature of the person and that he is likely  to  do  it
        again, thereby  constituting  a  danger  to  the  community.   Both
        Section 72 NIAA and the list of offences in  the  Order  shift  the
        burden of proof from the State to the refugee to prove that  he  is
        not a danger to the community.  Such  a  presumption  is,  however,
        excessively onerous and virtually impossible to rebut."

40. At page 6, the UNHCR reaches its overall conclusion on the UK regime:

        "CONCLUSION

        In UNHCR's view, the broad regime set out by the Order and  Section
        72 NIAA is not  necessary  or  appropriate.   UNHCR  considers  the
        compilation of a list that removes the need to consider  individual
        cases to be generally undesirable and the long list set out in  the
        Order to be particularly alarming.  As outlined above, the analysis
        to apply Article 33(2) is a two-step process:   the  first  one  to
        establish whether there is a conviction for a particularly  serious
        crime and then whether by this fact, the refugee presents a  danger
        to the community.

        In line with general principles of law, the exception to  the  non-
        refoulement  principles  contained  in  Article  33(2)  should   be
        interpreted restrictively.  The large number of offences listed  in
        the Serious Crimes Order and the wide discretionary powers  granted
        to the Secretary of State regarding  analogous  offences  committed
        abroad, instead increase the scope of interpretation.  The creation
        through various pieces of legislation of open-ended  exceptions  to
        the rule against non-refoulement, weaken it  for  all  intents  and
        purposes and seriously impair the  good-faith  application  of  the
        1951 Convention in the United Kingdom.

        This is additionally undermined by the  use  of  an  administrative
        instruction  extending   this   wide   ranging   qualification   of
        particularly serious crimes to deny examination of an asylum  claim
        in substance altogether."

41. The views of the UNHCR on  the  scope  of  Art  33(2)  are  undoubtedly
    relevant to our decision.  In KK (Article 1F(c)) Turkey)  [2004]  UKIAT
    00101, the IAT set out (at [81]) the proper approach  when  considering
    the UNHCR's view of the meaning of Art 1F(c):

           "The views of the UNHCR, which has the responsibility under  the
           governing statute for administering the Refugee Convention as it
           applies to nations and individuals, are of  course  entitled  to
           the very  greatest  respect.   Those  views  are  not,  however,
           binding on us and they do not necessarily  reflect  the  correct
           interpretation of the Convention."

42. The UNHCR's paper supports Mr Draycott's submission that s.72  and  the
    2004 Order may not reflect the 'autonomous' meaning and application  of
    Art 33(2).   The need to take account of all the circumstances  of  the
    individual and  his  offending  is  a  central  plank  of  the  UNHCR's
    understanding of the phrase "particularly serious crime" in Art  33(2).
      Equally,  we  see  the  attraction  of  an  interpretation  which  is
    consistent with the humanitarian aims of  the  Refugee  Convention  and
    which, because we are concerned with the scope of an exception  to  the
    international  protection  afforded  to  refugees  by  the  Convention,
    militates in favour of an  interpretation  that  only  eats  into  that
    protection to the extent necessary to protect  the  country  of  refuge
    from a serious criminal who is a danger to  that  country's  community.
    That is what we understand by the UNHCR's reference to interpreting Art
    33(2) "restrictively" (see KK at [64] in  relation  to  exclusion  from
    protection by virtue of Art 1F).   It is not readily  apparent  to  us,
    however, why that results in Art 33(2)  only  being  applied  in  cases
    where there is an "exceptional threat" to the community.  There  is  no
    justification of that in the words themselves  and  we  have  not  been
    shown any basis for that being the intended scope of Art 33(2).

43. We also have reservations about the UNHCR's  own  categorisation  of  a
    "serious crime" and "particular serious crime".  No authority or source
    (beyond the UNHCR's own Handbook) is offered for the limitation of  the
    latter to  a  crime  that  is  "capital  or  very  grave  ...  normally
    punishable with long imprisonment" (p.4).  To  some  extent  this  cuts
    across the UNHCR's own view that the scope and application of Art 33(2)
    can only be  determined  by  looking  at  the  individual's  particular
    circumstances.    Further  the  UNHCR   offers   no   basis   for   the
    "international standards" which would  exclude  some  crimes  from  the
    "serious" category such as possession of narcotics for an  individual's
    own use but necessarily  include,  for  example,  all  convictions  for
    murder.  As regards the latter, there may be a  discernible  difference
    in culpability between a person  convicted  of  murder  for  helping  a
    terminally-ill loved one to die and a pre-meditated killer of a police-
    officer on duty.  Both are equally guilty of the crime of murder but it
    may be doubted whether, without more, it would necessarily be right  to
    categorise both as having committed a "particularly serious crime".

44. The important point, in our view, may well be that made  by  the  UNHCR
    that circumstances are everything even if some crimes, at first  blush,
    should fall inside or  outside  the  "particularly  serious"  category.
    This, of course, is one of Mr Draycott's points.  Section  72  and  the
    2004 Order do not allow for  that  individual  assessment  because  the
    presumptions in s.72(2) (imprisonment for at least 2 years) and s.72(4)
    (listed offences  in  the  2004  Order)  are  irrebuttably  treated  as
    "particularly serious" crimes.

      Joint Committee on Human Rights

45. Mr Draycott also referred us to the Report of the  Parliamentary  Joint
    Committee  on  Human  Rights,  The  Nationality  and  Asylum  Act  2002
    (Specification of Particularly  Serious  Crimes)  Order  2004,  Twenty-
    second Report of Session 2003-04, HL Paper 190,  HC  1212  (27  October
    2004).   The Joint  Committee  referred  to  an  earlier  UNHCR  paper,
    Guidelines on International Protection: Application  of  the  Exclusion
    clauses: Article 1F of the 1951 Convention relating to  the  Status  of
    Refugees (4 September 2003), where the UNHCR contrasted the  definition
    of "serious" crime in Art 1F(b) with "particularly  serious  crime"  in
    Art 33(2):

        "25. The Guidelines and Background Note also provide some  guidance
        on the relationship between Articles 1F(b) and 33(2) of the Refugee
        Convention-

           10. Article 1F should not be confused  with  Article  33(2)  ...
           Unlike Article 1F which is concerned with persons  who  are  not
           eligible for refugee status, Article 33(2) is directed to  those
           who have already been determined to be refugees. Articles 1F and
           33(2) are thus distinct legal provisions serving very  different
           purposes. Article  33(2)  applies  to  refugees  who  become  an
           extremely serious threat to the country of  asylum  due  to  the
           severity of crimes perpetrated by them. It aims to  protect  the
           safety of the country of refuge and  hinges  on  the  assessment
           that the refugee in question poses  a  major  actual  or  future
           threat.  For  this  reason,  Article  33(2)  has   always   been
           considered as a measure of last resort, taking  precedence  over
           and  above  criminal  law  sanctions  and   justified   by   the
           exceptional threat posed by the individual-a threat such that it
           can only be countered by removing the person from the country of
           asylum.

           ...

           44. Article 1F(b) also requires the crime to have been committed
           'outside the country  of  refuge  prior  to  [the  individual's]
           admission to that country as a  refugee'.  ...  Individuals  who
           commit 'serious non-political  crimes'  within  the  country  of
           refuge are subject to that country's criminal law  process,  and
           in the case of particularly grave  crimes  to  Articles  32  and
           33(2) of the 1951 Convention; they do not fall within the  scope
           of the exclusion clause under Article 1F(b). The  logic  of  the
           Convention is thus that the type of crimes  covered  by  Article
           1F(b)  committed  after  admission  would  be  handled   through
           rigorous  domestic   criminal   law   enforcement   and/or   the
           application of Article 32 and Article 33(2) where necessary.

        26. The UNHCR guidance confirms what to us appears from the wording
        of Article  33(2)  compared  to  Article  1F(b):  that  the  phrase
        "particularly serious crimes"  in  Article  33(2)  of  the  Refugee
        Convention has a narrower meaning than the phrase "serious crimes",
        which can lead to the exclusion from refugee status  under  Article
        1F(b). Where a refugee who has  already  been  recognised  as  such
        commits a serious non-political crime in  the  country  of  refuge,
        this should be dealt with through the ordinary criminal law process
        of that country; it is only in  the  case  of  "particularly  grave
        crimes" that Article 33(2) applies.

        Assessment of compatibility

        27. We therefore have grave concerns about the compatibility of the
        Order with the Refugee Convention,  properly  interpreted.  In  our
        view, the crimes included in the Order go far beyond  what  can  be
        regarded as "particularly  serious  crimes"  for  the  purposes  of
        Article 33(2). The list of  crimes  which  are  specified  for  the
        purposes of s. 72(4)(a) of the 2002 Act includes a number of crimes
        which cannot on any  view  be  regarded  as  "particularly  serious
        crimes" as that phrase is to be interpreted in the context  of  the
        Refugee Convention. It includes, for  example,  theft,  entering  a
        building as a trespasser intending to steal, aggravated taking of a
        vehicle, criminal damage, and possession of  controlled  drugs.  We
        doubt whether these offences, per  se,  would  amount  to  "serious
        crimes" for the purposes  of  Article  1F(b),  and  are  even  more
        doubtful that  they  are  capable  of  amounting  to  "particularly
        serious crimes" for the purpose of Article 33(2).

        28. By specifying such offences, the Order is in  effect  expanding
        the exceptions to the important principle of  non-refoulement,  and
        thereby weakening the strength of that principle. In our view  this
        is incompatible with the Refugee Convention  properly  interpreted.
        In view  of  the  humanitarian  purpose  of  that  Convention,  the
        exceptions to the principle of  non-refoulement  in  Article  33(2)
        should be given a restrictive interpretation, not an interpretation
        which expands their scope and correspondingly weakens the principle
        itself. We draw this matter to the attention of each House."

46. The Joint Committee also expressed  considerable  doubt  about  whether
    s.72 itself was compatible with the Refugee Convention because  of  the
    irrebuttable  presumption  that  certain  offences  were  "particularly
    serious" and because of the presumption, albeit a rebuttable one,  that
    conviction of such an offence made  the  individual  a  danger  to  the
    community.  At paras 33-36 the Joint Committee said this:

        "33. In the course of our consideration of this question,  however,
        it has become clear to us that the very scheme of s. 72 itself  may
        be  incompatible  with  the  Refugee  Convention  in  a  number  of
        respects. We have concerns, for example, about the  appropriateness
        of a conclusive presumption in  relation  to  whether  a  crime  is
        "particularly serious". It is clear to us that the applicability of
        the exceptions to the principle of non-refoulement in Article 33(2)
        must be judged on a case-by-case basis, taking into account all the
        individual circumstances of  the  case,  including  the  particular
        circumstances of the commission of  the  specified  offence.  There
        may, for example, have been  significant  mitigating  circumstances
        surrounding the offence which lessen its seriousness. By  the  same
        token, there may be aggravating factors  which  make  an  otherwise
        less serious offence more serious, for example the use of a  deadly
        weapon, or serious injury  to  people.  Section  72  precludes  any
        consideration of such factors, because it provides for a conclusive
        (i.e.  non-rebuttable)  presumption  that  certain   offences   are
        "particularly serious crimes" for the purposes of Article 33(2).

        34. We are also concerned that s. 72 of the 2001 Act  reverses  the
        burden of proof in relation to whether a refugee is  a  "danger  to
        the community". Article 33(2) appears to presuppose that the burden
        is on the State  to  establish  that  an  individual,  having  been
        convicted of a particularly serious crime, is also a danger to  the
        community. The effect of section 72 of the 2002  Act,  however,  is
        that where an offence of a particular kind has been committed by  a
        refugee or a claimant for refugee status, they are presumed both to
        have committed a particularly serious offence and to be a danger to
        the community, unless they can demonstrate  that  they  are  not  a
        danger to the community.

        35.  We  are  further  concerned  that  by  adopting  a  rebuttable
        presumption approach to the applicability of Article 33(2)  of  the
        Refugee Convention, s. 72 of the 2002 Act precludes the application
        of a proper proportionality test to the particular circumstances of
        an individual case. In determining whether  the  exception  to  the
        principle  of  non-refoulement  in  Article  33(2)  applies  in   a
        particular case, it is necessary for a  balancing  exercise  to  be
        carried out, weighing the nature of the offence and the  degree  of
        danger to the community on the  one  hand  against  the  degree  of
        persecution feared on the  other  if  the  individual  were  to  be
        returned. Section 72 of the 2002 Act gives effect to an approach to
        the application of  Article  33(2)  which  has  no  regard  to  the
        individual circumstances of each case other than to the extent that
        the individual can prove that he is not a danger to the  community.
        Even  this  limited  opportunity   to   consider   the   individual
        circumstances  of  the  case   is   narrowly   circumscribed:   the
        seriousness of the offence is not relevant  to  this  inquiry  (see
        above), and the gravity of the fear or  threat  of  persecution  is
        expressly ruled out as a relevant consideration. The only  question
        is whether the individual can show that he is not a danger  to  the
        community. If he cannot prove this,  Article  33(2)  is  deemed  to
        apply simply by virtue of a particular type of offence having  been
        committed.

        36. We do not, however, go any further into  the  question  of  the
        compatibility of s. 72 of the 2002 Act with the Refugee Convention,
        as no purpose would  be  served  reporting  to  Parliament  on  the
        compatibility of a provision which has  already  been  enacted  and
        which there is no imminent occasion for Parliament  to  reconsider.
        We merely draw to the attention of each House  our  concerns  about
        the compatibility of s. 72 of the 2002 Act with  Article  33(2)  of
        the Refugee Convention. We  may  return  to  this  question  at  an
        appropriate juncture in the future."

47. There is considerable overlap between  the  arguments  and  conclusions
    reached by the Joint Committee and those of the UNHCR  whose  materials
    the Joint Committee rely so heavily upon.  Our earlier  concerns  about
    some of the points made by the UNHCR apply with equal force  here.   We
    will return to some of these below.  For now, we would observe that the
    restrictive scope afforded Art 33(2) finds no root in the words of  Art
    33(2) itself, in particular that it serves  to  except  from  the  non-
    refoulement obligation only those that pose  an  "exceptional  threat".
    Further, even if the contextual approach is the correct one, it is  not
    clear why the Joint Committee reaches the view that Art 33(2) imposes a
    'proportionality' test requiring the decision-maker to weigh  the  risk
    of persecution in a particular case against the nature of the crime and
    the risk the individual poses  to  the  community.   That  approach  is
    eschewed in the UK by s.72(8) reading across the effect of  s.34(1)  of
    the Anti-terrorism, Crime and Security Act 2001.  It has also not found
    favour in the courts in different but  not  wholly  unrelated  contexts
    (e.g. T v Immigration Officer (Art 1F(b)) and KK (Art 1F(c))).  We  see
    no  basis  for  approaching  the  interpretation  of  Art   33(2)   any
    differently.   One  additional  point  is  worth  noting.   The   Joint
    Committee considered the  presumptions  in  s.72  only  implicated  the
    compatibility of s.72 itself with Art 33(2) rather than  the  vires  of
    the 2004 Order.  That may well be correct.  The defect will not be with
    the Order but in its application through the presumptions  in  s.72(4).
    Only an argument based upon the Qualification Directive  would  entitle
    us to conclude that s.72 is unlawful.

      Academic Literature

48. The relevance of  academic  commentaries  to  the  work  of  courts  in
    determining the content of  international  law  is  not  disputed.   Mr
    Draycott referred us to the work of two leading academic authors in the
    field of refugee law - Professor Guy Goodwin-Gill of Oxford  University
    and Professor James Hathaway (then of) Michigan Law School - in support
    of his submissions.

49. In The Refugee in International Law (3rd edn) (G.  Goodwin-Gill  and  J
    McAdam), 2008 OUP, the learned authors cite the majority's decision  in
    the Australian Federal Court decision of A v Minister  for  Immigration
    and Multicultural Affairs [1999] FCA 227 at para [42] to highlight  the
    dual requirements in  Art  33(2)  of  it  being  established  that  the
    individual has been convicted of a  "particularly  serious  crime"  and
    also that he constitutes "a danger  to  the  community".   The  authors
    continue (at pp.237-8):

        "Along with a number of  other  jurisdictions,  Australia  has  now
        legislated contrary to this reasoning, by prescribing crimes  which
        are to be regarded as 'particularly serious' for  the  purposes  of
        article 33(2) of the 1951 Convention.  An approach in terms of  the
        penalty imposed alone will likely be arbitrary.  In our  view,  and
        as  a  matter  of  international  law,   the   interpretation   and
        application of this concept in the context of an exception to  non-
        refoulement ought necessarily to involve an assessment of  all  the
        circumstances, including the nature of the offence, the  background
        to its commission, the behaviour of the individual, and the  actual
        terms of any sentence imposed.  As in the case of article 1F(b),  a
        priori  determinations  of  seriousness  by  way   of   legislative
        labelling or other measures substituting  executive  determinations
        for judicial (and judicious) assessments are inconsistent with  the
        international standard which is required to be  applied,  and  with
        the humanitarian intent of the Convention.  After all, what  is  at
        issue here is action by the State in manifest disregard of what  is
        recognized as serious danger (persecution) to the life  or  liberty
        of a refugee.  It is the nature of presumptions that they disregard
        context and circumstances, and  therefore  also  the  principle  of
        individual assessment."

50. It is  interesting  to  note  from  the  footnote  references  (see  in
    particular footnote 236 which we have omitted) that the regime in  s.72
    and the 2004 Order is  not  unique  to  the  United  Kingdom.   Similar
    legislative "labelling" provisions deeming certain  offences  to  be  a
    "particularly serious crime" exist, for example, in Canada (Immigration
    and Refugee Protection Act 2001, s.36), Australia (Migration Act  1958,
    s.91U) and the United States of America (Immigration & Nationality  Act
    1952, ss.208 and 241).

51. The thrust of Goodwin-Gill and McAdam's view is that Art 33(2) requires
    an individual assessment at least of the  individual's  danger  to  the
    community.  Little is said about any 'autonomous' meaning of the phrase
    "particularly serious crime" other than this (at p.237):

        "The jurisprudence  is  relatively  sparse  and  the  notion  of  a
        'particularly serious crime' is not a term of art..."

52. The learned authors' views are largely in line with the UNHCR and Joint
    Committee in relation to the issue of the use of presumptions in  s.72.
    What little is said about the meaning of "particularly  serious  crime"
    is, in our respectful view, not helpful.  It is unclear what  is  meant
    by their latter statement but, in our view, it cannot be taken to  mean
    that there is no autonomous international meaning.

53. In The Rights of Refugees under International Law (2005), CUP Professor
    James Hathaway offers a fuller analysis of Art 33(2) (at pp.349-52):

        "...the criminality exclusion set by Art. 33(2)  exists  to  enable
        host states to protect the safety of  their  own  communities  from
        criminal refugees who are shown to be  dangerous.   This  right  to
        engage in the  refoulement  of  dangerous  criminals  is,  however,
        carefully constrained.

        First, the gravity of criminality which justifies refoulement under
        Art. 33(2) is higher than that which  justifies  the  exclusion  of
        fugitives from justice under Art. 1(F)(b) of the Convention.   Art.
        1 denies protection to an extraditable criminal who has committed a
        "serious non-political crime outside the country of refuge prior to
        his admission to that country as a refugee."  "Serious" criminality
        in this context is normally understood to mean  acts  that  involve
        violence against persons, such as homicide, rape, child  molesting,
        wounding, arson, drugs trafficking, and armed robbery.  The gravity
        of harm necessary to  justify  the  refoulement  of  a  person  who
        qualifies for refugee status - expressly framed as a "particularly"
        serious crime - is clearly higher still, and has  been  interpreted
        to require that even when  the  refugee  has  committed  a  serious
        crime, refoulement is only warranted when account has been taken of
        all mitigating and other circumstances  surrounding  commission  of
        the offence. ....

        Second, while  refugee  status  is  to  be  withheld  from  persons
        reasonably suspected of criminal conduct under  Art.  1(F)(b),  the
        refoulement of refugees is permissible only when there has actually
        been  conviction  by  a  final  judgement.   Appeal  rights  should
        therefore have expired or been  exhausted,  limiting  the  risk  of
        refoulement  strictly  to  those   whose   criminality   has   been
        definitively established in accordance with accepted, general legal
        norms.

        Third and most important, the nature of the  conviction  and  other
        circumstances must justify the conclusion that the refugee in  fact
        constitutes a danger to the  community  from  which  protection  is
        sought.   Because  danger  follows  from  the  refugee's   criminal
        character, it does not matter whether the crime  was  committed  in
        the state of origin, an intermediate state, or  the  asylum  state.
        Nor is it relevant whether the claimant has or  has  not  served  a
        penal  sentence  or  otherwise  been  punished.   In  contrast   to
        exclusion  from  refugee  status  under  Article  1(F)(b)  of   the
        Convention, however, particularized refoulement cannot be based  on
        the refugee's criminal record per se - as seems increasingly to  be
        the practice in the United States,  for  example.   Refoulement  is
        instead authorized only as  a  "last  resort"  where  there  is  no
        alternative mechanism to protect the community in  the  country  of
        asylum from an unacceptably high risk of  harm.   The  practice  of
        some states to give dangerous refugees  the  option  of  indefinite
        incarceration in the asylum state as an alternative to  refoulement
        is therefore one mechanism to be considered, since it protects  the
        host community, yet averts the risk of being  persecuted.   In  the
        end, however, the Refugee Convention accepts that  in  extreme  and
        genuinely exceptional cases, the usual considerations  of  humanity
        must yield to the critical  security  interests  of  the  receiving
        state.   Thus,  if  the  demanding  criteria  of  Art.   33(2)  are
        satisfied , an asylum state may, assuming there is no other option,
        remove a refugee convicted of  a  particularly  serious  crime  who
        poses a danger to the host community's safety - even  if  the  only
        option is to send the refugee to his or her country of origin."

54. We have quoted this passage at length because Professor  Hathaway  sets
    out  his  view  of  the  underlying  purpose  behind,  and   consequent
    limitations upon, Art 33(2) of the Refugee Convention.  He states  that
    "the  Refugee  Convention  accepts  that  in  extreme   and   genuinely
    exceptional cases, the usual considerations of humanity must  yield  to
    the critical security interests of the  receiving  state."   Again,  we
    remain unconvinced that any words in the text of Art 33(2) or  inherent
    underlying policy necessarily justify such a high hurdle ("extreme" and
    "exceptional") for displacement of the non-refoulement obligation.   To
    paraphrase, there is nothing to suggest  that  only  the  exceptionally
    criminal and extremely dangerous fall within Art 33(2).  The underlying
    theme of  a  "contextual"  approach  to  applying  Art  33(2)  is  also
    repeated.   Hathaway   endorses   the   need   for   the   individual's
    circumstances to be taken into account in assessing the application  of
    Art 33(2).  To this extent, Hathaway's understanding of the meaning  of
    Art 33(2) chimes with the essence of Mr Draycott's submissions.

55. To support this point, Professor Hathaway relies  upon  the  Australian
    Federal Court decision of Betkoshabeh v Minister  for  Immigration  and
    Multicultural Affairs (1998) 157 ALR 95  (reversed  on  other  grounds:
    [1999] FCA 980).  This case is also relied upon by Mr Draycott  and  we
    consider it next.

      Overseas Case Law

56. Mr Draycott referred us to the Australian  Federal  Court  decision  of
    Betkoshabeh v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs (1998)
    157 ALR 95.  In Betkoshabeh, the appellant was  an  Assyrian  Christian
    from Iran.  He was recognised as a refugee in Australia.  The appellant
    developed severe paranoid  delusions.   He  formed  the  view  that  an
    interpreter whom he had befriended whilst detained  pending  resolution
    of his refugee status was responsible for his detention and involved in
    a conspiracy to deport him.  He entered  the  interpreter's  home  and,
    armed with two knives,  hid  in  a  cupboard.   He  was  found  by  the
    interpreter's father and subsequently  pleased  guilty  to  charges  of
    being unlawfully on the premises and intentionally  damaging  property.
    He received a community based order.  Subsequently, he  went  again  to
    her home with a knife and threatened to kill her.  He  made  subsequent
    threats  over  the  telephone.   He  was  convicted  of  one  count  of
    aggravated burglary and  five  counts  of  threats  to  kill.   He  was
    sentenced to three years and six months imprisonment.

57. A decision was made to deport the appellant.  The Minister relied  upon
    Art 33(2) and the Administrative Appeals Tribunal affirmed the decision
    to deport him on the basis that the offence of "threat to kill"  was  a
    "particularly  serious  crime"  within  Art  33(2)   of   the   Refugee
    Convention.  The appellant appealed to the Federal Court which  quashed
    the decision.  Finkelstein J held that the  AAT  had  misconstrued  Art
    33(2)  by  failing  to  consider  the  specific  circumstances  of  the
    appellant's  crime  (particularly   his   psychiatric   condition)   in
    determining that it was one that fell within Art 33(2).  Finkelstein  J
    said (at p.100):

        "The expression "particularly serious crime" in  Article  33(2)  is
        not defined in the Convention. The expression shows that it is  not
        enough for the crime committed to be a serious crime.  It  must  be
        "particularly serious" as well as  a  crime  that  shows  that  the
        refugee is a danger to the community.

        On its proper construction, Article 33(2) does not contemplate that
        a crime will  be  characterised  as  particularly  serious  or  not
        particularly serious merely by reference to the nature of the crime
        that has been committed although this may suffice  in  some  cases.
        The reason is that there are very many crimes where it is just  not
        possible to determine whether they are particularly serious without
        regard to the circumstances surrounding their commission. "

58. Having cited the earlier unreported  case  of  Vabaza  v  Minister  for
    Immigration and Multicultural Affairs (Fed  Ct  Aust,  Goldberg  J,  27
    February 1997) in which the judge seemed to say that the offences of  a
    threat to kill and rape were  per  se  "particularly  serious  crimes",
    Finkelstein J continued (at pp.101-2):

        "If this is what his Honour meant then I regret to say  that  I  am
        unable to agree with him. There will be occasions when a threat  to
        kill cannot be treated as a  particularly  serious  crime.  It  all
        depends upon the circumstances. While it is true  that  rape  is  a
        serious crime there will be occasions, rare  though  they  may  be,
        when a rape could not be treated as a particularly  serious  crime.
        Again, it all depends upon the circumstances.

        The view that I have formed concerning the proper  approach  to  be
        adopted in determining whether a crime is particularly serious  for
        the purposes of Article 33(2) is one that has been applied  in  the
        United States  of  America.  For  example,  in  In  the  matter  of
        Frentescu, (1982) 18 I & N Dec 244 a refugee had been convicted  of
        burglary and sentenced to a term of imprisonment of  three  months.
        The  question  arose  whether  this  was   a   conviction   for   a
        "particularly serious crime" within the meaning of  s  243(h)(2)(B)
        of the Immigration and Nationality Act 1952 (US) thus enabling  the
        refugee to be deported from the United States. Section 243(h)(2)(B)
        was in substantially  the  same  terms  as  Article  33(2)  of  the
        Convention. The Board of Immigration Appeals held that while  there
        are crimes which on their face are particularly serious crimes,  in
        most cases it is necessary to analyse each crime on a case by  case
        basis to decide whether it is particularly serious. The Board  said
        (at 247):

           "In judging the seriousness of a crime, we look to such  factors
           as  the  nature  of  the  conviction,  the   circumstances   and
           underlying  facts  of  the  conviction,  the  type  of  sentence
           imposed,  and,  most   importantly,   whether   the   type   and
           circumstance of the crime indicate that  the  alien  will  be  a
           danger to the community. Crimes against persons are more  likely
           to  be   characterised   as   "particularly   serious   crimes".
           Nevertheless we recognise that  there  may  be  instances  where
           crimes (or a crime) against property will be considered as  such
           crimes".

        This formulation of principle was approved by two decisions of  the
        Court of Appeals  for  the  9th  Circuit,  namely  Ramirez-Ramos  v
        Immigration and Naturalisation Service (1987) 814 F (2d)  1194  and
        Beltran-Zavala v Immigration and Naturalisation Service (1990)  912
        F (2d) 1027.

        In Beltran-Zavala the Court of Appeals was concerned with a refugee
        who had been convicted of selling marijuana to an undercover police
        officer. The refugee, Beltran, pleaded guilty to a violation of the
        Californian Health and Safety Code and was sentenced to  two  years
        probation. Shortly thereafter Beltran was arrested for  an  alleged
        theft from an automobile. As a consequence  he  had  his  probation
        revoked. While imprisoned Beltran received from the Immigration and
        Naturalisation Service an order to show cause why he should not  be
        deported. An immigration judge held that Beltran  did  not  qualify
        for the withholding of deportation because he had been convicted of
        a "particularly serious crime". An appeal from this decision to the
        Board of Immigration Appeals was dismissed and  that  decision  was
        the subject of review by the Court of Appeals. The  court  reversed
        the decision of the Board. It said (at 1421):

           "In the case at hand, however, the BIA did not examine the  type
           of sentence or the underlying facts. It  simply  leapt  directly
           from the fact of conviction to the determination that  it  could
           not withhold deportation. In fairness, it may not have given  as
           much consideration to this factor as it should have, because  of
           its error regarding asylum. Had it been correct about  Beltran's
           eligibility for  asylum,  the  BIA  could  have  concluded  that
           Beltran was not entitled to withholding of  deportation  in  any
           event. The BIA was not correct."

        In this case the Tribunal fell into the same error.  It  failed  to
        have  regard  to  the  facts  and  circumstances   underlying   the
        commission of the various offences of which the appellant had  been
        convicted. It simply decided that those offences were "particularly
        serious offences" because of the  nature  of  those  offences.  The
        Tribunal should have taken into account the fact that  it  was  the
        appellant's psychological illness that led to the commission of the
        offences. It should have taken into account  that  the  appellant's
        conduct was directed to a person whom he believed, as a consequence
        of his psychological illness, had  been  conspiring  to  cause  him
        harm. The Tribunal should have considered the extent to which  that
        psychological  illness  reduced  the  moral  culpability   of   the
        appellant in much the same way as  his  psychological  illness  was
        taken into account in sentencing the appellant for having committed
        those offences: as to the relevance of a psychological  illness  in
        sentencing ...."

59. Mr Draycott relied upon the decision of Finkelstein J in support of his
    contention that the autonomous meaning of Art  33(2)  was  inconsistent
    with the 2004 Order and the presumptions in s.72.

60. For completeness we should refer to  the  case  of  A  v  Minister  for
    Immigration and Multicultural Affairs  [1999]  FCA  227.   Mr  Draycott
    referred to A in his written submissions and it is discussed in Goodwin-
    Gill and McAdam (at pp.238-9) to which we were also referred.  We  were
    not supplied with a report of the case but we subsequently  obtained  a
    transcript of the judgments via  BAILII.    A  number  of  issues  were
    raised in the case.  Dealing  with  the  phrase  "particularly  serious
    crime" in Art 33(2), Burchett and Lee JJ (in their  majority  judgment)
    approved the approach in Betkoshabeh (at [4]):

        "Finkelstein J made it clear that a crime will not necessarily  "be
        characterised as particularly serious or not  particularly  serious
        merely by reference to  the  nature  of  the  crime",  although  he
        thought it might be in a particular  case.  That  was  because  its
        seriousness would  depend  on  the  circumstances  surrounding  its
        commission."

61. Katz J (the third member of the court) also  accepted  Finkelstein  J's
    approach and referred to its acceptance in further litigation involving
    the same claimant (at [41]):

        "As to whether A had been convicted of a particularly serious crime
        within the meaning of Art 33(2),  in Betkoshabeh  v  Minister  for
        Immigration and Multicultural Affairs (1998)  157  ALR  95  at  100
        (Finkelstein J) held that, in order to determine whether a crime is
        a particularly serious one for present purposes,  it  is  generally
        necessary to have regard to  the  circumstances  in  which  it  was
        committed, although he accepted the possibility that there  can  be
        crimes which are particularly serious  per  se.  In Betkoshabeh  v
        Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs  [1999]  FCA  16
        (unreported, 15 January 1999), a  later  case  involving  the  same
        parties, Marshall J (at par 8 of his reasons for  judgment)  agreed
        with the approach of Finkelstein J."

      Domestic Case Law

62. As regards this country, there is a dearth of relevant  case  law.   We
    were only referred to one case touching on the issues we are  asked  to
    decide in respect of Art 33(2)  namely  SB  (Cessation  and  Exclusion)
    Haiti [2005] UKIAT 00036. The appellant was a refugee who had a  string
    of convictions including ones for  assault  occasioning  actual  bodily
    harm, theft, burglary, possession of an imitation firearm and wounding.
     In respect of the latter two offences he had been sentenced  to  terms
    of imprisonment of 15 months and 3 years respectively.   He  sought  to
    resist deportation, inter  alia,  on  the  basis  of  Art  33(1).   The
    Secretary of State relied upon Art 33(2).  Section 72 was not in  force
    at the relevant time.   The  IAT  rejected  the  Secretary  of  State's
    submission that a series of offences could amount  to  "a  particularly
    serious crime" (at [70]):

        "The Convention, and section 72, refer to "a" particularly  serious
        crime.  Of course, convictions for  several  "particularly  serious
        crimes"  also  suffices,   but   convictions   for   several   "not
        particularly serious crimes" do not cause  the  protection  against
        non-refoulement  to  be  removed.   There  must  be  at  least  one
        conviction for "a particularly serious crime".  This is not a piece
        of pedantic  focus  on  an  indefinite  article.   The  removal  of
        protection is serious;  the disqualifying offence has to  attain  a
        particular  level  not  met  by  persistent  low  level  offending.
        Incorrigible criminality and danger to the community do not suffice
        of themselves."

63. In dismissing his appeal, the IAT took the view that on the facts  only
    the offence of wounding was  a  candidate  for  being  a  "particularly
    serious offence" (at  [72]).   The  IAT  looked  at  the  circumstances
    surrounding its commission (at [73]) and concluded (at [74]):

        "74. This offence, by itself or as a single offence, does not quite
        reach the threshold, even though it was a nasty attack,  on  people
        in their homes, and undertaken because the Appellant  thought  that
        he was entitled to take the law into his own  hands.   However,  in
        the context of the Appellant's previous offending,  which  involved
        dishonesty and violence, and an earlier occasion on  which  he  had
        gone to someone's house to deal with a perceived wrong, outside the
        law, it does reach that threshold."

64. Mr Draycott relied on the IAT's approach and submitted that it was only
    the context of the appellant's cumulative criminality that 'tipped  the
    balance' in respect of a conviction for wounding that resulted in  a  3
    year prison sentence.  In the light of this,  applying  the  autonomous
    meaning of the phrase  "particularly  serious  crime",  it  cannot,  he
    submitted, be said that the Appellant's offence  under  s.3(1)  of  the
    Sexual Offences Act 2003 for which he was sentenced to  a  term  of  21
    months reached the high threshold to fall within Art 33(2).

      2. Analysis and Conclusions

65. On the basis of the materials to which we have been  referred  and  the
    submissions made to us, we make the following preliminary points.

66. First, it is our  task  to  search  for  the  autonomous  international
    meaning of the phrase "particularly serious crime" in Art 33(2).   That
    task  is  to  be  undertaken  in  accordance  with  the  principles  of
    interpretation set out in the Vienna Convention, in particular  Art  31
    which we have set out above.   There is no binding  decision  upon  us,
    either from within the UK or at  an  international  level,  as  to  the
    proper interpretation of Art 33(2).

67. Secondly, there is no  clear  guidance  in  the  text  of  the  Refugee
    Convention itself.  There is an apparent contrast  drawn  in  the  text
    between the phrase  "particularly  serious  crime"  in  Art  33(2)  and
    "serious non-political crime" in Art 1F(b) setting out one of the bases
    for excluding an individual from refugee status.  The addition  of  the
    word "particularly" in Art 33(2) suggests a higher  threshold  than  is
    required for exclusion under Art 1F(b).

68. Given the different applications of Arts 1F and 33, it is not clear  to
    us that any meaningful interpretative assistance  beyond  this  can  be
    gained by dwelling on the linguistic variation.   The  arguments  pull,
    at times, in conflicting directions. Art  1F(b)  deals  with  exclusion
    from the Convention's  protection  rather  than,  as  does  Art  33(2),
    permitting  refoulement  of  a  person  otherwise  falling  within  the
    Convention's protection.  On the one hand, one might have expected  the
    more  drastic  outcome  that  an  individual  is  excluded   from   the
    Convention's protection to require a higher, rather than the apparently
    lower, threshold.  That is, perhaps,  reflected  in  the  very  serious
    nature of the international crimes covered by Art  1F(a),  e.g.  crimes
    against humanity and war crimes, and by the high level of international
    transgression that is  needed  to  amount  to  acts  "contrary  to  the
    purposes and principle of the United Nations" in Art 1F(c).  But, it is
    not apparently reflected in the respective wording of Art 1F(b) and Art
    33(2). On the other hand, Art 33(2) is only engaged where an individual
    is a refugee under the Refugee Convention: subject in  the  UK  to  the
    effect of s.72(10) in a certified case.  Art 33(2) does not  take  away
    that status.  As the IAT remarked in KK  at [81]:

        "[Articles 32 and 33] do not affect his refugee status: they merely
        diminish the incidents of that status."

    The consequence is  that  Art  33(2)  contemplates  the  return  of  an
    individual who has established a risk on return to their  own  country.
    It might be thought that Art 33(2) potentially has  therefore  an  even
    greater  impact  upon  an  individual  which  would  justify  a  higher
    threshold than Art 1F(b) before it is engaged.  But even that  argument
    loses some force when it is appreciated that the  exclusion  provisions
    in Art 1F can  be  applied  to  an  individual  who  has  already  been
    recognised as a refugee (see, MT (Algeria) v SSHD [2007] EWCA  Civ  808
    approving KK at [87]).

69. Thirdly, there is broad agreement in the material to which we have been
    referred that for Art 33(2) to be engaged all the circumstances of  the
    individual must be considered.  For  some  this  is  because,  usually,
    whether a crime is "particularly serious" cannot be  determined  merely
    by looking at the nature of the crime; the individual circumstances  of
    the commission of the offence must be taken into account.  Others  more
    readily tether the contextual approach to the "danger to the community"
    requirement.  By way of possible internal contradiction, there is broad
    agreement that some offences, for example murder always fall within the
    "particularly serious" category.  Absent legislative  provisions,  both
    in the UK and abroad, judges have approved and applied this approach of
    looking at the  individual  circumstances  of  the  commission  of  the
    offence in order to determine whether it  is  a  "particularly  serious
    crime" within Art 33(2).  Of particularly note is the  Australian  case
    of Betkoshabeh.

70. Fourthly, and perhaps by way of counter-weight to the  previous  point,
    it may not be without significance that in a number  of  countries  who
    are parties to the Refugee Convention, for  example  Canada,  Australia
    and the USA, legislation has  been  enacted  to  specify  that  certain
    crimes will be treated as "particularly serious" for  the  purposes  of
    Art 33(2) or its legislative equivalent in that country - what Goodwin-
    Gill and Adams refer to as legislative "labelling".   We were not taken
    to this material by either representative.  We are not, therefore, in a
    position to analyse it and we can draw no  conclusions  from  its  mere
    existence.  It may be that each of these countries has  acted  contrary
    to the  Treaty  obligations  or  it  may  be  that  their  actions  are
    indicative of what has been understood that Contracting States  may  do
    consistently with their obligations under the Refugee Convention.

71. Where does that leave the proper interpretation  (and  application)  of
    Art 33(2)?

72. We are in no doubt that what amounts to a "particularly serious  crime"
    is (in part) anchored in the domestic law of the country of refuge  (or
    abroad where that is the place of conviction relied upon).  We  do  not
    see how  the  notion  of  a  "crime"  can  be  otherwise  defined  once
    international criminal law is (rightly) not considered to be the touch-
    stone.  That does not mean,  however,  that  when  a  crime  is  to  be
    characterised as "particularly serious" is also a  matter  of  domestic
    law.  It is not: there is an 'autonomous' international meaning of  the
    phrase.

73. That said, no 'bright line' definition has been  suggested  to  us  and
    none is offered in the materials to which we were  referred.   What  we
    find there is, perhaps, the next best thing; namely  an  interpretative
    approach that recognises that, in applying  Art  33(2)  to  a  specific
    individual, consideration must be taken of the individual circumstances
    of the commission of the offence.  That, in our view,  is  the  correct
    interpretation - and interpretative approach to -  Art  33(2)  and  the
    phrase  "particularly  serious  crime".  We  essentially   agree   with
    Finkelstein J's view in Betkoshabeh ( at p.100) that:

        "On its proper construction, Art 33(2) does not contemplate that  a
        crime  will  be  characterised  as  particularly  serious  or   not
        particularly serious merely by reference to the nature of the crime
        that has been committed although this may suffice  in  some  cases.
        The reason is that there are very many crimes where it is just  not
        possible to determine whether they are particularly serious without
        regard to the circumstances surrounding their commission."

74. Thus, the forensic investigation of whether a crime is a  "particularly
    serious" one in a given case must be a struggle by  the  decision-maker
    (judicial or otherwise) with the facts and  circumstances  relating  to
    the conviction and the offender.  The conclusion, which is part factual
    but essentially one of judgment, must be conscientiously and rationally
    arrived at. No definitional or descriptive lexicon has  been  suggested
    to us that can assist further in the  judicial  quest  for  what  is  a
    "particularly serious crime".   Despite  its  popularity  in  the  non-
    judicial materials we have been  referred  to,  we  see  no  basis  for
    restricting the application of Art 33(2) to "exceptional" or  "extreme"
    cases or to "grave" crimes.  To do so would, in  our  judgment,  be  to
    impose an unwarranted gloss upon the words of Art 33(2).

75. We accept that the words of Art 33(2) dictate that not every crime will
    suffice - self-evidently the crime must be "particularly serious".   We
    also agree with the Australian Federal Court in A (discussed more fully
    below) that it is important to bear in mind that the  requirement  that
    the individual is a "danger to the community" is a distinct issue  when
    applying  Art  33(2).   It  may  well  be  relevant  to  consider   the
    dangerousness of the crime (and of the criminal) in determining whether
    someone has been convicted of a "particularly serious crime" but it can
    be no more than a relevant factor.  One requirement may be  established
    even if the other is not.

76. We  agree  with  Finkelstein  J's  statement  in  Betkoshabeh  that  in
    determining whether an individual's conviction falls within Art  33(2),
    it may be that some offences by  their  very  nature  will  usually  be
    covered.   There will be little need  to  look  at  the  circumstances.
    Murder, rape, serious crimes of violence or public disorder may require
    little more to place them in the "particularly serious" category.   But
    that  will  be  because  nothing  in  the  circumstances  dilutes   the
    justifiable conclusion reached.  But not always: it is not difficult to
    envisage even for murder circumstances which might lead to  a  contrary
    view, for example the offence is an act of mercy  killing.    Likewise,
    there are crimes which, at first blush, do not necessarily seem  to  be
    "particularly serious", for example theft.  Theft is, of course, one of
    the scheduled crimes in the 2004 Order.  By virtue of that Order, it is
    always a "particularly serious crime" regardless of  the  circumstances
    of its commission.  But, there may be a world of difference between the
    categorisation of a conviction for theft arising from a bank heist  and
    one where the individual stole from a supermarket to feed  his  family.
    Both amount to the same crime, but only by looking at the circumstances
    can  it  properly  be  determined  whether  the  crime  was   in   fact
    "particularly serious".  Views may differ on these  factual  situations
    and that is the point.  In our view, Art 33(2) can only be applied in a
    fact-sensitive way taking account  of  all  the  circumstances  of  the
    offence including its nature,  gravity  and  consequences  and  of  the
    offender including any aggravating or mitigating factors.

      Compatibility of the 2004 Order and s.72 with Art 33(2)

77. It follows from our analysis above that by depriving the decision-maker
    of the ability to take account of all the circumstances of an offence's
    commission, and instead listing crimes which a priori fall  within  Art
    33(2), the legislative scheme of  the  2004  Order  combined  with  the
    irrebuttable presumption in s.72(4) that offences falling within it are
    "particularly  serious  crime[s]"  diverges   from   the   'autonomous'
    international meaning and interpretation  of  Art  33(2).    (The  same
    conclusion follows ineluctably for the presumptive effects of  ss.72(2)
    and (3) of the 2002 Act in respect of a UK conviction  with a  sentence
    of at  least  two  years'  imprisonment  and  the  equivalent  overseas
    conviction.)

78. We do not accept Mr Draycott's submission that  any  presumption  would
    offend the Refugee Convention.  Despite the contrary view of the  UNHCR
    (at p.5) and the "concerns" of the Joint Committee (at paras 34-35), we
    see nothing in principle that should lead us to conclude  that  s.72(4)
    (or indeed  s.72(2)  or  (3))  offends  the  'autonomous'  meaning  and
    interpretation of Art 33(2) in presuming that a  specific  crime  is  a
    "particularly serious" one providing that  presumption  is  rebuttable.
    The  individual  would  have  an  opportunity  to  raise  the  relevant
    individual circumstances albeit that a burden of proof is  prima  facie
    cast upon him by the presumption.  Only if the presumption could not be
    rebutted even in the face of evidence  and  argument  to  the  contrary
    would the proper effect of Art 33(2) be  frustrated.   The  problem  is
    that, on ordinary principles of interpretation, s.72(4) does create  an
    irrebuttable presumption (see, SSHD v TB (Jamaica) [2008] EWCA Civ 977,
    at [37] per Stanley Burnton LJ).

79. That deficiency is not, in our view, ameliorated by the fact that there
    is the additional requirement in Art 33(2) that the individual must  be
    shown to be "a danger to  the  community".  That  requirement  is  also
    subject to a presumption against the individual but it is one  that  is
    rebuttable by virtue of s.72(6) of the 2002 Act and  which  might  well
    therefore permit at least some individual, contextual consideration  of
    the  relevant  circumstances.    The  two  are  nevertheless   separate
    requirements in Art 33(2) that must each be satisfied for Art 33(1) not
    to apply.  We agree with the view of Burchett and Lee JJ in the Federal
    Court of Australia's decision in A v MIMA (at [3]-[4])that:

        "The logic of the syntax of  [Art  33(2)]  moves  in  the  opposite
        direction.   The  principal  statement   of   exclusion   is   'who
        constitutes a danger to the community'.  The  phrase  'having  been
        convicted...of a particularly serious  crime'  adds  an  additional
        element, but it is not  expressed  as  if  the  additional  element
        swallowed up the principal  statement....both  of  two  things  are
        required, not that one of them negates the  need  to  consider  the
        other."

80. Although the Australian court was  concerned  to  reject  the  converse
    argument, namely that merely to be convicted of a "particularly serious
    crime" sufficed to show the person was a "danger to the community", the
    interpretative guidance is as apposite here.  Merely  showing  that  an
    individual is a "danger to the community" cannot obviate  the  need  to
    show that the danger springs from his conviction  for  a  "particularly
    serious crime".   The  latter  requires  the  individual  circumstances
    pertaining to that offence to  be  considered  which  may  or  may  not
    correlate directly to the factors relevant to determining whether he is
    also a "danger to the community".

81. That conclusion, however, as Mr Draycott recognised does not assist the
    Appellant to win this appeal unless the 'autonomous' meaning has effect
    in English law and further that the inconsistency means either that the
    legislative  scheme  must  be   interpreted   consistently   with   the
    'autonomous' meaning or, if cannot be, the Tribunal is required not  to
    apply it because the 2004 Order is ultra vires and  if  EU  law  is  in
    play, s.72(4) itself is unlawful.

      Ultra vires and Incorporation

      1. Ultra Vires?

82. We deal first with the issue of whether the Tribunal  has  jurisdiction
    to determine whether a statutory instrument, here the  2004  Order,  is
    ultra vires and, if so, not apply it.

83. The 2004 Order is a statutory instrument passed subject to the negative
    resolution procedure in Parliament (s.72(5)).   As such, it became  law
    on 12 August 2004.  It is trite law that a statutory instrument, unlike
    an Act of Parliament, may be held to be ultra vires on  substantive  or
    procedural  grounds.   (Statutory  instruments  are  also  subject   to
    challenge under the provisions of the Human Rights Act 1998,  including
    the interpretative imperative in s.3(1).)  A statutory  instrument  is,
    nevertheless, the law unless and until it is held  to  be  ultra  vires
    (usually by declaration) by a competent court: until such time  it  has
    legal and practical effect (Hoffman-La Roche (F) & Co  v  Secretary  of
    State for Trade and Industry [1975] AC 295).

84. The conventional view is that the  'competent'  court  in  England  and
    Wales is the High Court through  an  application  for  judicial  review
    under Part 54 of the CPR or, in  Scotland,  is  the  Court  of  Session
    exercising  its  comparable  supervisory  jurisdiction.   It  does  not
    include tribunals such as the AIT.  Thus,  in  a  number  of  Court  of
    Appeal decisions where parts of the AIT's 2005  Procedural  Rules  have
    been challenged as being ultra vires it has never been  suggested  that
    the Tribunal could itself decide that the rule was ultra  vires  rather
    it has been assumed that the Court of Appeal alone, despite  hearing  a
    statutory appeal from the AIT on a point of law, exclusively  has  that
    jurisdiction  presumably  under  its  inherent  jurisdiction:  see   AM
    (Serbia) v SSHD [2007] EWCA Civ 19 (r.62(7)); FP (Iran) v  SSHD  [2007]
    EWCA Civ 13 (r.19(1) - although these cases may do no more than reflect
    the fact that an immigration decision cannot be  said  to  be  "not  in
    accordance with the law" merely because the AIT applies an ultra  vires
    procedural rule in determining an appeal against that decision after it
    has been made).

85. Likewise, the Tribunal has itself - with one exception - eschewed  such
    a jurisdiction based upon the appeal ground  (now  in  ss.84(1)(e)  and
    86(3)(a)) that the decision is "not in accordance with the law" both in
    respect of statutory instruments and the Immigration  Rules  which,  of
    course, are not a statutory instrument but merely  formalised  policies
    of the Secretary of State albeit ones  given  statutory  imprimatur  by
    s.3(2) of the Immigration 1971 (see Odelola v SSHD [2008] EWCA Civ  308
    and AM (Ethiopia) and others v SSHD [2008] EWCA Civ 1082).

86. In Pardeepan v SSHD [2000] INLR 447 Collins  J  speaking  for  the  IAT
    stated (at [7]) that:

        "...we would need a very great deal of persuasion  indeed  that  we
        had the power to disregard any legislative provision, be it primary
        or secondary legislation."

87. Any reticence on Collins J's part had disappeared a  few  months  later
    when in Koprinov v SSHD (01/TH/00091) (5th February 2001), he said:

        "We  are...satisfied  that,  although   'the   general   law'   and
        'established principles of administrative or common law' are to  be
        applied,  adjudicators  and  the  tribunal  cannot  decide  whether
        Immigration rules or any subordinate legislation is ultra vires."

88. The same view also found favour in R v IAT ex parte Begum [1986] Imm AR
    385.  At page 389 Simon Brown J (as he then was) said this:

        "[The submission that the Immigration Rules should be  struck  down
        as ultra vires] is not one which could have  been  advanced  before
        the Tribunal.  Only the High Court has power under its  supervisory
        jurisdiction to strike down such a provision.  The Tribunal, having
        construed it, had simply to  apply  it,  however  unreasonable  and
        unfair they regard it to be."

89. Likewise in AI v SSHD [2007] EWCA Civ 386, Dyson LJ at [58] re-iterated
    the same limited scope to the Tribunal's jurisdiction  in  relation  to
    the immigration rules:

        "If para 289A(iv)  did  bear  the  meaning  contended  for  by  the
        Secretary of State and if it  were  ultra  vires,  the  AIT  should
        nevertheless have given it full force and  effect.   They  have  no
        power to declare it to be ultra vires, nor did they purport  to  do
        so."

90. That view applies a fortiori in respect of a statutory instrument  such
    as the 2004 Order.

91. The only contrary decision to which we were referred  directly  dealing
    with the  Tribunal's  jurisdiction  is  Shafique  v  SSHD  (18448)  (16
    September 1998) where, relying on  the  House  of  Lords'  decision  in
    Foster v Chief Adjudication Officer [1993] AC 794, the IAT declined  to
    follow Simon Brown J's judgment in Begum  and  concluded  that  it  had
    jurisdiction to determine the vires of an immigration rule.   At  p.10,
    the IAT said this:


         "In the light  of  the  interpretation  put  upon  the  phrase  "in
         accordance with the law...applicable" by the  Court  of  Appeal  in
         Abdi (above), whereby an adjudicator or the Tribunal  is  permitted
         to  consider  whether  a  decision  is  in  accordance   with   the
         established principles of administrative or common law, it is  hard
         to  see  why  the  issue  of  vires   should   be   excluded   from
         consideration.  In the Tribunal's view the approach  taken  by  the
         House of Lords in Foster (above) in respect of the jurisdiction  of
         Social Security Commissioners should apply equally and for the same
         reasons to the  Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal.   In  our  view  the
         decision of Manshoora Begum (above) should be treated as superseded
         by Foster (above).   Accordingly the Tribunal  are  satisfied  that
         they do have jurisdiction to consider the vires of the  Immigration
         Rules."

92. Were it not for the decision in Foster  and  another  decision  of  the
    House to which we were referred, Boddington v British Transport  Police
    [1999] 2 AC 143, we would have no hesitation in rejecting Mr Draycott's
    submissions and accepting those of Mr Patel  to  the  effect  that  the
    Tribunal has no power to disregard a statutory instrument such  as  the
    2004 Order because it considers it to be ultra  vires.    The  Tribunal
    only has statutory jurisdiction (so far as relevant for these purposes)
    to determine whether an immigration decision is "not in accordance with
    the  law"  (s.84(1)(e)  and  s.86(3)(b)).   That  "law"  includes   any
    statutory instrument unless and until it is held to be invalid  by  the
    High Court.  The legal 'metewand' by which the Tribunal determines  the
    legality of the 'immigration decision' is that "law".  A challenge that
    entails the argument that the "law" itself is unlawful is a more  deep-
    rooted and fundamental challenge  going  beyond  the  legality  of  the
    'immigration decision' itself.  It is not one which we consider  to  be
    contemplated by the 2002 Act.  It is properly the  domain  of  judicial
    review.  It is true that in  AA  and  others  [2008]  UKAIT  00003  the
    Tribunal took  the  view  that  the  ground  of  appeal  in  s.84(1)(e)
    permitted challenges based upon public law principles, for  example  of
    fairness and legitimate expectation (see especially  at  [55]).   That,
    however, was intended as a  general  statement  of  the  scope  of  the
    statutory ground: it did not purport to deal with  the  issue  in  this
    appeal.  The Tribunal was not concerned with the vires of  a  statutory
    instrument or of  an  immigration  rule.   Indeed,  at  para  [51]  the
    Tribunal specifically  noted  that  such  challenges  fell  exclusively
    within the jurisdiction  of  the  Administrative  Court  (or  Court  of
    Session).   That is  also,  in  our  view,  a  complete  answer  to  Mr
    Draycott's reliance upon the dicta in E v SSHD [2004] 2 WLR 1351  where
    the Court of Appeal stated that the grounds of challenge in a  case  on
    appeal on a point of law were the same as those available  on  judicial
    review.  The Court simply did not have in mind the issue raised here.

93. Our understanding of the law, however, requires re-examination  in  the
    light of the decisions in Foster and Boddington which were relied  upon
    by Mr Draycott.  We begin with Boddington.

94. In Boddington, the defendant was convicted in the Magistrates Court  of
    the offence of smoking a cigarette in a railway carriage where  smoking
    was prohibited (by notice) contrary  to  the  British  Railway  Board's
    Byelaws 1965 made pursuant to s.67(1) of the Transport Act  1962.   The
    defendant sought to raise the defence that the relevant  byelaw  (taken
    with the required administrative act of posting  a  notice  prohibiting
    smoking) was ultra vires the 1962 Act.  Hence, he had not committed the
    offence.  Overturning the decision of the Divisional Court,  the  House
    of Lords concluded that the defendant could challenge the vires of  the
    byelaw (and administrative act) in the criminal  proceedings,  although
    the House held that he had not made out the substance of his challenge.
     The House of Lords held that the defendant was not  required  to  seek
    judicial review in the High Court.  The  reasoning  of  the  Law  Lords
    reflects the fact that the defendant faced a criminal  charge  and  the
    impracticalities of pursuing judicial review in such cases.

95. Lord Steyn commented (at p.226):

        "One would expect a defendant in a criminal case, where the liberty
        of the subject is at stake, to have no lesser rights. Provided that
        the invalidity of the byelaw is or maybe a defence to the charge  a
        criminal case must be  the  paradigm  of  collateral  or  defensive
        challenge."

96. Later in his speech Lord Steyn (at p.227) considered  the  problems  of
    restricting the defendant's ability  to  challenge  the  vires  of  the
    byelaw to judicial review proceedings as had been held in  the  earlier
    case of Bugg v DPP [1993] QB 473:

        "That decision contemplates  that,  despite  the  invalidity  of  a
        byelaw and the fact that  consistently  with  Reg.  v.  Wicks  such
        invalidity may in a given case afford a  defence  to  a  charge,  a
        magistrate  court  may  not  rule  on  the  defence.  Instead   the
        magistrates may convict a defendant under  the  byelaw  and  punish
        him. That is an unacceptable consequence in a  democracy  based  on
        the rule of law. It is true that Bugg's case allows  the  defendant
        to  challenge  the  byelaw  in  judicial  review  proceedings.  The
        defendant may, however, be out of time before he becomes  aware  of
        the existence of the byelaw. He may lack the  resources  to  defend
        his interests in two courts. He may not be able to obtain legal aid
        for an application for leave to apply for judicial review. Leave to
        apply for judicial review may be refused. At a substantive  hearing
        his scope for demanding examination of witnesses in the  Divisional
        Court  may  be  restricted.  He  may  be  denied  a  remedy  on   a
        discretionary basis.  The  possibility  of  judicial  review  will,
        therefore, in no way compensate him for the loss of  the  right  to
        defend himself by a defensive challenge  to  the  byelaw  in  cases
        where the invalidity of the byelaw might afford him with a  defence
        to the charge. My Lords,  with  the  utmost  deference  to  eminent
        judges  sitting  in  the  Divisional  Court  I  have  to  say   the
        consequences  of  Bugg's  case  are  too  austere  and  indeed  too
        authoritarian to be compatible with the traditions  of  the  common
        law. In Eshugbayi Eleko v. Government of Nigeria [1931] A.C. 662, a
        habeas corpus case, Lord Atkin observed, at p. 670, that "no member
        of the executive can interfere with the liberty or  property  of  a
        British subject  except  on  condition  that  he  can  support  the
        legality of his action before a court  of  justice."  There  is  no
        reason why a defendant in a criminal trial should  be  in  a  worse
        position. And that seems to me to reflect the true  spirit  of  the
        common law.

        There is no good reason why a defendant in a criminal  case  should
        be precluded from arguing that a byelaw is invalid where that could
        afford him with a defence."

97. To like effect, Lord Irvine of Lairg LC said (at pp.216-7):

        "...where subordinate legislation (e.g.  statutory  instruments  or
        byelaws) is promulgated which is of  a  general  character  in  the
        sense that it is directed to the world at large, the first time  an
        individual may be affected  by  that  legislation  is  when  he  is
        charged with an offence under it: so also where a general provision
        is brought into effect by an administrative act, as in this case. A
        smoker might have made his first journey on the line  on  the  same
        train as Mr. Boddington; have found that there was no carriage free
        of no smoking sign and have chosen to exercise what he believed  to
        be his right to smoke on the train. Such an individual  would  have
        had no sensible  opportunity  to  challenge  the  validity  of  the
        posting of the no smoking signs throughout the train until  he  was
        charged, as Mr. Boddington was, under Byelaw 20. In my judgment  in
        such a case the strong presumption must be that Parliament did  not
        intend to deprive the smoker of an opportunity to defend himself in
        the criminal proceedings by asserting the alleged  unlawfulness  of
        the decision to post no smoking notices throughout the train. I can
        see nothing in section 67 of the Transport Act 1962 or the  byelaws
        which could displace that presumption. It is clear from  Wandsworth
        London Borough Council v. Winder [1985] A.C. 461 and Reg. v.  Wicks
        [1998] A.C. 92, 116, per Lord Hoffmann that the  development  of  a
        statutorily based procedure for judicial  review  proceedings  does
        not of itself displace the presumption.

        Accordingly, I consider that the Divisional Court was wrong in  the
        present case in ruling that Mr.  Boddington  was  not  entitled  to
        raise the legality of the  decision  to  post  no  smoking  notices
        throughout the train, as a possible defence to the  charge  against
        him."

    (Lords Slynn of Hadley, Browne-Wilkinson and Hoffmann agreed  with  the
    speeches of Lord Irvine of Lairg LC and Lord Steyn that the magistrates
    were entitled to determine the vires of the byelaw.)

98. There are a number of threads in the Law Lords' reasoning.   First  and
    foremost there  is  the  criminal  context.   The  Law  Lords  objected
    strongly to the prospect of a  defendant  in  a  criminal  case  facing
    conviction for an offence and not being able to argue the vires of  the
    law creating the offence.  That, of course, can have no application  in
    appeals before the Tribunal.  Secondly, the Law  Lords  emphasised  the
    practical difficulties facing a defendant of having  to  challenge  the
    byelaw in  separate  judicial  review  proceedings  and  the  potential
    duplication of proceedings.  That may be  a  real  difficulty  in  some
    cases but again, we would  anticipate,  would  not  necessarily  be  an
    insuperable obstacle for an individual  who  seeks  to  appeal  to  the
    Tribunal.   Indeed,  it  is  within  our  collective   knowledge   that
    concurrent judicial review proceedings are sometimes launched whilst an
    appeal is pending before the Tribunal (see, e.g.  the  'highly  skilled
    migrant' litigation: R(HSMP Forum Ltd) v SSHD [2008] EWHC  664  (Admin)
    and AA and others [2008] UKAIT 00003).

99. One final point.  The Law Lords were concerned to  dispel  reliance  by
    the prosecution upon the (then) championed 'exclusivity rule' in public
    law cases following O'Reilly v Mackman [1983] 2 AC 237.  That rule, now
    fallen out of favour,  was  even  then  of  no  application  where  the
    challenge to the public law decision was raised as a  defence  (whether
    in a civil or criminal context) as  it  is  difficult  to  sustain  the
    argument  that  a  defendant  has  abused  the  court's  process   (the
    jurisprudential basis for O'Reilly) where  he  has  not  initiated  the
    procedure (see Wandsworth LBC v Winder [1985]  AC  461  and  the  cases
    referred to in Lord Steyn's speech  above).    Of  course,  proceedings
    before the Tribunal are brought by the claimant and  so  the  abuse  of
    process argument might have some potential  application  here:  but  it
    does  not.   An  appeal  to  the  Tribunal  is  a  statutory  procedure
    specifically set up to allow challenge to an immigration decision.   We
    do not see how in these circumstances initiating that  procedure  where
    part of the claim is that a statutory instrument is ultra vires can  be
    properly described as an abuse of process (see also Foster,  below  per
    Lord Bridge of Harwich at p.762E-F).

100. We accept that Boddington demonstrates that there are situations  where
    the vires of a statutory instrument (we see no distinction between that
    and the byelaw in Boddington) may be  challenged  outside  of  judicial
    review proceedings.   However, beyond that, it does not seem to us that
    the decision materially advances Mr Draycott's submissions on behalf of
    the Appellant.  In our view, in Boddington  the  criminal  context  and
    practical difficulties facing a defendant of bringing  judicial  review
    proceedings  were  compelling  and  led  the  House  of  Lords  to  its
    conclusion.  We see no basis for  Mr  Draycott's  submission  that  the
    claimant in this appeal is "in the nature of a defendant" in respect of
    the application of Art 33(2) of the Refugee Convention.  The underlying
    rationale for the decision in Boddington does not drive us to  reach  a
    similar conclusion in respect of appeals before the AIT.

101. That said, we turn to the decision of  the  House  of  Lords  in  Chief
    Adjudication Officer v Foster which seems to present a more solid  base
    for Mr Draycott's submissions.

102. In Foster, the claimant, who  was  disabled,  received  certain  social
    security payments including income support.   The  case  concerned  the
    claimant's entitlement to 'severe disability premium' as  part  of  her
    income support.   That entitlement turned upon whether a  part  of  the
    Income  Support  (General)  Regulations  1987   (which   excluded   her
    entitlement) was ultra vires the enabling  Social  Security  Act  1975.
    The claim was initially rejected by an  adjudication  officer  and,  on
    appeal, by the Social Security Appeal Tribunal.  On further  appeal,  a
    Social Security Commissioner upheld her claim holding the relevant part
    of the 1987 Regulations  to  be  ultra  vires.    On  appeal  from  his
    decision,  the  Court  of  Appeal  held  that  a  Commissioner  had  no
    jurisdiction to consider the vires of the Regulation; that  could  only
    be  decided  in  judicial  review  proceedings.   The  House  of  Lords
    overturned the Court of Appeal's decision.

103. The  House  of  Lords  was  concerned  with  the  jurisdiction  of  the
    Commissioner on  an  appeal  under  s.101(1)  of  the  1975  Act  which
    provided:

        "An appeal lies to a Commissioner from any  decision  of  a  social
        security appeal tribunal on the grounds that the  decision  of  the
        tribunal was erroneous in point of law."

104. Lord Bridge of Harwich set out the context as follows (at p.762):

        "the central question... is whether a claimant  otherwise  entitled
        to some social security benefit which has been denied to him by the
        adjudication officer and the appeal tribunal in  reliance  on  some
        provision in a regulation which the Secretary of State had no power
        to make is entitled to succeed on appeal to the commissioner on the
        ground that the decision against him was  'erroneous  in  point  of
        law' or whether, as must follow if the Court of Appeal were  right,
        before he invokes the statutory machinery by which alone his  claim
        can be enforced, he must first proceed by way of an application for
        judicial review to have the offending provision quashed or declared
        invalid. It is common ground  that  the  principle  of  O'Reilly  v
        Mackman [1982] 3 All ER 1124, [1983] 2 AC 237 has  no  application,
        since there can be no abuse of process  by  a  party  who  seeks  a
        remedy by the very process which statute requires him to pursue. It
        was further rightly accepted by [counsel for the Chief Adjudication
        Officer and secretary  of  State]  before  your  Lordships  that  a
        decision giving effect to  secondary  legislation  which  is  ultra
        vires is, indeed, in the ordinary meaning of the  words  'erroneous
        in point of law'. The question then is whether, when that phrase is
        used in s 101 of the 1975 Act, there is something in the context in
        which it appears which requires by necessary implication that it be
        given a restricted meaning so as to  exclude  from  its  ambit  any
        errors of law referable to a misuse by the Secretary  of  State  of
        his regulation making power."

105. Lord Bridge of Harwich (with  whom  Lords  Templeman,  Ackner,  Browne-
    Wilkinson and Slynn of Hadley agreed) expressed the conclusion  of  the
    House of Lords on the vires point as follows (at pp.766-7):

        "My  conclusion  is   that   the   commissioners   have   undoubted
        jurisdiction to determine any challenge to the vires of a provision
        in regulations made by the Secretary of State as being  beyond  the
        scope of the enabling power whenever it is necessary to  do  so  in
        determining whether a decision under appeal was erroneous in  point
        of law. I am pleased to reach  that  conclusion  for  two  reasons.
        First, it avoids a cumbrous duplicity of  proceedings  which  could
        only add to the  already  overburdened  list  of  applications  for
        judicial review awaiting determination  by  the  Divisional  Court.
        Secondly, it is, in my view, highly desirable that when  the  Court
        of Appeal, or indeed your  Lordships'  House,  is  called  upon  to
        determine an issue of the kind  in  question  it  should  have  the
        benefit of the views upon it of one or more of  the  commissioners,
        who have great expertise in this  somewhat  esoteric  area  of  the
        law."

106. Mr Draycott placed considerable reliance  upon  Foster.   He  submitted
    that there is no discernible  distinction  between  the  Commissioners'
    statutory jurisdiction that a decision is "erroneous in point  of  law"
    and the  Tribunal's  jurisdiction  to  decide  whether  an  immigration
    decision is "not in accordance with the  law".    Mr  Patel  sought  to
    distinguish Foster on a number of bases both in  his  oral  submissions
    and his written submissions (see para 51 of written submissions dated 8
    February 2008).

107. There are strong parallels between the statutory jurisdiction at  issue
    in Foster and that of the AIT.  It is difficult, if not impossible,  to
    grasp any rational distinction between the statutory basis of an appeal
    phrased as "erroneous in point of law" (in the social security context)
    and one phrased as "not in accordance with the law" (in the case of the
    AIT).  Mr Patel submitted that the latter presupposes that the "law" is
    that laid down in the statutory instrument.  As we stated earlier,  had
    it not been for Foster, we would  have  reached  just  this  conclusion
    ourselves.  However, in Foster  the  Law  Lords  took  a  diametrically
    apposed view as to the content of the word "law" in the social security
    legislation.  It matters  not,  in  our  view,  that  counsel  for  the
    government in  Foster  conceded  that  "a  decision  giving  effect  to
    secondary legislation which is ultra vires is...in the ordinary meaning
    of the words 'erroneous in point of law'" (see Lord Bridge of Harwich's
    speech at p.762F).  The House expressed no doubt about the  correctness
    of the concession and subsequently Foster was followed on this point by
    the Court of Appeal in  Howker  v  Secretary  of  State  for  Work  and
    Pensions  [2002]  EWCA  Civ  1263  where  it  was   stated   that   the
    Commissioners' jurisdiction was "not now  in  doubt"  as  a  result  of
    Foster (per Peter Gibson LJ at [33]).

108. Both  Boddington  and  Foster  require  the  statutory  context  to  be
    considered in order to determine whether "by necessary implication" the
    2002 Act was not intended to  include  "errors  of  law"  generated  by
    reliance upon an ultra vires statutory instrument.  Mr Patel offered no
    reasoned  basis  upon  which  we  could  base  a  conclusion  that  the
    interpretation of "law" in Foster should be any different in an  appeal
    under the 2002 Act.

109.  In  Foster,  Lord  Bridge  of  Harwich  saw  no   objection   to   the
    Commissioners rather than the High Court reaching  a  decision  on  the
    vires of a statutory instrument. It was better  that  a  "duplicity  of
    proceedings"  was  avoided  (pp.766H-787A).   Likewise   it   was   not
    problematic  that,  unlike  the  High  Court,   a   decision   of   the
    Commissioners was only binding between the parties  and  had  no  wider
    force in law (at p.764G).   Whilst we agree with  the  first  of  these
    points, we would consider the latter point to be an important  argument
    supporting the Appellant's submissions in this appeal.  The  effect  of
    the 2004 Order is, in our view, better determined  by  the  High  Court
    whose decision will have general effect rather than being restricted to
    determining  the  outcome  of  a  particular  appeal  before  the  AIT.
    However,  the  point  is  no  better  in  the  context  of  the   AIT's
    jurisdiction than in the social security context and so  its  rejection
    in Foster makes this an  untenable  basis  for  reaching  a  conclusion
    contrary to that in Foster.

110. It might be suggested that Lord Bridge of Harwich was content to  reach
    the decision he did because, for him, the ultra  vires  issue  was  one
    which could be determined by the Commissioners alone - a small group of
    senior tribunal judges whom he described as "of comparable standing  to
    circuit judges" (at p.762C).   There  would  be,  in  other  words,  no
    prospect of a large number of  first  instance  tribunals  adjudicating
    upon difficult  and,  potentially  at  least,  controversial  and  far-
    reaching legal issues relating to the vires of  statutory  instruments.
    If that were an important limitation, that might suggest  a  contextual
    difference with the AIT where the jurisdiction could not be so limited.
     It would be within the scope of any AIT Tribunal however  constituted,
    not just those comprised of its  senior  judiciary,  to  determine  the
    vires of a statutory  instrument  on  the  basis  that  an  immigration
    decision was "otherwise not in  accordance  with  the  law".   However,
    whilst alive to the dangers, Lord Bridge  of  Harwich  acknowledged  in
    Foster that the jurisdiction to determine vires applied throughout  the
    tribunal appeals hierarchy.  He said (at p.762H):

           "if the commissioner can base his decision in any  case  on  the
           invalidity of some provision in regulations made under the  Act,
           it must follow that appeal tribunals and  adjudication  officers
           can do likewise."

111. Lord Bridge's solution was to recognise the reality that  any  "serious
    challenge" to a statutory instrument was likely to find its way to  the
    Commissioners on appeal (at p.763B-F).  Precisely  the  same  reasoning
    and outcome applies in the context of the AIT.  Any such case is likely
    ultimately  to  come  before  a  panel  of  senior  AIT  judges  either
    specifically constituted at the initial hearing or  on  reconsideration
    when an immigration judge's decision is challenged.

112. Consequently, it is difficult to avoid the conclusion as  a  result  of
    Foster that if a decision-maker  (or  lower  tribunal)  in  the  social
    security context errs in law by applying "law" derived  from  an  ultra
    vires statutory instrument, so too, it would seem,  the  decision-maker
    acts "not in accordance with the law" in applying ultra vires "law"  in
    the immigration or asylum context.  We recognise  the  significance  of
    this if correct.  It would not, however, be our  view  unless  we  were
    driven to reach it by Foster.  For the reasons we are about to develop,
    it is not necessary for us to reach any concluded view in  this  appeal
    on the impact of Foster to  the  AIT's  jurisdiction  because  we  have
    concluded that the 2004 Order is not in fact ultra vires  the  enabling
    power in s.72 of the 2002 Act.

      2. Incorporation

113. Mr Draycott submitted that the Refugee Convention  is  itself  part  of
    English law.  As such,  the  power  in  s.72(4)  had  to  be  exercised
    consistently with that Convention or any resulting statutory instrument
    would be ultra vires.  He relied, in particular, upon s.2 of the Asylum
    and Immigration Appeals Act 1993 and the  speeches  of  Lord  Keith  of
    Kinkel in R v SSHD ex parte Sivakumaran [1988] AC 958 and Lord Steyn in
    R(European Roma Rights Centre and  others)  v  Immigration  Officer  at
    Prague Airport and another (UNHCR intervening) [2004] UKHL 55  for  the
    proposition that the Refugee Convention had been incorporated into  our
    domestic law.  We do not agree that this is their effect.

114. In Sivakumaran, Lord Keith of Kinkel commented (at p.990) that:

        "The United Kingdom having acceded to the Convention and  Protocol,
        their provisions have for all practical purposes been  incorporated
        into United Kingdom law."

115. In the European Roma Rights Centre case, Lord Steyn, having cited  Lord
    Keith of Kinkel's statement in Sivakumaran, also referred to  s.  2  of
    the Asylum and Immigration Appeals Act 1993 which is in  the  following
    terms:

        "Nothing in the immigration rules (within the meaning of  the  1971
        Act) shall lay down any practice which would  be  contrary  to  the
        [Refugee] Convention."

116. Lord Steyn continued (at [41]-[42]):

        "41....It  is  necessarily  implicit   in   section   2   that   no
        administrative practice or procedure may be adopted which would  be
        contrary to the Convention. After  all,  it  would  be  bizarre  to
        provide that formal immigration rules must be consistent  with  the
        Convention but  that  informally  adopted  practices  need  not  be
        consistent with the Convention. The reach of section 2 of the  1993
        Act is therefore comprehensive.

        42. Parliament must be taken to have been aware,  in  enacting  the
        1993 Act, that the courts had treated references in the immigration
        rules to the Refugee Convention as "indirectly" or  "for  practical
        purposes" incorporating it into domestic  law:  Bennion,  Statutory
        Interpretation, 4th ed  (2002),  p  469.  In  the  context  of  the
        decisions of the Court  of  Appeal  and  House  of  Lords  in  1987
        Parliament must have intended that the  strengthened  reference  to
        the Refugee Convention in primary legislation would be  treated  by
        the courts as an  incorporation  of  the  Refugee  Convention  into
        domestic law. Moreover, the heading of section 2 is "Primacy of the
        Convention." This is a relevant  and  significant  pointer  to  the
        overriding effect of the Convention in English law: R v Montila and
        Others [2004] UKHL 50, paras 31-37, per Lord Hope of Craighead.  It
        is true, of course, that a  convention  may  be  incorporated  more
        formally by scheduling it to an enactment, eg the Carriage of Goods
        by Sea Act 1971 which enacted the Hague-Visby Rules. But  there  is
        no rule specifying the precise legislative method of incorporation.
        It is also possible to incorporate  a  treaty  in  part,  e.g.  the
        European Convention on Human Rights was incorporated into  our  law
        without article 13: see Human Rights Act 1998. In  my  view  it  is
        clear that the Refugee Convention has been  incorporated  into  our
        domestic law."

117. Lord Steyn's final conclusion is strongly relied upon by  Mr  Draycott.
    Both Lord Bingham of Cornhill (at [7]) and Lord Hope of  Craighead  (at
    [50]) also referred to Lord Keith of Kinkel's view on incorporation  in
    Sivakumaran with apparent approval.

118. Despite the supportive nature of  these  dicta,  we  have  considerable
    difficulty with the argument that anything in s.2 of the  1993  Act  or
    elsewhere in our domestic  legislation  establishes  that  the  Refugee
    Convention has become formally incorporated into English  Law.   It  is
    trite law to state that a treaty must be expressly incorporated  before
    it becomes part of English law.  We  were  not  shown  any  legislative
    provision purporting to do so beyond s.2 of the 1993 Act.  On its face,
    s.2 has no application to this case which is concerned,  not  with  the
    Immigration Rules, but with s.72 and the 2004 Order.  Beyond that, s.2,
    which only applies to the Immigration Rules, would  be  unnecessary  if
    the Refugee Convention was already part of our law.

119. We do not need to struggle further with  the  view  of  Lord  Keith  of
    Kinkel in Sivakumaran (and the apparent support given by Lord Steyn and
    the  others  in  the  European  Roma  Rights   Centre   case)   because
    subsequently the legal position was put beyond doubt by  the  House  of
    Lords itself in the case of R v Asfaw [2008] UKHL 31.

120. Asfaw concerned the interpretation  of  s.31  of  the  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 1999 which creates a statutory  defence  to  certain  listed
    immigration offences where the individual is a refugee.  The defendant,
    who was a refugee in transit, was convicted of an offence  relating  to
    the presentation of a false passport but the offence was not one  which
    was listed in s.31.  The defendant sought to rely directly on Art 31 of
    the Refugee Convention  which  stated  that  penalties  should  not  be
    imposed upon refugees in respect of their illegal  presence  or  entry.
    One of the arguments presented to the House of Lords, but  rejected  by
    them, was that Art 31 was part of English law and so could be  directly
    relied upon.  In emphatically rejecting this submission Lord Bingham of
    Cornhill said (at [29]):

        "29. The appellant sought to address this disparity  by  submitting
        that the Convention had been incorporated into  our  domestic  law.
        Reliance was placed on observations of Lord Keith of Kinkel in R  v
        Secretary of State for the Home Department, Ex p Sivakumaran [1988]
        AC 958, 990G; Lord Steyn in R  (European  Roma  Rights  Centre  and
        others) v Immigration Officer at Prague Airport and another (United
        Nations High Commissioner for Refugees Intervening) [2004] UKHL 55,
        [2005] 2 AC 1, paras 40-42; section 2 of the Asylum and Immigration
        Appeals  Act  1993;  and  para  328  of  Statement  of  Changes  in
        Immigration Rules (HC 395). It is plain from these authorities that
        the British regime for handling applications for  asylum  has  been
        closely assimilated to the Convention model. But it is  also  plain
        (as I think) that the Convention as a whole has never been formally
        incorporated or given effect in domestic law. While, therefore, one
        would expect any government intending to  legislate  inconsistently
        with an obligation binding on the UK to  make  its  intention  very
        clear, there can on well known authority be no ground  in  domestic
        law  for  failing  to  give  effect  to  an  enactment   in   terms
        unambiguously inconsistent with such an obligation."

121. At para [69], Lord Hope of Craighead, agreeing  with  Lord  Bingham  of
    Cornhill, added:

        "The giving effect in domestic law to international obligations  is
        primarily a matter for the legislature. It  is  for  Parliament  to
        determine  the  extent  to  which  those  obligations  are  to   be
        incorporated domestically. That determination having been made,  it
        is the duty of the courts to give effect to it."

122. It is significant that both Lord Bingham of Cornhill and Lord  Hope  of
    Craighead who, in the European Roma Rights case had cited Lord Keith of
    Kinkel's incorporation view in Sivakumaran, unambiguously  rejected  it
    in Asfaw.  It is worth noting that in Asfaw the House was not concerned
    with the effect of the Qualification Directive (which we discuss below)
    presumably because it contains no equivalent of Art 31 of  the  Refugee
    Convention that could have been relied upon.

123. In the light of Asfaw, which was  decided  subsequent  to  the  initial
    hearing before us in this appeal, Mr Draycott did  not  wholly  abandon
    reliance upon his submission  that  the  Refugee  Convention  had  been
    incorporated into English law.  However, he accepted that it had scaled
    down the broad proposition of Lord Steyn in the  European  Roma  Rights
    Centre case.

124. In our view, Mr Draycott's submission (scaled  down  or  otherwise)  is
    doomed to fail in the light of the clear and unchallenged statements of
    the law in the speeches of  Lords  Bingham  of  Cornhill  and  Hope  of
    Craigheadin Asfaw.  There is  no  suggestion  that  any  of  the  other
    members of the House disagreed.  As a  result,  in  our  judgment,  the
    'incorporation' of the Refugee Convention into English Law effected  by
    s.2 of the 1993 Act is limited to  that  provision's  impact  upon  the
    content of immigration rules or  any  wider  policy.   Of  course,  the
    Tribunal must, when called upon to do so, deal with the  argument  that
    an individual's removal in  consequence  of  a  particular  immigration
    decision will be a breach of the Refugee Convention.  That much follows
    from the statutory ground of appeal in s.84(1)((g)  of  the  2002  Act.
    Beyond  that  however,  at  its  highest,  reliance  upon  the  Refugee
    Convention is confined to the  established  interpretative  axiom  that
    when construing  legislation  giving  effect  to  a  treaty  obligation
    Parliament should be taken to have intended  to  give  effect  to  that
    treaty's terms unless clear contrary  words  are  used.    The  problem
    faced by Mr Draycott in this appeal is that Parliament both in s.72 and
    the  2004  Order  has  clearly  done   just   that.    Parliament   has
    unambiguously presumed to lay down a meaning of some of  the  words  in
    the Convention, despite any autonomous international meaning that those
    words might have. No ordinary principle of statutory interpretation  in
    English Law could led to a  different  reading  of  s.72(4)  read  with
    s.72(6) - the presumption that certain crimes are per se  "particularly
    serious" ones is irrefutable.

125. For this reason, there is no basis - apart from  the  EU  law  argument
    below - which could lead us to the conclude  that  s.72  and  the  2004
    Order should not be applied precisely as the Panel in this appeal did.

126. We turn now to consider the effect of the Qualification  Directive,  in
    particular Art 21.

      Art 21 of the Qualification Directive

127. In  his  skeleton  argument,  Mr  Draycott  placed  reliance  upon  the
    Qualification Directive.  As the case progressed, it became clear -  as
    a result of some encouragement from the Tribunal - that this aspect  of
    the case acquired  greater  significance  in  Mr  Draycott's  argument.
    Ultimately, we received detailed written submissions from both  parties
    on the effect of Art 21.2 of the Qualification Directive.  We  set  out
    Art 21 above but for convenience we do so again here.  It  provides  as
    follows:


        "Protection from refoulement


        1. Member States shall respect the principle of non-refoulement  in
        accordance with their international obligations.

        2. Where not prohibited by the international obligations  mentioned
        in paragraph 1,  Member  States  may  refoule  a  refugee,  whether
        formally recognised or not, when:


                 a) there are reasonable grounds for considering him or her
                    as a danger to the security  of  the  Member  State  in
                    which he or she is present; or
                 b) he or she, having been convicted by a  final  judgement
                    of a particularly serious crime, constitutes  a  danger
                    to the community of that Member State.



        3. Member States may revoke, end or refuse to renew or to grant the
        residence permit of (or to) a refugee to whom paragraph 2 applies."

128. The importance of this provision is as follows.  Mr Draycott  submitted
    that Art 21.2 incorporates the non-refoulement provision in  Art  33(2)
    of the Refugee Convention and therefore the 'autonomous' meaning of Art
    33(2).  He submitted that it would be contrary to  Art  63  of  the  EC
    Treaty for  the  Qualification  Directive  to  legislate  in  a  manner
    incompatible  with  the  Refugee  Convention.    The   former   should,
    therefore, wherever possible be interpreted so as to give effect to the
    Refugee Convention.  Mr Draycott submitted that Art  21.2  is  directly
    effective under EU law and thus 'trumps' any domestic legislation  that
    is contrary to it.  Thus, s.72 of the 2002 Act and the 2004 Order  must
    either  be  read  consistently  with  the   'autonomous'   meaning   of
    "particularly serious crime" or, under EU law, they can have no effect.
      Any  issue  of  the  Tribunal's  jurisdiction  to  hold  a  statutory
    instrument to  be  ultra  vires  is  thereby  avoided  and,  given  the
    intrusive nature of EU law, even s.72 may be vulnerable.  The  Tribunal
    must give effect to EU law.

129. Mr Patel's  submissions  on  this  aspect  of  the  appeal  were  again
    straightforward.  In his written submissions Mr Patel did  not  contend
    that Art 21 did not have direct effect.  He accepted that  the  wording
    of Art 21 was, for all relevant purposes, identical to Art 33(2) of the
    Refugee Convention.  However, he maintained his primary  submission  in
    relation to Art 33(2) - now part of EU law by virtue of Art 21  of  the
    Qualification Directive -  that  s.72  and  the  2004  Order  were  not
    contrary to any 'autonomous' meaning of Art 33(2)  which  he  submitted
    did not exist.

130. We have already rejected Mr Patel's primary submission  on  the  proper
    meaning and interpretation of Art 33(2).  That now places Mr  Patel  in
    some difficulties as  to  the  effect  of  Art  21.2.   We  are  wholly
    persuaded by Mr Draycott's submissions on this aspect  of  the  appeal.
    We have no doubt that Art  21.2  was  intended  to  enshrine  the  non-
    refoulement obligation in Art 33(2) into the EU asylum regime.  We  did
    not understand this to be a matter of dispute between the parties.  Art
    21.2(b) is worded in identical terms to Art 33(2).  The  context  makes
    plain that the  Directive  is  seeking  to  give  effect  to  the  non-
    refoulement provisions of the Refugee Convention.  Recitals (2) and (3)
    emphasis the central role played by the Refugee Convention in the  EU's
    protection regime.  Recital (3) puts  the  Refugee  Convention  at  the
    heart of the EU asylum system, including the Qualification Directive:

        "The Geneva Convention and Protocol provide the cornerstone of  the
        international legal regime for the protection of refugees."

131. Recital (2) deals specifically with refoulement:

        "The European Council at its special meeting in Tampere on  15  and
        16 October 1999  agreed  to  work  towards  establishing  a  Common
        European Asylum system, based on the full and inclusive application
        of the Geneva Convention relating to the Status of Refugees  of  28
        July 1951 (Geneva Convention), as  supplemented  by  the  New  York
        Protocol  of  31  January  1967  (Protocol),  thus  affirming   the
        principle of non-refoulement and ensuring that nobody is sent  back
        to persecution."

132. As to Art 21.2's direct  effect,  Mr  Patel  accepted  in  his  written
    submissions that it has direct effect.  He was right to do so.  That is
    the view we would have taken had it been a matter  of  dispute  between
    the parties given that Art 21.2 is  "unconditional"  and  "sufficiently
    precise"  (see,  e.g.  Marks  &  Spencer  plc  v  Customs  and   Excise
    Commissioners (Case C-62/00) [2003] 2 WLR  665  at  [24]-[26]).    Once
    that is accepted, it follows that  s.72(4)  and  the  2004  Order  must
    either be read consistently with the 'autonomous' meaning of Art  33(2)
    or  simply  not  applied  (see,  e.g.  Marleasing  SA  v  La  Comercial
    Internacional de Alimentacion SA (Case C-106/89) {1990] ECR I-4135).

133. This approach governs whether the domestic legislation  is  seeking  to
    give effect to the Directive (which s.72 and the 2004  Order  are  not)
    or, as in this appeal,  where  directly  enforceable  EU  rights  arise
    independently.  The latter is exemplified by the decision of the  House
    of Lords' in Autologic Holdings plc v IRC [2005] UKHL 54  to  which  we
    were referred by Mr Draycott.  That case concerned the compatibility of
    provisions in the Income and Corporation Taxes  Act  1988  with  fiscal
    reliefs  and  advantages  derived  from  Community  law  rights.    The
    principal issue was  whether  the  Special  Commissioners  should  give
    primacy to those EU rights.  In holding that they should, Lord Nicholls
    of Birkenhead set out the approach to be adopted (at [16]-[17]):
        "16. The second basic principle  concerns  the  interpretation  and
        application of a provision of United Kingdom legislation  which  is
        inconsistent with a directly applicable provision of Community law.
        Where such an inconsistency exists the statutory provision is to be
        read and take effect as though the statute  had  enacted  that  the
        offending provision was to be without  prejudice  to  the  directly
        enforceable Community rights of persons having the benefit of  such
        rights. That is the effect of section 2 of the European Communities
        Act 1972, as explained by your Lordships' House in R v Secretary of
        State for Transport, Ex p Factortame Ltd [1990] 2 AC 85,  140,  and
        Imperial Chemical Industries Plc v Colmer (Inspector of Taxes)  (No
        2) [1999] 1 WLR 2035, 2041.
        17. Thus, when deciding an appeal from a refusal by an inspector to
        allow group relief the appeal commissioners  are  obliged  to  give
        effect to all directly enforceable Community rights notwithstanding
        the terms of sections 402(3A) and (3B) and 413(5) of ICTA. In  this
        regard the commissioners' position is  analogous  to  that  of  the
        Pretore di Susa in Amministrazione  delle  Finanze  dello  Stato  v
        Simmenthal SpA (Case 106/77) [1978] ECR  629.  Accordingly,  if  an
        inconsistency  with  directly  enforceable  Community  law  exists,
        formal statutory requirements must where necessary be disapplied or
        moulded to the extent needed to enable  those  requirements  to  be
        applied in a manner consistent with Community law. Paragraph 70  of
        Schedule 18 to the Finance Act  1998  is  an  instance  of  such  a
        requirement. Paragraph 70 provides that a claim  for  group  relief
        requires the consent of the surrendering  company,  which  must  be
        given by notice in writing to its own inspector of  taxes  when  or
        before  the  claim  is  made.  This  provision  cannot  be  applied
        literally in the case, say, of a German subsidiary which  makes  no
        tax returns in this country. So if  the  residence  restriction  is
        found to be inconsistent with Community  law  this  provision  will
        need adapting so as to give  effect  to  the  overriding  Community
        rights. In this regard  the  appeal  commissioners  have  the  same
        powers and duties as the High Court." (emphasis added)

134. We considered earlier the proper construction of s.72 of the 2002  Act.
      Applying  accepted  canons  of  construction  applicable  to  English
    legislation, it is impossible to  read  s.72(4)  as  creating  anything
    other than an irrebuttable presumption that any  offence  specified  in
    the 2004 Order is a  "particularly  serious  crime".   The  same  would
    follow for the presumption in s.72(2) where the individual is convicted
    of an offence for which he receives a sentence of  imprisonment  of  at
    least 2 years  and  also  in  s.72(3)  in  respect  of  the  equivalent
    conviction overseas.  Section 72(6) provides:

        "A presumption under subsection (2),  (3)  or  (4)  that  a  person
        constitutes a  danger  to  the  community  is  rebuttable  by  that
        person."

135. The legislative intent is  manifest:  only  the  presumption  that  the
    individual is a "danger to the community"  can  be  rebutted.   In  our
    judgment, the preliminary view of the Court of Appeal in  TB  (Jamaica)
    to this effect is correct.  However, the force  of  the  interpretative
    canon of EU law requires us to construe and  apply  s.72(6)  as  if  it
    included the presumption that a conviction for an offence listed in the
    2004 Order is one for a "particularly serious  crime".   Section  72(6)
    must be radically "moulded" (to use Lord Nicholls' word)  in  this  way
    otherwise, short of disapplying s.72 (and the 2004 Order),  we  see  no
    other way of giving effect to the EU obligation founded in Art 21.2  of
    the Qualification Directive.

136. It follows that the Panel in this appeal erred in law in  paragraph  17
    of its determination (rejecting  the  Appellant's  submissions  to  the
    contrary) when it held that the Appellant could not as a matter of  law
    rebut the presumption that his conviction of the offence  under  s.3(1)
    of the Sexual Offences Act 2003 was a "particularly serious  crime"  by
    virtue of the combined effect of s.72(4) of the 2002 Act and  the  2004
    Order.

137. That said we do not consider that this error affected  the  outcome  of
    the appeal.  Despite prompting from us, Mr Draycott did not suggest any
    basis  upon  which  the  Appellant's  offence  would  not  properly  be
    characterised as a "particularly serious crime" other  than  to  submit
    that it was "self-evidently" not sufficiently serious to meet the  high
    threshold of Art 33(2).  We disagree.  We are  in  no  doubt  that  the
    offence of sexual  assault  contrary  to  s.3(1)  of  the  2003  Sexual
    Offences Act is capable of being a "particularly serious  crime".   The
    nature of the offence and the maximum penalty of 10 years  imprisonment
    on indictment are indicative of that.   The actual sentence  passed  of
    21 months imprisonment and a recommendation for deportation also points
    in that direction.  So far as we can tell,  the  offence  involved  the
    touching of a 20 year old woman in circumstances  where  the  Appellant
    maintained his innocence and blamed the victim for the  offence  having
    been committed after they consumed alcohol together.  So much is  clear
    from a Probation Officer's report which is in  the  appeal  file  which
    also notes that the Appellant's "remorse is  low".   The  jury  clearly
    disagreed with the Appellant's myopic view of  his  own  responsibility
    and concluded that the victim had not consented to the sexual  touching
    and the Appellant did not reasonably believe she was  consenting  (both
    requirements of the offence) when they returned a guilty verdict.

138. As we have said, Mr Draycott did not put forward any argument to  rebut
    the presumption that  on  these  facts,  the  Appellant  had  not  been
    convicted of a "particularly serious crime".  The Panel's finding  that
    the Appellant had not on the evidence rebutted the presumption that  he
    was a "danger to the community" was not challenged before us.   We  can
    see no basis upon which the decision of this Tribunal can be other than
    to agree with the Secretary of State's certificate under  s.72(9)  that
    the presumptions in subsection (4) applied and thus dismiss the  appeal
    on asylum grounds.

139. For the same reasons,  the  Panel's  decision  that  the  Appellant  is
    excluded from humanitarian protection by virtue of para 339D(i) of  the
    Immigration Rules is unassailable in law.  There are "serious  reasons"
    for considering that the Appellant has committed a "serious crime".  On
    the basis of the Panel's findings, the same would follow applying  para
    339D(iii), namely that the  Appellant  constitutes  a  "danger  to  the
    community".

      Credibility

140. In his written and oral submissions, Mr Draycott  mounted  a  sustained
    attack upon the Panel's rejection of the Appellant's credibility and of
    the whole of his account of what the Appellant claimed happened to  him
    during military service in Eritrea and which led him to escape to Sudan
    in May 2000.   As a consequence, he submitted that the Panel materially
    erred in law in dismissing the Appellant's appeal under Art  3  of  the
    ECHR.

141. Mr Draycott made a number of general and  specific  criticisms  of  the
    determination.  First, the Panel unduly relied upon its view about  the
    plausibility  of  various  aspects  of  the  Appellant's  evidence   in
    rejecting it - in the words of Mr Draycott, the Panel rested its  views
    on "Western standards"  rather  than  those  pertaining  to  people  in
    Eritrea.  Secondly, the Panel failed adequately or at all to assess the
    Appellant's evidence in the light of the objective  material  that  was
    placed before it.   Thirdly,  Mr  Draycott  criticised  the  Panel  for
    failing to take account of the medical  evidence  that  was  before  it
    relating to injuries which the Appellant  claimed  were  caused  whilst
    engaged in military service in Eritrea.  Mr Draycott submitted that the
    Panel effectively reached  its  conclusion  on  credibility  before  it
    looked at that medical evidence in paragraph 23 of  its  determination.
    Finally, Mr Draycott submitted, relying upon specific instances of what
    he had identified as general errors of approach by the Panel, that  the
    Panel had erred in law in its approach to the Appellant's  evidence  in
    respect of specific events which the  Appellant  claimed  had  occurred
    whilst serving in the Eritrean military.

142. Mr Patel more or less accepted that there were some errors  that  could
    be  identified  in  the  Panel's  determination.    However,   in   his
    submission, much  of  the  Panel's  reasoning  in  rejecting  important
    aspects of the  Appellant's  evidence  was  unimpeachable  in  law  and
    justified the Panel's overall conclusion to find the Appellant  not  to
    be credible and to reject his account.

143. We deal first with Mr Draycott's  general  criticisms  of  the  Panel's
    approach before turning to the detailed challenge he made  to  specific
    parts of their reasoning.

144. Mr Draycott's first point concerns the Panel's recourse to  the  notion
    of "implausibility" of the Appellant's account to reject it.   We  were
    referred to the observations of Sedley LJ in A v SSHD [2006]  EWCA  Civ
    973 at [7] as follows:

      "7. I have to say that the now prevalent practice of finding that  an
        applicant  is  lying  because  the  events  described  by  him  are
        "implausible" is not attractive and may even  be  said  not  to  be
        intellectually respectable.  We all know from our  own  lives  that
        the improbable and the implausible happed repeatedly.   It  is  the
        task  of  the  fact-finder  to  decide  not  whether  a  particular
        occurrence or set of occurrences is probable or  plausible  in  the
        sense  that  it  was  likely  to  happen,  but   whether,   however
        objectively improbable or  implausible,  it  is  what  did  happen.
        Increasingly,  as  it  seems  to   me,   immigration   judges   are
        substituting the former for the latter."

145. These remarks were made  by  Sedley  LJ  in  the  context  of  granting
    permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal.  Even assuming that  these
    are properly citable before us, they cannot, nor in our view were  they
    intended to, be anything more than entering a cautionary note about the
    approach of decision-makers and their reliance upon the  implausibility
    of an account as a basis for rejecting it.   We  would  reiterate  that
    caution.  On the other hand, it cannot be said as a matter of principle
    that a decision-maker cannot properly rely upon the  implausibility  of
    an account or, the converse, its plausibility in assessing the veracity
    of a witness or the cogency  of  the  evidence.   For  example,  if  an
    individual in his evidence was to claim that he travelled  from  London
    to Edinburgh  by  foot  in  an  afternoon  the  implausibility  (indeed
    impossibility) that what he is saying could occur is something that the
    decision-maker may properly take into account, in this case,  to  reach
    the conclusion that his evidence should not be accepted.  The important
    point, particularly in respect of appeals heard by the AIT, is that the
    assessment of an individual's evidence  (often  the  Appellant's)  will
    relate to what is claimed to have happened  in  another  country  where
    what may seem implausible here may be altogether  less  implausible  in
    the circumstances pertaining in that other country.

146. The difficulties  of  fact-finding  in  asylum  cases  and  the  proper
    approach to be taken is, in our view, identified by the Court of Appeal
    in the case of HK v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ  1037  at  [27]-[30].   There,
    Neuberger LJ said this:

        "27. The difficulty of the fact-finding  exercise  is  particularly
        acute in asylum cases, as has been said on more than  one  occasion
        in this court - see for instance Gheisari -v-  Secretary  of  State
        [2004] EWCA Civ 1854 at paragraphs 10 and 12 per Sedley LJ  and  at
        paragraphs 20 and 21 per Pill LJ.  The  standard  of  proof  to  be
        applied for the  purpose  of  assessing  the  appellant's  fear  of
        persecution is low. The choice is not normally which of two parties
        to believe, but whether or not to believe the appellant. Relatively
        unusually for an English Judge, an Immigration Judge has an  almost
        inquisitorial function, although  he  has  none  of  the  evidence-
        gathering or other investigatory powers of an inquisitorial  Judge.
        That is a particularly acute problem in cases where the evidence is
        pretty unsatisfactory in extent, quality and presentation, which is
        particularly  true  of  asylum  cases.  That  is  normally  through
        nobody's fault: it is the nature of the beast.

        28. Further,  in  many  asylum  cases,  some,  even  most,  of  the
        appellant's story may seem inherently unlikely but  that  does  not
        mean that it is untrue. The ingredients of the story, and the story
        as a whole, have to be considered  against  the  available  country
        evidence and reliable expert evidence, and other familiar  factors,
        such as consistency with what the appellant has  said  before,  and
        with other factual evidence (where there is any).

        29. Inherent probability, which may be  helpful  in  many  domestic
        cases, can be a dangerous, even a wholly inappropriate,  factor  to
        rely on in  some  asylum  cases.  Much  of  the  evidence  will  be
        referable to societies with customs  and  circumstances  which  are
        very different from those of which the members of the  fact-finding
        tribunal have any (even  second-hand)  experience.  Indeed,  it  is
        likely that the country which an asylum-seeker  has  left  will  be
        suffering from the sort of problems and dislocations with which the
        overwhelming majority of residents of this country will  be  wholly
        unfamiliar. The point is well made in Hathaway on  Law  of  Refugee
        Status (1991) at page 81:

              "In assessing the general human rights information, decision-
              makers must  constantly  be  on  guard  to  avoid  implicitly
              recharacterizing the nature of the risk based  on  their  own
              perceptions of reasonability."

        30. Inherent improbability in  the  context  of  asylum  cases  was
        discussed at some length by Lord Brodie in Awala -v-  Secretary  of
        State [2005] CSOH 73. At paragraph 22, he pointed out that  it  was
        "not proper to reject an applicant's account merely  on  the  basis
        that  it  is  not  credible  or  not  plausible.  To  say  that  an
        applicant's account is not  credible  is  to  state  a  conclusion"
        (emphasis added). At paragraph 24, he  said  that  rejection  of  a
        story on grounds of implausibility  must  be  done  "on  reasonably
        drawn inferences and not simply on conjecture or  speculation".  He
        went on to emphasise, as did Pill LJ in Ghaisari,  the  entitlement
        of the fact-finder to rely "on his common sense and his ability, as
        a practical and informed person, to identify  what  is  or  is  not
        plausible". However, he accepted that "there will  be  cases  where
        actions  which  may  appear  implausible  if  judged  by...Scottish
        standards, might be plausible when considered within the context of
        the applicant's social and cultural background"."

147. In part  therefore,  Mr  Draycott's  first  general  criticism  of  the
    Panel's determination merges with his second,  namely  that  the  Panel
    failed to assess the Appellant's evidence in the light of the objective
    evidence before it.

148. It is true that the Panel refers to the Appellant's evidence  as  being
    "implausible",   "intrinsically   implausible",   "extraordinary"    or
    "surprising" over 20 times in a somewhat dense and  often  unstructured
    effusion of lengthy paragraphs; all of which makes  this  determination
    difficult to read, let alone analyse.  However, in our view, the proper
    criticism, if any, of the Panel's recourse to "implausibility" must lie
    in its approach to particular aspects of the Appellant's  evidence  for
    the reasons we have already given.

149. Turning to Mr Draycott's second criticism, the Panel had  before  it  a
    number of bundles prepared by the Appellant's representatives including
    a bundle containing a section headed "Objective Evidence" beginning  at
    page 202 of that bundle and ending at page 304.  We see nothing  in  Mr
    Draycott's general criticism of  the  approach  of  the  Panel  to  the
    objective evidence.  It is clear to us that the Panel had well in  mind
    the need to take account of the objective evidence.   At  paragraph  23
    of its determination, the Panel specifically records that it has "taken
    into account the background material and objective evidence  which  has
    been submitted".  Again, the general criticism can only have any effect
    on the sustainability of this determination  as  a  matter  of  law  by
    looking at the way the Panel dealt with the  specific  aspects  of  the
    Appellant's evidence and whether it can be  said  they  adequately  had
    regard to the background evidence that might have been relevant.

150. Finally, in relation  to  Mr  Draycott's  general  criticisms,  we  see
    nothing in his submission that the Panel failed to have regard  to  the
    medical evidence before it relating  to  the  Appellant's  injuries  in
    assessing  the  Appellant's  credibility.   In  paragraph  23  of   its
    determination the Panel said this:

        "23.       We  have  considered  the  statements  by  the   general
        practitioner and consultant which have been submitted.  We note the
        possible  explanation  attributed  by  the   general   practitioner
        referred to at page 111.  We note the analysis where injuries could
        be consistent with descriptions of injury given by  the  Appellant.
        We note that the general practitioner Dr Phythian-Adams  could  not
        comment on the mechanism of fracture in relation to  the  fractured
        bone in the Appellant's left hand which  the  Appellant  described.
        We note that the consultant plastic and reconstructive surgeon,  Mr
        Mark Ho-Asjoe stated that it was unfortunately difficult to suggest
        any form of aetiology to the scars referred to at page 119.   There
        was multiple scarring relating to  his  profession.   It  has  been
        accepted by the respondent that the Appellant was in the  military.
        From the scar point of view, the author stated it was difficult  to
        associate any form of aetiology to  the  scarring  because  of  the
        regular repetitive damage to the medial and inferior aspect of  the
        feet from walking.  We  do  not  find  that  the  medical  evidence
        submitted bears out the causation claimed by the Appellant  on  the
        basis of his description of the events which have befallen him."

151. Of course, medical evidence relevant to the veracity of  the  Appellant
    which, for example, confirms or, more likely, is consistent with events
    claimed to have happened must be taken into  account  as  part  of  the
    overall assessment of the Appellant's credibility.  So  much  is  clear
    from the decision of the Court of Appeal in Mibanga v SSHD [2005]  EWCA
    Civ 367 and the many cases which have followed it.  It  is  clear  from
    paragraph 23 that the Panel did precisely this.  Self-evidently,  there
    the Panel took the medical evidence into account  before  reaching  its
    final conclusion on the Appellant's credibility in the final  sentences
    of paragraph 23. Also, in our judgment, the Panel was entitled to  give
    the weight that they did to that medical evidence, namely that  it  did
    not bear out the causation claimed by the Appellant.  In  context,  the
    Panel obviously meant that, whilst it  might  be  consistent  with  the
    Appellant's account, the medical evidence (as patently  was  the  case)
    did not  establish,  to  the  exclusion  of  other  possibilities,  the
    aetiology of the Appellant's injuries.  Taken into account as  part  of
    the overall evidence, there can be nothing objectionable in  this.   We
    see no discernable error of law in the Panel's approach here.

152.  Turning  now  to  the  detailed  criticisms  made   of   the   Panel's
    determination and its conclusion to reject the Appellant's credibility,
    we focus first upon those aspects of the Appellant's claim,  which,  if
    accepted, would put him  in  the  'at  risk'  category  of  a  military
    deserter who has illegally left Eritrea.  It was  not  disputed  before
    us, indeed it could not be in  the  light  of  the  Tribunal's  country
    guidance case MA (Draft evader - illegal departures - risk) Eritrea  CG
    [2007] UKAIT 00059, that if the Appellant's account was true he  is  at
    risk of serious ill-treatment contrary to Article 3 of the ECHR  if  he
    returned to Eritrea.  (Of course, that would also justify findings that
    he would be at risk  of  persecution  or  of  ill-treatment  justifying
    humanitarian protection but those matters were  not  (properly  in  our
    view) before the Panel, because of the effect of s.72 of the  2002  Act
    and paragraph 339D(i) of the Immigration Rules).

153. As we have said, the form of  this  determination  makes  comprehension
    and analysis not without  its  difficulties.   Mr  Draycott's  detailed
    submission sought to attack a series of negative  credibility  findings
    in relation to specific events which formed  part  of  the  Appellant's
    narrative.  The crux of the Appellant's account which, he said, put him
    at risk if returned to Eritrea is  that  he  was  a  conscript  in  the
    Eritrean military having been called up (for  a  second  time)  in  May
    1998.  There are then, in our view, three central events upon which  he
    relies to establish his case.  First, he says that a few  months  after
    he was called up he attended a military conference where he  spoke  out
    against and criticised  the  Eritrean  authorities  and  the  war  with
    Ethiopia.  As a result of this, three days later  he  was  detained  in
    prison, accused of being a spy, tortured before being released some six
    months later in February 1999 when he was sent to rejoin the  fighting.
    The essentials of the Appellant's evidence in respect of this  are  set
    out at paragraphs 11 - 20 of his statement dated  30  August  2006  (at
    pp.1-9 of the Appellant's main bundle).

154. Secondly, the Appellant says that in April  2000,  when  he  discovered
    that his wife  and  daughter  were  to  be  deported  to  Ethiopia,  he
    questioned this and was imprisoned in Barentu prison, a  high  security
    prison as the Appellant describes it.  He was in prison for eleven days
    before the Ethiopian troops overran Barentu and the prison guards fled.
     The Appellant then claims that he escaped from the prison opening  his
    handcuffs with a nail and breaking the padlock on the door  by  hitting
    it with the handcuffs and fled to Sudan.  The third central part of his
    claim is that he then fled to Sudan by walking the 120 -130  kilometres
    over a three day period.

155. The Panel rejected the Appellant's account in respect of each of  these
    three events.

156. As regards the first, Mr Draycott criticised  aspects  of  the  Panel's
    reasoning in paragraphs 18 and 19 of its determination.  In particular,
    he criticised the Panel for concluding that it was "extraordinary "that
    there should be a three  day  delay  between  the  conference  and  the
    Appellant being detained.  Mr Draycott submitted  that  the  Panel  had
    failed to have regard to an Amnesty  International  letter  of  27  May
    2002, which was considered and adopted, by the European Court of  Human
    Rights in the case of Said v Netherlands (2006) 43 EHRR 248 (at  tab  4
    of the Appellant's bundle of authorities before the Panel) where it  is
    stated:

        "It was usual for the  Eritrean  army  to  get  together  after  an
        offensive and to conduct an evaluation of that offensive.   It  was
        also not unusual for a considerable time  to  pass  between  openly
        expressed criticism and arrest, or for deserters to be punished  by
        their superiors without trial".

157. Mr Draycott submitted that the Panel had failed to have regard to  this
    in  reaching   their   view   that   the   Appellant's   evidence   was
    "extraordinary".

158. Also, Mr Draycott criticised the Panel where in  paragraph  18  of  its
    determination it said:

        "Given the nature of the accusations against the Appellant and  his
        own account of what he said at the big military conference we  find
        it astounding that following his detention he was sent back to  his
        old division".

159. Mr Draycott referred us to paragraph 5.47  of  the  COI  Report  of  28
    April 2006 (which is at tab 18 of the Appellant's main bundle which was
    before the Panel) where  it  is  stated,  referring  to  the  US  State
    Department Report for 2005:

        "There were substantial reports that prison conditions for  persons
        temporarily held for  evading  military  service  were  also  poor.
        Unconfirmed  reports  suggested  there  maybe  hundreds   of   such
        detainees.  Draft evaders were typically held  for  one  to  twelve
        weeks before being reassigned to their units."

160. Mr Draycott submitted that the Panel's failure to  take  this  evidence
    into  account,  given  that  it  supported  the  Appellant's   account,
    undermined in law the Panel's rejection of that evidence.

161.  Further,  Mr  Draycott  criticised  the  Panel's  view  that  it   was
    "extraordinary"  (at paragraph 19 of its determination) that  following
    his detention the Appellant was returned  to  active  service  and  did
    fighting in the  front  line  given  his  claimed  injuries  which  had
    occurred during his detention.  Mr Draycott referred us to the case  of
    KA (Draft- related risk categories and updated) Eritrea CG [2005] UKAIT
    00156 at [81], the Human Rights Watch Report of 18 January 2006 and the
    COI Report for 28 April 2006 at para 6.19 which,  he  said,  identified
    the often adverse "conditions of service" for conscripts.  Mr  Draycott
    reminded us that the Appellant's evidence was that he  had  suffered  a
    back injury during his detention and that there was no suggestion  that
    he was unable to continue his military service because of it.

162. Mr Draycott also criticised the Panel's view that it was  "astonishing"
    that the Appellant would be returned to the  front-line  following  his
    detention given his evidence that he had completed a form on joining up
    which showed his mother was Ethiopian.  Mr Draycott  pointed  out  that
    the Appellant was an Eritrean citizen (see COI Report, para  5.05)  and
    there was no evidence that those with  Ethiopian  parents  were  exempt
    from military service.   All Eritrean  citizens  aged  18  to  50  were
    eligible (see COI Report, para 5.58).

163. We have considerable misgivings  about  the  Panel's  approach  to  the
    Appellant's evidence leading up to  and  including  his  detention  and
    release between May 1998 and February 1999.  It is always a matter  for
    the fact-finder, subject to an over-arching yardstick of perversity, to
    weigh up evidence and reach findings and  conclusions  based  upon  it.
    The fact-finder  must,  however,  take  account  of  all  the  relevant
    evidence in doing so.  We accept Mr  Draycott's  submissions  that  the
    Panel failed adequately, or at all, to do so in this case.

164. In reaching its view that the Appellant's evidence was  "extraordinary"
    and "implausible" in respect of his  detention  in  May  1998  and  his
    release and return to active duty at the front in  February  1999,  the
    Panel in our judgment failed to have regard to the background  evidence
    supporting the substance of the Appellant's account, in  particular  to
    which we have been referred. In addition, the Panel  misunderstood,  or
    at  least  mischaracterised,  the  nature  and   seriousness   of   the
    Appellant's claimed injuries and his ability, therefore, to  return  to
    active duty.  He did indeed claim his back was damaged and painful  but
    the  background  evidence  shows  the  harsh  conditions  imposed  upon
    conscripts especially at times of active fighting between  Eritrea  and
    Ethiopia.  Likewise, that the Appellant's mother was Ethiopian  cannot,
    in the light of the background evidence, justify the incredulity of the
    Panel that he would not be returned to the front-line.  Indeed, neither
    can his claim that in February 1999 as a result  in  an  escalation  of
    hostilities with Ethiopia those who had been previously  detained  were
    released in order to continue their Eritrean military service.

165. Turning now to the Appellant's second  detention  in  and  escape  from
    Barentu prison in May 2000, the  Panel's  reasons  for  rejecting  this
    aspect of the Appellant's account can be found at paragraph 20  of  its
    determination:

        "We find the account given by the Appellant of the circumstances of
        his escape from Barentu prison to be intrinsically implausible.  In
        his witness statement dated 5th May 2004  the  Appellant  described
        the Eritrean military retreat after which  the  Appellant  and  the
        others broke the doors of the prison and they fled.  It was a  high
        security prison as the Appellant has  described  at  paragraph  13.
        The Appellant repeats this  description  at  paragraph  27  of  his
        statement dated 30th August 2006.  The people who are there were to
        be killed in secret.  Again the Appellant refers  to  breaking  the
        doors of the prison with the others and fleeing.   However  in  the
        SEF interview in answer to question 56 the Appellant described  the
        prison.  He stated it was an underground prison and there was  only
        one door.  There were guards at the door.  They are  there  for  24
        hours in turn.  The Appellant has  described  one  of  the  inmates
        being handcuffed so they managed to unlock by a nail and then  they
        unlocked the handcuffs and then broke the padlock on  the  door  by
        hitting it with the handcuffs.  We  find  this  description  to  be
        intrinsically implausible.  The Appellant amplified his explanation
        in the  proceedings  before  us.   We  have  set  this  out  above.
        Despite the lack of technological barriers we  find  it  astounding
        that a handcuff unlocked by means of  a  nail  and  which  featured
        spikes would be capable of use to break down the single door of  an
        underground prison classified as a high security institution.   The
        guards had already  left.   Nonetheless  the  physical  achievement
        described by the Appellant we find  intrinsically  implausible.  We
        note the Appellant has stated that while he described the prison as
        a high security prison it was only considered  such  because  there
        were many guards present to prevent escape.  The actual  technology
        was very poor.  In that explanation to be found at pages 12 and  13
        of the Appellant's witness statement dated  30th  August  2006  the
        Appellant refers to being given the  opportunity  because  all  the
        guards had fled at this time to  break  though  the  doors  of  the
        cell."

166. Mr Draycott submitted that the Appellant's evidence was supported by  a
    CNN internet report dated 18 May 2000 which was produced to  the  Panel
    at the date of the hearing.  We were not taken directly to this  report
    but, as we understand it, the substance relied upon is set out  in  the
    grounds of review as follows:

        "Ethiopian troops Wednesday captured the  town  of  Barentu,  about
        forty five miles north of the border.

        Wrku Tesfamichael, Director of the state run  Eritrean  Relief  and
        Refugee Commission, said Ethiopia's military campaign  already  had
        driven a total  of  550,000  Eritreans  from  their  homes  or  the
        temporary camps where they were sheltered".

167. Mr Draycott submitted that the Panel, in finding that  the  Appellant's
    account  of  his  imprisonment  and  escape  from  Barentu  prison  was
    "intrinsically  implausible",  had  failed  to  have  regard  to   this
    supporting evidence.  We do not accept this.   It  is  clear  that  the
    Tribunal was well aware of this  evidence.   At  paragraph  23  of  its
    determination the Panel stated:

        "We have noted in particular the evidence obtained by  Counsel  for
        the Appellant  from  the  internet  in  relation  to  the  fall  of
        Barentu."

168. We accept that the CNN report is not referred to  in  paragraph  20  of
    the  Panel's  determination  when  considering  the  evidence  of   the
    Appellant in relation to his imprisonment in Barentu.   However,  there
    is no doubt in our view that the Tribunal  had  in  mind  the  evidence
    about the fall of Barentu to the Ethiopians around the  time  that  the
    Appellant claimed  that  he  escaped  when  considering  his  evidence.
    Reference to the fall of Barentu was made in the submissions on  behalf
    of the Appellant made to the Tribunal.  These  are  fully  recorded  at
    paragraph 16 of its determination where the Tribunal said:

        "We were referred to the 18th May report.  We were referred to  the
        US State Department Report 2001.  This stated that Barentu fell  to
        the Ethiopian troops.  There was a coincidence  to  this  being  so
        close to the Appellant's account."

169. In our judgment, it would be wrong to conclude that the Panel  was  not
    aware of this evidence  supporting  the  Appellant's  account  of  what
    happened in May 2000 and failed to take it into account in reaching its
    conclusion.  We reject Mr Draycott's submissions in this respect.

170. In addition, Mr Draycott criticised the  Panel's  reasoning  about  the
    method of escape from Barentu prison employed  by  the  Appellant.   He
    submitted that the Panel  erred  in  law  in  concluding  that  it  was
    intrinsically implausible that the Appellant would open  his  handcuffs
    using a nail and then break open the padlock on the door to the  prison
    by hitting it with those handcuffs.  Mr  Draycott  submitted  that  the
    Panel's conclusion was unsustainable.  There was evidence  before  them
    of prison breaks one of which showed an escape  by  means  which  might
    otherwise seem as being implausible,  namely  where  a  wall  had  been
    pushed over and troops had been killed during the escape.

171. We do not accept Mr Draycott's submissions.  The Panel  had  regard  to
    the  situation  in  which   the   Appellant   found   himself,   namely
    incarceration in a high security underground prison.  In our view,  the
    Panel was entitled  to  reach  the  view  that  the  method  of  escape
    described by the Appellant was implausible, in the  sense  of  unlikely
    and on the basis of that to reach the conclusion that his  evidence  in
    this respect was not to be accepted.  We see no error  of  law  in  the
    approach or reasoning of the Panel here.  The  Panel  was  entitled  to
    reach the view that it did.

172. The third aspect of the Appellant's account crucial to  his  claim  for
    international protection in the UK concerns his flight to Sudan once he
    escaped from prison.  In paragraph 21 of its determination,  the  Panel
    rejected this aspect of the Appellant's evidence.  Its reasons were  as
    follows:

        "21. The Appellant has described taking around three days  on  foot
        having escaped Barentu prison to reach Kassala in Sudan.  Prior  to
        the Appellant's transfer to Barentu prison the Appellant  had  been
        tied with a rope by the division administrator  and  taken  to  the
        prison.   This  punishment,  the  Appellant   states,   is   called
        "helicopter."  Despite this treatment, the back  injury  which  the
        Appellant had sustained during his  period  of  about  six  months'
        detention and the debilitating circumstances of  his  detention  in
        Barentu prison which the Appellant has related he  was  nonetheless
        able to cover a very considerable distance to Sudan from Barentu on
        foot.  During the hearing the Appellant submitted a note  that  the
        distance from Barentu to Kassala is about  120-130  kilometres  and
        the climate was very hot so that it was impossible to  walk  for  a
        long time at any one time.  Despite the climatic conditions and the
        physical condition of the Appellant he  was  clearly,  it  appears,
        able  to  cover  some  40  kilometres  each  day.   We  find   this
        intrinsically implausible in relation to someone who  had  suffered
        the physical privations and injuries described  by  the  Appellant.
        The Appellant stayed in the Sudan from May 2000.  It  was  only  in
        February 1999 that the  Eritrean  government,  on  the  Appellant's
        account, had been forced to release the ex-soldiers in  prison  and
        make them including him join the fighting.  The Appellant was  sent
        back to his old division.  In  his  witness  statement  dated  30th
        August 2006 the Appellant refers being  sent  to  the  hospital  in
        Asmara in March 2000 while he had problems with his back and caught
        malaria and was very ill.  His wife and child visited him.  In  his
        witness statement dated 20th April 2004 the Appellant refers  being
        given permission to stay with his fiance for a week.  He went back
        to the military camp after  a  period  of  one  week  as  expected.
        Thereafter he was taken to another military camp and stayed at this
        military camp until April 2000.  At the end of that  month  he  was
        told by his sister his wife and daughter had been deported.   There
        is no mention in that witness statement of the Appellant  going  to
        hospital in March 2000.  In the Appellant's  supplementary  witness
        statement of 5th May 2004 the Appellant refers at paragraph  11  to
        the marriage ceremony and being given permission to stay  with  his
        wife for a week.  He was allowed to stay with her in  another  camp
        in the military front.  In March 2000, he  states,  he  received  a
        letter from his sister saying his wife had been deported  with  his
        daughter.   Straight  away  the  Appellant  went  to  the  division
        administrator and told him there was no reason for him to  continue
        fighting.  After that the  Appellant  was  tied  up  and  taken  to
        Barentu prison.  There was no mention in this witness statement  of
        the Appellant being in hospital in March 2000.  We  find  that  the
        Appellant has further embroidered his account.  We  find  that  the
        significance of the Appellant's receiving treatment in  March  2000
        is to assist in explaining how the Appellant was able to reach  the
        Sudan  having  escaped  from  Barentu  prison.   Without  being  in
        hospital in  March  2000  the  Appellant  would  have  received  no
        treatment for his back and  would  have  endured  the  difficulties
        originating with his detention for about six months  following  his
        speech at the military conference and  having  been  sent  back  to
        fight without any or proper attention.  We do not find it plausible
        that the Appellant would have been able on the account he has given
        including of his treatment and injuries and wounds  that  he  would
        have been able to accomplish such an arduous and lengthy journey in
        the time he has claimed to the Sudan.  Plainly  the  Appellant  has
        realised this difficulty in the time which  has  elapsed  from  his
        original statement and supplementary statement to which we refer of
        2004 and has attempted to improve the level of plausibility of what
        is already an intrinsically implausible account.  Had the appellant
        suffered and continued to suffer such back problems in  March  2000
        it is even more extraordinary that he was able  to  accomplish  the
        journey to the Sudan."

173. Mr Draycott criticised this reasoning.  First, he  submitted  that  the
    Panel had wrongly overstated the nature of any injuries suffered by the
    Appellant prior to his flight in reaching their conclusion that it  was
    "intrinsically implausible"  that someone  with  those  injuries  could
    make the journey from Barentu to Kassala in Sudan in the claimed  three
    days.  Secondly, and linked to that, Mr Draycott criticised  the  Panel
    for taking  into  account  what  it  considered  to  be  in  effect  an
    embellishment of his account that he had  been  hospitalised  in  March
    2000.

174. There is no doubt  that  the  Panel  was  well  aware  of  the  medical
    evidence relating to the Appellant's injuries.  As we noted earlier the
    evidence  is  referred  to  by  the  Panel  at  paragraph  23  of   its
    determination.  It does seem to us, however, that the Panel appears  to
    regard the Appellant's claimed back injury  as  inconsistent  with  his
    ability to "accomplish such an arduous and lengthy journey in the  time
    he has claimed to Sudan."  We are not clear why the Panel took  such  a
    view.  As we noted earlier, the  Panel  seems  to  have  overstated  or
    mischaracterised the Appellant's claimed injuries.

175. Equally, the Panel's criticism of the Appellant for  not  referring  to
    his hospitalisation in March 2000 in his witness  statements  in  April
    and May 2004 is somewhat diluted by the fact that he does refer  to  it
    in his SEF interview on 25 May 2004.  It is not the case, therefore, as
    the Panel appeared to think that the Appellant first referred  to  this
    in his witness statement of 30 August 2006.   At  Question  41  of  his
    interview when asked whether he  received  any  medical  treatment  for
    injuries he had suffered whilst he was first  detained,  the  Appellant
    replied:

        "In March 2000, I went to a hospital because my back  bone  started
        to deteriorate and I was poorly with malaria."

176. Nevertheless, it remains the case that the Appellant  claimed  to  have
    walked about 120-130 kilometres in three days in a climate which in his
    own words "was very hot so that it was impossible to walk  for  a  long
    time at anyone time".  It seems to us that given the evidence that  the
    Appellant had suffered a back injury which,  he  claimed,  subsequently
    showed in an x-ray taken in Sudan that his backbone was bent and, given
    the climatic circumstances acknowledged by the Appellant, the Panel was
    entitled to reach the view that it was implausible that  the  Appellant
    (trained soldier or not) could, in those circumstances,  walk  seventy-
    five miles in a three day period.  In the result, therefore, we see  no
    discernable error of law in the Panel's rejection  of  the  Appellant's
    evidence concerning his flight to Sudan.

177. Mr Draycott also relied  upon  a  number  of  other  matters  which  he
    submitted had wrongly led the Panel to  find  the  Appellant's  account
    incredible.

178. Mr Draycott referred us to paragraph 22 of the determination where  the
    Panel considered the Appellant's  evidence  about  his  stay  in  Sudan
    between May 2000 and April 2004 when he came  to  the  UK.   The  Panel
    disbelieved him:

        "22. The Appellant arrived in Sudan in May 2000 and  only  left  on
        6th April 2004.   In  his  screening  interview  at  page  A12  the
        Appellant stated that he tried to claim asylum in  Sudan  but  they
        would not accept an ex-soldier.  In  his  witness  statement  dated
        20th April 2004 the Appellant stated I did not apply for asylum  in
        Sudan as I feared I will be deported  back  to  Eritrea  like  many
        other people  were  being  deported.   In  the  SEF  interview  the
        Appellant explained that his friends had been asked  by  him  about
        asylum and they told him not to claim.  He also explained  that  if
        you are an ex-soldier they do not accept you as a  refugee  because
        of strained relationship with Eritrea and secondly you are  an  ex-
        soldier and if they send you into a refugee camp you  do  not  need
        military training to join the Islamic Movement which is a big plus.
         Given the reasons that the  Appellant  has  set  forward  for  not
        claiming asylum in Sudan namely that he was  told  by  his  friends
        that if you claim asylum first they will take you  into  a  refugee
        camp and then they will force you  to  join  the  Islamic  Movement
        against Eritrea so he did not want to get into politics  again  and
        war we find it very surprising that the Appellant spent so long  in
        Sudan.  He was separated from his wife and child. He had been  told
        to wait effectively until 2003 in relation to his desire to  go  to
        America.  He did not leave the Sudan until 2004.  Had the Appellant
        truly been at risk we find that he would not have spent so long  in
        the Sudan having made up his mind that he could  not  claim  asylum
        there.  We find that the reality  of  the  situation  is  that  the
        Appellant was  determined  to  go  to  America  and  that  was  his
        priority.  We find that the Appellant is using the  United  Kingdom
        as a transit point for his original ambition of going  to  America.
        We do not find that the Appellant has been at risk.  At page B4  of
        the Respondent's bundle the Appellant stated that his intention was
        not to stay in England but to try to get to America  to  stay  with
        his  family.   We  find  that  that  comment  amply  reflects   our
        conclusions.  He stated in answer to section 2.2 that his intention
        is to go to America to live with his family.  At question  2.79  at
        page B11 he was asked did you come to the UK specifically  to  seek
        asylum.  He replied yes but as a means of getting to  America.   We
        find that had the Appellant genuinely required asylum he would have
        come to the United Kingdom  much  sooner  or  left  the  Sudan  for
        another country in which he could have claimed asylum much sooner."



179. Mr Draycott submitted that the Panel had failed to take  properly  into
    account the Appellant's explanation that he had stayed in Sudan because
    he had to and only left because he feared being  deported  to  Eritrea.
    The Panel had also not taken account of the  background  evidence,  for
    example in the COI Report  (paras  6.91-6.94)  that  large  numbers  of
    Eritreans took refuge in Sudan and remained there refusing to return to
    Sudan.

180. We accept the thrust of the COI Report is  as  Mr  Draycott  submitted.
    However, we do not agree that the Panel's rejection of the  Appellant's
    evidence is flawed in law.  The Appellant's account in brief  was  that
    he wanted to travel to America where his father lived and  he  remained
    in Sudan but experienced difficulties in obtaining a visa from  the  US
    officials who told him to wait until 2003 (see paras 29- 30,  Statement
    30 August 2006).   The Panel clearly had the  Appellant's  evidence  in
    mind  in  paragraph  22  of  its  determination.   There  are   several
    references to  passages  in  the  Appellant's  evidence  including  the
    evidence about him wishing to go to America  and  the  difficulties  he
    encountered in doing so and his being told he would have to wait  until
    2003.  In fact, he waited until 2004 before leaving Sudan.   The  Panel
    considered the Appellant's account and rejected  it.   That  assessment
    cannot be characterised as  perverse  even  if  another  decision-maker
    could have reached a different conclusion.  In reaching its  conclusion
    on this aspect of the Appellant's evidence, the Panel did not,  in  our
    judgment, materially err in law.

181. Mr Draycott also challenged the Panel's rejection  of  the  Appellant's
    evidence that he was not allowed to attend his own wedding in May  1999
    but was allowed to spend one week with his wife after the wedding in  a
    military camp.  At paragraph 20 of its determination,  the  Panel  said
    this:

        "20. In his statement of 20th April 2004 the appellant referred  to
        "when I went to meet my fiance I got married to her in the church.
         I intended to leave the country with my wife at this point however
        as it was not a convenient time to escape I could not leave."   The
        Appellant then explained he went back to the military camp after  a
        period of one week as expected by the military  officers.   In  his
        statement dated 5th May 2004 the Appellant referred to the  wedding
        being done without his presence.  No adequate explanation has  been
        put forward by the Appellant as to  how  the  mistaken  version  of
        events was given in the first witness statement to which we  refer.
        In the first witness statement in which the Appellant  comments  on
        the Home Office refusal letter to be found at page 10 of  the  main
        bundle the appellant does  not  comment  on  paragraph  31  of  the
        reasons for refusal of asylum letter which deals with  this  issue.
        His comments cease in respect of paragraph 20.  The  Appellant  has
        made a  supplementary  statement  commenting  on  the  reasons  for
        refusal letter.  This is to be found at page 1 of  the  Appellant's
        supplementary bundle.  Again there is no comment on paragraph 31 of
        the reasons for refusal of asylum letter.   We  have  set  out  the
        Appellant's explanation in cross-examination.  We reject that.  The
        statement of 20th April is detailed and  relatively  complex.   The
        part relating to the place of  the  marriage  is  preceded  by  the
        Appellant stating that he went to meet his fiance.  We reject  the
        possibility of double error by the interpreter on  one  such  point
        alone.  We find no adequate explanation  has  been  given  for  the
        discrepancy for the same reasons we have set out in  the  preceding
        paragraph.  We find it intrinsically implausible that the Appellant
        would have been refused permission to attend the actual wedding but
        after the marriage ceremony be given permission to  stay  with  his
        wife for a week after she came  to  his  division.   The  Appellant
        states at paragraph 23 of his witness statement at page  6  of  the
        main bundle that he was allowed to stay with her in another camp in
        the military front.  We find it extraordinary  that  the  Appellant
        made no attempt to escape during this period.  He had already  been
        in detention for about six months and  suffered  considerable  ill-
        treatment which he has related.  The Appellant states at  paragraph
        13 of his witness statement at page 4 of the main  bundle  that  he
        thought they would kill him.  However it was only in May 1999  that
        he was allowed to stay with his wife.   We  find  it  extraordinary
        that the Appellant should contradict himself within a short  period
        of time with regard to the circumstances of his marriage.  We  find
        it intrinsically implausible given the fear which  he  had  already
        experienced that he did not seek to escape given the  circumstances
        in which he found himself."

182. Mr Draycott submitted that the Panel erred in law  in  concluding  that
    it was "intrinsically implausible" that the Appellant would be  refused
    permission to attend his marriage ceremony whilst being allowed to stay
    with his wife for a week in a camp thereafter.  He submitted  that  the
    Appellant had adequately explained the contradiction  in  his  evidence
    about whether he had actually attended the marriage with  his  wife  or
    whether that had been done so through a proxy.  Dealing first with  the
    latter criticism, in our judgement, this does no  more  than  assert  a
    disagreement with the Panel's  conclusion.  The  Panel  identified  the
    discrepancy in the Appellant's accounts as to whether he was present at
    his marriage and of the Appellant's explanation of  how  this  apparent
    discrepancy had occurred.  They rejected his explanation.  In our view,
    as a matter of law they were entitled to do so.  On  this  basis  alone
    they were entitled to reject the Appellant's  evidence  in  respect  of
    this matter.  As regards Mr Draycott's other criticism of  the  Panel's
    reasoning, he referred us to paragraph 5.49 of the COI Report in  which
    it is stated that:

        "Authorities generally permitted three visits per  week  by  family
        members except for  detainees  arrested  for  reasons  of  national
        security or for evading national service."

183. He submitted that this undermined the Panel's  reasoning  that  it  was
    implausible that the Eritrean authorities would refuse  him  permission
    to attend his marriage but at the same time allow him to stay with  his
    wife one week later.  It is  said  that  this  evidence  supports  such
    conjugal visits.  It may do so although  we  note  that  the  exception
    referred to there, namely those  "detainees  arrested  for  reasons  of
    national security or for evading national service".  It may well be, on
    the Appellant's account, he fell within this exception  in  any  event.
    However,  whether  that  is  so  or  not,  whilst  this  supports   the
    availability of  family  visits  it  does  nothing,  in  our  view,  to
    undermine the Panel's reasoning which was to contrast the  attitude  of
    the Eritrean authorities to the Appellant over a short period of  time.
    The Panel was entitled to take into account that contrast and,  in  our
    view, the COI Report does not undermine that reasoning.

184. Mr Draycott criticised the Panel for its view that it  was  implausible
    that the Appellant would not take the opportunity to escape if  he  had
    been staying with his wife for a week  at  the  military  camp  at  the
    front.  Taken alone, this criticism might have some  substance  to  it.
    However, it is premised on the assumption that the Panel accepted  that
    this had indeed happened.  In reality, the Panel had already  concluded
    on a basis which we consider entirely sustainable in law that they  did
    not accept the Appellant's evidence concerning  his  marriage  and  the
    subsequent claimed stay with his wife.  In truth, this  aspect  of  the
    Appellant's evidence is, in the words used in the  grounds  for  review
    "wholly peripheral to his claim".  Unless it can be said, and we do not
    think that it can, that  the  Panel's  conclusion  not  to  accept  the
    Appellant's evidence in relation to his marriage and stay with his wife
    was significant in reaching its conclusion on the  overall  credibility
    of his evidence in respect of the  events  central  to  his  claim,  Mr
    Draycott's attack on this aspect of the Appellant's evidence,  even  if
    well made, takes Mr Draycott's submissions  that  the  Panel's  overall
    conclusion on credibility cannot stand no further.

185. Finally, we reject Mr Draycott's submission that the Panel  adopted  an
    attitude of general disbelief such  that  it  failed  to  give  careful
    consideration to each aspect of the Appellant's evidence. We are in  no
    doubt, having read the determination, that the  Panel  considered  each
    aspect of the Appellant's evidence  individually  and  looked  at  each
    incident on its own merits.   Indeed, the analysis above of the Panel's
    reasoning demonstrates that it did so.

186. Whilst  there  are  some  aspects  of  the  Panel's  determination  and
    reasoning that are unsustainable, the ultimate issue for us is  whether
    the Panel's proper rejection of the crucial parts  of  the  Appellant's
    evidence relating to his claim for protection in  themselves  justified
    the  Panel  in  rejecting  the  Appellant's  account.    Despite   some
    hesitation, it seems to us that they do.  In rejecting the  Appellant's
    evidence of his detention in 1999, escape and flight to  Sudan  in  May
    2000 the Panel was entitled as a matter of law  to  conclude  that  the
    Appellant had failed to establish  essential  factual  building  blocks
    necessary to show that he was at real  risk  of  serious  ill-treatment
    contrary to Article 3 of ECHR.  The rejection of these crucial parts of
    the Appellant's claim so undermine his credibility and the veracity  of
    his evidence that the Panel was entitled to conclude that  he  had  not
    made out his case.  If he was not to be believed on these central parts
    of his evidence, the Panel was entitled to conclude as a matter of  law
    that he was not a person of credit such that any part  of  his  account
    crucial to his claim would be accepted.

187. For these reasons, in respect of the Appellant's claim to  be  at  risk
    because he is  a  military  deserter,  in  our  judgment,  the  Panel's
    decision to dismiss his appeal discloses no material error of law.

188. The Appellant has, however, another string  to  his  bow.   It  was  an
    argument presented to the Panel but rejected by them in paragraph 24 of
    the determination.  It is that the Appellant  is  entitled  to  succeed
    because he illegally exited Eritrea and as such will be perceived as  a
    deserter or draft evader.  In paragraph 24 the Panel said this:

        "It has been accepted by the Respondent that the  Appellant  served
        in the military.  Having rejected the Appellant's account we do not
        accept that on return he would be perceived as a  deserter  and  an
        escapee from a military prison.  The Appellant therefore  fails  to
        come within the criteria set out in  KA.   We  do  not  accept  the
        Appellant's account in relation to his departure from the  country.
        We therefore do not conclude that he  did  not  leave  on  a  legal
        basis."

189. It was not disputed before us that if an  individual  establishes  that
    he had left Eritrea illegally there is a real risk that he will  suffer
    serious ill-treatment as  a  perceived  deserter  or  draft  evader  on
    return.  That is the position acknowledged in the country guidance case
    of MA which was approved and followed by the  Court  of  Appeal  in  GM
    (Eritrea) and Others v SSHD [2008] EWCA Civ 833.   The  point  in  this
    appeal is, accepting  the  Panel's  view  on  the  incredulity  of  the
    Appellant's account, did the Panel err in law in  concluding  that  the
    Appellant had failed to establish that he had left  Eritrea  illegally.
    Mr Draycott submitted that the Panel had  failed  to  take  account  in
    reaching its conclusion the evidence of the Appellant that he had  left
    Eritrea illegally and that  his  passport  had  expired  in  1997  (see
    screening form, at 1.21).  Mr Draycott submitted that the Appellant had
    no reason to lie about this as, the time he gave this  information,  it
    was not yet the position that illegal exit per  se  was  considered  to
    create a real risk on return.

190. The difficulty with Mr Draycott's position is that this  issue  has  to
    be considered in the context of  the  Panel  having  properly  rejected
    totally the credibility of the Appellant's evidence  about  his  claim.
    In such circumstances, it was entirely open to the Panel not to  accept
    the evidence he gave about his passport or the nature of his  departure
    from Eritrea.  The reasoning of the Panel, in  our  view,  is  entirely
    sustainable and their conclusion on that basis that the  Appellant  had
    failed to establish that he had left Eritrea illegally is unassailable.



191. For completeness we should add that we see no other  basis  upon  which
    the Panel could have reached a finding  that  the  Appellant  had  left
    Eritrea illegally.  The only evidence accepted  by  the  Panel  (indeed
    accepted by the Respondent at all  times)  is  that  the  Appellant  is
    Eritrean, that he was thirty-three at the date of the Panel's  decision
    and that he had, at some time, served in  the  Eritrean  military.   It
    was, of course, part of the Appellant's case that he had initially been
    conscripted between 1990 and 1993 before, on his case, being called  up
    for a second time in May 1998. His evidence in respect  of  the  latter
    was not accepted by the Panel. Any earlier military service does  mean,
    of course, as the background evidence shows, that  he  was  subject  to
    recall at any time.  But, as the decision of the Court of Appeal in  GM
    makes clear, that alone  does  not  create  a  risk  on  return  to  an
    individual.  The risk only exists if it is established, albeit  on  the
    lower standard applicable in human rights  cases,  that  the  Appellant
    also left Eritrea illegally.  As the Tribunal  pointed  out  in  MA  at
    paragraph [449]:

        "...where a person has come to this country and given what the fact-
        finder concludes (according to the requisite standard of proof)  to
        be an incredible account of his or her experiences, that person may
        well fail to show that he or she exited illegally."

192. That approach was cited and approved by the Court of Appeal in GM  (see
    [13] per Buxton LJ).

193. In MA the Tribunal identified from the  substantial  body  of  evidence
    put before it the situations in which an Eritrean national might obtain
    an exit visa.  At para [348] relying upon the  expert  evidence  of  Dr
    Kibreab the Tribunal said this:

        "348.  As noted at paragraph 205 above, Dr  Kibreab  told  us  that
        those  not  affected  by  National  Service   and   considered   as
        trustworthy by the government, and thus unlikely to have difficulty
        in obtaining exit visas, comprised Ministers;  ex-Ministers;  Party
        Activists; Eritrean expatriates; namely those who could be  British
        citizens working in Eritrea but of Eritrean origin; elderly  people
        over fifty who were forty or over in 1994, those who wanted  to  go
        on Haj or visit relatives abroad; government officials; scholarship
        students (although Dr Kibreab's evidence was that  the  government
        now restricted their movements as many did not return);  government
        employees who attended conferences (although Dr Kibreab maintained
        this had recently stopped); and relatives of  those  in  power  who
        might arguably obtain exit visas as a result."

194. The Tribunal's view was adopted by the Court of Appeal in GM.

195. We accept that there are large numbers of  Eritrean  citizens  who  are
    obliged to leave their country illegally (see MA at  [361]).   We  also
    accept that a male of military service age - such as  the  Appellant  -
    would be unlikely to obtain an exit visa  unless  he  came  within  the
    limited categories  identified  in  MA  (see  [357]).   In  this  case,
    however, there is no evidence one way or another as to the  Appellant's
    basis for exiting Eritrea.  His evidence was not  accepted.   In  these
    circumstances, in our view, it would be mere  speculation  to  conclude
    upon what basis he did leave. In the result, there is only  one  proper
    conclusion which we can reach, that  is  that  the  Appellant  has  not
    demonstrated a real risk or reasonable likelihood that he left  Eritrea
    illegally.

196. For all these  reasons,  we  are  satisfied  that  the  Panel  did  not
    materially err in law in rejecting the Appellant's claim based upon his
    illegal exit from Eritrea.

      Decision

197. For all the above reasons, we are satisfied  that  the  Panel  did  not
    materially err in law in dismissing the Appellant's  appeal  on  asylum
    and humanitarian protection grounds or in respect of Article 3  of  the
    ECHR.  The Panel's decision to dismiss the appeal stands.



                                              SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE GRUBB



