
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal

LB and MB (dependants of absent Community nationals) Colombia [2006] UKAIT
00015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 23 January 2006                              |On 09 February 2006        |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                    Mr G WARR (SENIOR Immigration Judge)
                  Mr p CHALKLEY (SENIOR Immigration Judge)


                                   Between



                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R P Scannell, Counsel, instructed by JCWI
For the Respondent:    Mr N Sheildon, Treasury Solicitor


Where a qualified person within the meaning of the Immigration (European
Economic Area) Regulations 2000 leaves the United Kingdom, Article 6(2B)(b)
does not confer a right to remain on all his dependants. Only the children
or descendants of the qualified person can remain in this country for the
purposes of pursuing an educational course. The reference to "dependants"
does not introduce a wider class of persons who have such a right.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellants are citizens of Colombia born on 2 September 1986 and  4
      January 1984 respectively.   They are brother and sister.   In  August
      1996, the appellants' elder sister travelled to the United Kingdom  as
      a visitor. She met a Swedish national living and working in the United
      Kingdom. They married in  December 1996 and set up home together  with
      the appellants' sister's two children by a previous marriage.  At that
      time, the appellants' sister's Swedish husband held a quasi-diplomatic
      status because of his employment by an international  institution  and
      the appellants' sister was granted immigration status  describing  her
      as exempt. In early 1997, another of the appellants' sisters travelled
      to the United Kingdom to study. She lived with the appellants'  sister
      and her Swedish husband as a dependent member of their  household.  In
      1999,  the  appellants'  mother  travelled  to  London  to  visit  the
      appellants' sister and also lived with them as a dependent  member  of
      their household.  In the household  were  also  two  children  by  the
      appellants' sister's first marriage, and two other  children  born  to
      the appellants' sister and her Swedish husband. EEA residence  permits
      were eventually issued to the family on 24 May 2001,  valid  until  28
      March 2005. The appellants arrived in the United Kingdom  on  4  April
      2001. After they arrived, their sister arranged for them to be  issued
      with EEA residence documents, also valid  until  28  March  2005.  The
      appellants' father arrived in the United Kingdom in May 2001.  Shortly
      after their arrival in the United Kingdom, arrangements were made  for
      the appellants  to  learn  English.  The  first  appellant  took  GCSE
      examinations in June 2002.  He then enrolled at Barnet  College  where
      he is still pursuing studies at "A" level. He is due to  sit  his  "A"
      level examination in June 2006.  The second appellant enrolled upon  a
      course of training as a fitness instructor  at   Barnet  College.   In
      September 2002 she enrolled upon another course of studies  at  Barnet
      College pursuing an NVQ in administration.  She then undertook further
      training as a legal secretary, which she completed in June 2004.   She
      is now a law student at the University of Surrey. Towards the  end  of
      2002, the appellants' sister's Swedish husband was offered  employment
      in Washington DC. In  December  2002,  he,  the  appellants'  sisters,
      together with the four children, travelled to the USA.   They hope  to
      return to the United Kingdom in due course.  The  appellants  went  to
      live with their parents in the United Kingdom, where they  remain.  In
      anticipation of the expiration of their EEA residence  documents,  the
      appellants' representative made an application on their behalf  on  21
      March 2005 for their renewal.

2.   The appellants' application was refused by the Secretary  of  State  as
      the sponsor was living abroad and was therefore not a qualified person
      as set out in Regulation 5 of the Immigration (European Economic Area)
      Regulations 2000.  The decision under appeal was taken on 23 May 2005.
      Accordingly, the requested residence documents confirming the right of
      residence of the appellants in the United Kingdom as the dependants of
      an EEA national were refused.

3.   The Immigration Judge referred to the  Regulations  and  the  case  law
      which had been cited to him including Baumbast (C-413/99) [2003]  INLR
      1 and concluded that the appellants had derived an indefinite right of
      residence in the  United  Kingdom  by  virtue  of  Article  12  of  EC
      Regulation 1612/68.  They were  dependent  family  members  when  they
      entered into education and in  the  light  of  the  principles  to  be
      derived from Community law jurisprudence he was satisfied:

             '... that no sensible distinction can be drawn as regards  the
             content of the rights  enjoyed  by  children  who  are  family
             members of a worker. In short, once Community  law  defines  a
             child as a family member of a worker it  matters  not  whether
             such a person is defined in that way through Article  10.1  or
             10.2 of EC Regulation 1612/68.'

4.    Accordingly  the  rights  acquired  by  the  appellant  survived   the
      sponsor's  departure  from  the  United  Kingdom.    In  the   grounds
      contending that the Immigration Judge made a material error of law, it
      is contended that Regulation 6(2B)(b)  in referring to 'descendants of
      his or of his spouse who are under twenty-one or are their dependants,
      provided that they were attending an educational course in the  United
      Kingdom when the qualified person was resided in  the  United  Kingdom
      and are continuing  to  attend  such  a  course'  did  not  cover  the
      appellants since they were not 'descendants of his or of his  spouse'.



   5. Before us Mr Sheildon relied on his skeleton argument.  The  Secretary
      of State summarised the arguments advanced on behalf of the appellants
      in paragraph 12 of the  skeleton  argument.   It  was  said  that  the
      appellants sought to persuade the Tribunal that the  rights  conferred
      by Article 12 of Regulation 1612/68 and Regulation 6(2B) of  the  2000
      Regulations extended beyond children of the national of a member state
      or his spouse.  It was said  that  the  effect  of  the  words  'their
      dependants' in Regulation 6(2B)(b) was to extend  the  scope  of  that
      regulation to anyone who could properly be described as a dependant of
      a  qualified  person  whether  or  not  that  person  is  his  or  her
      descendant.  Following the case of Baumbast, the right to continue  in
      education following the departure of the qualified  person  could  not
      'depend on how the child qualified as a family member'.   In  response
      to  these  representations  Mr  Sheildon  submitted  in  his  skeleton
      argument that the meaning of Regulation 6(2B)(b) was clear on its face
      and the words 'their dependants' referred back to 'descendants'.  They
      had the effect of extending the scope of the regulation to descendants
      who were over the age of twenty-one  but  who  remained  dependent  on
      their parents. Article 12 of Regulation 1612/68 and  paragraph  57  of
      Baumbast made the matter clear.  As it was accepted on behalf  of  the
      appellants that they were not  the  children  or  descendants  of  the
      qualified person (for the purpose of the 2000 Regulations) and/or  the
      national of a member state (for the purposes of Regulation 1612/68) it
      followed that they fell outside the scope of those provisions.

6.    A  number  of  consequences  of  the  acceptance  of   Mr   Scannell's
      interpretation were sketched out in paragraphs 20FF  of  the  skeleton
      argument.

7.   It was submitted that there was nothing in  the  Baumbast  judgment  to
      support the argument advanced by Mr Scannell.   The matter  was  clear
      both under municipal law and the EC Regulations.  There was  no  scope
      for any reference  to  the  ECJ.    It  was  of  note  that  Directive
      2004/38/EC which repealed Article 12 and which was due  to  come  into
      force on 1 May 2006 provided as follows:

             'The Union Citizen's departure from the host member  state  or
             his/her death shall not entail loss of the right of  residence
             of his/her children or of the parent who has actual custody of
             the children, irrespective of  nationality,  if  the  children
             reside in the  host  member  state  and  are  enrolled  at  an
             educational establishment, for the purpose of studying  there,
             until the completion of their studies'.

8.   It was submitted that the Immigration Judge had made a  material  error
      of law in determining that the appellants have 'derived an independent
      right to residence in  the  United  Kingdom  from  Article  12  of  EC
      Regulation 1612/68'.

9.   Mr Scannell, relying on his skeleton argument,  reminded  the  Tribunal
      that it should consider the case from  the  perspective  of  Community
      law.  One should seek the best  possible  integration  of  the  family
      members of a person exercising  Treaty  rights  -  see,  for  example,
      paragraph 50 of Baumbast.  In  the  cases  of  Echternach  and  Moritz
      (389/87 and 390/87) [1989] ECR 723 the following argument was upheld:

             'that the principle of equal treatment enshrined in  Community
             law must ensure as complete  an  integration  as  possible  of
             workers and members of their families in the host country  and
             that therefore an interruption in a family  members  residence
             in that country must  not  prevent  him  from  continuing  his
             studies there.'


      Reliance was also placed on Carmina di Leo (C-308/89)  [1990]  ECR  I-
      4185 in particular at paragraph 13:


         "It must also be borne in mind that the aim of Regulation  1612/68,
         namely freedom of movement for workers, requires, for such  freedom
         to be guaranteed in compliance with the principles of  liberty  and
         dignity, the best possible conditions for the  integration  of  the
         Community worker's family in the society of the  host  country.  If
         such integration is to be successful, it is essential for the child
         of a Community worker who resides  with  his  family  in  the  host
         Member State to have the opportunity to choose a course  under  the
         same conditions as a child of a national of that state."

10.  While the appellants were not the children of the worker on  whom  they
      relied in order to obtain their right of residence under Article 10 of
      Regulation 1612/68  they  were  dependent  family  members  when  they
      entered education and (so it was submitted in the  skeleton  argument)
      'it is highly unlikely - having regard inter  alia  to  the  principle
      vouched saved by Regulation 1612/68 which requires 'the best  possible
      conditions for the integration of the Community workers family in  the
      society of the host member state' (paragraph  50  Baumbast  refers)  -
      that any distinction can sensibly be drawn as regards the  content  of
      the rights enjoyed by children who are family members of a worker.'

11.  Community law defined child as a family  member  of  a  worker  and  it
      mattered not whether such a person was so defined through Article 10.1
      or 10.2 of Regulation 1612/68.  No objective  justification  could  be
      made for distinguishing between the  Article  12  rights  of  children
      admitted as descendants and those  admitted  as  dependants.   If  the
      Community worker's spouse had remained in the United Kingdom with  her
      own Colombian children, and as the carer of the  appellants,  she  and
      her children would have been allowed to remain  but  her  brother  and
      sister would  have  been  refused.  It  was  submitted  that  the  EEA
      Regulations did not properly incorporate all the  categories  referred
      to in Article 10.1 and 10.2 of Regulation 1612/68.  Unless  the  point
      could be determined with complete confidence, it should be referred to
      the ECJ.  It was not an academic  matter  since  it  was  an  obstacle
      preventing or inhibiting the free movement of Community workers.

12.  In reply, it was submitted that the submissions advanced on  behalf  of
      the appellants went counter to the regulations relied upon.    All the
      case law referred to related to the children of  Community  nationals.
      Article 12 was only concerned with the children of workers who  wished
      to remain after the departure of the worker in order to complete their
      education.  There was  nothing  surprising  that  children  should  be
      treated in a different position from those who were not  the  children
      of the worker.  The line had to be drawn somewhere.

13.  If the position were as contended by the appellants,  the  EU  national
      could bring in an indefinite number of children of the extended family
      who might live in the United Kingdom for very short periods  and  they
      would all have the right to come and complete their education.   There
      was nothing anomalous or unfair in restricting the application of  the
      provision to the children of workers.  It was submitted  that  Article
      10 of Regulation 1612/68 was a red herring.  Regulation 6(2B)  of  the
      2000 Regulations was concerned with implementing Article 12  and   not
      Article 10 of Regulation 1612/68.   On Mr Scannell's  argument,  there
      was a very wide class of persons with an entitlement, not  limited  to
      children of family  members.  The  Immigration  Judge  had  failed  to
      explain on what basis he had rejected the plain meaning of Article  12
      and Regulation 6(2B).

14.  At the conclusion of the submissions we reserved our determination.  We
      are grateful to counsel for their respective skeleton arguments.   The
      facts are not in dispute and we  have  referred  to  them  above.  The
      narrow question is the meaning of the  Regulations  and  whether  they
      faithfully implement the provisions of Community law.

15.  Regulation 6 of the EEA Regulations sets out who are to be regarded  as
      the  family  members  of   another   person   in   various   different
      circumstances.    Where the person is  a  student,  for  example,  the
      persons are his spouse and  dependent  children  -  see  6(2)  of  the
      Regulations.   The relevant paragraphs for our purposes is 6(2B):

             'If the other person has ceased to be a  qualified  person  on
             ceasing to reside in the United Kingdom, the persons are -


             (a)  his spouse or his divorced spouse, provided  she  is  the
                  primary carer  of  their  dependent  child  who  is  under
                  nineteen and attending an educational course in the United
                  Kingdom;  and


             (b)  descendants of his or of his spouse who are under twenty-
                  one, or are their  dependants,  provided  that  they  were
                  attending an educational course in the United Kingdom when
                  the qualified person was residing in  the  United  Kingdom
                  and are continuing to attend such a course.'


     Under 6(2D) it is  provided  that  a  person  to  whom  paragraph  2(B)
      applies 'shall be treated as the family member of a qualified  person,
      notwithstanding that the other person has ceased  to  be  a  qualified
      person.'

16.  Reliance is placed on Article 12 of Regulation 1612/68.    This  refers
      to the children of a national of a member state who is or:

              'has been employed in the territory of another  member  state
             shall  be  admitted  to  that  state's  general   educational,
             apprenticeship and vocational training courses under the  same
             conditions as the nationals of that state,  if  such  children
             are  residing  in  its  territories.   Member   states   shall
             encourage all efforts to enable such children to attend  these
             courses under the best possible conditions.'

17.  Mr Scannell points out  that  Regulation  1612/68  requires  'the  best
      possible conditions for the  integration  of  the  Community  worker's
      family in the society of the host member  state'.      Once  Community
      law defines a child as a family member  of  a  worker  it  matter  not
      whether such a person was so defined through Article 10.1 or  10.2  of
      Regulation 1612/68.

18.  We find that the provisions relied upon are perfectly  clear  in  their
      intention and effect. The appellants are not 'descendants of his or of
      his spouse ...' under Regulation 6(2B)(b).   The words 'or  are  their
      dependants' does not make the  class  wider  -  it  simply  refers  to
      descendants who are  not  under  twenty-one.   We  consider  that  the
      meaning of Regulation 6(2B)(b) is clear on its face. There is  nothing
      inconsistent with that interpretation in  the  Baumbast  judgment  and
      indeed that judgment refers at paragraph 57 (see [2003]  INLR  46)  to
      the phrase 'descendants who are under the age of twenty-one  years  or
      are dependants' in Article 10 of Regulation 1612/68:

             'Furthermore, the right of "his spouse and  their  descendants
             who are under the age of twenty-one years or are  'dependants'
             to  install  themselves  with  the  migrant  worker  must   be
             interpreted  as  meaning  that  it  is  granted  both  to  the
             descendants of that worker and to those of his spouse'.

     As is pointed out by Mr Sheildon, in order to be  consistent  with  the
      appellants' interpretation, it would be necessary to add the words 'or
      any of their dependants' to the end of this sentence.

19.  In his skeleton argument Mr  Sheildon  identified  a  number  of  other
      difficulties with the appellants' construction of the Regulations.  It
      is pointed out, for example, that if  the  appellants'  interpretation
      were correct then an EEA national who might only  be  working  in  the
      United Kingdom for a short period, could  arrange  for  an  indefinite
      number of individuals to come to the United Kingdom as his dependants,
      all of whom would be entitled to remain in the United Kingdom after he
      had left for as long as they continued to engage in education.

20.  The effect and purpose of the  words  'or  are  their  dependants'  was
      clear, it was submitted.  They extended  the  right  of  children  who
      remained dependent upon their parents after the age of  twenty-one  to
      remain in the United Kingdom to complete their education.  This  would
      protect children who had embarked on a four year degree  course  while
      their parents were working in the United Kingdom.  They would have had
      to leave when they turned twenty-one if provision  was  not  made  for
      them.

21.  It was further pointed out that if the rights conferred  by  Regulation
      6 applied to all dependants, whether  they  were  descendants  of  the
      qualified person or not, then the words 'descendants of his or of  his
      spouse who are under twenty-one' would be  rendered  entirely  otiose.
      There was a further anomaly  in  that  descendants  of  the  qualified
      person would be treated  less  favourably  than  'dependants'  of  the
      qualified person since the rights of descendants would be extinguished
      when they reached the age of twenty-one where the rights of dependants
      were apparently open ended.

22.  We find, as we have said, Regulation 6 to be clear on  its  face.   The
      appellants are not descendants of  the  qualified  person  or  of  his
      spouse.  The appellants are  not  dependants  within  the  meaning  of
      Regulation 6(2B)(b).  The Regulation can only sensibly be construed in
      the manner contended for by Mr Sheildon.  Bearing in mind the guidance
      given by the Master of the Rolls in R v. International Stock  Exchange
      ex parte Else [1993] QB 534 at 545 we see no basis to refer the  issue
      resolving it as we do with no real doubt and with complete confidence.

23.  We see nothing anomalous or unfair in so construing the Regulation.  As
      Mr Sheildon submits, a line has to be drawn somewhere.  We see nothing
      in the regulations contrary to the intention  of  Regulation  1612/68.
      The authorities relied  upon  by  the  Immigration  Judge  and  by  Mr
      Scannell before us refer to the children  of  nationals  of  a  member
      state. The Immigration Judge  acknowledges  in  paragraph  40  of  the
      determination that the appellants are not the children of  the  worker
      on whom they relied in order to first secure their right of  residence
      under Article 10 of E Regulation 1612/68.  We see  no  basis  for  the
      Immigration Judge's decision that their rights survived the  cessation
      of employment of their sponsor and his seeking to reside in the United
      Kingdom. It is not possible to distil a principle of Community law  to
      assist the appellants from the materials relied on by Mr Scannell  and
      indeed the authorities compellingly support the arguments advanced  by
      Mr Shieldon.

24.  We were also referred to Directive 2004/38/EC which  comes  into  force
      on 1 May 2006. in Article 12(3) it states :

             'The Union citizen's departure from the host member  state  or
             his/her death shall not entail loss of the right of  residence
             of his/her children or of the parent who has actual custody of
             the children, irrespective of  nationality,  if  the  children
             reside in the  host  member  state  and  are  enrolled  at  an
             educational establishment, for the purpose of studying  there,
             until the completion of their studies.'

     As Mr Sheildon submits, it has been expressly  decided  to  reject  the
      extension of the scope of Article 12 in the manner advanced on  behalf
      of the appellants.

25.  We find that the Immigration Judge made a material error  of  law.   He
      had no basis for concluding that the right  conferred  by  Article  12
      extended beyond children of nationals of member states.   None of  the
      arguments advanced on behalf of the appellants persuades us  that  the
      Immigration Judge came to the right conclusion.

26.  The Immigration Judge made a material  error  of  law.  We  accordingly
      substitute a fresh decision.

27.  The appeals of the appellants are dismissed.



Signed                                  Date
G. Warr
Senior Immigration Judge

