

                                 [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Treebhawon and Others (NIAA 2002 Part 5A - compelling  circumstances  test)
[2017] UKUT 00013 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Error of law hearing: 28 October 2015 |      Part 1 promulgated  19 November|
|Remaking hearing: 06 December 2016    |2015                                 |
|                                      |Part 2 promulgated  09 January 2017  |


                                   Before

                                  [Part 1]

                   THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY, PRESIDENT
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCIS

                                  [Part 2]

                   THE HON MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY, PRESIDENT
     THE HON MR JUSTICE SOOLE, SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                   SOOREEADO TREEBHAWON, KJUL TREEBHAWON,
                   ATISH TREEBHAWON, AKASH TREEBHAWON AND
                              ADESH TREEBHAWON
                                                                 Respondents

Representation

For  the  Secretary  of  State:      Ms  A  Fijiwala,  Senior  Office   Home
                  Presenting Officer [Part 1]
     Ms C Patry, of counsel, instructed by the Government  Legal  Department
                  [Part 2]

For  the  Appellant:      Mrs  H  Arrif,  Solicitor,  of  Arden   Solicitors
                  Advocates

   I) Where the case of a foreign national who is not an offender  does  not
      satisfy  the  requirements  of  the  Article  8  ECHR  regime  of  the
      Immigration Rules, the test  to  be  applied  is  that  of  compelling
      circumstances.


  II) The Parliamentary intention underlying Part 5A of NIAA 2002 is to give
      proper effect to Article 8 ECHR.  Thus a  private  life  developed  or
      established during periods of unlawful or precarious  residence  might
      conceivably qualify to be accorded more than little weight and s  117B
      (4) and (5) are to be construed and applied accordingly.


 III) Mere hardship, mere difficulty, mere hurdles, mere upheaval  and  mere
      inconvenience, even where multiplied, are unlikely to satisfy the test
      of "very significant hurdles" in paragraph 276 ADE of the  Immigration
      Rules.


McCloskey J

Preface

 I) This judgment is in two  Parts,  in  consequence  of  the  conventional
    (though not invariable) separation of the error of law hearing and  the
    remaking hearing.  The error of law decision is reproduced fully in [1]
    - [26] below.  It is reported  at  [2015]  UKUT  00674  (IAC).   It  is
    appropriate to note that one aspect of this decision was, in substance,
    disapproved by a subsequent decision of the Court  of  Appeal:  see  MM
    (Uganda) v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 450, concerning section 117C (5) of the
    2002 Act. This was followed with  notable  reluctance  by  a  different
    division of the Court of Appeal in MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA  Civ  705,
    where the judgment of  Elias  LJ  acknowledges  the  strength  of  this
    Tribunal's competing interpretation of section  117B  (6)  espoused  by
    this Tribunal in the present appeal, contained in Part 1:  see  [36]  -
    [45]. It may be that the Supreme Court will be the ultimate arbiter. In
    the meantime, the decision in MM (Uganda) is the binding one concerning
    section 117C (5) and MA (Pakistan) is binding concerning  section  117B
    (6).

II) The second main aspect of this Tribunal's  error  of  law  decision  is
    expressed in the headnote of the initial reported  version,  at  [2015]
    UKUT. (IAC) in these terms:

         Section 117B (4) and (5) are not parliamentary prescriptions of the
         public interest. Rather, they operate as instructions to courts and
         tribunals to be applied in cases where the  balancing  exercise  is
         being conducted in order to determine proportionality under Article
         8 ECHR, in cases where either of the factors  which  they  identify
         arises.


    None of the several Court of Appeal decisions belonging to this sphere,
    promulgated subsequently, calls into question the correctness  of  this
    assessment. Indeed, one finds indications  of  substantially  the  same
    approach in the recent decision of the Court of Appeal  in  Rhuppiah  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 803 at  [49]
    - [54].

III) Part 2 of this judgment contains our remaking of the  decision  of  the
    FtT: see [27] - [52].


                        Part 1: Error of Law Decision


Introduction

 1. These conjoined appeals raise interesting  questions  relating  to  the
    construction and application of section 117B (6)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 which, so far as the  panel  is  aware,
    have not previously been the  subject  of  adjudication  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

The Appellants

 2. The Appellants are a family unit consisting of father, one daughter and
    three sons.  All are nationals of Mauritius.  The father is aged 44 and
    the children's ages range from 11 to 17.  Their immigration history  is
    as follows:

    (i)  The father claims to have entered the United Kingdom, via  Dublin,
         in 2003.

     ii) In November 2007 the oldest child was  given  leave  to  enter  the
         United Kingdom and remain for a period of six  months.  It  appears
         that both she and the children's mother entered around this time.


    iii) In February 2008, in response to formal overstaying  measures,  the
         father confirmed that his wife and oldest child were in the  United
         Kingdom, representing that they would  be  returning  to  Mauritius
         where their other three children resided.

     iv) On 04 August 2010 the second and third of the four children entered
         the United Kingdom.

      v) On 26 December 2011 the youngest of the four children  entered  the
         United Kingdom as a visitor.

        [There is no mention in the papers of  the  mother  of  the  family
        postdating this event.]

     vi) On 01 February 2013 the Appellants' human  rights  application  was
         refused.

    vii)  On  03  April  2013  further  representations  were  made  on  the
         Appellants' behalf.

   viii) On 10 June 2014, in response to a request  for  clarification,  the
         Appellants' representatives furnished further submissions.
     ix) By a decision dated 24 October 2014 on behalf of the  Secretary  of
         State for the Home  Department  (the  "Secretary  of  State"),  the
         Appellants' further human rights application was refused.




Appeal Proceedings

 3. The latter decision was challenged by the Appellants by appeal  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal (the "FtT").  By its  decision  promulgated  on  17
    July 2015, the FtT allowed the appeals "under the Immigration Rules and
    under Article 8".  Upon scrutiny, the FtT decided that  the  appeal  of
    the oldest of the four children succeeded under paragraph 276 ADE(1) of
    the Rules, while the appeals of the other four family members succeeded
    under Article 8 ECHR outwith the Rules.

 4. The Secretary  of  State  applied  for  permission  to  appeal  on  the
    following two grounds:

    (i)  The second Appellant could not satisfy paragraph 276  ADE  of  the
         Rules, given the date of  the  decision,  giving  rise  to  a  free
         standing error of law.  This is allied to a further contention that
         this error infected the FtT's Article 8 decision in respect of  the
         other four family members.

    (ii) The FtT further erred in law in treating section  117B(6)  of  the
         2002 Act as determinative of the public interest  question,  namely
         the issue of proportionality under Article 8(2) ECHR and failing to
         apply the other public interest provisions of the section.

     The latter formulation is ours. Permission to  appeal  was  granted  on
both grounds.

First ground of appeal: the Immigration Rules issue

 5. At the material time,  paragraph  276  ADE  of  the  Immigration  Rules
    provided:

         "276ADE (1). The requirements to be met by an applicant  for  leave
         to remain on the grounds of private life in the UK are that at  the
         date of application, the applicant:


         (i)  does not fall for refusal under any of the grounds in  Section
             S-LTR 1.2 to S-LTR 2.3. and S-LTR.3.1. in Appendix FM; and


         (ii) has made a valid  application  for  leave  to  remain  on  the
             grounds of private life in the UK; and


         (iii)    has lived continuously in the UK for  at  least  20  years
             (discounting any period of imprisonment); or


         (iv)  is under the age of 18 years and has  lived  continuously  in
             the UK for at least seven years  (discounting  any  period  of
             imprisonment) and it would not be  reasonable  to  expect  the
             applicant to leave the UK; or


         (v)   is aged 18 years or above and under 25 years and has spent at
             least  half  of  his  life  living  continuously  in  the   UK
             (discounting any period of imprisonment); or


         (vi)  subject to sub-paragraph (2), is aged 18 years or above,  has
             lived  continuously  in  the  UK  for  less  than   20   years
             (discounting any period of imprisonment) but  there  would  be
             very significant obstacles to the applicant's integration into
             the country to which he would have to go if required to  leave
             the UK.

         276ADE (2). Sub-paragraph (1)(vi) does not apply, and  may  not  be
         relied upon, in circumstances in which it is proposed to  return  a
         person to a third country pursuant to Schedule 3 to the Asylum  and
         Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc) Act 2004."

    The history, in brief, is that on 09 July 2012, pursuant to HC 194, the
    Immigration Rules were revised in respect of applications for leave  to
    remain on the  ground  of  private  life  under  Article  8  ECHR  (per
    paragraphs 276 ADE - 276 DH), applications for entry and stay based  on
    family life under Article 8 (Appendix FM) and claims based on Article 8
    in the context of deportation (paragraphs 398 - 399B).

 6. These provisions of the Rules have generated much jurisprudence  during
    the last two years.  In R (Amin) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2014] EWHC 2322 (Admin) it was held that paragraphs 276 ADE
    - 276 DH and Appendix FM do not constitute a  comprehensive  Article  8
    Code.  Thus it is recognised that a claim based on Article  8  can,  in
    principle, succeed either under  the  prescriptive  Article  8  regimes
    within the Rules or outwith the Rules, residually.   In  Haleemudeen  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014]  EWCA  Civ  558,  the
    Court of Appeal espoused the  test  of  "compelling  circumstances"  in
    respect of claims  outwith  the  Rules:  see  [44]  and  [77].   In  MM
    (Lebanon) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA  Civ
    985 the Court of Appeal, in effect, disapproved  the  suggestion  in  R
    (Nagre) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2013]  EWHC  720
    (Admin), at [29], that there is an intermediate hurdle to  be  overcome
    prior to consideration of Article  8  claims  outwith  the  Rules:  per
    Aikens LJ at [129].

 7. In the Secretary of State's decision it was noted that the  longest  of
    the sojourns of the four children [the oldest, the second Appellant] in
    the United Kingdom was six years  and  five  months.   As  the  minimum
    sojourn prescribed by the  relevant  provision  of  the  Rules,  namely
    paragraph 276 ADE (1)(vi) is seven years, it  was  concluded  that  the
    four children's Article 8 claims under the Rules must be refused.

 8. In considering the appeal of the oldest child, the FtT stated:

         "The only issue ..........  Is whether it would  be  reasonable  to
         expect [this child] to leave the United Kingdom she being under the
         age of 18 years and having lived continuously in the United Kingdom
         for seven years. (It is accepted that at the  date  the  Respondent
         made her decision [this child] had not been living continuously  in
         the United Kingdom for seven years.)"

    [Emphasis added.]

    The Judge's ultimate finding was that it would  not  be  reasonable  to
    expect this Appellant to leave the United  Kingdom.   Accordingly,  her
    appeal was allowed under the Rules.  We consider that  this  conclusion
    is unsustainable in law, having regard to  the  seven  years  residence
    requirement and the operative date for assessing same, namely the  date
    of the application to the Secretary of State, not the date of  the  FtT
    decision: per paragraph 276 ADE(1) of the Rules.   The  materiality  of
    this error being unmistakeable, the first limb of the first  ground  of
    appeal is established accordingly.

 9. The second limb of the first ground of appeal is that the error of  law
    which we have found above infected the  FtT's  decision  to  allow  the
    appeals of the other four family members outwith the Rules.  In the key
    section of its decision, under the rubric of  "My  Findings",  the  FtT
    devotes  most  of  its  attention  to  the  oldest  child,  the  second
    Appellant.  This is followed by a brief final section which yields  the
    following analysis:

    (i)  All five Appellants enjoy family and private life together.


     ii) Only the second Appellant can succeed under the Rules.


    iii) The removal of the other four family members would  interfere  with
         the rights to private and family life in play.

     iv) The issue is proportionality.


      v) The public interest  engaged  is  the  maintenance  of  immigration
         control in pursuit of the economic wellbeing of the country.


     vi) To require the other four Appellants to leave  the  United  Kingdom
         would be disproportionate -

             ".... because family life would be disrupted given that it  is
             reasonable for [the second Appellant] to remain in the  United
             Kingdom .... [and] there would be [concerns] and  difficulties
             for the remaining siblings should the first Appellant's health
             deteriorate.   These     factors  tip  the  balance  in  their
             favour."


         This latter passage may be linked to  an  earlier  section  of  the
         decision in which evidence relating to the health and employability
         of the first Appellant, the father, is recorded.

10. We consider that there is a demonstrably clear nexus between the  FtT's
    decision to allow the second Appellant's appeal on the ground that  her
    case satisfied the requirements of the Rules and the  further  decision
    to allow the other four Appellants' appeals outwith the Rules.  The two
    are inextricably linked.  We have concluded that the first decision  is
    unsustainable in  law.   Given  that  the  cornerstone  of  the  second
    decision is  the  legally  unsustainable  first  decision,  it  follows
    inexorably that the second decision  cannot  survive.   It's  sole  and
    exclusive rationale is  the  legally  untenable  first  decision.   The
    materiality of this further error of law brooks no argument.  Thus  all
    five decisions must be set aside.


Second ground of appeal: the section 117B(6) issue

11. The FtT gave consideration to section 117B (6) of the 2002 Act  in  the
    context of considering whether the claims of the 1st, 3rd, 4th and  5th
    Appellants could succeed outwith the Article 8  regime  of  the  Rules.
    The decision states:

         "In considering this I have had regard to and applied [section 117B
         (6)] ...  which confirms to me that there is no public interest  in
         removing  the  first  Appellant  because  he  has  a  genuine   and
         subsisting parental relationship with a  qualifying  child  and  it
         would not be reasonable to expect her to leave the United Kingdom."

    This is the only reference to section  117B  in  the  entirety  of  the
    decision.

12. Section 117B of the 2002 Act provides:

         "(1) The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is  in  the
             public interest.

         (2)  It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
             interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are able to speak English, because persons who can speak
             English-

             (a)  are less of a burden on taxpayers, and


             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

         (3)  It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
             interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are financially independent, because such persons-


             (a)  are not a burden on taxpayers, and


             (b   are better able to integrate into society.


         (4)  Little weight should be given to-


             (a)  a private life, or


             (b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner, that is
                  established by a person at a time when the person is in
                  the United Kingdom unlawfully.


         (5)  Little weight should be given to a private life established by
             a person at a time when the person's immigration status is
             precarious.


         (6)  In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation, the
             public interest does not require the person's removal where-


             (a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child, and


             (b)   it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave
                  the United Kingdom."

    The new Part 5A of the 2002 Act, comprising sections 117A - 117D,  came
    into operation on 28 July 2014.  This is a novel legislative  mechanism
    whereby in the exercise of determining  proportionality  in  Article  8
    cases, courts and tribunals are obliged to have regard to  Parliament's
    formulation of the public interest.  This flows from the definition  of
    the  "public  interest  question"  as  the  question  of  "whether   an
    interference with a person's right to respect for  private  and  family
    life is justified under Article 8(2) [ECHR]", per section 117A (3).


13. In the evolving jurisprudence of the Upper Tribunal, the  new  Part  5A
    regime has been considered in a series of reported decisions.  The most
    comprehensive analysis of its provisions   is found in Forman (Sections
    117A - C considerations) [2015] UKUT 00412 (IAC), at  [17]  especially.
    In that case the Upper Tribunal decided, inter alia, that sections 117A
    and 177B apply in every case where a court or tribunal is  required  to
    determine whether a decision made under the Immigration  Acts  breaches
    any person's rights under Article 8 ECHR.   It  further  held  that  in
    considering the public interest question, the Court  or  Tribunal  must
    have regard to the considerations listed in section 117B in all  cases:
    per section 117A (1) and (2).  Other major pronouncements of the  Upper
    Tribunal on sections 117A - 117B are found in AM (Section 117B)  Malawi
    [2015] UKUT 0260 (IAC) and Deelah and Others  (section  117B  -  ambit)
    [2015] UKUT 00515 (IAC).

14. None of the above decisions addresses the specific issue  which  arises
    in the present appeals.  We  formulate  this  issue  in  the  following
    terms:

         In a case where a Court or Tribunal decides that a  person  who  is
         not liable to deportation has a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
         relationship with a qualifying child, as defined in Part 5A of  the
         Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, as  amended,  and  it
         would not be reasonable to expect such child to  leave  the  United
         Kingdom, with the result  that  the  two  conditions  enshrined  in
         section 117B(6) are satisfied, is this determinative of the "public
         interest question",  namely  the  issue  of  proportionality  under
         Article 8(2) ECHR?


    While acknowledging that this formulation has certain offshoots, giving
    rise to other issues, we consider this to be the overarching question.

15. In Deelah  and  Others,  the  Upper  Tribunal  provided  the  following
    overview of the new Part 5A regime, at [19]-[21]:

         "19. Next, in construing the  provisions  under  scrutiny,  certain
             observations about the structure and syntax of  sections  117A
             and  117B  are  appropriate.   The  draftsman's  mechanism  of
             enjoining a decision maker, whether it be a court or  tribunal
             or other agency, to "have regard to" specified matters  is  of
             some longevity.   It  is  long  established  that  where  this
             mechanism is employed, the corresponding duty is to  obey  the
             legislature's instruction, that is to say the  decision  maker
             must have regard to the matter in question.   In  the  typical
             statutory model, the legislature goes no further.  Where  this
             model is invoked this denotes the first stage in the  exercise
             to be performed by the judge or decision  maker.   The  second
             stage is a product of the common law: it  imports  a  duty  to
             give such rational weight to  the  matters  specified  as  the
             judge or decision maker  considers  appropriate.  Within  this
             formulation lies the principle that in the generality of cases
             involving decisions of this genre the barometer  for  judicial
             review, or appeal  on  a  point  of  law,  is  the  Wednesbury
             principle. See, for example, Tesco Stores v Secretary of State
             for  the  Environment  and  Others  [1995]  1  WLR  759.  Lord
             Hoffmann's formulation of the principles at [56]  -  [57]  and
             [68],  while  devised  in  a  planning  law  context,  applies
             generally.


         20.  The statutory model for which the  legislature  has  opted  in
             sections 117A and 117B is not the typical one. True it is that
             its first striking element is the familiar one of obliging the
             court or  tribunal  concerned  to  have  regard  to  specified
             considerations:  per  section   117A(2).    These   obligatory
             considerations are then listed in sections 117B and 117C.   As
             section 117C does not arise in this appeal, I say nothing more
             about it.  As regards section 117B, there is a  total  of  six
             "considerations".  Some of these have  the  dual  identity  of
             statutory considerations and legal principles,  being  readily
             traceable to both Strasbourg and domestic jurisprudence.   The
             characteristic which  links  the  "considerations"  listed  in
             section 117B(1), (2), (3) and  (6)  is  that  of  the  "public
             interest".  These provisions  reflect  the  reality  that  the
             public interest is multi-layered and has multiple  dimensions.
             Those aspects of the public interest which the legislature has
             identified as considerations to be taken  into  account  as  a
             matter of obligation are contained in these provisions.


         21   In contrast, the two  "considerations"  contained  in  section
             117B(4) and (5) are somewhat different from the other four, in
             the following respects.  First, they make no  mention  of  the
             public interest.  They are, rather, concerned with  facts  and
             factors which, while bearing on the proportionality assessment
             under Article 8(2) ECHR, shift the focus from the ambit of the
             public interest to choices and decisions which have been  made
             by  the  person  or  persons  concerned  in  their  lives  and
             lifestyles.  Second, there is a degree of  tension  between  a
             court or tribunal having regard to a specified  factor,  as  a
             matter of obligation (on the one  hand)  and  (on  the  other)
             giving effect to a Parliamentary instruction about the  weight
             to be given thereto.  Indeed,  in  giving  effect  to  section
             117B(4) and (5), the court or tribunal concerned  is  not,  in
             truth, performing the  exercise  of  having  regard  to  these
             statutory provisions.  Rather, the Judge is complying  with  a
             statutory obligation, unconditional and unambiguous,  to  give
             effect to a parliamentary instruction that the  considerations
             in question are to receive little weight."

16. In answering the  question  formulated  in  [14]  above,  we  begin  by
    subjecting Part 5A of the 2002 Act   to the following further analysis:


          a) Part 5A is expressed to be applicable in every  case  where  a
             court or tribunal is required to determine whether a  decision
             made under the Immigration Acts  breaches  a  person's  rights
             under Article 8 ECHR.


          b)  In  cases  where  an  interference  with   such   rights   is
             demonstrated, the  court  or  tribunal  must,  in  determining
             proportionality, have regard to the considerations  listed  in
             section 117B in all cases and to the additional considerations
             enumerated  in  section  117C  in  all  cases  involving   the
             deportation of foreign criminals.


          c) Turning to section 117B, the first port of call is  the  cross
             heading "Article 8: public interest considerations  applicable
             in all cases".

         [Our emphasis.]

    At this juncture of the analysis, the effect of section  117A(2)(a)  is
    that the Court or Tribunal must have regard to everything contained  in
    section 117B.


          d) Section 117B  comprises,  in  subsections  (1)  -  (3),  three
             unequivocal Parliamentary statements of  the  content  of  the
             public interest:  the  maintenance  of  effective  immigration
             controls,  the  ability  to  speak   English   and   financial
             independence.   En  passant,  a  striking   feature   of   the
             formulation of the second and third of these statements of the
             public interest is the exposition of their rationale.


          e) The next division of section 117B, in subsections (4) and (5),
             consists of separate statements that "little weight" should be
             given to three specified factors.


          f) Next, and finally, there is an unequivocal  statement  of  what
             the public interest does not require in section 117B (6):  this
             is the only  public  interest  pronouncement  in  section  117B
             framed in these negative terms.

17. The two "little weight" provisions  of  section  117B  do  not  readily
    satisfy the appellation  of  Parliamentary  statements  of  the  public
    interest, in view of the terms in which they are phrased  and  compared
    with the formulation of the public interest statements  in  subsections
    (2), (3) and (6).  Furthermore,  the  two  "little  weight"  provisions
    relate to matters  which,  in  practice,  are  invoked  by  the  person
    concerned, rather than the Secretary of State, namely  a  private  life
    and/or a relationship formed with  a  qualifying  partner  during  such
    persons sojourn in the United Kingdom.  As noted in  Deelah,  at  [21],
    the focus  of  these  discrete  statutory  provisions  is  choices  and
    decisions which have been made by the person or  persons  concerned  in
    their lives and lifestyles.  We consider that section 117B (4) and  (5)
    contain a recognition that the factors therein sound on the question of
    proportionality,  where   they   arise,   but   are,   by   unambiguous
    Parliamentary direction, to be  accorded  little  weight.   We  further
    consider that, properly construed, section 117B (4)  and  (5)  are  not
    Parliamentary statements of the public  interest.   They  are,  rather,
    Parliamentary instructions to courts and tribunals, to  be  applied  in
    the balancing exercise, that little  weight  should  be  given  to  the
    matters specified where relevant.  Thus analysed, the function  of  the
    court or tribunal concerned is not  simply  to  have  regard  to  these
    factors, in cases where they arise.  Rather, they  must  be  considered
    and given little weight.  This is in contrast with the  classic  public
    law case whereby the decision maker, having discharged the primary duty
    of identifying all relevant facts and considerations, is free to accord
    to these such weight as he rationally considers appropriate.

18. The resolution of the second ground of appeal turns on how we  construe
    section 117B  (6),  considered  in  its  full  statutory  context.   In
    performing this exercise, we derive no assistance from the construction
    which we have given to section  117B  (4)  and  (5).   WE  consider  it
    instructive to  juxtapose  section  117B  (6)  with  its  three  public
    interest siblings, namely Section 117B (1), (2) and (3).  Section  117B
    (6), notionally, follows these three provisions sequentially.  Notably,
    Parliament has not established any correlation between Section 117B (6)
    and the other three sibling public interest provisions.  In particular,
    section 117B (6) is not expressed  to  be  "without  prejudice  to"  or
    "subject to" any of the other three related  provisions.   Furthermore,
    section 117B (6) is formulated in unqualified terms: in cases where its
    conditions are satisfied, the public  interest  does  not  require  the
    removal from the United  Kingdom  of  the  person  concerned.  In  this
    respect  also  it  different  from  its  siblings,  which  contain   no
    comparable instruction.

19. The next notable feature of the new statutory regime is that in section
    117B (6) Parliament has chosen to differentiate between those who  are,
    and who are not, liable to deportation.  It has provided a separate and
    special  dispensation  for  members  of  the  latter  class.   This  is
    harmonious with one of the overarching themes of Part 5A, which  is  to
    subject foreign criminals who are  liable  to  deportation  to  a  more
    rigorous and unyielding regime. In the case of those who are not liable
    to deportation, Parliament has chosen  to  recognise  that,  where  the
    specified conditions are satisfied, a  public  interest  which  differs
    from those public interests expressed in Section  117B  (1  )-  (3)  is
    engaged.  The most striking feature of this discrete public interest is
    its focus on one of the most  vulnerable  cohorts  in  society,  namely
    children. The focus is placed on  the  needs  and  interests  of  these
    vulnerable people. Furthermore, the content  of  this  public  interest
    differs markedly from the other three, all of which are focused on  the
    interests of  society  as  a  whole.  In  enacting  Section  117B  (6),
    Parliament has given effect to  a  public  interest  of  an  altogether
    different species.  Notably, this new statutory  provision  is  closely
    related to and harmonious with what  has  been  decided  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal in a number of cases, namely that there  is  a  free  standing
    public interest in children being reared within  a  stable  and  secure
    family unit.  The effect of Part 5A of the 2002 Act is, of course, that
    this  discrete  public  interest  must  yield  to  more  potent  public
    interests in certain circumstances.


20. In section  117B  (6),  Parliament  has  prescribed  three  conditions,
    namely:

      a) the person concerned is not liable to deportation;

      b) such person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with
         a qualifying child, namely a person who is under the age of 18  and
         is a British citizen or has lived  in  the  United  Kingdom  for  a
         continuous period of seven years or more; and

      c) it would not be reasonable to expect the qualifying child to  leave
         the United Kingdom.

    Within this discrete regime, the statute  proclaims  unequivocally  that
    where these three conditions are satisfied the public interest does  not
    require the removal of the parent from  the  United  Kingdom.  Ambiguity
    there is none.

21. Giving effect to the analysis above, in  our  judgment  the  underlying
    Parliamentary  intention  is  that  where  the   three   aforementioned
    conditions are satisfied the public  interests  identified  in  section
    117B (1) - (3) do not apply.


22. It would further appear that the "little weight" provisions of  section
    117B (4) - (5) are of no application.  If Parliament had been  desirous
    of qualifying, or diluting, section 117B (6)  by  reference  to  either
    section 117B (4) or (5), it could have done so with ease.  It  has  not
    done so.  Fundamentally, there is no indication  in  the  structure  or
    language of Part 5A that in cases where, on the facts, section 117B (4)
    and/or (5) is engaged, the unambiguous proclamation in Section 117B (6)
    is in some way weakened or demoted.  To this may be added the  analysis
    in  [18]  -  [21]  above.  Clearly,  there  is  much  to  favour   this
    construction.   However,  conscious  of  the  limits  of  the  judicial
    function, we decline to provide a definitive answer  to  this  discrete
    question, for two reasons.  First, we received  no  argument  upon  it.
    Second, it does not clearly fall within  the  grant  of  permission  to
    appeal.


23. Similarly, the issue of the interplay between Section 117B (6) and  the
    Immigration Rules does not arise directly  in  this  appeal.   In  this
    context, we draw attention to the  leading  reported  decision  of  the
    Upper  Tribunal,  Bossade  (Sections  117A-D:  Inter-relationship  with
    Rules) [2015] UKUT 415 (IAC).  In that case, the  Upper  Tribunal  held
    that,  ordinarily,  a  court  or  tribunal  will  first   consider   an
    appellant's Article 8 claim by reference to the Immigration Rules,  the
    purpose  of  this  exercise  being  to  decide  whether  the   relevant
    qualifying conditions are satisfied  by  the  person  concerned.   This
    exercise is performed without reference to Part 5A.  The latter  regime
    is engaged directly only where the decision making process reaches  the
    stage of concluding that the person does not satisfy  the  requirements
    of the Rules.  Thereafter, in any consideration of the case outwith the
    framework of the Rules, and subject to the application  of  the  Razgar
    tests, Part 5A  will  fall  to  be  applied  in  the  decision  maker's
    determination of the proportionality question.  It follows that in  any
    case where the parent concerned is unable to satisfy  the  requirements
    of the Rules section 117B(6) may conceivably apply: all will depend  on
    the facts as found by the tribunal.


24. We apply the analysis and conclusions above to the decision of the  FtT
    in the following way:

      i) The FtT committed no error of law in  giving  no  consideration  to
         Part 5A of the 2002 Act in deciding whether the case of the  second
         Appellant satisfied the requirements of the Rules.

     ii) The FtT committed no  error  of  law  in  giving  consideration  to
         section 117B (6) of the 2002 Act in deciding whether the claims  of
         the other four Appellants  could  succeed  outwith  the  Article  8
         regime of the Rules.


    iii) The FtT's application of Section 117B (6), which  did  not  involve
         consideration of any of the other provisions   of Section 117B, was
         similarly free of error.

     iv) Accordingly, the second ground of appeal fails.

Decision

25. For the reasons explained in [8] - [10]  above,  the  first  ground  of
    appeal succeeds.  Accordingly, we set aside the decision  of  the  FtT.
    The decision will be remade in this forum.


Direction

26. The Appellant's bundle of evidence,  indexed  and  paginated,  will  be
    lodged with the Upper Tribunal and served on the Secretary State by  08
    January 2016 at latest.















                      Part 2: Remaking the FtT's Decision


27. We remind ourselves of the  composition  of  the  family  unit  and  to
    reflect the passage of time, certain updated data.  Mr Treebhawon ("the
    father") is aged 45 years and has  resided  unlawfully  in  the  United
    Kingdom during the past 13 years.  The mother of their  four  children,
    from whom he is separated, has not formed part of the family unit since
    2008, the separation having begun and progressed some years previously.
     There are four children of the family:


      i) The oldest child of the family, a  girl  now  aged  18  years,  has
         resided continuously in the United Kingdom during the past 9 years,
         having the status of unlawful overstayer during the  bulk  of  this
         period.


     ii) The second and third children, twins now aged 16, have  resided  in
         the United Kingdom during the past six and a half years, unlawfully
         throughout.

    iii) The youngest child, now aged 13, has resided in the United  Kingdom
         during the past five years, unlawfully during most of this period.


28. All five members of the family were born and reared  in  Mauritius,  an
    island nation in the Indian Ocean which gained  its  independence  from
    Britain in  1968  and  is  a  member  of  the  Commonwealth.  It  is  a
    constitutional democracy.  Its official  languages,  in  sequence,  are
    English and French, while Mauritian Creole is popularly spoken.  It has
    a population of around 1.5 million.  Since independence, Mauritius  has
    progressed to a middle-income diversified  economy  based  on  tourism,
    textiles, sugar and financial services.


29. Mr Treebhawon, the father, had an active working career, both  employed
    and self-employed, having previously studied to GCSE  level,  prior  to
    departing Mauritius.  Apart from GCSEs he has no  special  academic  or
    vocational qualifications.  While he has suffered  ill  health  in  the
    United Kingdom, he has been classed  fit  for  work  since  2013.   The
    family has survived on  publicly  funded  services  (education  et  al)
    throughout their sojourn in the United Kingdom.


30. Mr Treebhawon has sole  responsibility  for  his  four  children.   The
    family previously resided in the two   bedroom home owned by his mother
    (now aged 76)  in  Mauritius.   She  continues  to  live  in  the  same
    accommodation, assisted by  a  nephew,  one  of  four  children  of  Mr
    Treebhawon's sister, all of them grown up and married.   We  find  that
    this accommodation would be less than adequate by many standards if the
    family were to return to Mauritius.  However,  we  further  find  as  a
    probability that it would be available to them and  they  would  resume
    living with the grandmother.  The probability  is  that  Mr  Treebhawon
    would substitute for his nephew, a married man, who is  providing  some
    unspecified care to  Mr  Treebhawon's  mother.   There  is  nothing  to
    suggest that Mr Treebhawon could not provide this service.  Nor did any
    of the evidence hint that the current arrangement involving the  nephew
    is designed to continue long term.


31. Inevitably, there is substantial evidential focus on the four children.
     This is encapsulated  in  the  following  passage  in  their  father's
    witness statement:


         "...   My  children  have  continuously  attended  school  with  an
         immaculate attendance record and have really  flourished  as  young
         children.  They receive excellent feedback  from  school  and  take
         part in many  activities  outside  of  school.   My  children  have
         integrated into the United Kingdom society and community, they very
         much love the ties they have established within the United  Kingdom
         and are very ambitious in respect of their future. I  am  proud  to
         state  that  my  children  are  all  very  intelligent  and  bright
         individuals.  This is evident from the school reports, letters  and
         certificates ....  If given the opportunity, my children will  take
         full advantage of their stay in  the  United  Kingdom  and  have  a
         valuable input into the United Kingdom community ...


         I fear that should I have  to  return  with  my  children  then  my
         children and I will have no future ...  This will greatly  harm  my
         children  mentally,  psychologically  and  emotionally  as  we  all
         consider the United Kingdom to be our home ...   [and]  ...    they
         may lose interest in education, in their future  and  their  social
         wellbeing."


    It is abundantly clear that the  family  has  been  surviving  on  very
    limited means in the United Kingdom.  In one part of the evidence there
    is a reference to "excruciating financial difficulties".  The  survival
    and progress of the family are, in essence, due  to  a  combination  of
    publicly funded services, the determination and devotion of the  father
    and the resilience of the children.  The claims made  in  the  father's
    witness statement about the integration, educational  achievements  and
    general progress of the four children are  unremarkable,  were  largely
    unchallenged and are confirmed by the bundles of documentary  evidence,
    which we have considered.




32. We have  also  considered  a  not  insubstantial  tranche  of  evidence
    relating to the quality of life which the family  would  be  likely  to
    experience upon return to Mauritius.  Much of this evidence  proved  to
    be uncontentious and it is unnecessary to rehearse it  in  any  detail.
    Our assessment of this  is  as  follows.  In  short,  Mauritius  has  a
    functioning welfare benefits system.  The  benefits  available  include
    housing aid, social aid  and  unemployment  benefit.   There  is  state
    funded free education.  There is a state  funded  health  care  system.
    Furthermore, there is a social housing  programme.   Much  of  this  is
    summarised in a report adduced in evidence by the Appellants, thus:


         "Mauritius is a free and democratic country and  it  inherited  its
         system of Welfare State from the British. Everybody is entitled  to
         free health care, free education up to  university  level  in  some
         cases and social security benefits to all who  are  eligible  under
         the relevant legislation ....


         Mr Treebhawon would be entitled to claim Disability Allowance if it
         is confirmed by the Medical Board  that  his  physical  ability  to
         undertake employment is not possible and his degree  of  disability
         is over 60%.  He is also likely to be entitled to claim Social  Aid
         but he cannot claim disability benefit  and  Social  Aid  currently
         ....


         Social Aid ...  is payable only where the income of  a  head  of  a
         household is not enough to  meet  the  basic  requirements  of  the
         members of the household ...  [and] ...  is payable to  the  poorer
         section of the population where the persons concerned are unable to
         earn a living ...  [and] ...  to abandoned spouses especially  with
         dependent children."


    The evidence also points to the likelihood  that  Mr  Treebhawon  would
    qualify for unemployment benefit.

33. In addition to the above, we make the following evaluative  predictions
    about the probable future for the family in the event of  returning  to
    Mauritius at this stage of their lives.  First, the  children  will  be
    educated.  While adaptation and integration will not  be  immediate  or
    initially comfortable, there are no indications that these will not  be
    achievable.  Second, all family members will be returning as  nationals
    to their country of birth in which they were previously  integrated  in
    all material respects.  While reintegration will not  be  immediate  or
    initially comfortable, there are no indications that  it  will  not  be
    attainable, particularly having regard  to  the  children's  linguistic
    abilities, and evident capacity for any further necessary  learning  in
    this respect and their resilience noted above.

34. Should they  return  to  Mauritius  life  will,  in  general,  be  less
    comfortable and, initially,  less  enjoyable  for  the  entire  family.
    Mauritius and England, while having much in common, unsurprising  given
    the island's history, are not directly comparable.  The panel is  under
    no illusions: the family's likely accommodation will be unsatisfactory,
    there will be no adult support other than that provided by  the  father
    and the  family  will  struggle  financially.   However,  albeit  in  a
    different environment and context, this, with certain adjustments,  has
    been the reality of their lives in the United Kingdom.  The educational
    achievements of the children in England augur well for  their  academic
    progress in Mauritius, the children are clearly resilient young  people
    and the benefits of their English education will not be lost  to  them.
    Furthermore, certain State benefits and services will, in principle, be
    available to them.


35. At this juncture we turn  our  attention  to  the  legal  rules  to  be
    applied.  It is common case that none of  the  children's  cases  falls
    within the Secretary of State's policies  expressed  in  the  leave  to
    remain provisions of the Immigration Rules ("the Rules").  Their  cases
    cannot satisfy the Rules. The proposition that the  impugned  decisions
    of the Secretary of State interfere with, substantially so, the private
    lives of all of the Appellants is incontestable.  The  legal  question,
    in a nutshell, is whether such interference ranks as a disproportionate
    means of furthering the overarching public interest in play, namely the
    maintenance of firm immigration control.   This  public  interest  has,
    since 2014, had the imprimatur and weight of parliamentary  endorsement
    via section 117B (1) of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
    2002 ("the 2002 Act").  This is not, however, the only public  interest
    engaged in this appeal.  Section 117B (3) provides:


         "It is in the public interest, and in particular in  the  interests
         of the economic wellbeing of the United Kingdom, that  persons  who
         seek to enter or remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  are  financially
         independent, because such persons -


          a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and


          b) are better able to integrate into society."


    We shall return to these public interests infra.


36. Mr Treebhawon is the  only  member  of  the  family  whose  case  might
    conceivably satisfy one of the Secretary  of  State's  Article  8  ECHR
    private life policies as expressed in the Rules.  This is so by  virtue
    of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi), which provides in material part:

         "The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to remain  on
         the grounds of private life in the UK are that at the date  of  the
         application, the applicant ...

         has lived continuously  in  the  UK  for  less  than  twenty  years
         (discounting any period of imprisonment) but there  would  be  very
         significant obstacles  to  the  applicant's  integration  into  the
         country to which he would have to go if required to leave the  UK".



    The question is whether there would be "very significant obstacles"  to
    his reintegration in Mauritius: see paragraph  276  ADE(1)(vi)  of  the
    Rules.  Being housed in the Rules, it  ranks  as  a  statement  of  the
    Secretary of State's policy,  to  be  contrasted  with  a  legal  Rule.
    Tribunals are enjoined to  give  considerable  weight  to  such  policy
    statements: Hesham Ali v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2016] UKSC 60 at [46].




37. The two limbs of the test to be addressed are "integration"  and  "very
    significant obstacles". In Secretary of State for the Home Department v
    Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ 813, the Court of Appeal held that "integration"
    in this context is a broad concept.  See [14]:


         "It is not confined to the mere ability to find a job or to sustain
         life while living in the other country.  It is not  appropriate  to
         treat the statutory language as subject to some gloss and  it  will
         usually be sufficient for a Court  or  Tribunal  simply  to  direct
         itself in the terms that Parliament has chosen to use.  The idea of
         'integration' calls for a broad evaluative judgment to be  made  as
         to whether the individual will be enough of an insider in terms  of
         understanding how life in the society  in  that  other  country  is
         carried on and a capacity to participate in it, so  as  to  have  a
         reasonable opportunity to be accepted there, to be able to  operate
         on a day to day basis in that society and  to  build  up  within  a
         reasonable time a variety of human relationships to give  substance
         to the individual's private or family life".


    The other limb of the test, "very significant obstacles", erects a self-
    evidently elevated threshold, such that mere hardship, mere difficulty,
    mere hurdles and mere upheaval or inconvenience, even where multiplied,
    will generally be insufficient in  this  context.  The  philosophy  and
    reasoning, with  appropriate  adjustments,  of  this  Tribunal  in  its
    exposition of the sister test  "unduly  harsh"  in  MK  (Sierra  Leone)
    [2015] UKUT 223 at [46] apply.


38. The finding that  Mr  Treebhawon's  case  does  not  satisfy  the  test
    enshrined in paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the Rules is readily made.   If
    required to leave the United  Kingdom,  his  future  will  lie  in  the
    country of his birth where he has spent most of his life (33 of his  46
    years).  He is an educated, evidently intelligent man with a command of
    all of the  languages  commonly  used  in  Mauritius.   He  is  plainly
    familiar with the culture of the country.  There is no apparent  reason
    why he will be unable to renew certain  relationships  and  friendships
    and develop others.  He has overcome ill health  and  is  now  fit  for
    work, albeit we accept that finding employment will not  be  easy.   He
    has maintained some contact with his mother and sister and we refer  to
    our finding above that, as a matter of probability, he and his children
    will return to the mother's home where they lived previously.  In  sum,
    the "very significant obstacles" test is not satisfied by some measure.
    It follows that no error of law has been committed  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State  in  failing  to  find  that  Mr  Treebhawon's  case
    satisfies this (or any) provision of the Rules.


39. The second legal test in play is to be applied to all five  Appellants.
    In undertaking our search for this  test,  it  is  no  exaggeration  to
    observe that there is a proliferation of  decisions  of  the  Court  of
    Appeal addressing the Article 8 test to  be  applied  in  the  specific
    context of  the  deportation  of  foreign  national  offenders.   These
    decisions begin with MF (Nigeria) v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2013] EWCA Civ  1192,  at  [42]  where,  in  a  deportation
    context, the court formulated the test  that  where  removal  from  the
    United Kingdom is resisted under Article  8  ECHR,  outwith  the  Rules
    regime -


         ".. something very compelling  ...  is  required  to  outweigh  the
         public interest in removal."


    Further citation of authority in this context is otiose.


40. Before continuing the search for  the  governing  principle  in  non  -
    deportation cases, we consider it important to highlight  a  particular
    imperative.   The   fundamental   importance   of    identifying    the
    characteristics and conduct of  the  person  against  whom  removal  or
    deportation action is proposed courses through the veins of Part 5A  of
    the 2002 Act and the growing jurisprudence in this field. It is one  of
    the themes of the decision in Hesham Ali (supra), where, in  [46],  one
    finds an important distinction between foreign national  offenders  who
    have been punished by a custodial sentence of four years  or  more  and
    those whose sentences belong to the bracket of twelve  months  to  four
    years:

         "A custodial sentence of four  years  or  more  represents  such  a
         serious  level  of  offending  that  the  public  interest  in  the
         offender's  deportation  almost  always  outweighs   countervailing
         considerations of private or family life ....  Great weight  should
         generally be given to the public interest in the deportation  of  a
         foreign offender who has received a custodial sentence of more than
         twelve months ... ".

    We discern a nuanced  difference  between  these  two  public  interest
    propositions.  This differential approach is  unsurprising,  given  the
    unequivocal statement in Part 5A of the 2002 Act, in section 117C  (2),
    that the public interest is greater in the  cases  of  those  who  have
    committed more serious offences.  We  further  draw  attention  to  the
    unambiguous statement of principle in Part 1 of this judgment: see [19]
    above. All of this is traceable to the distinct categories  of  foreign
    national offender recognised by Parliament in the UK Borders Act (ss 32
    - 33).

41. With the benefit of the above preface we resume the task of identifying
    the correct legal test to be applied in a context such as the  present,
    where there is no element of criminality or deportation.  Since 28 July
    2014, the operative date of category Part  5A  of  the  2002  Act,  the
    substantial jurisprudence which has developed both in this chamber  and
    the Court of  Appeal,  has  focussed  mainly  on  cases  involving  the
    deportation of foreign national  offenders.   Cases  belonging  to  the
    present stable have been somewhat eclipsed.  In this context, it is  of
    no little significance that in Part 5A of the 2002 Act  Parliament  has
    singled out  foreign  national  offenders  for  special  attention  and
    treatment.  There are "additional" considerations in their  cases:  per
    section 117A(2)(b).  In very brief compass, the hurdles in the  way  of
    foreign criminals who seek to resist deportation by invoking Article  8
    ECHR are greater: they find themselves within a  heavily  circumscribed
    statutory regime containing  elevated  tests.   Furthermore,  in  their
    cases the additional, freestanding  public  interest  underpinning  the
    deportation of foreign criminals is engaged, per section 117C (1).

42. Those who adjudicate, practise, teach  and  study  in  this  field  may
    struggle to find a clear formulation of the Article 8  test  applicable
    in a case such as this.  First, the test is nowhere to be found in Part
    5A of the 2002 Act - although certain  indicators  and  guides  can  be
    identified.  Second, the domination of cases involving foreign national
    offenders in the jurisprudence  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  has  rather
    eclipsed the illegal  entrant  or  unlawful  overstayer  who  has  been
    convicted of no offence.

43. There is a brief passage in Haleemudeen v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ  558  at
    [44] suggestive of a test of  "compelling  circumstances",  though  not
    decisively so.  This lacuna in the jurisprudence of the Court of Appeal
    has, very recently, been addressed in Rhuppiah v Secretary of State for
    the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 803.  In this  decision  one  finds
    clear recognition of  the  imperative  highlighted  above,  namely  the
    importance of identifying clearly the characteristics  and  conduct  of
    the person against whom removal or deportation action is proposed.

44. Rhuppiah is the  most  recent  notable  contribution  to  a  series  of
    decisions of this chamber and the Court of Appeal addressing the  novel
    and challenging provisions of Part 5A of the 2002 Act.  It is essential
    to reproduce two important passages in full, given the present context.
     First, in [53] Sales LJ states:

         "Reading section 117A(2)(a) in  conjunction  with  section  117B(5)
         produces this: "In considering the public  interest  question,  the
         court or tribunal must have regard to the consideration that little
         weight should be given to a private life established by a person at
         a time when the person's immigration status is precarious". That is
         a normative statement which is less definitive than those given  by
         the other sub-sections in section 117B and section 117C. Although a
         court or tribunal should have  regard  to  the  consideration  that
         little weight should be given to private life established  in  such
         circumstances, it is possible without violence to the  language  to
         say that such generalised normative guidance may be  overridden  in
         an exceptional case by particularly strong features of the  private
         life in question, where it is not appropriate in Article 8 terms to
         attach only little weight to private life. That is to  say,  for  a
         case falling within section 117B(5) little weight should  be  given
         to private life established in  the  circumstances  specified,  but
         that approach may be overridden where the private life in  question
         has a special and compelling character. Such an  interpretation  is
         also necessary to prevent section 117B(5) being applied in a manner
         which  would  produce  results  in  some  cases  which   would   be
         incompatible with Article 8,  i.e.  is  necessary  to  give  proper
         effect  to  Parliament's  intention  in  Part  5A;  and  a  similar
         interpretation of section 117B(4) is required, for same reasons".

    Sales LJ continues at [54]:

         "In my view, reading section 117A(2) and section  117B(5)  together
         in this way, as is  appropriate,  means  that  considerable  weight
         should be  given  to  Parliament's  statement  in  section  117B(5)
         regarding the approach which should normally be adopted.  In  order
         to identify an exceptional case in  which  a  departure  from  that
         approach would be justified, compelling reasons would  have  to  be
         shown why it was not appropriate. That is  a  significantly  higher
         threshold than was urged upon us by Mr Southey by reference to  the
         London Oratory School case.  There  is  a  considerable  difference
         between a statement by Parliament  itself  as  to  what  the  usual
         approach should be and the Diocesan guidance at issue in that case.
         The threshold to displace the ordinary rule in section  117B(5)  in
         the present context cannot be less than that to justify a  decision
         not  to  follow  statutory  guidance  as  in   the   Munjaz   case.
         Identification of the  test  as  one  of  compelling  circumstances
         differentiates  the  position  in  an  appropriate  way  from  that
         applicable in relation to foreign criminals, in relation to which a
         test of "very compelling circumstances" applies".

    Here  one  finds  the  clearest  statement  in  the  Court  of   Appeal
    jurisprudence that the test to be applied in  Article  8  private  life
    cases not involving foreign national offenders is  that  of  compelling
    circumstances.



45. Certain observations are  apposite.   First  (and  importantly  in  the
    present context), Parliament has chosen to devise distinct regimes  for
    foreign offenders (on the one hand) and illegal entrants  and  unlawful
    overstayers (on the other). Moreover, the public  interest  engaged  in
    the deportation of foreign national offenders is a variable,  depending
    upon the individual case.  Second, the recently promulgated decision of
    this  chamber  in  Kaur  (children's  best  interests/public   interest
    interfaces) [2017] UKUT 00014 (IAC) contains, at [22] - [24], a  thesis
    on the words "little weight" and the notional sliding scale which  they
    entail. Kaur reasons that this produces the result that in some cases a
    private life developed during a period of unlawful or precarious  leave
    in the United Kingdom may qualify for virtually no weight,  whereas  in
    others the quantity of  weight  to  be  attributed  may  verge  on  the
    notionally moderate where the assessment is that the  particular  case,
    with its individual traits and circumstances, belongs to the upper  end
    of the "little weight" spectrum.  We consider  this  complementary  to,
    and not in conflict with,  the  'little  weight  flexibility'  approach
    espoused in Rhuppiah.

46. Ultimately, having regard to orthodox doctrine, the  regime  introduced
    by Part 5A of the 2002 Act is to be construed and applied in  a  manner
    which makes it sensible, intelligible and workable.  As  this  Tribunal
    has observed previously, its structure and  contents  are,  in  certain
    respects, not altogether clear:  see  for  example  Deelah  and  Others
    [2015] UKUT 515 (IAC) at [19] - [22].  However,  broadly,  and  as  the
    decided  cases  since  July  2014  have  demonstrated,  this   discrete
    statutory regime can be made to work in a manner that  is  faithful  to
    the discernible parliamentary purpose

47. We return to the question posed above: what is the  legal  test  to  be
    applied in a case such as the present?  The  answer,  which  we  deduce
    from a combination  of  the  governing  statutory  provisions  and,  in
    particular, the decision in Rhuppiah, is  that  these  Appellants  must
    demonstrate a  compelling  (not  very  compelling)  case  in  order  to
    displace the public interests inclining towards their removal from  the
    United Kingdom.  In formulating this principle, we do not overlook  the
    question of whether the adverb "very" in truth  adds  anything  to  the
    adjective "compelling", given that the latter partakes of  an  absolute
    flavour.  It seems to us that the judicially formulated test  of  "very
    compelling circumstances"  has  been  driven  by  the  aim  of  placing
    emphasis on the especially elevated threshold which must be overcome by
    foreign national offenders, particularly those convicted  of  the  more
    serious crimes, who  seek  to  displace  the  potent  public  interests
    favouring their deportation.  In contrast,  immigrants  such  as  these
    Appellants confront a less daunting threshold.




Conclusion

48. We apply the governing legal test, as formulated above, to the  salient
    facts and considerations characterising these appeals.  In doing so, we
    would observe that this is not a judicial fact  finding  exercise.   It
    is, rather, an exercise of evaluative judgement and assessment,  to  be
    undertaken on the basis of and by reference to material facts found and
    material facts that are uncontentious. We undertake  this  exercise  on
    the basis that these appeals have  been  presented  as,  fundamentally,
    Article 8 private life cases. We concur with this approach.  The family
    life which all five Appellants have enjoyed together for so many  years
    is capable of being maintained:  above all, the effect of the  impugned
    decisions of the Secretary of State is to leave the family unit intact.
     Accordingly,  on  this  dimension  of  Article  8,  the  threshold  of
    interference is not overcome.


49. We give effect to section 117B of the 2002 Act in the following way:


      a) The starting point is that the maintenance of effective immigration
         controls is in the public interest.


      b) There is no dispute about the English language abilities of any  of
         the Appellants.


      c) The Appellants are plainly not financially independent and owe much
         of their survival and progress in the United Kingdom to reliance on
         publicly funded services.


      d) Given the nature of their status in the United  Kingdom  throughout
         their  combined  sojourns,  the  private  lives  which  they   have
         developed qualify for the attribution of little  weight  only.  The
         case has not been made that any of their  private  lives  is  of  a
         special or compelling character: and there  is  no  evidence  which
         would warrant this conclusion in any event.


50. Next, we are mandated by section 55 of  the  Borders,  Citizenship  and
    Immigration Act 2009 to give primacy  to  the  best  interests  of  the
    third, fourth and fifth Appellants as all are  children.   We  consider
    that the best interests of these children will primarily be  served  by
    the maintenance of  the  family  unit:  as  already  noted,  this  will
    predictably occur.  The second dimension  of  these  three  Appellants'
    best interests is that, on balance, they would be better off in certain
    respects, in particular economically, if the family were to  remain  in
    the United Kingdom.  This we must take into account  in  the  balancing
    exercise as a primary consideration.


51. Our balancing of the salient features of the Appellants' cases with the
    public interests engaged, all as set forth above, yields the conclusion
    that the public interests must  prevail.   The  Appellants'  cases,  in
    combination,  unquestionably  possess  a  certain  appeal  and  various
    attractions. No reasonable or humane court or tribunal  could,  in  our
    judgement, consider otherwise.  Furthermore, we must accord  a  primacy
    of importance to that aspect of the third  to  fifth  Appellants'  best
    interests identified above.  However, we consider that  the  effect  of
    contemporary immigration law is that this superficially seductive  case
    falls short, measurably so, of overcoming the  threshold  necessary  to
    demonstrate a disproportionate interference with  private  life  rights
    under Article 8 ECHR.  The most sympathetic  view  of  the  Appellants'
    combined   cases - which  we  have  adopted  -  does  not  warrant  any
    different conclusion in law. While we are mindful that  the  Article  8
    private life claim of each of  these  Appellants  has  its  distinctive
    personal features, given their different  ages  and  circumstances,  we
    find nothing to warrant a different conclusion in respect of any of the
    Appellants individually.


Decision


52. We remake the  decision  of  the  FtT  by  dismissing  the  Appellants'
    appeals.  While as  human  beings  we  reach  this  conclusion  without
    enthusiasm, as judges we do so without any real hesitation.

53. While the Tribunal is not required to determine the discrete  issue  of
    whether it would be disproportionate to require the removal of the four
    children concerned from the United Kingdom in the middle of the  school
    year, we consider it appropriate to  add  that  any  argument  to  this
    effect would be a powerful one.  The doctrine  of  proportionality  has
    much in common with what is humane, sensible, measured and  reasonable.
    It would be, as a minimum, surprising if the Secretary of State were to
    insist on the removal of this family from the United Kingdom  prior  to
    the end of the current academic year.  Furthermore, such action  would,
    predictably, generate further legal challenge with resulting - and pre-
    eminently avoidable - delay, expense and uncertainly to all  concerned.









                                                                       [pic]


                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY
                                             PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER

                                           Dates:  07 November 2015 [Part 1]

                           22 December 2016 [Part
                                     2]
