

                       ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL



LH (Truly exceptional - Ekinci applied) Jamaica [2006] UKAIT 00019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at         Field House            Determination Promulgated
On               10th January 2006                       24 January 2006


                                   Before

                      MrMr Justice Hodge OBE, President
                  Mr L V Waumsley, Senior Immigration Judge
                   Prof A Grubb, Senior Immigration Judge


                                   Between


                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:       Mr A Alexander (Counsel)
For the Respondent: Mr S Ouseley (Home Office Presenting Officer)

(1) In determining whether an appellant's removal is disproportionate under
Article 8(2) it is wrong to assume that an ECO will ignore or breach his
human rights when deciding whether to grant entry clearance to return to
the UK; (2) following Ekinci, removal is not disproportionate merely
because any such application would be unsuccessful; (3) to succeed, the
appellant's circumstances must be "truly exceptional".

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


    1. The appellant is a national of Jamaica, born on 28th July 1979.   He
       came to the United Kingdom on 14th April 2001 and  was  granted  one
       month's leave to enter.   He  thereafter  applied  to  remain  as  a
       student.  This application was refused in July 2001.  The  appellant
       remained in the United Kingdom.  He was arrested on 8th  July  2004.
       He then claimed asylum and that application was refused on 29th July
       2004.  He appealed.

    2. The appeal came on  for  hearing  before  an  adjudicator  (Mr  M  B
       Hussain) on 4th October 2004.  The appellant  abandoned  his  asylum
       appeal at the hearing.  However, he claimed that  his  removal  from
       the United Kingdom would breach his right to a  family  and  private
       life under Article 8 of the  European  Convention  on  Human  Rights
       (ECHR).  His Article 8 claim was and is based  on  his  relationship
       with his then partner, Michelle Grant, and their two  children.   He
       married Ms  Grant  on  21st  October  2004,  after  the  adjudicator
       hearing, but before the promulgation of the decision.

    3.  The  adjudicator  allowed  the   appeal.    He   regarded   it   as
       disproportionate that the appellant should be removed  from  the  UK
       and that such  removal  would  breach  his  Article  8  rights.  The
       respondent  applied  for  permission   to   appeal,   claiming   the
       adjudicator had erred in law in reaching the decision he did on  the
       appeal.  The application  was  granted  and  a  reconsideration  was
       ordered by a Senior Immigration Judge on 13th April 2005.

    4. By Article 5 of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment  of  Claimants
       etc) Act 2004 (Commencement Number No 5 and Transitional Provisions)
       Order 2005 (SI 2005/565) any appeal  which  immediately  before  the
       commencement of the 2004 Act  was  pending  before  the  Immigration
       Appeal Tribunal shall after commencement of that Act be  dealt  with
       by the Asylum and Immigration  Tribunal  as  if  it  had  originally
       decided the appeal and it was re-considering its decision.


Error of Law

    5. The appellant and his wife have two  daughters.   The  elder  child,
       Rene, born on 28th February 2002 has cerebral palsy.  She requires a
       good deal of care.  The evidence shows that the appellant lives with
       his now wife and their two children, and he provides important  care
       and help, particularly for Rene.

    6. It is uncontroversial that the appellant  has  no  right  under  the
       Immigration Rules (HC395) to be or remain in this  country.   Indeed
       he had no such right since his leave to enter elapsed in  May  2001,
       over three years before he eventually made the asylum claim in  July
       2004 which he abandoned in October 2004.   He  has  throughout  this
       period been in the United Kingdom unlawfully.   He  has  no  current
       entry clearance.  He is liable therefore to  be  removed  under  the
       general provisions of the Immigration Rules.

    7. Article 8 of the ECHR states:

           (1) Everyone has the right to respect for his private and family
           life, his home and his correspondence.


           (2) There shall be no interference by a  public  authority  with
           the exercise of this right, except such as is in accordance with
           the law  and  is  necessary  in  a  democratic  society  in  the
           interests of national security, public safety  or  the  economic
           well being of the country, for the  prevention  of  disorder  or
           crime, for the protection  of  health  or  morals,  or  for  the
           protection of the rights and freedoms of others.

    8. A person who is in this country in breach of the  Immigration  Rules
       is liable to removal.  The relationship between Article 8 rights and
       the Immigration Rules was analysed in Huang and others  v  Secretary
       of State for the Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ 105.   As  Laws  LJ
       said at para 60

           "The balance struck by  the  Rules  will  generally  dispose  of
           proportionality issues arising under Article 8; but they are not
           exhaustive of all cases.  There  will  be  a  residue  of  truly
           exceptional instances."


       States are entitled under European jurisprudence confirmed  in  many
       UK cases to exercise immigration control even though there may be an
       interference with the  private  or  family  life  of  an  individual
       subject to those controls.

    9. In this appeal, the adjudicator said at para 19:


           "Whilst the removal of a person unlawfully in the United Kingdom
           is in the interests of immigration control, that interest of the
           community  has  to  be  balanced  against  the  impact  on   the
           individual concerned.   In  this  case,  I  find  that  if  this
           appellant is removed from this country, then although it is open
           to him to apply to return as the fianc� of Michelle  Grant,  the
           prospect of that application succeeding is almost negligible and
           the  impact  on  the  appellant's  spouse  and  their   children
           disproportionate.  I come to this view,  because  one  does  not
           know how long it will be before the appellant will  be  able  to
           obtain a visa (if at all) and in the  meanwhile  Michelle  Grant
           would be left to look  after  two  young  children.   Given  her
           vulnerability as a person on medication for  depressive  illness
           and given the severe condition of the appellant's  first  child,
           in my judgment she is unlikely to cope with either looking after
           herself or her children.  As a result they would all suffer".


   10. This is plainly wrong in law.  In R (Ekinci) v  Secretary  of  State
       for the Home Department [2003] EWCA Civ 765,  the  Court  of  Appeal
       dealt with a very similar case to  this  appeal.   There  a  Turkish
       citizen was unlawfully in the UK.  Whilst  here  he  had  married  a
       British citizen.  A son had been born to  them.   That  son  had  an
       illness which required an operation.  Mrs Ekinci was caring for  her
       82 year old mother, who was semi mobile and dependent upon her.  His
       wife and child could not join Mr Ekinci in Germany to where  he  was
       to be removed.

   11. It was argued on behalf of the appellant in Ekinci that it would  be
       wrong to return him to Germany and require him to  apply  for  entry
       clearance there, because he would on any such  application  fail  to
       qualify.   The Secretary of State replied  that  it  was  immaterial
       whether or not the appellant will qualify for entry clearance in the
       future.  That  should  be  decided  when  the  time  comes  for  the
       appellant to  apply  for  such  entry  clearance.   Simon  Brown  LJ
       regarded that argument as unanswerable.  He said at para 17:

           "it would be a bizarre and unsatisfactory result  if,  the  less
           able the applicant is to satisfy the full requirements of  entry
           clearance, the more readily he should be  excused  the  need  to
           apply.......it is entirely understandable that the Secretary  of
           State should require the appellant to return to Germany so as to
           discourage  others  from  circumventing  the   entry   clearance
           system".

   12. The court also quoted Keane LJ at para 10 in  Shala  v  SSHD  [2003]
       EWCA Civ 233.

           "it is important that those without leave to  enter  or  remain,
           should not be able to exploit the procedures so as to be able to
           prolong their stay in the United Kingdom by  making  in  country
           applications for such leave.  As Mahmood [R v SSHD [2001] 1  WLR
           840] shows, even with a subsisting marriage, a person only  here
           on temporary admission will be required to return home  to  seek
           entry clearance, unless there are exceptional circumstances."


   13. The reasons given by the adjudicator for his decision are  wrong  in
       law, as they fail to have regard to  the  clear  guidance  from  the
       Court of Appeal in Ekinci.  It is wrong to decide that any appellant
       must be allowed to stay, not primarily because he cannot be expected
       to go abroad to obtain entry clearance,  but  because  he  would  or
       might be refused entry clearance if he  did.    Such  arguments  are
       periodically advanced in appeals before  the  Asylum  &  Immigration
       Tribunal.  They purport to  pre-judge  both  an  application  and  a
       decision by an entry clearance officer that has not yet  been  made.
       They may, in many instances, ask a judge to  assume  that  an  entry
       clearance officer would ignore and/or breach  any  applicable  human
       rights issues which the applicant would be able to  assert  at  that
       stage.  There is no justification for such assumptions.

   14. The adjudicator in this appeal has assumed that,  if  the  appellant
       were returned to Jamaica, he would not succeed in any application he
       might make to return to this country.  That  is  not  an  assumption
       which can or should be made and even if it were the case,  following
       Ekinci, it would be wrong to conclude that the removal decision  was
       not proportionate on that basis alone.  This approach was the  basis
       for his decision that the appellant's  Article  8  rights  would  be
       breached if he was removed, and is legally wrong.


Reconsideration

   15. We concluded, for the reasons  set  out  above,  that  there  was  a
       material error of law in this case.  We considered we  had  adequate
       evidence  to  complete  a  full  reconsideration  of  the  case  and
       accordingly heard submissions.  We had regard to those  and  to  the
       evidence that had been before the adjudicator.   This  consisted  of
       two short statements by the appellant and his wife; a medical report
       by a consultant community paediatrician on Rene and the  speech  and
       language therapy report  on  her,  both  dated  8th  May  2003;  the
       appellant's marriage certificate;  supportive  letters  from  family
       members; a report from a consultant paediatrician at  a  child  care
       development centre dated 5th February 2004; a  letter  about  Rene's
       condition from a Professor of Paediatric  Neuro-surgery  dated  19th
       August 2005; an undated, but recent letter from the family's general
       practitioner; a letter  from  a  Sure  Start  visitor  for  Haringey
       Council dated 23rd August 2005.   The  adjudicator  found  that  the
       appellant's wife has not been in employment for many years.  She  is
       primarily responsible for caring for the child, Rene, but  he  found
       that "she cannot cope on her own".  He said "without  the  practical
       support of the appellant, Michelle Grant would not be able  to  cope
       on her own in looking after the two children"

   16. It is clear  that  Rene  has  cerebral  palsy  and  she  requires  a
       considerable amount of care.  She has for periods been in a  special
       school.  She has a shunt which can become blocked.  We proceeded  on
       the basis that,  as  with  the  appellant's  wife  in  Ekinci,  this
       appellant's wife and children could not return with the appellant to
       Jamaica.  In particular, we were told the travelling involved  might
       be dangerous for Rene and this is clearly supported by the report of
       the Professor of Paediatric Neuro-surgery to which we were referred.
        We accordingly went on to  consider  whether  this  case  might  be
       described as "truly exceptional" in the sense referred to  in  Huang
       and one where this appellant's appeal should be allowed on the basis
       that his Article 8 rights would be breached  were  he  alone  to  be
       removed to Jamaica.

   17. Here, any ultimate removal of this appellant would be  in  pursuance
       of a lawful immigration policy.  As Lord Bingham pointed  out  in  R
       (Razgar) v SSHD [2004] INLR 349 at para 19 "the implementation of  a
       firm and orderly immigration policy  is  an  important  function  of
       government in a modern democratic state."  He said "where removal is
       proposed in pursuance of a lawful immigration policy"  the  question
       whether such removal is necessary  in  a  democratic  society  "will
       almost always fall to be answered affirmatively".

   18. On one side of the scales in this case therefore, is the  undeniable
       fact that the appellant is in the UK in breach  of  the  Immigration
       Rules.  On the other side of the scales are the circumstances which,
       it is said, engage Article 8 and go to the question whether they can
       be regarded as "truly exceptional" on  the  specific  facts  of  his
       case.  The appellant has known he has no entitlement to be here  for
       a number of years, but took no steps  to  regularise  his  position.
       His wife, on the evidence, was clearly aware that he had  come  only
       as a visitor for a short period.  But he has a disabled  child.   We
       do not regard the evidence as  showing  that  his  presence  in  the
       family is essential at all times.  The child herself has been  in  a
       special school for a period.  One or other of her parents takes  her
       to various hospital appointments.   Social  services  are  involved.
       The appellant was in detention for approximately one month in  2004.
       It is, we accept, clearly significantly easier  for  the  mother  to
       manage if the appellant is available in the household.

   19. On the other hand, were the appellant to stay, he would have  jumped
       the queue of those wishing to apply for leave to enter this  country
       as the spouse of the British citizen.  This is the same position  as
       the appellant was in, in Ekinci.  In our judgment,  the  maintenance
       of immigration control must weigh heavily in  the  scales  when  the
       necessary balancing act is  conducted  between  the  maintenance  of
       those controls and consideration of  whether  particular  individual
       facts can  be  regarded  as  "truly  exceptional".    The  need  for
       immigration control is itself one  of  the  factors  which  must  be
       considered, together with  and  alongside  the  individual  personal
       circumstances of any particular appellant.

   20. In conducting this balancing act, we considered  it  right  to  have
       some regard to what the position might  be  if  the  appellant  were
       removed and applied to return to the United Kingdom.  He would  have
       to satisfy paragraph 281 of the Immigration Rules.

           281. The requirements to be met by a  person  seeking  leave  to
           enter the United Kingdom with a view to settlement as the spouse
           of a person present and settled in the United Kingdom or who  is
           on the same occasion being admitted for settlement are that:


           (i) (a) the applicant is married to a person present and settled
           in the United Kingdom or who  is  on  the  same  occasion  being
           admitted for settlement; or
           (b) the applicant is married to a person  who  has  a  right  of
           abode in the United Kingdom or  indefinite  leave  to  enter  or
           remain in the United Kingdom and is on the same occasion seeking
           admission to the United Kingdom for the purposes  of  settlement
           and the parties were married at  least  four  years  ago,  since
           which time they have been living  together  outside  the  United
           Kingdom; and


           (ii) the parties to the marriage have met; and


           (iii) each of the parties intends to live permanently  with  the
           other as his or her spouse and the marriage is subsisting; and


           (iv) there will be adequate accommodation for  the  parties  and
           any dependants without recourse to public funds in accommodation
           which they own or occupy exclusively; and


           (v) the parties will be able  to  maintain  themselves  and  any
           dependants adequately without recourse to public funds; and


           (vi) the applicant holds a valid United Kingdom entry  clearance
           for entry in this capacity.


   21. The appellant's wife is in receipt of social security benefits.  She
       has not worked for many years.  However, the appellant has done some
       work in the UK.  The promise of a job  could  be  obtained  for  him
       either before he leaves the United Kingdom or  whilst  he  is  away.
       There is a family network in the UK who might help.  It does not, in
       our judgment, automatically  follow  that  this  appellant  will  be
       unable to satisfy paragraph 281 of the  Immigration  Rules.   If  in
       work, he will be able to provide some relief with child care for his
       wife.  Such family patterns are  no  doubt  replicated  among  those
       bringing up children with disabilities.

   22. In any event even  if  he  does  not  satisfy  paragraph  281,  this
       appellant will also have available to him,  the  argument  that  his
       wife's need for support and  the  children's  needs  mean  that  the
       appellant's right to a family life  with  them  should  properly  be
       considered as truly exceptional outside the Immigration Rules in the
       Huang sense.  In the  circumstances  of  such  an  application,  the
       appellant will have returned to Jamaica.  He will not have the  very
       significant burden which weighs in the scales against him presently,
       of currently being in the United Kingdom unlawfully in breach of the
       Immigration Rules.  The Article 8 claim will not be tainted by  that
       illegality.  It can be considered in  the  round,  with  such  fresh
       evidence as may be available.

   23. In  our  judgment,  the  individual  facts  of  this  case  must  be
       considered together with the fact that the appellant has been in the
       United Kingdom in breach of the Immigration Rules for  a  number  of
       years.  Those two factors taken together lead us  to  conclude  that
       this is not a "truly exceptional" case in the Huang sense.  Once the
       background unlawfulness  of  the  appellant's  current  position  is
       changed by his leaving the United  Kingdom,  any  fresh  application
       made by him based solely on his right to a family life with his wife
       and daughters might, with appropriate supporting evidence, meet  the
       "truly exceptional" test, if he is unable otherwise to  satisfy  the
       Immigration Rules.


Decision

   24. For the reasons given, we substitute  a  fresh  decision  dismissing
       this appeal.


                                                            Mr Justice Hodge
                                                                   President
                                                                    13.01.06
