




R (on the application of Saha and Another) v  Secretary  of  State  for  the
Home  Department  (Secretary  of  State's  duty  of  candour)  [2017]   UKUT
00017(IAC)

                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber


                               Judicial Review



                     Notice of Decision/Order/Directions





                       The Queen on the application of

                                Debashis Saha
                                 Linda Saha
                                                                  Applicants
                                      v

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent




          Before The Honourable Mr Justice McCloskey, President and
                        Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul



Having considered all  documents  lodged  and  having  also  considered  the
submissions of Mr M Iqbal, of counsel, instructed by  Jinnah  solicitors  on
behalf of the Applicants and Mr S Kovats QC and Mr C  Thomann,  of  counsel,
instructed by the Government Legal Department on behalf  of  the  Respondent
at a hearing, conjoined with two related cases  (infra),  conducted  on  01,
02, 04 and 16 August 2016 and 19 December 2016.

 I) It is impossible to overstate the importance of the duty of candour  in
    judicial review proceedings. Any failings  by  the  Executive  in  this
    respect threaten the guarantees upon which judicial review  is  founded
    and are inimical to the rule of law.

II) A failure by the Executive to conduct judicial review proceedings  with
    the necessary degrees of candour, efficiency and attention  compromises
    the ability of its legal representatives to discharge their ethical and
    professional duties.

III) All of the aforementioned duties are encompassed within an  overarching
    obligation of good faith rooted in respect for the rule of law.

IV) Failings of this kind may be reflected in various ways,  including  how
    the  judicial  exercise  of  discretion  in  the  matter  of  costs  is
    performed.


      DECISION AND ORDER

McCLOSKEY J

    Preface

    The Tribunal having identified certain common and inter-related  issued
    in  this  case,  the  judicial  review  case  of  Mohammad   Mohibullah
    (JR/2171/2015)[1] and the statutory appeal of MA v Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department (IA/39899/2014)[2], a decision was made to hear
    these three cases together.   Having battled against  every  increasing
    and profoundly frustrating odds, the panel  has  at  last  reached  the
    stage of delivering the third of its three judgments in these conjoined
    cases in which the delivery of judgments was originally  scheduled  for
    August 2016. In passing, we dismissed the statutory appeal of Mr MA and
    allowed the judicial review challenge of Mr Mohibullah.


I  INTRODUCTION


 1) The background to the growing number of judicial review challenges  and
    statutory appeals in the field to  which  these  two  cases  belong  in
    relation to action taken on behalf of the Respondent, the Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department (the "Secretary of State"), frequently in
    the form of refusing to extend leave or cancellation of leave, relating
    to the scores purportedly obtained by some 30,000 foreign  students  in
    "TOEIC" English language proficiency tests.  It is set out  in  extenso
    in SM and Qadir (ETS - Evidence - Burden  of  Proof)  [2016]  UKUT  229
    (IAC) and in general terms in R (Gazi) v Secretary  of  State  for  the
    Home Department (ETS-Judicial Review) (IJR) [2015] UKUT  327  (IAC)  at
    [2] - [4], which need not be reproduced here.



 2) As explained  in  R  (Mahmood)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2014] UKUT 439  (IAC),  at  [1]  cases  belonging  to  this
    sphere:


           "... have gained much currency during recent months,  stimulated
           by action taken on behalf of the  ......    Secretary  of  State
           ....  in the wake of the BBC "Panorama" programme  broadcast  on
           10 February 2014."


      As further explained in Mahmood,  "ETS"  denotes  Educational  Testing
      Services -


           "... a global agency contracted to provide  certain  educational
           testing and assessment services to the Secretary of State".


      In all of these cases the impugned decision of the Secretary of  State
      is based upon an assessment that the TOEIC Certificate of  the  person
      concerned was procured by deception.


    II  THESE PROCEEDINGS: THE REGRETTABLE PROCEDURAL HISTORY

 3) Permission to apply for judicial review was refused  initially  on  the
    papers, by Order dated 11 January 2016.  An  oral  renewal  application
    followed, giving rise to an inter-partes hearing and an Order of  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Allen, dated 21 April 2016, granting permission to apply
    for  judicial  review.   This  order  incorporated  a  series  of  case
    management directions, the first whereof stated:


           "The Respondent ....  must file and serve detailed  grounds,  or
           where  appropriate  additional  grounds,  for   contesting   the
           application  ....   and  any   written   evidence,   or,   where
           appropriate, additional evidence, within 3 days  from  the  date
           this decision was sent."


    This discrete direction and the others contained in the  Order  were  a
    reflection of the timetable then prevailing  which  was  geared  to  an
    early,  expedited  hearing  scheduled  for  early  May   2016.    Other
    directions fixed time limits for the provision of  skeleton  arguments.
    Another of the directions stated:


           "Where there are genuine and compelling grounds for seeking  any
           modification of any of  the  above  directions,  these  must  be
           communicated in writing to the Tribunal and the other  party  or
           parties  at  the  earliest  possible  date,  accompanied  by  an
           appropriate request for application  and  (where  relevant)  any
           agreement between the parties on the modification."




    A further direction specified that any interlocutory application of any
    kind be filed and served not later than 7  days  before  the  scheduled
    hearing date (06 May 2016).



 4) The direction relating to detailed grounds of defence may be juxtaposed
    with the AOS (with summary grounds of defence) dated 12  October  2015,
    which included the following passage:


           "The  Respondent  submits  that  the  claim  is  not  reasonably
           arguable for the reasons set  out  herein  and  that  permission
           should be refused. If permission is granted, then the Respondent
           reserves the right to amend and/or expand upon the arguments set
           out below, in Detailed Grounds of Defence."

       The  substantive  hearing  which  was  arranged  for  06  May   2016,
    regrettably, disintegrated.  The  Secretary  of  State's  case  was  in
    disarray at this stage.  Further directions and orders,  on  that  date
    and subsequently, had to be issued: five in total during  a  period  of
    some 10 weeks. During this period there  were  three  further  listings
    before the Tribunal for case management and interlocutory purposes.  In
    tandem, there was progressive disclosure of documents by the  Secretary
    of State and ETS.  Furthermore, the process whereby  the  three  expert
    witnesses were seeking to agree and refine the issues was advancing.


 5) The skeleton argument provided on behalf of Mr and Mrs Saha on 29 April
    2016, in compliance with the first set of case  management  directions,
    made clear, consistent with their judicial review claim form, that  the
    basis of their challenge to the  Secretary  of  State's  decisions  was
    Wednesbury irrationality.  This was repeated when, in compliance with a
    direction  addressed  to  all  parties,  these  Applicants  provided  a
    "Position Statement" approximately one month  in  advance  of  the  re-
    scheduled trial date.



 6) This regrettable excursus into procedural  matters  has  been  rendered
    necessary by the following facts and considerations:


      a) No detailed grounds of defence were, in the event, served on behalf
         of the Secretary of State.


      b) The substantive hearing, was conducted on  01,  02  and  04  August
         2016.


      c) The submissions of Mr Iqbal on behalf of Mr and Mrs Saha were  made
         on the third of these three days.


      d) The riposte of Mr Kovats QC, on behalf of the Secretary  of  State,
         was that he was taken by surprise by Mr Iqbal's submissions.


      e) The Tribunal, while making no ruling on the merits  of  Mr  Kovats'
         submission, having reached the  end  of  the  third  of  the  three
         scheduled hearing days, opted for the pragmatic course of directing
         that Mr Kovats'  submission  in  reply  be  provided  by  close  of
         business the following day.


      f) Within the time limit directed,  the  Secretary  of  State's  legal
         representatives proceeded to serve and lodge the written submission
         directed.  This was accompanied by new evidence, not authorised  by
         any direction of the Tribunal and not previously served or, indeed,
         foreshadowed  in  any  way.   This   included   Mr   Saha's   TOEIC
         Certificates,  provided  for  the  first  time.   The  other  items
         consisted of an Excel spreadsheet purportedly depicting  Mr  Saha's
         TOEIC test scores: undated and unsigned and  unaccompanied  by  any
         witness statement;  a  new  witness  statement  of  a  Home  Office
         employee  dated  three  days  before  these  hearings   began;   an
         "Operation  Bodger  Progress  Report"  -  redacted,  unsigned   and
         undated; and  a  new  witness  statement  of  another  Home  Office
         employee, prepared on the  day  following  the  completion  of  the
         hearings.  The latter  statement  purports  to  be  expert  opinion
         evidence. It contains, inter alia, averments  which  are  sweeping,
         generalised and unparticularised.  All of these new materials  were
         simply  served  and  lodged.   They  were  unaccompanied   by   any
         explanatory witness statement or letter.  Moreover,  there  was  no
         accompanying  application   to   vary   the   Tribunal's   previous
         directions.  Nor was there any application to have the new evidence
         admitted.



 7) Given the extensive procedural history  rehearsed  above,  these  post-
    hearing  developments  were  startling.   Moreover,  they  occurred  in
    circumstances where the  Tribunal  had  announced  during  the  hearing
    (which ended on 04 August 2016) its  intention  to  circulate,  in  all
    three cases, draft embargoed judgments by 11 August 2016  and  to  list
    the cases for hand down purposes on 16 August 2016.  This timetable was
    demolished as a result.  The Tribunal was, instead, put to the  trouble
    of formulating and issuing still further directions,  dated  07  August
    2016 (see Appendix 1), making a formal ruling, with further  directions
    (Appendix 2) and issuing still further directions (Appendix 3).

 8) Following the events detailed in  [6]  -  [7]  above,  a  progressively
    deafening silence, bilaterally,  developed.   Neither  party  made  any
    response to the Tribunal's ruling and directions dated 16 August  2016.
    This inertia remains largely unexplained. As a result, the Tribunal was
    driven to issuing still further directions,  dated  21  November  2016,
    with a view to  bringing  these  increasingly  delayed  proceedings  to
    completion.  This resulted in  a  further,  and  final,  hearing  being
    convened on 19 December 2016.



 9)  At  this,  the  final,  stage  the  Applicants  no  longer  had  legal
    representation  and   neither   attended   the   final   listing.    In
    communications with the Tribunal, they  intimated  their  intention  to
    rely on all  submissions,  oral  and  written,  previously  made.   The
    incongruity in this stance was that  the  previous  submissions,  self-
    evidently, had not addressed the new evidence noted  in  [6](f)  above.
    The Tribunal, as a reflection of its grave dissatisfaction with how the
    Respondent's case had been presented and had evolved, directed that the
    author of the new Home Office witness statement, Mr Sewell, attend  for
    the purpose  of  formally  proving  the  statement  and  responding  to
    questions.  We address this further in [52] - [59] infra.


    III  THE CHALLENGES

10)  The  organic  and  innovative  character  of  the  challenges  in  the
    litigation belonging to this field has become one  of  its  established
    features.  The present cases are no exception in this respect.  In  the
    two conjoined  judicial  review  cases,  the  Applicants  were  granted
    permission to apply for judicial review, approximately  one  year  ago.
    Since then, there has been much activity in the  matters  of  gathering
    further evidence, in  particular  expert  evidence  and  disclosure  of
    documents on the part of both the Secretary of State and ETS.


11) These Applicants, Mr and Mrs Saha, are challenging the decision of  the
    Secretary of State dated 12 June  2015  whereby  Mr  Saha  was  refused
    further leave to remain in the United Kingdom on three grounds,  namely
    (a) that he had engaged in deception in procuring his TOEIC Certificate
    in December 2011, invoking paragraphs 245ZX(a) and 322(2) of the Rules;
    (b) because he had  not  submitted  a  valid  CAS  (a  Confirmation  of
    Acceptance for Study) triggering paragraph 245ZX(c) and Appendix  A  of
    the Rules; and (c) his course fees or  maintenance  requirements  could
    not be established, thus engaging paragraph 245ZX(v) and Appendix C  of
    the Rules. The challenge is confined to (a) only.  This is  squarely  a
    Wednesbury  irrationality  challenge,   as   the   following   pleading
    demonstrates:


           "The issue .... is whether.....   the Respondent's decision was
           within the range of reasonable responses open to her on the
           available evidence."



12) In the second of the conjoined judicial  review  cases,  Mr  Mohibullah
    challenged the Secretary  of  State's  decision  made  under  paragraph
    323A(a)(ii)(2) of  the  Immigration  Rules,  dated  18  December  2014,
    whereby his leave to remain in the United Kingdom was curtailed in  the
    wake of his sponsor college withdrawing him from his course  of  study.
    This decision was  challenged  on  the  grounds  of  improper  purpose,
    conspicuous unfairness, illegality and procedural unfairness.



13) In the third of the conjoined cases, the statutory appeal  of  MA,  the
    main issues which arose were whether  MA  undertook  the  TOEIC  tests;
    whether the voice recordings which have been provided by ETS relate  to
    the speaking test which MA apparently took; whether MA's spoken answers
    were properly recorded and/or correctly transferred to ETS headquarters
    in the USA; and whether the transmission of MA's data to ETS in the USA
    gave rise to a breach of the Data Protection Act.



14) One significant feature common to the three cases  is  that  all  three
    claimants accept that the voice contained  in  the  computerised  voice
    files which have been produced are not theirs.  In  this  context,  the
    difference between a challenge by statutory appeal and a  challenge  by
    judicial review is thrown into sharp relief.  In the case  of  MA,  the
    statutory appeal, the Tribunal had  to  decide  as  a  matter  of  fact
    whether the speaking test was  taken  by  him.   In  contrast,  in  the
    present case (as in Saha), the ultimate question for  the  Tribunal  is
    whether the Secretary of State's  assessment  that  the  speaking  test
    attributed to Mr Saha was  taken  by  a  proxy,  rather  than  him,  is
    unsustainable in law by reference to orthodox public law principles.


IV  THE SECRETARY OF STATE'S DECISIONS


15) In the present case, the Secretary of State made  two  decisions.   The
    first of these, which stimulated the judicial  review  application,  is
    contained in a letter dated 12 June 2015.  This  letter  documents  the
    determination of Mr Saha's application  for  leave  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom as a Tier 4 (General)  Student.   This  application  was
    refused in the following terms:


           "Prior to submitting this application, on 25  October  2013  you
           applied for leave to remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student.   For
           this application you submitted a TOEIC Certificate from (ETS) to
           the Home Office and your sponsor in order for  them  to  provide
           you with a Confirmation of Acceptance for Studies ....


           ETS  has  a  record  of  your  speaking   test.    Using   voice
           verification software, ETS is  able  to  detect  when  a  single
           person is undertaking multiple tests.  ETS undertook a check  of
           your test and confirmed to the SSHD that there  was  significant
           evidence to conclude  that  your  certificate  was  fraudulently
           obtained by the use of a proxy test taker.   ETS  have  declared
           your tests to be 'invalid' due to the aforementioned presence of
           a proxy tester who sat the test in your  place  and  the  scores
           have therefore been cancelled by  ETS.   On  the  basis  of  the
           information provided to her by ETS, the SSHD is  satisfied  that
           your certificate was fraudulently obtained."


    This, the decision recited, gave rise  to  a  refusal  under  paragraph
    322(2) of the Immigration Rules on the ground that a false document had
    been submitted in connection with Mr Saha's previous  leave  to  remain
    application.  Two further refusal reasons, neither of  which  is  under
    challenge, were provided, namely Mr Saha's failure  to  provide  a  CAS
    reference number with his application and a  consequential  failure  to
    demonstrate that he was in possession of the requisite finances.


16) Following the grant of permission  to  apply  for  judicial  review,  a
    review decision was composed on behalf of the Secretary of State.  This
    affirmed the original decision.  We shall examine the  review  decision
    in a little detail infra.


V  LEGAL FRAMEWORK


17) Paragraph 321A of  the  Immigration  Rules  (the  "Rules")  states,  in
    material part:


         "The following grounds for the cancellation of a person's leave  to
         enter or remain which is in force on his arrival in, or  whilst  he
         is outside, the United Kingdom apply;
         (1)       there has been such a change in the circumstances of that
             person's case since the leave was given,  that  it  should  be
             cancelled; or
         (2)       false representations were made or false  documents  were
             submitted (whether or not material  to  the  application,  and
             whether or not to the holder's knowledge), or  material  facts
             were not disclosed, in relation to the application for  leave;
             or in order to obtain documents from the Secretary of State or
             a third party required in support of the application ...."


    By paragraph 322 (so far as material):

         "In addition to the grounds for refusal of extension  of  stay  set
         out in Parts 2-8 of these Rules, the following provisions apply  in
         relation to the refusal of an  application  for  leave  to  remain,
         variation of leave to enter or remain or,  where  appropriate,  the
         curtailment of leave:


          Grounds on which leave to remain and variation of leave  to  enter
         or remain in the United Kingdom are to be refused


          1)     the fact that variation of leave to  enter  or  remain  is
             being sought for a purpose not covered by these Rules.


         (1A)      where false  representations  have  been  made  or  false
             documents or information have been submitted (whether  or  not
             material to  the  application,  and  whether  or  not  to  the
             applicant's  knowledge),  or  material  facts  have  not  been
             disclosed, in relation to  the  application  or  in  order  to
             obtain documents from the Secretary of State or a third  party
             required in support of the application.


         ..................




         Grounds on which leave to remain and variation of leave to enter or
         remain in the United Kingdom should normally be refused


         (2)       the making of false representations  or  the  failure  to
             disclose any material fact for the purpose of obtaining  leave
             to enter or a previous variation  of  leave  or  in  order  to
             obtain documents from the Secretary of State or a third  party
             required in support of the application for leave to enter or a
             previous variation of leave.


         (2A)      the making of false representations  or  the  failure  to
             disclose any material fact for  the  purpose  of  obtaining  a
             document from the Secretary of State that indicates the person
             has a right to reside in the United Kingdom."




VI  THE CRIMINAL INVESTIGATION


18) The fact, now well known, of continuing  criminal  investigations  into
    the TOEIC saga shines brightly in the evidence. It is a matter of  some
    notoriety that those under investigation include  ETS  as  a  corporate
    entity and its servants or agents.  On  24  June  2014  the  Government
    Minister for Immigration and Security made a statement in the House  of
    Commons, the subject matter whereof was "student visas", containing the
    following passages:


         "Immigration  Enforcement  Officers  with  the  support  from   the
         National Crime Agency, together with officials from  UK  Visas  and
         Immigration, have  been  conducting  a  detailed  and  wide-ranging
         investigation  into  actions  by  organised  criminals  to  falsify
         English language tests for student visa applicants ....


         They have also investigated a number of colleges  and  universities
         for their failure to make sure that the foreign students they  have
         sponsored meet the standards set out in the Immigration Rules ....


         Since reforms we introduced in 2011, it has been a requirement  for
         all student visa applicants to prove they can speak English  at  an
         appropriate level ....


         All students in further education or at a university  which  relies
         on English language testing  who  want  to  extend  their  stay  by
         applying for a new student visa have to be tested by  one  or  five
         companies licensed by the Government ....


         One of those companies - the European  subsidiary  of  an  American
         firm called Educational Testing Services - was exposed by the BBC's
         Panorama programme earlier this year following systematic  cheating
         at a number of their UK test centres ....


         Facilitated  by  organised  criminals,  this   typically   involved
         invigilators supplying, even reading out,  answers  to  whole  exam
         rooms or gangs of imposters being allowed to  step  into  the  exam
         candidate's places to sit the  test.   Evidently  this  could  only
         happen with considerable collusion by the  test  centres  concerned
         ....


         Having been provided with analysis from the American arm of ETS for
         a number of ETS test centres in the UK operating in 2012 and  2013,
         they have identified ...."


    The Minister, elaborating, then suggested that the  ETS  investigations
    had resulted in the identification of a substantial number  of  suspect
    accredited colleges in the United Kingdom where tests had  been  taken.
    In passing, we observe that the Minister's reference to the years  2012
    and 2013 is of a little significance, having regard to the  formulation
    of these Applicant's challenge (infra). The criminal investigation, the
    so-called "Operation Bodger", features in the evidence adduced.

19) Disclosure issues featured prominently during the pre-trial  phase,  to
    the extent that an interlocutory ruling of the Tribunal  was  required.
    This, with three other rulings, is attached at Appendices 1 -  3.   ETS
    was actively involved, and  legally  represented  in,  these  pre-trial
    skirmishes.  While much disclosure  resulted,  ETS  resisted  producing
    certain materials on self-incrimination grounds.  Some of the documents
    disclosed by both the Secretary of State  and  ETS  took  the  form  of
    witness statements and kindred  materials  generated  by  the  criminal
    investigation.  Unsurprisingly,  there  was  much  focus  on  disclosed
    materials during the hearing.

20) We remind ourselves at  this  juncture  that  the  voluminous  evidence
    assembled does not document any prosecution, much less any  conviction,
    of any person or corporate entity.  Furthermore, we bear in  mind  that
    the "section 9" witness statements, which have  been  prepared  with  a
    view to deployment and scrutiny in the adversarial process of  criminal
    proceedings, have not been subjected to any comparable testing in  this
    quite different forum  of  judicial  review  proceedings.   We  further
    remind ourselves that it is not our function to adjudicate, directly or
    indirectly, on the legality of the Secretary of  State's  decisions  to
    revoke the licences of approximately five per cent (circa 100)  of  the
    "sponsor" colleges operating in the "Tier 4" sphere.




VII  THE CHALLENGE OF MR AND MRS SAHA

21) We preface our outline of the Applicants' case  with  the  observation,
    uncontroversial,  that  the  testing  which   underpins   every   TOEIC
    Certificate is undertaken  in  two  parts  which  unfold  on  separate,
    staggered dates.  On the first occasion, the skills  of  listening  and
    reading are tested.  On the second occasion, the subject of the testing
    is the candidate's proficiency in speaking and writing.   The  speaking
    test is  undertaken  by  candidates  at  a  computer  terminal.   Their
    responses to questions are recorded on computer files.  These files are
    then uploaded and transmitted to the ETS  headquarters  in  the  United
    States.  There they are assessed by ETS employees who allocate scores.

22) It has become commonplace for the claimants in cases of  this  kind  to
    request their voice recording files.   Every  speaking  test  generates
    multiple files of this  nature.   This,  it  appears,  is  because  the
    software employed to transmit  the  voice  recordings  to  ETS  creates
    recordings of each answer rather than a recording of the whole session.
     The disclosure of these files stimulates an assessment by the claimant
    and his legal representatives and, not infrequently, an expert witness.
     This has occurred in each of the three conjoined cases.  It is  within
    this context that each of these claimants, while acknowledging that the
    files do not contain their voices, makes the case that due to some kind
    of manipulation or error or other contaminant the  "wrong"  files  have
    been disclosed.  The claimants assert that the  disclosed  files  could
    not have been generated on the occasion when each of them underwent the
    speaking test.

23) Mr Saha is a national of Bangladesh,  aged  33  years.   He  was  first
    granted leave to enter the United Kingdom in the  capacity  of  Tier  4
    (General) Student in February 2007, for a period  of  just  over  three
    months.  Subsequently, he  was  the  beneficiary  of  three  grants  of
    further leave to remain in the United Kingdom, issued in November 2010,
    June 2012 and December 2013.  The impugned decision of the Secretary of
    State took the form of a refusal of Mr Saha's application for leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom  in  the  capacity  of  Tier  4  (General)
    Student: see [15] supra. A similar decision  letter,  as  a  matter  of
    course, issued in relation to Mrs  Saha.   Both  then  exercised  their
    statutory entitlement to pursue the so-called  "Administrative  Review"
    procedure (introduced by statute in mid-2014), without success.


24) The consequences of the Secretary of State's assessment that Mr  Saha's
    TOEIC Certificate had been procured by  fraud  should  be  noted.   The
    first consequence is that, subject to successful legal challenge, it is
    incumbent on Mr and Mrs Saha to  leave  the  United  Kingdom  as  their
    status has become irregular.  Second, by virtue of paragraph 320(7B) of
    the Rules, subject to demonstrating an infringement of rights under the
    Human Rights Act 1998 or the Refugee Convention any future  application
    for entry clearance or leave  to  enter  the  United  Kingdom  will  be
    refused for the following periods,  each  measured  from  the  date  of
    departure from the United Kingdom:



      a) One year, if the subject leaves voluntarily without the  Government
         having to finance departure in whole or in part.


      b) Five years, if the subject leaves voluntarily at  the  Government's
         expense.


      c) Ten years, if the subject is removed or deported  from  the  United
         Kingdom.


    There are certain exceptions, the details whereof are not  germane  for
    present purposes.

25) The application for permission  to  apply  for  judicial  review  which
    ensued was grounded on a witness statement of  Mr  Saha.   In  this  he
    avers that his  leave  to  remain  applications  made  successively  in
    September 2011 and September 2013 were based on, inter alia, the  TOEIC
    Certificate in issue.  His next leave to remain application made on  31
    December 2014, was based on (inter alia) a different  form  of  English
    proficiency certificate, known as the "IELTS" Certificate, which he had
    procured on 25 October 2014.  He asserts that his TOEIC test was  taken
    on 13 December 2011.  While Mr Saha makes a bare denial  of  deception,
    it is striking that  his  statement  contains  no  material  whatsoever
    relating to the TOEIC testing and ensuing certificate.


26)  The  Secretary  of  State's  Acknowledgement   of   Service   ("AOS"),
    incorporating summary grounds of defence, followed on 12 October  2015.
    This begins with an averment that  the  Applicant's  case  is  "totally
    without merit", inviting a refusal of permission.  Reference is made to
    the (now well known) "Panorama" programme broadcast by the  BBC  on  10
    February 2014 and the ensuing exercise undertaken by ETS entailing  the
    review of the validity of test scores awarded by  it  at  certain  test
    centres in the United Kingdom.  The pleading continues:


         "On 24 March 2014, ETS informed the Respondent of  the  results  of
         the first phase of its testing process and has continued to  update
         the Respondent with further results .....


         ETS informed the Respondent that the Applicant's test score,  along
         with a large number of other test takers had been cancelled due  to
         substantial evidence of invalidity being present.  ETS has via  the
         use of computerised voice recognition software and a further  human
         review in each case  by  2  anti-fraud  staff  (each  of  whom  has
         determined that a proxy was used) determined that  the  Applicant's
         ETS language test score was obtained by the use  of  a  proxy  test
         taker."


    The witness statements of Mr Millington and  Ms  Collings,  which  were
    considered extensively by this Tribunal in SM and Qadir, were attached.
     The whole of the remainder of the AOS is devoted to legal submissions.
     It contains nothing more relating to the Applicant Mr Saha.



27) The AOS confirms the impression conveyed by the text  of  the  impugned
    decision that the action which the Secretary  of  State  determined  to
    take against  Mr  Saha  was  based  exclusively  upon  a  communication
    received from ETS conveying its assessment that his  TOEIC  Certificate
    had been "obtained by the use of a proxy test taker".

28) The case made by these Applicants is the very compact and  focused  one
    that the Secretary of State's decision to refuse Mr Saha's  request  to
    secure further leave to remain in the United Kingdom on the ground that
    he had engaged in deception  in  procuring  his  TOEIC  Certificate  is
    vitiated by Wednesbury irrationality.  The centrepiece of the clear and
    economic argument developed by Mr Iqbal focused  on  the  Secretary  of
    State's evidence relating to the dates upon which Mr Saha  is  said  to
    have undertaken the suspect TOEIC tests.



29) The submission of Mr Iqbal on behalf of Mr and Mrs Saha  was  that  the
    evidence adduced on behalf of the Secretary of State in support of  the
    assessment underpinning the impugned decision that Mr Saha had procured
    his TOEIC Certificate by deception, via the mechanism of a  proxy  test
    taker,  is  unreliable,  irredeemably  so.   Mr  Iqbal  developed  this
    argument by, firstly, drawing attention to the bare terms of  the  AOS,
    coupled with the fact that this exhibited no  spreadsheet  or  "lookup"
    tool or anything comparable.   While  the  AOS  exhibited  the  witness
    statements of Mr Millington and Ms Collings, these did not contain  any
    evidence specific to Mr Saha.

30) Developing his argument, Mr Iqbal drew our  attention  particularly  to
    the following sources in the evidence assembled:

      i) The Secretary of State's supplementary decision  letter,  dated  05
         May 2016, which contains an assertion that Mr  Saha  underwent  the
         TOEIC speaking test on 19 October 2011.


     ii) The "GCID" notes, which state that the date  of  the  test  was  13
         December 2011.


    iii) The TOEIC Certificate, which specifies  the  date  as  13  December
         2011.


    Mr Iqbal suggested that his client's TOEIC Certificate is  one  of  the
    earliest of the thousands of suspect TOEIC Certificates,  the  majority
    of  which  relate  to  the  period  2012/2013.   One  of  the   matters
    highlighted in the experts' reports is the absence of any evidence that
    the database on which audio recordings were stored,  had  the  security
    measure of password  protection.   The  experts  also  highlighted  the
    uncertainties concerning the  date  of  creation  of  individual  audio
    files.  Mr Iqbal,  drawing  on  these  sources,  also  pointed  to  the
    evidence that from late 2011/early 2012  there  was  a  change  in  the
    system for the storage of audio files.


31) In this context, we note the criminal investigation statement of an ETS
    employee,  Mr  Cline.   He  describes  his  role  as  that  of   Senior
    Investigator in the ETS Office of Testing Integrity ("OTI") since 2011.
     He recounts that once ETS had decided on the  (earlier  than  planned)
    introduction of certain voice recognition technology, in the context of
    the storm caused by the Panorama Programme, the  following  steps  were
    taken:


         "OTI ... requested all UK TOEIC exam files from  the  2012  -  2014
         period from the  Online  Scoring  Network  (OSN)  an  internal  ETS
         Department.  Each  electronic  file  contained  candidate  details,
         their unique  reference  number  and  6  audio  files  (out  of  11
         available) that were most appropriate for comparison  ....   The  6
         were chosen by file size ... (which) would contain longer and  more
         verbose responses making them much more suitable for comparison."

      Continuing, he explains that the ETS investigation  gave  priority  to
    certain "high risk" test centres identified by  the  Home  Office.   He
    then describes the following methodology:

         "ETS considered that the best way to test for  'imposters'  was  to
         look at test centres individually as it was  more  likely  that  an
         imposter would sit multiple tests at one test centre.  Tests from a
         test centre were 'batched' into groups of 300 - 400 test takers  in
         chronological order.  These batches could spread across one day  of
         testing or multiple testing days, depending on class sizes at  each
         centre.   The  audio  files  were  then  processed  by  the   voice
         biometrics engine.  Each batch would take a minimum of two hours to
         analyse. The voice engine would compare  each  test  to  all  other
         tests in that batch and flag all  suspicious  results  (those  that
         were a 'match').  The output would  be  a  list  of  flagged  cases
         ranked in order of the most likely match through to least likely."

      Mr Cline continues:

           "It is acknowledged that the technology used in both  the  TOEFL
           and TOEIC analysis  is  imperfect  and  that  samples  could  be
           incorrectly flagged as matches.  This could occur due to  noises
           in the background of a recording (eg an air conditioning system)
           or the detection of another voice in the  background  which  may
           match another test taker."

      This is followed by a brief description  of  the  mechanism  of  human
    verification, which appears to have been somewhat chequered in  nature.
    The final passage of particular note in Mr  Cline's  statement  is  the
    following:

         "Following this investigation, ETS provided the  Home  Office  with
         lists of  candidates  whose  test  results  were  cancelled  either
         because  they  were  'invalid'  or   because   they   were   deemed
         'questionable'.  Scores were deemed to be invalid if  ETS  believed
         there was evidence of cheating, specifically that  an  impersonator
         (also referred to as a proxy) had taken the test on behalf  of  the
         true candidate.  A score was referred to as 'questionable'  if  the
         analysis conducted was not as conclusive, but a significant  number
         of test scores for a test centre at the relevant test  sittings  or
         overall had been assessed as 'invalid'."



32) Mr Iqbal pointed out that  in  this  detailed  statement  there  is  no
    mention of any ETS audit of TOEIC speaking tests undertaken during  the
    period of relevance to his clients viz pre-2012.  Furthermore, while Mr
    Saha's name, date of birth and certain other particulars,  including  a
    testing date of 19 October 2011, appear on an Excel sheet  which  seems
    to condemn all four elements of his TOEIC testing as  "invalid",  there
    is no indication or explanation of the origins of this document or when
    or how it was generated.



33) Mr Iqbal contrasted his client's case with  that  of  Mr  Shehzad,  the
    first of the  two  Appellants  in  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department v Shehzad and Chowdhury [2016] EWCA Civ 615,  in  which  the
    comparable spreadsheet was served on  the  Appellant  at  the  Tribunal
    appeal hearing stage and did not  declare  Ms  Shehzad's  test  results
    invalid.  In its consideration of  the  question  of  whether,  at  the
    appeal stage, the Secretary of  State  had  discharged  the  evidential
    burden engaged, in the case of Mr Chowdhury, the Court of Appeal  noted
    that the evidence available to  the  Tribunal  included  two  items  in
    particular, namely (a)  a  screen  shot  of  the  outcome  of  the  ETS
    investigation classifying the test as "invalid" and (b) the "ETS lookup
    tool" which was to like effect.  As regards the case of Mr Shehzad, the
    judgment of Beatson LJ contains the following  noteworthy  passage,  at
    [30]:


         "It appears that no material was put in front of  the  tribunal  to
         show that  Mr  Shehzad's  TOEIC  speaking  English  test  had  been
         adjudged to be "invalid" as opposed to  "questionable".   All  that
         the tribunal had in front of it were his results. The  document  at
         B1 of the bundle referred to by the  tribunal  (a  screenshot)  was
         partial in not showing the tab at the bottom which  indicated  that
         it was from the page of tests which  were  assessed  as  "invalid".
         That tab is also not on the extract  from  the  "ETS  Lookup  Tool"
         attached to an email dated 4 April 2014 although the  email  states
         that the extract  is  "of  test  takers  whose  results  have  been
         invalidated". It thus appears that the documents before the FtT did
         not identify  Mr  Shehzad's  test  as  "invalid".   Ms  Giovennetti
         accepted that there were problems with the way the  material  about
         Mr Shehzad had been put in front of the tribunal by  the  Secretary
         of State. She stated Mr Shehzad's case  was  one  of  the  earliest
         cases and that matters  were  now  handled  very  differently.  The
         tribunal might be  open  to  criticism  in  its  treatment  of  the
         Millington/Collings  evidence  at  the  initial  stage.   But,   in
         circumstances where the generic  evidence  is  not  accompanied  by
         evidence showing that the individual under consideration's test was
         categorised as "invalid", I consider that the  Secretary  of  State
         faces a difficulty in respect  of  the  evidential  burden  at  the
         initial stage."



34) Concluding his argument,  Mr  Iqbal  drew  attention  to  the  evidence
    adduced on behalf of the Secretary of State in SM and Qadir.   In  this
    context we highlight the evidence provided by a Home  Office  employee,
    at [12]:


         "Mr Green, a Home Office employee, gave written  evidence  relating
         to the two spreadsheet computer printouts purporting to record  the
         outcome of the ETS testing  of  the  voice  samples  purporting  to
         relate to the two Appellants .....   ETS  devised  a  dichotomy  of
         'invalid' and 'questionable' TOEIC test results.  The Home  Office,
         in turn, has developed a system whereby upon  receipt  of  the  ETS
         testing analysis outcomes, these are matched to the person who  has
         the name, date of birth and nationality of the certificate  holder.
         This is known as the 'Lookup Tool'."

      In the same  passage  this  Tribunal  noted  the  evidence  that  some
    200,000 student visas are issued in the United Kingdom annually;  there
    are 1700  Government  approved  colleges;  the  Home  Office  has  made
    decisions that TOEIC Certificates were procured by fraud in some 33,000
    cases; and ETS is one of the largest English testing  organisations  in
    the world, assessing some 50 million tests per annum.



35) Mr Iqbal, concluding, emphasised that the aforementioned Excel sheet is
    the only evidence specific to Mr Saha.  Its reliability, he  submitted,
    is  fatally  undermined  by  its  incorporation  of  the   demonstrably
    incorrect test taking date of 19 October 2011.  As this must have  been
    the only evidence particular to Mr Saha upon  which  the  Secretary  of
    State's decision maker acted, the impugned  decision  is  unsustainable
    and is so seriously flawed as to be irrational in the Wednesbury sense.



36) Before turning to the issue of the new and belated evidence produced on
    behalf of the Secretary of State after the hearing had concluded -  see
    [6] above - it is convenient to summarise the argument of Mr Kovats QC.
     Given the history of these proceedings which we have been  obliged  to
    outline above, the title of Mr Kovats printed  argument,  "Respondent's
    Skeleton Argument and Detailed Grounds for Opposing the Claim",  has  a
    particular resonance.  Similarly,  its  date,  05  August  2016,  which
    postdates the three day hearing.  There is evident  disharmony  between
    what the Tribunal received in this way and what it had directed at  the
    conclusion of the  hearing,  namely  counsel's  written  submission  in
    response to the oral submissions of Mr Iqbal, a measure dictated by the
    purely pragmatic factor of time constraints.


37) Mr Kovats submits that the detailed critique developed by  Dr  Harrison
    in his report (considered  in  extenso  in  SM  and  Qadir)  is  of  no
    assistance to Mr and Mrs Saha, given the provision in these proceedings
    of Mr Saha's voice recording files and his acceptance that they do  not
    reflect his voice.  Mr Kovats' submissions  have  two  further  central
    elements.  The first is that Mr Saha has served  no  evidence  to  cast
    doubt on the Secretary of State's assessment (not finding) that Mr Saha
    procured his TOEIC Certificate via a proxy.  The  second  is  that  the
    Secretary of State was entitled to rely on the information supplied  to
    her by ETS, in the context of her understanding of the  ETS  procedures
    as explained  in  the  witness  statements  of  Mr  Millington  and  Ms
    Collings: see Shehzad and Chowdhury at [5], [10], [21] - [26], [43] and
    [44].




VIII  THE EXPERT EVIDENCE



38) At this juncture it is appropriate to reflect on the  expert  evidence.
    There  is  evidence  from  three  expert   witnesses.    Sensibly   and
    commendably, as a  result  of  a  collaborative  approach  the  experts
    produced a joint memorandum.  In addition, two of them, Mr Stanbury and
    Professor Sommer, gave evidence to the Tribunal.



39) The expertise of the three persons concerned belongs to the  fields  of
    computing,  database  programming,  computer  forensics  and   computer
    security, in general terms.  In  their  joint  memorandum  the  experts
    helpfully outline the task to which their endeavours were addressed:


         "The task of the experts was to review the available material which
         consisted of a variety of print outs said to come  from  computers,
         handbooks  which  should  have  been  used  during   the   testing,
         testimonial evidence from the organisers of  the  events  and  from
         Home Office officials and some paper records.  There was also a BBC
         "Panorama" programme about the use of proxies and other frauds  run
         by testing centres for the benefit of attendees ......


         The issue before the experts was to consider  the  plausibility  of
         scenarios which might explain how the ETS  computer  records  could
         reconcile the two conflicting assertions: that the audio recordings
         were created by proxies and that [the students]  actual  recordings
         were incorrectly married up in the ETS records."


         [Emphasis added.]


    The judicial review applicants, Mr  Mohibullah  and  Mr  Saha  and  the
    Appellant in the related case, MA, claim to have undergone their  TOEIC
    testing at different test centres.  These were, respectively:


      a) Mr Mohibullah: Synergy Business College.


      b) Mr Saha: Elizabeth College.


      c) Mr MA: Cauldon College.

    All of these centres are located in the Greater London area.







40) The  experts,  jointly,  have  highlighted  the  following  matters  in
    particular:


      i) As regards every decision such as  those  under  challenge  in  the
         present cases, "...  everything  depends  on  the  quality  of  the
         information provided by ETS to the Home Office and the  ability  of
         the Home Office to match this with  the  data  from  other  sources
         which they hold".


     ii) According to the witness statement of the Home Office  employee  Mr
         Green, the "Lookup tool" is an Excel spreadsheet.   This  mechanism
         was:


             "..  wholly developed within the Home  Office  to  enable  the
             information provided by ETS of invalid and  questionable  test
             results to be checked and cross referenced against the details
             of those who have made applications for  leave  to  enter  and
             remain .....


             A search can  be  made  on  the  Lookup  Tool  using  the  ETS
             Certificate number, the person's passport reference number  or
             the unique number allocated to their record on the Home Office
             case work information and management system."


iii) With the exception of the ETS "audit"  of  Synergy  College,  which  is
    dated 16 January 2013, none of the ETS documents bears a date and  "...
    it is not entirely clear whether they accurately refer to circumstances
    as they existed in April 2012  and  March  2013  when  the  tests  were
    taken".


     iv) There is conflicting evidence about whether the spoken and  written
         responses of candidates  to  individual  questions  are  stored  on
         individual electronic files or otherwise.


      v) One of the ETS test centre administration  manuals  disclosed  post
         dates the periods when the TOEIC  Certificates  of  the  Applicants
         were generated.


     vi) There  is  clear  evidence  that  the  speaking  and  writing  test
         methodology was converted in late 2011/early 2012 from a web  based
         system to a mobile delivery  system.   (In  passing,  the  Tribunal
         records its surprise that there is no evidence of the  month,  much
         less the specific date or dates, when this rather important  change
         was implemented.)


    vii) The manuals contemplate that each candidate will be photographed by
         an iPhone and/or that there  will  be  photo  registration  by  the
         Centre Administrator's personal computer.  The information provided
         by ETS solicitors is  that  ETS  has  been  unable  to  locate  any
         photographic records, cannot  confirm  whether  the  aforementioned
         procedure was in operation in April 2012 and simply does  not  know
         the provenance of the photograph of  the  Appellant  MA  (the  only
         member of this group of  three  litigants  in  respect  of  whom  a
         photograph has been produced).


   viii) According to ETS, the system was that each candidate  was  required
         to register on a computer relevant personal  details,  including  a
         passport  number,  which  automatically  generated  a  computerised
         unique Registration Number.


     ix) The "CBT Manager application" was the  computer  software  used  to
         record  each  candidate's  spoken  and  written   responses.    The
         computerised files thereby created were  then  transmitted  to  the
         "Online Scoring Network" at ETS US Headquarters.


      x) There is a distinct lack of clarity  relating  to  the  process  as
         described by ETS in (ix) above.  The description  of  uploading  of
         the data following completion of the test  is  not  consistent:  in
         particular, the description provided in respect of the Applicant Mr
         Mohibullah has not been put forward in  either  of  the  other  two
         cases.


     xi) The integrity of the test taking procedures and systems established
         by ETS in its  manuals  depends  heavily  on  the  reliability  and
         probity  of  test  centre  staff.   Further,   the   ETS   security
         precautions concentrate on the illicit conduct  of  candidates  and
         not test centre employees.


    xii) With the sole exception of audio files, all of the  computer  files
         produced have been in the form of "print-out to PDF": the effect of
         this "...  has been not to preserve any original date - and -  time
         stamps or internal metadata either or  both  of  which  would  have
         assisted  analysis  using  digital  forensic  analysis  and  helped
         produce a chronology of events".


   xiii) The  test  centre  seating  plans  which  have  been  produced  are
         incomplete.


    xiv) A study of the spreadsheets attached to the witness  statements  of
         the Home Office employee, Mr Sewell reveals a  lack  of  any  nexus
         between the data supplied to him  by  ETS  and  the  unique  ID  of
         individual candidates.  As a result, the experts  say  "We  do  not
         know the processes by which the candidate's name is linked to  each
         test".


     xv)  The  experts  acknowledge  the  documentary  evidence  of  "simple
         impersonation", with particular reference to  the  unannounced  ETS
         audit at Synergy College on 16 January  2013.    They  express  the
         opinion  that  the  simple   impersonation   mechanism   would   be
         "vulnerable" in any speaking tests.


xvi) While there is also some evidence of "dictated  answers",  viz  answers
    to test questions being called out by a person in the examination room,
    this method would not be viable for the spoken English test.


xvii)  The  investigation  of  a  particular  test  centre   in   Birmingham
    established the use of the "remote control software" mechanism  by  the
    use of "Team Viewer" software whereby a person using  another  computer
    could secure access to the computer being used by the  candidate.   The
    possibility  of   other,   covert,   remote   control   mechanisms   is
    acknowledged.  There is  no  evidence  of  the  use  of  any  of  these
    mechanisms in the test centres which relate to these Applicants or  the
    Appellant MA.


xviii) The experts also advert to the possibility of  manipulation  of  file
    responses held on the local server, the CBT  Manager,  at  the  testing
    centre.  If file responses were  stored  on  this  server,  this  would
    create an opportunity for alteration by test centre staff.  Two of  the
    experts opined that this was unlikely.


xix) Yet another mechanism, entailing a simultaneous testing  session  using
    proxies in  a  "hidden  room"  at  the  test  centre  or  elsewhere  is
    acknowledged.


xx) According to the experts, "particular opportunities for mistakes appear
    to arise if the actual registration on  the  ETS  system  is  sometimes
    carried out by test centre staff and not by the candidates themselves",
    creating the risk of the data provided by the test centre to  ETS  mis-
    matching the  candidates  and  their  tests.   There  was  no  security
    precaution available to counter this risk, with  the  exception  of  an
    unannounced ETS audit.


xxi) As none of the computers  and  data  media  associated  with  the  test
    centres involved in these cases is available, there is  no  information
    relating to the important issues of audit, log and configuration  files
    and related time and date stamps.  This is one aspect  giving  rise  to
    the recurring lament of the experts:


                 "We have been  limited  by  the  quantity  and  quality  of
                 material actually available to us."


xxii)  The  "naming  conventions"  for  the  digital  files  of  the   voice
    recordings produced  do  not  provide  an  explicit  link  between  the
    candidate and the recording: rather, there is  only  reference  to  the
    particular test being taken.  Contrary to a suggestion  emanating  from
    ETS  via  their  solicitors,  the  file  name  does  not  include   the
    candidate's "unique registration code".  Thus:


                  "...  What this naming system does is to  provide  linkage
                  between a  registered  candidate  and  the  responses  and
                  recording but assumes that the unique registration code is
                  reliably linked to the real candidate. As we have  already
                  pointed out, in the two  spreadsheets  exhibited  by  Adam
                  Sewell  there  are  no  columns   uniquely   to   identify
                  candidates by reference to the ID they originally tendered
                  (eg the passport number)."


xxiii) "The experts have examined the supplied audio  files  and  find  that
    there is no embedded metadata which might assist their enquiries.  Time
    and date stamps appear to be of the most recent copying of the file and
    not of the point of origination".


xxiv) The experts' consideration of the report generated by  an  unannounced
    audit of Synergy College on 15  May  2012  highlights  that  while  the
    auditor expressed "mild concern", no specific remedies or sanctions vis-
    -vis the college were proposed.



41) In the MA appeal, two of the experts, Mr Stanbury and Professor Sommer,
    gave evidence to the Tribunal.  Their oral  evidence  was  confined  to
    certain discrete issues and themes.  The choreography of  the  judicial
    review cases and statutory appeal  resulted  in  no  objection  to  the
    evidence particular to one case being considered in all three cases.



42) Mr Stanbury, in his evidence,  highlighted  the  following  matters  in
    particular:


      a) The absence of any evidence that the security mechanism of password
         protection vis--vis candidate's test computers was in operation.


      b) The "hidden room" theory could involve  the  falsification  of  the
         completed tests of both genuine and fraudulent candidates.


      c) Whereas the speaking and writing TOEIC tests, which were undertaken
         at a single session, were fully  computerised,  the  listening  and
         reading tests, also undertaken at a single session, were manual.


      d) There is no evidence of any  audit  logs.   An  "audit  log"  is  a
         computerised record which would demonstrate the chain  of  storage,
         handling, processing and transmission of the data generated by  the
         speaking and writing tests (our formulation).


      e) Metadata, if they  existed,  would  be  located  inside  the  voice
         recording files: there are none.  As a result, these files  do  not
         contain  particulars  of  the  time,  date  and  location  of   the
         recordings therein stored.


      f) Finally, Mr Stanbury's expectation  was  that  there  would  be  in
         existence  certain   contemporaneous   manual   records,   relating
         particularly to  the  names  of  candidates  and  the  desk  number
         allocated to each: there are no such records.


      g) Profess Sommer, in his testimony to the Tribunal,  emphasised  that
         the evidence available to  the  experts  was  "pretty  incomplete".
         This frustrated the expert's  endeavours  to  reconstruct  the  ETS
         computer system.  The  experts  were  further  handicapped  by  the
         unavailability of the computer system and its environs for personal
         inspection and surveying.  The absence of any metadata in the voice
         recording, audio, files was emphasised.   As  a  result,  (agreeing
         with the panel's  formulation),  Professor  Sommer  explained  that
         there  are  no  available  landmarks  in  the   lifetime   of   the
         computerised files in question, with the result that a proper audit
         has not been possible   While the  evidence  includes  spreadsheets
         containing the names of these litigants, the questions which remain
         unanswered are how these spreadsheets were generated and  what  are
         the origins of the data they contain.  Professor Sommer  emphasised
         that there is nothing containing Mr  Mohibullah's  personalised  ID
         number, passport number or photograph.



43) Professor Sommer further testified that the evidence fails to  disclose
    whether the important act of  uploading  the  files  generated  by  the
    speaking and writing tests, from the test centres to the  ETS  servers,
    occurred automatically or involved some human intervention.  He  agreed
    that if human intervention was part of this process,  this  would  have
    created an opportunity for manipulation of the files,  particularly  if
    there was a time lag. The latter could occur through,  for  example,  a
    loss of internet connectivity,  whether  false  or  genuine.   Finally,
    Professor Sommer focused on  the  issue  of  photographing  TOEIC  test
    candidates.  His evidence was that he "never  got  to  the  bottom"  of
    this.  While this issue receives some consideration  in  the  ETS  test
    centre manuals and the witness statement of ETS employee, these sources
    are incomplete.  In response to a question from  the  panel,  Professor
    Sommer stated that the description of the Appellant MA in  evidence  of
    group photographs following completion of the test exercises,  bore  no
    resemblance to what is specified in the manuals.



44) At this juncture, we would observe that while the joint  memorandum  of
    the three expert witnesses and the oral testimony of two of them  have,
    inevitably, focused attention on certain discrete issues and themes, we
    have considered in their entirety the experts' reports and all  of  the
    documentary evidence bearing thereon.


IX  THE RESPONDENT'S DUTY OF CANDOUR

45) The circumstances in which this evidence materialised can be gauged  by
    reference to [6] - [7] above and Appendices 1 and 2 hereto.  An outline
    of the new evidence is contained in [6](f).


46)  No satisfactory explanation of the timing of the  production  of  this
    evidence has been provided.  This is a matter of  substantial  concern,
    for two main reasons.  The first is the manner in which this litigation
    has been conducted on behalf of the Secretary of State: see  especially
    [4] - [8] above. The second is that there appears to have been no  true
    appreciation on the part of the Secretary  of  State  of  the  duty  of
    candour and the solemn obligations which this entails.  In this context
    we refer to R (Khan) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2016] EWCA Civ 416 at [35] and following and R (Mahmood)  v  Secretary
    of the State for the Home Department [2014] UKUT 00439 at [15] ff.


47)  In our judgement it is impossible to overstate the importance  of  the
    duty of candour in judicial review proceedings.  The value and force of
    judicial  review  in  a  society  governed  constitutionally   by   the
    separation of powers and built on the  rock  of  the  rule  of  law  is
    founded on, inter alia, a relationship between the  executive  and  the
    courts akin to a partnership. The executive, for its  part,  guarantees
    that the court will be fully armed and equipped to adjudicate in  every
    case.  The court, for its part,  guarantees,  in  accordance  with  the
    judicial oath of office, independent and impartial adjudication.


48) The mutual trust and confidence upon which these guarantees  depend  is
    threatened and undermined by the events which have  occurred  in  these
    proceedings.  Every failure of this kind on the part of  the  executive
    is inimical to the rule of law.  The damage  which  is  caused  is  not
    confined to the individual case.  There can  be  a  significant  ripple
    effect.  Furthermore, there is another impact which  the  Tribunal  has
    witnessed at first hand in  these  proceedings.   Where  litigation  is
    conducted in this way by  the  executive,  the  ability  of  its  legal
    representatives to discharge their ethical and professional duties owed
    to other parties and the court or tribunal is  compromised.   This  too
    undermines the rule of  law  and  can  have  repercussions  beyond  the
    individual case. Government clients owe duties not only to the court or
    tribunal.   They  also   have   duties   to   their   appointed   legal
    representatives and all other parties to the proceedings.  All  of  the
    duties in play are encompassed within an overarching obligation of good
    faith rooted in respect for the rule of law.


49) The Tribunal, with its intimate  insight  into  the  conduct  of  these
    proceedings, entertains not the slightest doubt that all members of the
    Secretary of State's  legal  team  discharged  their  professional  and
    ethical   duties   conscientiously   throughout   these   unnecessarily
    protracted proceedings.  That they did so is highly creditable  to  all
    concerned, given the obvious  and  persistent  difficulties  they  were
    clearly  experiencing  vis--vis  their   client.    Their   continuing
    struggles and travails were unmistakable.


50) The resulting delays, obstructions, detours and  diversions  were  such
    that the Tribunal wondered more than once whether it was being  treated
    with contempt [in the non - technical sense].  Ultimately  it  was  not
    persuaded otherwise. The events in these proceedings noted  above  were
    inexcusable and must be deprecated in the strongest possible terms. The
    Upper Tribunal looks forward to receiving appropriate   assurance  that
    there will be no recurrence. Meanwhile, it  would  be  no  surprise  if
    litigants have no real   faith in how the Secretary of  State  conducts
    litigation of this kind.


51) The damage inflicted on the overriding objective was massive.  The  so-
    called "unholy trinity" of increased cost, excessive delay and multiple
    complexity, all pre-eminently avoidable, had a field day. Enough said.




X.    THE RESPONDENT'S NEW EVIDENCE


52) Given the circumstances detailed above, the  Tribunal  determined  that
    the new evidence of Mr Sewell warranted robust scrutiny. To this end  a
    further hearing was convened  and  the  attendance  of  Mr  Sewell  was
    ordered.  Regrettably, at this late stage, the  proceedings  no  longer
    had an adversarial dimension.  Those who had represented the Applicants
    throughout the greater part of the litigation were no longer instructed
    and neither of the Applicants attended.  In these circumstances, absent
    a legitimus contradictor, the Tribunal assumed the role of inquisitor.


53) It is necessary to elaborate briefly on the discrete context.  This  is
    conveniently  described  in  the  witness  statement  of  Ms   Hammond,
    solicitor, grounding the  Secretary  of  State's  application  for  the
    admission of further evidence:


         "On 12  August  2016...   an  order  [was]  made  by  the  Tribunal
         requiring the Secretary of State to explain the error in  the  core
         bundle, more specifically to explain why the wrong  entry  for  the
         'look up tool' was included within the bundle ....


         On 20 April 2016 GLD requested the 'spreadsheet  extract'  relating
         to [Mr] Saha for inclusion in the bundle ....


         The [senior case worker] returned a spreadsheet entry for the  test
         taken on 19 October 2011 in haste and on the basis that it was  the
         first entry to appear for Mr Saha ....


         As we now know, Mr Saha took two tests, both of which were  invalid
         and so there were two entries on the spreadsheet ....


         An administrative error clearly occurred for which I  apologise  on
         behalf of GLD and the Respondent."



    Continuing, Ms Hammond explains that certain items of the proposed  new
    evidence, namely Mr  Saha's  two  TOEIC  Certificates  of  October  and
    December 2011 and a witness statement of Mr Hilton, were  omitted  from
    the  core  bundle.   Pausing,  we  accept  that  these  omissions  were
    inadvertent and we recognise that a contributory factor was a  lack  of
    interaction between the Applicants' solicitors  and  the  GLD  at  that
    stage.  We further accept Ms Hammond's uncontested averment that  these
    three items, though omitted from the core bundle, had  been  served  on
    the Applicants' solicitors previously.

54) In her witness statement, Ms Hammond  further  explains  that  the  new
    evidence demonstrates conclusively certain key facts.  First,  that  Mr
    Saha  undertook  TOEIC  English  Language  proficiency  tests,  all  at
    Elizabeth College, as follows:


    (i)    speaking and writing, on 19 October 2011;


    (ii)   listening and reading, on 27 October 2011; and


    (iii)  speaking and writing (a second time) on 13 December 2011.


    Second, the ETS assessment of both of Mr Saha's  speaking  and  writing
    tests was "invalid".  We accept that this is indeed the effect  of  the
    new documentary evidence.



55) At this juncture we refer to the Tribunal's ruling dated 16 August 2016
    (Appendix 2).  By this ruling, which illuminates  further  the  context
    disclosed in Ms Hammond's witness statement, the Tribunal admitted  the
    further evidence.  The Tribunal's expectation was that  this  would  be
    followed by further representations from  the  representatives,  or  an
    agreed order, relating to the mechanics of completing the  proceedings.
    However, nothing materialised.  While we accept that this  was  largely
    due to the apparent rupture of the solicitor/client engagement  between
    the Applicants and their representatives, greater  proactivity  on  the
    part of the Secretary of State's representatives could reasonably  have
    been expected, not least because of the profile  of  these  proceedings
    and the special treatment they were receiving in this Chamber.


56) Of its own motion, the Tribunal sought to  reignite  and  complete  the
    proceedings by a further order and directions dated  21  November  2016
    (Appendix 3).  By this  mechanism  (but  not  otherwise)  the  Tribunal
    learned  from  the  solicitors  concerned  that  they  were  no  longer
    representing the Applicants.  Next, the Tribunal relisted the case  for
    further and final hearing  (on  19  December  2016)  and  directed  the
    attendance of Mr Sewell, author of the belated witness statement  (with
    attachments) noted in [6](f) above.


57) In his statement Mr Sewell describes himself as an Analyst  within  the
    Home  Office  Immigration  and   Intelligence   Directorate.    Through
    questioning we satisfied ourselves about  Mr  Sewell's  credentials  to
    give the evidence contained in his  statement.   We  accept  that  from
    February 2014 he has had the designation of Lead Analyst in relation to
    Secure English Language Testing ("SELT"), following which he  completed
    his training in Government intelligence analysis techniques.


58) Since February 2014, Mr Sewell and the members of  the  team  which  he
    leads have been engaged in analysing data provided to the  Home  Office
    by ETS.   His  witness  statement  contains  the  following  especially
    material passage:


         "Wider analysis of tests conducted by the  Elizabeth  College  Test
         Centre and the results of voice analysis conducted by [ETS] reveals
         that there was widespread abuse of testing by the Elizabeth College
         Test Centre. Multiple candidates that reportedly sat  speaking  and
         writing tests at the  same  time  in  the  same  classroom  as  the
         Applicant were deemed to have used  proxy  test  takers  by  [ETS].
         This shows that the Elizabeth College Test Centre was not operating
         genuine tests under genuine test conditions at the  time  that  the
         Applicant claims to have undertaken [his] tests.  Therefore none of
         the results from these test sessions could  be  considered  genuine
         even if the candidate had sat the test in person."


    Finally, Mr  Sewell  confirmed  that  there  are  12  voice  recordings
    attributed to the speaking tests allegedly undertaken by Mr Saha -  six
    for each test. As we have highlighted in [15] above, it is common  case
    that none of the voices contained in these computerised voice files  is
    his.




59) Having subjected Mr Sewell's evidence to careful scrutiny  we  find  no
    reason to reject any of its essential tenets.




XI.   OUR CONCLUSIONS

60) We remind ourselves that this  is  not  a  statutory  appeal.   It  is,
    rather, a challenge by judicial review which,  as  such,  engages  this
    Tribunal's supervisory jurisdiction.  One aspect of  this  jurisdiction
    is that the  impugned  decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State  can  be
    challenged  on  the  basis  of  the  Wednesbury  principle.   In   this
    particular litigation context,  there  being  no  contention  that  the
    impugned decision is vitiated by a failure to have regard to  something
    material or  the  intrusion  of  something  alien  or  immaterial,  the
    Wednesbury principle denotes the threshold of bare irrationality.   The
    question for us is  whether,  taking  account  all  the  evidence,  the
    impugned decision of the Secretary of State is unlawful  by  reason  of
    this vitiating fact.



61) The elevated hurdle which every irrationality challenge  must  overcome
    requires little elaboration.  The synonyms for irrationality  have,  in
    leading cases, included perversity  and  absurdity.   The  standard  of
    irrationality in  public  law  has  sometimes  been  expressed  in  the
    proposition that the only rational course for the decision maker was to
    make a decision favourable to the person concerned.  The Supreme  Court
    has recently affirmed this approach: see Keyu v Secretary of State  for
    Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs [2015] UKSC 69.


62) It is instructive to notionally stop the clock at the conclusion of the
    third day of hearing, 04 August 2016.  The submissions of Mr Iqbal (see
    (28) - (32) above) to the Tribunal were made  late  in  the  afternoon.
    His argument pursued the following route.   The  centrepiece  of  these
    Applicants' case took the form of a demonstrable discrepancy.   On  the
    one hand, both the TOEIC  certificates  and  the  GCID  ("General  Case
    Information Database") records document  that  Mr  Saha  underwent  his
    listening and reading tests on 27 October 2011 and  took  his  speaking
    and writing tests on 13 December 2011.  On the other  hand,  the  Excel
    spreadsheet, undated and unsigned (and first produced in evidence  that
    day) specifies only one date, namely 19 October  2011.   This  document
    consists of some 14 vertical columns and four  main  horizontal  lines.
    The first entry in each of these lines is the word "invalid".  In other
    columns Mr Saha's first name, surname and date of birth  are  correctly
    recorded.  So is the college where he claims to have taken  his  tests.
    The remaining entries consist of a series of numbers and acronyms,  all
    of which are  unexplained.   These  include  a  column  with  the  word
    "Update" and the date 19 August 2014, which is repeated in each of  the
    four horizontal lines.


63) The Excel sheet was first produced on behalf of the Secretary of  State
    on the final day of hearing.    Having regard  to  the  timing  of  its
    provision, its contents and those of  other  documents  with  which  it
    falls to be considered and compared, a series of  legitimate  questions
    arises. We have  begun  this  exercise  in  the  immediately  preceding
    paragraph.  We augment this analysis as follows.  The  Excel  sheet  is
    undated and unsigned.  Its origins and  contents  are  unexplained  and
    unelaborated.  Whilst  some  of  the  contents   are   susceptible   to
    interpretation, others,  absent  explanation  and  interpretation,  are
    meaningless.


64) We turn to consider the other important document in which the test date
    of 19 October 2011 appears, namely  the  Secretary  of  State's  second
    decision letter of 05 May 2016.  As noted above, this letter  documents
    the outcome of a review of the  impugned  decision  undertaken  on  the
    Secretary of State's initiative following the grant  of  permission  to
    apply for judicial review.  This letter contains the  following  inter-
    related passages:


         "....  On 31 October 2011, Elizabeth College wrote  to  state  that
         [Mr Saha] was registered for  an  ETS  English  Language  Programme
         there with an exam date  of  19  October  2011.   ETS  subsequently
         identified the speaking test result obtained from this  sitting  as
         being invalid due to the use of a proxy .....  On 12 June 2016  [Mr
         Saha] was refused leave to remain on the  basis  of  the  deception
         practiced  on  19  October  2011  to  obtain  an  English  Language
         Certificate and on the basis that he had not provided  a  CAS.  His
         wife was refused leave to remain as his dependant."


    The year 2016 is plainly erroneous, the principal decision letter being
    dated 12 June 2015.  This kind of  error  is  unimpressive.   We  shall
    comment infra on the quality of the two decision letters.



65)  Strikingly,  the  author  of  this  supplementary  decision  makes  no
    reference to four key pieces of documentary  evidence:  the  two  TOEIC
    Certificates, the Excel spreadsheet and the GCID notes.  The  inference
    that the author did not take any of this evidence into account seems to
    us strong and persuasive. We do not overlook the  supplementary  nature
    of this decision. However, precisely the same analysis applies  to  the
    principal  decision  of  12  June  2015,  under  challenge   in   these
    proceedings.  The latter, we note, does not contain any suggested  test
    date or dates.  Furthermore,  the  Elizabeth  College  letter  was  not
    attached to the supplementary decision.


66) We consider that the Secretary of State's two decision letters fall  to
    be assessed together.  They merge with each other.  No argument to  the
    contrary was formulated by  Mr  Kovats.  They  are  of  extremely  poor
    quality.  They obfuscate rather than illuminate.  They fail  to  attach
    basic, key documents which would have provided  necessary  explanations
    and clarification.  Ultimately they required the kind  of  interpretive
    exercise contained in Ms Hammond's witness statement.  They lacked  the
    standards of care, professionalism and attention demanded in a  context
    entailing draconian consequences for the person alleged to have engaged
    in deception. In this context we note the recent comments of the  Court
    of Appeal in Caroopen v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 1307, at [22] - [24].

67) The clock, however, did not stop at the conclusion of the third day  of
    hearing.  The case made on behalf of the Applicants at that  stage  had
    clear persuasive  value.  However,  the  evidential  landscape  altered
    dramatically with the advent of the Secretary of State's  new  evidence
    and the Tribunal's decision to admit this.

68) The route to the Tribunal's principal conclusion has been unnecessarily
    protracted and complex.  It is, however, easily made.  The  Applicant's
    succinct and  focused  challenge  to  the  impugned  decisions  of  the
    Secretary of State is confounded by the totality of the  evidence.   It
    falls manifestly short of establishing the only public law misdemeanour
    asserted, namely irrationality.  The  Secretary  of  State's  decisions
    have a demonstrably rational basis and readily withstand the species of
    challenge which the  Applicants  have  elected  to  mount.   While  the
    Tribunal had certain misgivings about the Secretary of State's evidence
    at the conclusion of the third day of hearing and while  we  take  into
    account   what was acknowledged on behalf of  the  Secretary  of  State
    before the Court of Appeal  in  Shehzad  and  Chowdhury  at  [30],  our
    concerns have been, ultimately,  addressed  via  the  further  evidence
    adduced.



69) Finally, it is appropriate to recall  that  the  Secretary  of  State's
    assessment that Mr Saha had practiced  deception  was,  as  [11]  above
    makes clear, only one of the three grounds  upon  which  his  leave  to
    remain application was refused.  There was no challenge  to  either  of
    the other two grounds.  It was acknowledged on behalf of the  Secretary
    of State from the outset that  this  was  not  an  academic  challenge,
    having regard to  the  consequences  flowing  from  the  fraud  refusal
    reason: see [10] above. If the  Applicant's  challenge  had  succeeded,
    declaratory relief would have been the appropriate remedy.




XII  ORDER

70)  For  the  reasons  given,  the  application  for  judicial  review  is
    dismissed.




XIII  COSTS

71) The power of the Upper Tribunal to award costs is  statutory,  deriving
    from Section 29 of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007  (the
    "2007 Act") and Rule 10(3A) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules 2008.  This power entails the exercise  of  judicial  discretion.
    The exercise of this discretion is less prescriptively  regulated  than
    in the High Court, where CPR 44.3 prescribes the general rule  that  an
    unsuccessful party will pay the costs of the successful party and  that
    consideration of the party's conduct, particularly compliance with  the
    pre-action protocol, will  be  a  material  factor.   These  regulatory
    provisions are illustrations of previously well established principles.
     The Upper Tribunal, in the exercise of its discretionary power,  gives
    effect to these principles and others.  The result is that the approach
    to costs in the High Court and in the Upper Tribunal  (judicial  review
    division) is in substance the same.

72) With the progressive pre-eminence of the  overriding  objective  during
    the past two decades there has been an increasingly acute focus on  how
    parties conduct proceedings.  This is reflected in decisions such as  R
    (Soylemez) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2003]  EWHC
    1056 (Admin) and R (Kemp) v Denbighshire Local Health Board [2006] EWHC
    181 (Admin).  Decisions of this  kind,  inter  alia,  give  effect  not
    merely to the overriding objective but also the specific  duty  imposed
    on parties to help the court  or  tribunal  to  further  to  overriding
    objective and to cooperate with the court or  tribunal  generally:  see
    Rule 2(4) of the 2008 Rules and CPR 44, Rule 1.3.

73) In applying this general approach to the present case we refer to,  but
    do not repeat, the sad tale to which  a  substantial  segment  of  this
    judgment is directed: see [45] - [51] above.  We refer also to  [62]  -
    [67].  At the conclusion of the hearing of these three conjoined cases,
    the Tribunal set a very strict timetable for the delivery of judgments.
     As a result, at the stage when a formal application for the  reception
    of  fresh  post-hearing   evidence   and   the   adjudication   thereof
    materialised the Tribunal's draft  judgment  was  at  a  very  advanced
    stage.  The draft judgment reflected our statement in [67]  above  that
    the case made on behalf of the Applicants "had clear persuasive value".



74) It is no exaggeration to state that the Secretary of State's  belatedly
    produced evidence altered the landscape  dramatically,  decisively  so.
    At the stage when the  Tribunal  made  its  ruling  to  admit  the  new
    evidence, viewed broadly the bulk  of  both  parties'  costs  had  been
    incurred, while the further costs incurred thereafter were a relatively
    small fraction of the whole.  While there are clear grounds for  making
    a wasted costs order against the Secretary of State, we prefer, in  the
    exercise of our discretion, to adopt a  rather  simpler  formula.   The
    Secretary of State shall pay all  of  the  Applicants'  costs  incurred
    during the period up to and including  16  August  2016.   The  further
    costs incurred by the parties subsequently were directly  referable  to
    the Secretary of State's unacceptable  conduct  of  these  proceedings.
    These further costs shall fall where they lie, sometimes  expressed  in
    the somewhat misleading formula that there shall  be  no  order  as  to
    these costs inter-partes.




XIV  PERMISSION TO APPEAL



75) While there is no application for permission to appeal to the Court  of
    Appeal, it is nonetheless incumbent on the Tribunal  to  consider  this
    matter at this stage (i.e. hand down of judgment), by  virtue  of  Rule
    44(4A) of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008.   We
    consider that the grant of permission to  appeal  is  inappropriate  as
    this is a highly fact  specific  case  involving  no  new,  complex  or
    controversial legal principles.







       Signed:


                       The Honourable Mr Justice McCloskey
                 President of the Upper Tribunal
                 Immigration and Asylum Chamber




        Dated:    26 December 2016



                                                          APPENDIX 1


                            FURTHER ORDER AND DIRECTIONS, 07/08/16

 1) At the conclusion of the three day  hearing  on  04  August  2016,  the
    Tribunal directed that Counsel's response to the oral submissions of Mr
    Iqbal on behalf of the Applicants be provided in writing by 17.00 hours
    on 05 August 2016.


 2) The response of the Secretary of State's legal representatives  is  not
    authorised  by  the  aforementioned  direction  or  any  previous  case
    management direction  or  order  of  the  Tribunal.  The  Tribunal  has
    received counsel's submission (authorised), together with a substantial
    quantity of new evidence (all unauthorised).  Remarkably, this  is  not
    accompanied  by  any  explanatory  witness  statement,  any  letter  of
    explanation or, most fundamentally  of  all,  any  application  to  the
    Tribunal to vary previous case  management  directions  and  to  permit
    reception of new evidence.


 3) The new evidence is, therefore, not properly before the Tribunal.


 4) If the Secretary of State wishes to pursue an  appropriate  application
    to the Tribunal, whether to vary previous directions and/or  to  extend
    time and/or for admission of the further evidence, any such application
    will be made by 16.00 hours on 10 August 2016.


 5) Any application of the kind mooted in [4] above will, inter alia (a) be
    supported by a witness statement  setting  out  in  full  all  relevant
    explanatory and exculpatory facts  and  considerations,  (b)  attach  a
    draft order which will, inter alia,  make  provision  for  the  further
    conduct of these proceedings, (c) indicate why all further costs  which
    may be incurred in consequence of these unexpected developments  should
    not be borne by the Secretary of State in any event and (d) show  cause
    why a wasted costs order should not be made against  the  Secretary  of
    State.


 6) In light of the above, the Tribunal's timetable for the circulation  of
    an embargoed draft judgment and handing down  the  same  in  the  three
    inter - related cases is no longer viable.  A new timetable will follow
    at the appropriate stage.


 7) Liberty to apply.


 8) Costs reserved.




                       Signed:
                                        The Honourable Mr Justice McCloskey
                                  President of the Upper Tribunal
                                  Immigration and Asylum Chamber

      Date:  07 August 2016


                                 APPENDIX 2


                       ORDER AND DIRECTIONS, 16/08/16


                            IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                 EXTEMPORE JUDGMENT GIVEN FOLLOWING HEARING

                                                               JR/10845/2015

                                                                Field House,
                                                            Breams Buildings
                                                                      London
                                                                    EC4A 1WR


                                                              16 August 2016


                                  The QUEEN
                           (ON The application OF)
                                Debashis Saha
                                                                   Applicant


                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                                   Before

               The Honourable Mr Justice McCloskey, President


                               - - - - - - - -

Mr M Iqbal, Counsel, instructed by JS Solicitors appeared on behalf of the
Applicant.

Mr S Kovats QC, instructed by the Government Legal Department appeared on
behalf of the Respondent.


                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -
                    ON AN APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW

                                  JUDGMENT
                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    THE HONOURABLE MR  JUSTICE  McCLOSKEY:  This  is  a  rather  unorthodox
    application.  It is unorthodox because it has  been  brought  following
    the conclusion of three conjoined cases which were heard on 01, 02  and
    04 August 2016.  Reference to the direction which the  Tribunal  issued
    on  07  August  2016  provides  the  context  for  this  unconventional
    application.

By this application the Secretary of  State  seeks  the  permission  of  the
    Tribunal to adduce further documentary  evidence.   The  documents  are
    identified in the application notice.

There are well established principles which govern the determination  of  an
    application of this kind.  Inexhaustively and in summary, they are  the
    following.  The court must take into account  inter  alia  whether  the
    evidence could by reasonable diligence have  been  provided  timeously.
    Next, the court must examine the explanations given for the  timing  of
    the production of the new evidence.  Thirdly, the  various  ingredients
    of the overriding objective must be balanced.  Fourthly,  prejudice  to
    the judicial review applicant, Mr Saha, must  be  taken  into  account.
    The court must also  weight  the  mechanisms  available  to  limit  the
    prejudice to him.  Some assessment, albeit not profound or complete, of
    the probative value of the new evidence is also  required.   These  are
    the main ingredients in the mix in adjudicating upon this application.

I accept the submission of Mr Kovats  that  the  Applicant's  case  did  not
    crystallise fully and clearly  until  Mr  Iqbal  made  his  submissions
    towards the end of the third day of the three day hearing.  The  timing
    of this was self-evidently important.

I further accept the  submission  that  the  Applicant's  case  has  evolved
    notably.  Initially there was a focus on the evidence of Dr Harrison in
    SM and Qadir which pointed up the real risk of a false positive  result
    of the ETS review of suspect TOEIC  scores.   But  this  faded  as  the
    proceedings evolved.

It became apparent to the Tribunal during the pre-hearing  review  exercises
    that Mr Saha's case was evolving.  Ultimately a  'Position  Statement',
    which itself was belated, made this quite clear.  While  the  Secretary
    of State's detailed grounds of defence were  unquestionably  very  late
    indeed, they could not properly have been compiled until receipt of the
    latter.  Even then there is a detectable disharmony between this  final
    pleading and the very focussed case which, ultimately was presented  on
    behalf of the Applicant.

In  its  ultimate  incarnation  (viz  via  Mr   Iqbal's   submissions)   the
    Applicant's case had one central focus, namely the discrepancies  which
    were clearly identifiable in the evidence  adduced  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State.  The Excel sheet unambiguously made the  case  that
    Mr Saha's leave to remain application, which was the  impetus  for  the
    action taken against him,  was  refused  on  the  ground  that  he  had
    practised deception by the use of a proxy in undertaking  his  language
    test on 19 October 2011.  This  date  was  of  not  less  than  crucial
    importance for a whole host of obvious reasons.  The Secretary of State
    now seeks to advance a different date for this  critical  event.   This
    application seeks to explain a serious discrepancy and to illuminate in
    particular a fundamental error which is said to have occurred.

These are public  law  proceedings.   There  is  no  lis  inter-partes.   It
    follows that the general principles which I have articulated  will  not
    be applied to this application with the full rigour which  would  arise
    in conventional private law civil litigation.  I must  also  take  into
    account the pace at which these proceedings have  been  driven  by  the
    Tribunal, in the interests of expedition and finality.

Weighing all the foregoing, I have concluded that the new evidence  will  be
    admitted.  I accede to  the  Secretary  of  State's  application.   The
    consequences of this are not capable of  being  forecast.   Appropriate
    directions will follow which will have the effect  of  restoring  order
    and discipline to the proceedings.  There has been  a  recent  lack  of
    order and discipline which will not be tolerated henceforth.

I return to what  was  said  by  the  Tribunal  at  the  conclusion  of  the
    conjoined hearings.  I made clear  that  judgments  in  embargoed  form
    would be produced by 12  August  and  that  today's  listing  would  be
    designed for hand-down purposes.  Mr Kovats'  response  to  Mr  Iqbal's
    submission arrived (timeously) on 05 August.  It was  followed  by  the
    application notice which is dated 12 August.

Judgment writing has been undertaken  energetically,  in  all  three  cases,
    since the conclusion of the hearing.  Regrettably, on  account  of  the
    interplay of the three conjoined cases, a decision  was  made  that  we
    would not hand down any judgment today.  But for  the  intervention  of
    this application judgment would have been  handed  down  today  in  the
    cases of Mr Saha and MA.

I make clear that we have not quite got to the conclusion  of  the  judgment
    in the case of Mr Mohibullah.  That would have  had  to  be  delayed  a
    little come what may.  Furthermore, the  holiday  arrangements  of  his
    representatives and those of the judges contribute to the  deferral  of
    this judgment until early September 2016.

For obvious reasons judgment will not be delivered in the case  of  Mr  Saha
    and further developments will have to be awaited.  This will  bring  me
    in a moment to the case of Mr MA and after I  have  heard  from  Mr  De
    Mello and Ms Rothwell a further order will issue in that case.

    ORDER

        i)  New evidence application of the Respondent allowed.

       ii) Judgment deferred.

      iii) Costs submissions by 31 August 2016.

       iv) Liberty to apply.











                       Signed:
                                        The Honourable Mr Justice McCloskey
                                  President of the Upper Tribunal
                                  Immigration and Asylum Chamber


                       Dated:           16 August 2016








                                 APPENDIX 3


                         FURTHER DIRECTIONS 21/11/16






    Further to The Tribunal's Order & Directions of 07/08/16 [reproduced
    below] and its ruling & directions of 20/08/16 [attached] the parties
    shall file an agreed draft order/directions for the completion of these
    proceedings or, alternatively, their competing proposed draft orders by
    02 December 2016 at latest.







                       Signed:
                                        The Honourable Mr Justice McCloskey
                                        President of the Upper Tribunal
                                  Immigration and Asylum Chamber


                             Dated:          21 November 2016



-----------------------
[1] Now reported at [2016] UKUT 00561 (IAC). Permission to appeal to the
Court of Appeal refused.
[2] Now reported at [2016] UKUT 00450 (IAC).  Permission to appeal to the
Court of Appeal was refused subsequently.

