
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

               MM (Darfuris) Sudan CG [2015] UKUT 00010 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard at Field House                          |Decision and Reasons         |
|On 7 October 2014                             |Promulgated on               |
|                                              |5 January 2015               |


                                   Before

                          THE HON. MR JUSTICE KING
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY

                                   Between

                                     MM
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr C Jacobs of Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co

For the Respondent: Ms A Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer

In the country guidance case of AA (Non-Arab Darfuris-relocation)  Sudan  CG
[2009] UKAIT 00056, where it is stated that if a claimant from  Sudan  is  a
non-Arab Darfuri he must  succeed  in  an  international  protection  claim,
"Darfuri" is to be understood as an ethnic term relating to origins, not  as
a geographical term. Accordingly it covers even Darfuris who were  not  born
in Darfur.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a national of Sudan born in 1973.   On  16  June  2014
    the Court of Appeal allowed his appeal  against  a  decision  of  Upper
    Tribunal Judge King dated 5 March 2013 which upheld  the  determination
    within the Fast-Track procedure of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Gordon
    dated 1 February 2013 dismissing his appeal.

2.   Our task is to re-make the  decision  in  respect  of  the  appellant's
    original appeal against the decision of the respondent dated 13 January
    2013 to remove  him  having  refused  to  grant  him  asylum.   In  the
    Statement of Reasons settled for the Court  of  Appeal  the  respondent
    accepts that the findings of fact made by FtT Judge Gordon were  unsafe
    "insofar as such findings were determined in a vacuum whereby  risk  of
    persecution was  determined  on  the  country  guidance  and  objective
    evidence".  At the time of  the  hearing  before  the  FtT  judge,  the
    appellant's representatives had  sought  but  not  obtained  an  expert
    report from Mr Peter Verney.

3.   The Statement of Reasons also stipulates that  the  previous  decisions
    of FtT Judge Gordon and UTJ King should be  set  aside  "save  for  the
    finding that the appellant is a member of  the  Berti  tribe  and  from
    Sudan".

4.   One of the grounds of appeal to the Court of  Appeal  was  that  Judges
    Gordon and King had erred in failing to apply the country guidance case
    of AA (Non-Arab Darfuris - relocation)  Sudan  CG  [2009]  UKAIT  00056
    which held at paragraph 5 that if a claimant is a non-Arab Darfuri,  he
    must succeed.  In the event, however, they  agreed  the  aforementioned
    Statement which records that the Secretary of State "accepts  that  the
    appellant's situation is not covered by the  current  country  guidance
    case, AA".  Since the appellant was arguing that AA did cover his case,
    "accepts" was probably a drafting  error,  but  it  remains  that  this
    Statement must be the starting point for our consideration.

5.   The appellant's grounds of appeal as  presented  to  us  had  two  main
    bases:  the first, (1), reiterated the argument that the appellant  was
    entitled to succeed on the basis of the guidance in AA,  which  it  was
    emphasised had endorsed the Home Office Operational Guidance Note.  The
    second basis, (2), was that the appellant was entitled  to  succeed  on
    the basis of his membership of the Justice and Equality Movement (JEM).




6.   We explained to the parties at the outset that we would  hear  evidence
    and submissions on (1) and only proceed to consider  (2)  if  we  found
    against the appellant on (1).

7.   In considering  whether  the  appellant  has  a  well-founded  fear  of
    persecution on the basis of (1), we must now take into account not only
    the evidence that was before  the  two  previous  Tribunals,  but  that
    submitted since.  The most important additions are the reports prepared
    by Mr Peter Verney which are dated 26 July 2013, 30 April  2014  and  a
    consolidated report (undated).  We also heard evidence from Mr  Verney.
    In view of what we go on to say, it is  unnecessary  to  summarise  his
    evidence save to note that he stated that:-

    (i)  The Sudanese authorities would treat the appellant as  a  non-Arab
         Darfuri.  What would matter to them was that he was a member  of  a
         non-Arab tribe  who  originate  from  Darfur.   It  would  make  no
         difference to them that his father had moved away from  Darfur  and
         that he himself had neither been born nor ever lived in Darfur.


    (ii) Since the Tribunal case of AA there had been no improvement in the
         attitude of the  Sudanese  authorities  to  non-Arab  Darfuris  and
         indeed for members of the Berti tribe things were now worse,  as  a
         significant number of members  of  that  tribe  were  educated  and
         educated Darfuris were  now  being  increasingly  targeted  by  the
         security forces on suspicion that they  were  assisting  the  rebel
         forces.


    (iii)    (This like (iv) below) were matters which arose from his  oral
         evidence).  Even though  there  was  evidence  that  a  significant
         number of educated Berti lived in Khartoum  and  were  able  to  go
         about  their  business  without  significant  problems,  they  were
         increasingly at risk of becoming a target for adverse treatment.


    (iv) On return the authorities would view the appellant not just  as  a
         non-Arab Darfuri/Berti, but as someone who had lived in the UK  and
         had claimed asylum there.  They would know from his  passport  that
         his exit visa had expired. This would add to the risk he would face
         on return.


8.   Ms Holmes cross-examined Mr Verney but did not  seek  to  suggest  that
    his  expert  opinion  was  based  on  inadequate  sources   or   flawed
    methodology.  Essentially she asked  the  Tribunal  to  attach  greater
    weight to the background evidence.

Our assessment

9.   It is common ground between the parties  that  the  Berti  are  one  of
    Sudan's non-Arab tribes (the others being the Fur,  Zaghawa,  Masaliet,
    Dinka, Meidob, Birgid Bidiat,  Gola,  Kbka,  Gimir,  Morant,  Mima  and
    Falata).  It is also  common  ground  that  the  Berti  originate  from
    Darfur.

10.  We do not know the reason  why  the  respondent  in  the  Statement  of
    Reasons stated that she did not consider the  appellant's  case  to  be
    covered by the country guidance  case  of  AA.   That  case  based  its
    guidance directly on the respondent's own position, as set out  in  the
    UKBA Operational Guidance Note (OGN) on Sudan of  2  November  2009  at
    3.8.19 that:

         "Conclusion.  All non-Arab Darfuris, regardless of their  political
         or other affiliations, are at real risk of  persecution  in  Darfur
         and internal relocation elsewhere in Sudan is not currently  to  be
         relied upon.   Claimants  who  establish  that  they  are  non-Arab
         Darfuris and who do not fall  within  the  exclusion  clauses  will
         therefore qualify for asylum."

11.  What may explain the respondent's position in the Statement of  Reasons
    (that AA did not cover the appellant's case) is that neither AA nor the
    abovementioned OGN on which the Tribunal relied specified what was  the
    personal scope  of  the  term  "Darfuri"  and  whether  it  was  to  be
    understood as a geographical term or as  an  ethnic  term  relating  to
    origins.

12.  However, in the light of the further evidence we have  received  it  is
    plain that  the  Sudanese  authorities  classify  persons  as  non-Arab
    Darfuris on the basis of ethnic origin and not  geographical  location.
    We note that Ms Holmes was unable to  point  to  any  evidence  casting
    doubt on this point.

13.  In such circumstances the appellant  is  entitled  to  succeed  in  his
    asylum appeal unless it can be shown that since AA there is now  cogent
    new evidence casting a different light on the situation  of  the  Berti
    and/or non-Arab Darfuris.  On the contrary, we find:-

    (a)  that the respondent has maintained word for word the  position  as
         set out in her 2009 OGN.  In the  latest  version  (V.17.0  updated
         August 1012), the same wording is now contained at  3.9.12  and  at
         3.10.1 it is  stated  that  applicants  can  base  their  claim  on
         membership of the Mussaleit, Zaghawa,  Fur  "or  the  other  ethnic
         groups from the Darfur States".


    (b)  The expert evidence from Mr  Verney  considers  that  the  current
         situation in terms of risk  for  non-Arab  Darfuri  (including  the
         Berti) has worsened.  As already noted, Ms Holmes did not  seek  to
         impugn his evidence nor was she able to identify any other evidence
         pointing in a different direction.


    (c)  Neither the country guidance case  of  AA  nor  the  current  Home
         Office OGN qualifies its identification of those who  are  at  real
         risk of persecution by reference to whether an element of the  risk
         they face derives from the fact of being a returnee  from  the  UK,
         but if that factor is taken into consideration, it seems to us that
         Mr Verney is right to consider that it is one  which  increases  to
         some degree the level of risk for such claimants.  It is true  that
         according to Mr Verney the Sudanese authorities  operate  a  highly
         sophisticated surveillance of Sudanese nationals in the UK  and  so
         might be expected to know through their intelligence who are  those
         actively associated with the rebel movement and those who are  not.
         However, there is insufficient evidence to show  that  the  actions
         and decisions taken by the authorities in Khartoum or elsewhere  in
         Sudan, either at the airport  or  thereafter,  are  based  on  such
         intelligence.


General conclusion

14. In light of the above, our general conclusion is as follows:

    In the country guidance case of AA (Non-Arab Darfuris-relocation) Sudan
    CG [2009] UKAIT 00056, where it is stated that if a claimant from Sudan
    is a non-Arab Darfuri he must succeed in  an  international  protection
    claim, "Darfuri" is to be understood as  an  ethnic  term  relating  to
    origins, not  as  a  geographical  term.  Accordingly  it  covers  even
    Darfuris who were not born in Darfur.

Conclusion on the appellant's case

15. For the above reasons we are satisfied that  even  though  not  born  in
Darfur  the  appellant  has  established  that  he  faces  a  real  risk  of
persecution on return as a non-Arab who will  be  perceived  as  a  non-Arab
Darfuri.  It is self-evident that the fear or persecution  he  faces  is  on
account of the Refugee Convention ground of race.

16. In such circumstances it is unnecessary for us to  consider  the  second
limb of the grounds of appeal.

17.  For the above reasons:-

     The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge has been  set  aside  for
    legal error.

     The decision we re-make is to allow the appellant's appeal.






Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Storey


