
RQ (Afghan National Army - Hizb-i-Islami - risk) Afghanistan CG [2008]
UKAIT 00013


Asylum and Immigration Tribunal


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Field House
On 5 June 2007



                                   Before

                      Senior Immigration Judge Gleeson
                         Immigration Judge EB Grant
                                 Mr P Bompas



                                   Between

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:           Mr P Jorro of Counsel
                       Instructed by Wilson & Co

For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller
                       Home Office Presenting Officer



        1) There is a risk to serving soldiers from the Taliban and Hizb-i-
           Islami, principally during troop movements and home  visits.   A
           soldier  cannot  be  expected  to  desert  in  order  to  access
           protection and in fact such protection would be  unavailable  to
           him as a deserter.

        2) There is always a risk to soldiers  of  a  country's  army  from
           rebel factions and the forces against which they  are  fighting.
           That is a risk which is assumed by those serving  their  country
           in its armed forces, and while on active service  and  with  his
           unit, a soldier of the Afghan National Army has  sufficiency  of
           protection.  Any risk which arises during home leave  and  troop
           movements  is  reasonable  to  the   Horvath   standard;   total
           protection cannot be expected and any military  service  entails
           an element of physical risk.

        3) After the end of military service, former Afghan  National  Army
           soldiers are not at  risk  engaging    international  protection
           solely for that reason, absent individual factors particular  to
           their individual circumstances and characteristics which may put
           them at increased risk.

        4) Where there are individual risk factors it is a question of fact
           whether the interest  in  a  former  soldier  is  likely  to  be
           confined to his  home  area  or  be  more  widely  pursued.   In
           particular, elements  of  'double  cross'  in  relation  to  the
           Taliban or Hizb-i-Islami, if true, may be sufficient to  elevate
           the pursuit of the appellant and the risk to him to such a level
           that  international protection is engaged.

        5) Where the risk to a particular appellant is confined to his home
           area, internal relocation to Kabul is in general available.   It
           would not be  unduly  harsh  to  expect  an  appellant  with  no
           individual risk factors outside his home area to live  in  Kabul
           and assist in the rebuilding of his country.

        6) If an appellant establishes a wider risk, extending  beyond  the
           home area, internal relocation is not necessarily available  and
           sufficiency  of  protection  will  depend  on   his   individual
           circumstances and characteristics.  In particular
            (a) internal relocation outside Kabul is  unlikely  to  provide
           sufficiency of protection as  the  areas  outside  Kabul  remain
           under the control of  local  warlords,  and  the  population  is
           suspicious of strangers; and
           (b) the safety of internal relocation to Kabul is a question  of
           fact based on the particular history of an individual  appellant
           and of the warlord or faction known to be seeking to harm him.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. This is the appeal  of  an  Afghan  national  against  the  Secretary  of
   State's refusal to recognise him  as  a  refugee  or  grant  humanitarian
   protection under paragraph 339C of  the  Immigration  Rules  HC  395  (as
   amended)).  The appellant's claim is  based  on  military  service.   The
   appeal  was  listed  initially  under  the  fast   track   procedure   at
   Harmondsworth but was removed from fast track to enable the appellant  to
   produce certain documents. On the suggestion of Immigration  Judge  Grant
   and with the consent of both representatives, the appeal was then  listed
   as a possible country  guidance  determination  on  the  risk  to  former
   members of the Afghan National Army from the Taliban and Hizb-i-Islami.

2. The appellant is currently 18 years old (date of birth  1  January  1989)
   and he claims to have served three years in the  Afghan  military  before
   leaving Afghanistan in or about November 2006, walking  for  three  hours
   into Iran, and then with the help of an agent and nine  or  ten  lorries,
   coming by a circuitous route to the United Kingdom.  The final lorry  was
   heat-scanned at Dover on arrival and the appellant,  along  with  several
   others, was discovered and arrested there.  He  claimed  asylum  once  he
   arrived at the police station and said he had no relatives in the  United
   Kingdom.

The refusal letter

3. After setting out the account, and making  incomprehensible  findings  at
   paragraph 12 (not now relied upon) the letter of refusal  considered  the
   appellant's claim at its highest. The Secretary of State considered  that
   -

     1) The appellant's claim to know himself to be wanted by Hizb-i-Islami
        and the Taliban was mere speculation;
     2) His army service was no longer  a  risk  factor  now  that  he  was
        discharged; the opposition groups had  what  they  wanted  in  that
        respect.
     3) His threats came only from family members of the appellant and were
        localised.
     4) State protection alternatively protection from actors of protection
        (the International Security Assistance  Force)  was  available  and
        would be adequate.
     5) There was an internal relocation option to areas outside  the  East
        and southeast of Afghanistan.
     6) Humanitarian protection as defined by the  Qualification  Directive
        Regulations 2006 was not available as the claim  was  not  believed
        and the appellant personally had never been threatened.

The appellant's claim
4. The core of this claim is that the appellant says he comes from a Hizb-i-
   Islami family and knew the whereabouts of two weapons depots used by Hizb-
   i-Islami and the Taliban, in his local area.   He served  in  the  Afghan
   National Army for the full three years required, having  lied  about  his
   age to join up; he was 15 but they said he  looked  18  and  he  did  not
   disagree.  There was a great need for recruits at the time.

5. His father's cousins, who were members of the Taliban and  Hizb-i-Islami,
   threatened harm to him and members of his family if he did not leave  the
   army, but the appellant was not put off.  After two  years,  he  returned
   home for five days to  marry .  He then returned to his posting (in Kunar
   at the time), only to be telephoned by his uncle who said that his father
   had been taken.   His  father  had  not  been  seen  since.   It  is  the
   appellant's case that he was so angry that he showed the army  where  the
   weapons depots were, and the weapons were  removed;  now,  he  fears  the
   wrath of Hizb-i-Islami and the Taliban should he return to Afghanistan.

6. The Secretary of State considered that the problems were local  and  that
   the appellant could either relocate or seek  state  protection  from  the
   Afghan police force,  army,  or  the  International  Security  Assistance
   (ISAF) in Kabul.  Both the  asylum  and  humanitarian  protection  claims
   failed on that basis.

The history of the appeal
7. The appellant appealed.  He relied on the Refugee  Convention,  paragraph
   339C and Articles 2 and  3  ECHR.   He  contended  that  the  appellant's
   account was credible and that, despite reporting the threats to his  army
   superiors during the appellant's service, they were unable to do anything
   and given the end of the appellant's service, would be even less inclined
   to do so now.  The power of the Taliban and Hizb-i-Islami in  Afghanistan
   was rising; outside Kabul, individuals were at the  mercy  of  the  local
   warlords.

8. The appeal had two  abortive  hearings  at  Harmondsworth  before  coming
   before the present Tribunal.  There were interpreter difficulties on  the
   second occasion; the appellant needs an Afghan Pushtu interpreter but was
   provided with a Pakistani one whom he could not properly understand.   By
   the 2 March 2007 the appellant had  obtained  documents  to  confirm  the
   appellant's military service.  After  further  directions  hearings,  the
   appeal was finally effective on 5 June 2007.

The hearing
9. The appellant prepared a  chronology  and  two  witness  statements,  one
   dated 29 January 2007 and one 25 May 2007.  He also gave oral evidence at
   the hearing through an  interpreter  who  spoke  Afghan  Pushtu.  Due  to
   difficulties caused  by  the  Tribunal  not  having  booked  the  correct
   interpreter, there was a delay in reaching the appellant's evidence while
   one was found. The Tribunal also had the benefit of expert evidence  from
   Mr Peter Marsden, MBE, a country expert who had assisted the Tribunal  in
   a number of its leading cases  on  the  situation  in  Afghanistan  (most
   recently in SO and SO (KhaD, members and family)  Afghanistan  CG  [2006]
   UKAIT 00003)  and from Mr Abdulmalik Bahaar  of  the  Afghan  Academy  in
   London.

10. For the Secretary  of  State,  having  seen  the  documents,  Mr  Deller
   accepted that the appellant had indeed carried out military  service  for
   the Afghan National Army as claimed; including that  he  had  managed  to
   join the army aged only 15 and completed the appellant's military service
   at 18 years old.  That  element  of  the  letter  of  refusal,  and  also
   paragraph 12 (which deals with the question of threats by the Taliban  or
   Hizb-i-Islami) were not relied upon.

The chronology
11. The appellant comes from Tehzin in Kabul province.  He had two  sisters,
   one older and one younger, and three  brothers,  all  younger.   He  left
   school after just a few  years,  age  only  13.   He  joined  the  Afghan
   National Army (ANA) in July 2003.  He had three months  training  at  the
   Army College in Kabul,  including  basic  English.   He  then  had  three
   months' combat training and was posted in early 2004 to Ghazni  province,
   where he spent a year in the run-up to the  Presidential  elections.   It
   was at this time that the appellant's father started to  receive  threats
   from Hizb-i-Islami and the Taliban intended to persuade him to leave  the
   army.  He did not do so.

12. In October 2004 President Karzai was elected.   From  December  2004  to
   January 2005,  the  appellant  completed  an  Engineer  Refresher  Course
   conducted by the US Army Engineer Mobile Training Site  at  Camp  Dawson.
   He was then posted to Kunar,  Laghman,  Jalalabad,  Khogiani,  Nooristan,
   Zabul and Jabal Saraj.  On 31 May 2005 the  appellant  received  his  ANA
   Drivers' Licence and from 4 July 2005 he spent three  weeks  helping  the
   ISAF construct the Afghan National Army compound.

13. In late 2005, the appellant returned to  Tehzin  where  he  married  his
   wife Fozia.  He did not go to the family home; he considered that unsafe.
    He only had five days' leave, and then it was back  to  the  army.   The
   threats continued after the appellant's marriage.

14. In early 2006, the appellant's father was kidnapped  in  the  middle  of
   the night by the Taliban.  Other villagers saw it happen.  The  appellant
   reported the kidnapping to his Army Commander, who sent a troop of  about
   20 soldiers, American and Afghan, to the village  to  investigate.   They
   spoke to the village chief who confirmed that the Taliban had  taken  the
   appellant's father but gave no more information than that.

15. Incensed, the appellant revealed to the Afghan and United States  troops
   the location of two weapons depots in the Tehzin area.  The weapons  were
   confiscated and the threats continued.  The appellant's family moved, and
   went into hiding.  On 25 July 2006 the appellant  received  his  official
   ANA discharge certificate but was  retained  on  operational  duty  until
   November 2006.

16. Once released from the army, the appellant left  Afghanistan  via  Iran,
   Turkey and various unknown countries, arriving in the United  Kingdom  in
   early 2007.

Evidence at the hearing

Expert witnesses

(1)   Mr Peter Marsden

17. By reason of the delay in obtaining an interpreter, we heard the  expert
   evidence first.  The first witness heard was Mr Marsden, an  acknowledged
   country  expert.   In  the  appellant's  written  evidence,  Mr   Marsden
   explained  that  he  had  worked  full-time  for  the  British   Agencies
   Afghanistan Group (BAAG) from 1989.  Initially, he worked as the  Group's
   Information Coordinator, and from June 2005 he became the BAAG's  Special
   Advisor.  The r�le of the Group was to provide a secretariat  to  support
   the British aid effort in  Afghanistan.   He  also  produces  the  BAAG's
   monthly review, of which he is the sole author.

18. Mr Marsden receives  information  on  a  daily  basis  from  Afghanistan
   through the internet, email, and  direct  communication  with  the  field
   offices of 25 humanitarian and development agencies which are part of the
   BAAG.  The Monthly Review goes to all of those, and also  to  Governments
   across Europe and the European Commission. Although he had often  visited
   Afghanistan over that period, Mr Marsden's last visit was in 1994 due  to
   the deteriorating security situation in Afghanistan.  Mr Marsden's report
   sets out at paragraph 4 his duty to the Court and the way  in  which  the
   report had been prepared.

19. Much of the report is very general and not targeted  at  the  particular
   facts of the present appeal.  The relevant parts begin at paragraph 39 on
   page 10 of the report.   In  a  detailed  commentary  on  the  letter  of
   refusal, Mr Marsden made the following relevant points -

        i) the current  practice of the Taliban is to attack convoys of the
           Afghan National Army on the move, rather than bases;   the  risk
           therefore is to soldiers on patrol;

       ii) The Taliban have a support base throughout the South, increasing
           the risk to returning soldiers on home leave;

      iii) That the appellant's previous known connection with  the  Afghan
           National Army, which works with  the  United  States  army,  did
           indeed put him at risk both from the Taliban and  Hizb-i-Islami.
           The level of risk might be lowered by  the  appellant's  leaving
           the army, but remained serious because of his disclosure of  the
           location of the arms depots;

       iv) The Taliban and Hizb-i-Islami would have an interest  in  taking
           punitive action because the appellant's disclosure of  the  arms
           depots, which were  large,  would  have  significantly  weakened
           their military capacity and correspondingly strengthened that of
           the Afghan National Army and the US Army.  Punishment  would  be
           ruthless:  hanging or decapitation were likely;

        v) A US State and Defence Department Report by the  Office  of  the
           Inspector  General,  'Inter-Agency  Assessment  of   Afghanistan
           Police Training and Readiness  Programme'  (no  date  is  given)
           indicated that the Inspector General considered that the  Afghan
           police were incapable of conducting law  enforcement  operations
           and  were  more  'a  security  force  than  a  law   enforcement
           organization'. The same report made it  clear  that  the  Afghan
           authorities could not  provide  sufficiency  of  protection  for
           individuals and that the ISAF was  neither  mandated  nor  in  a
           position  to  provide  individual  protection,  nor  to  prevent
           terrorist attacks in Kabul city; and that

       vi) The appellant could neither return  in  safety  to  his  uncle's
           house, nor relocate safely elsewhere in Afghanistan.  The  women
           of the family and the appellant's younger brother would be safer
           than he, partly because of the Taliban's code  of  honour  (they
           would apparently regard attacking a woman as dishonourable)  and
           partly because the appellant was no longer  in  Afghanistan  and
           that was known.

20.  The  general  background  evidence  set  out  in  Mr  Marsden's  report
   supported the appellant's core account.

21. Mr Marsden gave oral  evidence.   He  reminded  the  Tribunal  that  the
   Foreign  and  Commonwealth  Office's  current  advice  is  that   British
   nationals should not go to Afghanistan unless essential.   He  could  not
   return at present; he would have to travel round the  city,  which  would
   put him much more at risk than the average expatriate visitor.   Further,
   information sources were actually better on the  internet  and  by  email
   than on the ground, due to the collapse of the Afghan infrastructure;  Mr
   Marsden's 2004 visit had been  ineffective  as  an  information-gathering
   exercise compared with the information he received by other means, before
   and after the appellant's journey.

22. Mr Marsden said he knew of, and respected the Afghan Academy, which  was
   independent with no particular political affiliation  within  the  Afghan
   spectrum.  He had seen the appellant's documents and considered  it  very
   likely that they were genuine (Mr Deller had conceded that they were). Mr
   Marsden confirmed that the photographs of the appellant alongside US Army
   soldiers were typical of service  with  the  US  Army  and  international
   forces.  He was aware that the US Army had helped to train the appellant.



23. In cross-examination, Mr Marsden was asked to comment on the risk to  an
   Afghan National Army ex-soldier with no other risk factor.  He said  that
   memories were long and even  where  service  was  complete,  someone  who
   'betrayed the cause' by joining  the  occupying  forces  would  still  be
   viewed in a negative light.  Those associated with the West  were  deemed
   to have abandoned Islam; the passage of time would not help.  Mr  Marsden
   accepted that the incidents set out in his  report  (but  not,  for  that
   reason, in the present determination), all related to  serving  soldiers.
   Merely because that was not documented did not mean there  was  no  risk.
   Neither the UN Department of Safety and Security (UNDSS) nor  the  Afghan
   NGOs with whom he worked recorded incidents  of  harm  to  ex-servicemen,
   which were not considered newsworthy.

24. Mr Marsden was nevertheless certain of the risk to the appellant,  based
   on a judgment that in a situation where there was no  effective  law  and
   order, and against a background of a consistent pattern of reprisals over
   a  long  period  against  people  who  had  taken  particular   political
   positions, it was likely that the  Taliban  and  other  insurgents  would
   resort  to  violence  against  ex-servicemen.  Mr  Marsden  reminded  the
   Tribunal of his  Afghan  sources  and  added  that  he  attended  regular
   meetings with the  Foreign  and  Commonwealth  Office,  the  Ministry  of
   Defence, and the Department for International Development in  which  each
   of those bodies described the situation in their areas of operation.   He
   also read widely on the web, Western and  Islamic  websites  (Afghan  and
   Pakistani) with different perspectives, and press reports  in  both  West
   and East.  Mr Marsden had endeavoured to present a balanced view and  not
   to give information which did not fit with his subjective  and  objective
   knowledge of the region.

25. All these meetings and  written  sources  had  reinforced  Mr  Marsden's
   understanding that a pattern existed which would lead to former  soldiers
   being targeted.  If it occurred in Afghanistan, the press there would not
   report it.  He accepted that he had received no direct  information  from
   any of these sources to indicate that there had  been  acts  of  violence
   against former soldiers.

26. It was suggested to  Mr  Marsden  that  the  principal  concern  of  the
   Taliban and Hizb-i-Islami was to coerce soldiers into leaving the  Afghan
   National Army, rather than to punish them for their past  membership;  he
   insisted that it was both.  The strategy  was  to  undermine  the  Afghan
   National Army recruitment and encourage desertion,  but  also  to  punish
   soldiers for joining the 'other side'.

27. In relation to the specific account in this appeal, Mr Marsden told  the
   Tribunal that the appellant's home area of Sorobi was of huge  historical
   significance. Sorobi was a town between Kabul and  Jalalabad,  which  was
   the Hezb-i-Islami's stronghold from 1987-1995.  Sorobi was an area  where
   power and history counted; it was a narrow pass through which access  was
   gained  to  Kabul,  formerly  controlled  by  Commander  Zardad  of   the
   Mujahideen, who was from the Hekmatyar faction of Hizb-i-Islami.

28. Until December 1996, Zardad ran a checkpoint there,  robbing,  abducting
   and killing travellers.  He was subsequently tried in the United  Kingdom
   and convicted of conspiracy to torture.   He  was  in  prison  here:   Mr
   Marsden was unable to judge whether there remained a risk  from  Zardad's
   followers as opposed to Hizb-i-Islami as a whole.

29.  Mr  Marsden  explained  that  the  Hizb-i-Islami  were  part   of   the
   intellectual Mujahideen movement, of which the radical element sought  to
   create an Islamic state.  Hizb-i-Islami was vocal and was prepared to  be
   violent towards opponents.  The Taliban, on the other hand,  were  mainly
   people from rural areas and were opposed  to  the  intellectuals  of  the
   Mujahideen, who had reduced Kabul to rubble with their  quarrels.   There
   was no link between the parties in the years of the  Taliban  Government,
   and since the Karzai Government had come into power, the  Mujahideen  had
   opted to participate, except for  Hekmatyar,  who  remained  outside  and
   opposed to the occupying forces.

30. Both the Taliban  and  the  Hekmatyar  Hizb-i-Islami  still  engaged  in
   violence and attacked military convoys.  Both were  putting  pressure  on
   the Government and the authorities were unable to provide  protection  in
   places like Sorobi.  The Taliban seemed to  be  gaining  the  ascendancy,
   despite the Afghan authorities'  efforts  to  make  Afghanistan  safe  by
   countering  the  insurgency.   They  were  still  trying  to   create   a
   functioning police force and to remove judicial corruption.

31. There was a climate of impunity  and  the  situation  in  Kabul  was  no
   better; the police there had links with Jamiat-e-Islami.   Basically,  if
   someone wanted to get you then the protection in Afghanistan would not be
   enough; outside your home area you would be at risk  because  of  intense
   suspicion of foreigners and a  powerful  rumour  mill.   There  would  be
   questions as to the incomer's origin and discussions as to  whether  they
   were a threat.  Any Pashtun  coming  into  Kabul  would  be  viewed  with
   suspicion and could establish themselves only in particular regions.   If
   a young man turned up alone, that would be  suicide;  it  would  be  very
   difficult to escape detection and Kabul was not  very  far  at  all  from
   Sorobi, where the appellant's story was known.  Much of the  capital  was
   still bomb damaged, rents were high  and  the  only  available  work  was
   construction.

32. Young men who could not find  work  would  typically  be  vulnerable  to
   recruitment by  the  Taliban.   The  broad  mass  of  the  population  in
   Afghanistan was living on the margins: in Kabul, there were four  million
   now where before the war the city had  supported  only  a  quarter  of  a
   million people;  in Pakistan there were 2.3  million  registered  afghans
   (and another 200,000 unregistered) and there were a further  two  million
   in Iran.  Those in Iran and Pakistan were there  for  the  minimum  wage,
   which was still more than they could earn in Afghanistan. Employment  was
   available only through personal contacts, which the appellant  could  not
   risk.  He would have to  keep  the  appellant's  head  down  as  much  as
   possible.

33. In answer to questions from the Tribunal, Mr Marsden stated that it  was
   his opinion that all former members of the Afghan National Army  were  at
   risk, if the Taliban or Hizb-i-Islami could locate  them.  The  risk  was
   accentuated in areas where  the  Taliban  were  physically  present.  The
   appellant could not go to the Mazar-i-Sharif area; although there  was  a
   Pashtun community there, they were viewed as alien  colonisers  by  their
   neighbours and Hizb-i-Islami also had a presence  there.   The  appellant
   would still come to attention.

34. In re-examination, Mr Marsden drew a distinction  between  the  position
   of a former Afghan National Army soldier who, if discovered, he  insisted
   would be treated badly, and a person in this  appellant's  position.   He
   accepted that there must be many Afghan National Army soldiers  who  were
   not attacked.  The present appellant, however, would be personally sought
   out, as he had caused Hizb-i-Islami  and  the  Taliban  serious  harm  by
   disclosing the arms depot; punishing  him  was  strategically  important,
   because the transfer of those weapons to the US Army and Afghan  National
   Army, would have had a significant strategic effect.  The  appellant  had
   relatives in the Taliban and Hizb-i-Islami who would be keen to seek  him
   out.

(2)   Mr Abdulmalik Bahaar of the Afghan Academy
35. We next heard from Mr Abdulmalik Bahaar, a board member  of  the  Afghan
   Academy.  Mr Bahaar's written report, dated 23 May 2007,  indicated  that
   many of his sources prefer to  remain  unidentified.   The  report  deals
   largely with the issue of the appellant's service in the Afghan  National
   Army, which was  not  now  in  dispute.   He  explains  at  point  5  the
   difficulties in claiming asylum in  Turkey  or  Iran  (countries  through
   which the appellant passed) as  neither  gives  asylum  or  human  rights
   recognition to Afghans.

36. The most useful part of Mr Bahaar's report was at point 6.  He had  been
   able to verify that Hejrat, whom the appellant said was his  cousin,  was
   indeed  a  Director  with  the  Taliban's  intelligence  service,  having
   previously  worked  with  Ittehad-e-Islami.   The  verification  includes
   information that three other brothers were  involved  with  Hizb-i-Islami
   (the Mawalwi Khalis subgroup) and that the family originates from  Tehzin
   and was part of the large Babkerkehl branch of the Ahmadzai family.   The
   information was not good enough to prove the cousinage but it did confirm
   that there were Hizb-i-Islami and  Taliban  members  of  the  appellant's
   wider family in the correct geographical area with the history he had set
   out.  That was strongly corroborative of the appellant's account.

37. In oral evidence, Mr Bahaar  explained that the Afghan Academy had  been
   established over ten years ago and registered as a volunteer organisation
   in the United Kingdom, tasked with  helping  the  Afghan  community  with
   interpretation and  translation  in  its  dealings  with  Government  and
   private  bodies,  including  solicitors,  courts,  hospitals  and  Social
   Services.   It  had  later  developed   as   a   non-political   cultural
   organisation to try to play a positive r�le within the deeply  fragmented
   Afghan community.

38. The organisation publishes a monthly magazine,  'Millat'  (The  Nation),
   formerly called  'Warandar'  (Fellow  Countryman).   It  holds  meetings,
   conferences, social events and celebrations of  all  important  festivals
   with the aim of contact with all divisions and fractions  of  the  Afghan
   political situation, the Afghan  embassy,  scholars,  intellectuals,  and
   professionals such as doctors, media services and journalists.

39. In his evidence-in-chief, Mr Bahaar clarified that Hejrat, the  possible
   cousin, was in Taliban intelligence in Kabul.  He had  been  involved  in
   Jihad, had trained at the War University, and then changed his allegiance
   from Ittehad-e-Islami (of which he was an active member) to the  Taliban.
   As a Director of Intelligence he was high-ranking  and  influential.   He
   explained that it was not unusual for a degree of exaggeration by Afghans
   when describing their own position  or  that  of  others;  Hejrat  was  a
   Director but he was not, as the appellant had claimed,  either  chief  of
   Intelligence or chief of the Security Services.

40. Tehzin, the appellant's home area, was in the  Sorobi  district  to  the
   East of Kabul, and was dominated by the Ahmadzai tribe.  They, like  most
   Pashtun, had an extremely low literacy level.   The area was only  50  km
   to  the  East  of  Kabul,  between  Nangahar  and  Logar.   His  task  of
   establishing the facts for the Tribunal was to sift, among the very  many
   events of the last three decades, and the  claims  and  counterclaims  by
   rival factions (habitually and customarily exaggerated) the  facts  which
   could be authenticated.   His  report  contained  those  which  could  be
   authenticated  to   that   standard,   using   Government   publications,
   independent newspapers, NGO reports, UN reports,  and  publications  from
   opposition groups, as well as their own contacts.  The Afghan Academy had
   very strong links with the Afghan community in all walks of life,  inside
   and outside the United Kingdom.

41. Tehzin had been at the centre of intense activity during the  resistance
   against Russian occupation and thereafter until 1992.   The  presence  of
   the Mujahideen had  contributed  to  that  intensity  and  the  arms  and
   ammunition stores would have been used if it had been necessary to attack
   and take Kabul by force.  The  majority  of  those  in  the  Tehzin  area
   belonged to Hizb-i-Islami, which was dominant in that area.  The presence
   of such depots was therefore to be expected, and local people would  know
   where they were.

42. There was another piece of information which  was  not  in  Mr  Bahaar's
   report because he had  not  been  able  to  verify  it  to  the  exacting
   standards set out above;  he had made contact with  the  brother  of  the
   Hizb-i-Islami  commander  from  Chakari,  who  now  lived  in   Peshawar,
   Pakistan.  He confirmed that an arms and ammunition depot had been seized
   in that area in 2005 and another two in 2006, though he was unsure of the
   month or date.  The area where it had happened was to the East  of  Kabul
   in the mountains surrounding Tehzin  and  Sorobi,  where  the  Mujahideen
   activity had been intense.

43. In re-examination, Mr Bahaar said that  many  of  his  personal  sources
   were very reluctant to be named.  The Afghan Academy had no  interest  in
   partisan reporting: it  prided  itself  on  its  impartiality.  For  that
   reason,  his report was prepared objectively and  contained  no  personal
   comments as he was interested only  in  assisting  the  Tribunal  in  the
   interest of justice.  He had met Mr Marsden for the first  time  at  this
   appellant's hearing, having been introduced by Counsel for the appellant.
    None of  the  information  in  the  report  was  base  on  Mr  Marsden's
   information and he did not have a  copy  of  Mr  Marsden's  report.   The
   Tribunal was very impressed by the obvious knowledge and  objectivity  of
   this witness and despite the lack of sourcing of his report we have given
   it considerable weight.

Appellant's evidence
44. We next heard from the appellant.  He confirmed his name and address
   and adopted his evidence to date, including his screening interview,
   Statement of Evidence Form and asylum interview and two statements made
   in January and May 2007 (subject to two minor corrections in the May
   statement).  The appellant was recorded as having arrived in the United
   Kingdom on 8 January 2007.

A.    Screening interview: 11 January 2007
45.  In  the  appellant's  screening  interview,  he  had  some  interpreter
   difficulty  (the  interpreter  was  available  over  the  telephone   not
   physically present).  The appellant listed  his  family  members,  giving
   details of his mother and father (father deceased  approximately  1  June
   2005 at the hands of the Taliban) and of four siblings, a sister aged 19,
   another age 17 and three brothers ages 16, 15,  and  13,  all  living  in
   Sorobi in the Tehzin area of Afghanistan.  The appellant  confirmed  that
   he was married and that his wife was also still in Sorobi; on  his  entry
   they had been married for just over a year and she  was  still  about  15
   years old.  The appellant gave details of  his  journey.   He  had  never
   owned a passport.  His national identity card was still  in  Afghanistan.
   The appellant gave details of his schooling which ended in 2004 when  the
   appellant was 15.  The appellant then worked with the Afghan  army  until
   just two and a half months before coming to the United Kingdom.

B.    Statement of Evidence Form and asylum interview: 24 January 2007
46. In the Statement of Evidence Form the appellant  gave  more  detail.  He
   had come alone and the agent had only arranged the lorries: about  36  or
   37 people were travelling.   The appellant gave details of  his  journey:
   there was no  dispute  about  them.   He  did  not  have  his  relatives'
   telephone numbers.  Some people from his village had been in  the  United
   Kingdom for a long time but he had no blood relatives here.

47. The appellant had left Afghanistan because he was in danger from Hizb-i-
   Islami and the Taliban, because he had served in  the  Karzai  Government
   army and they wanted him to leave it.  The appellant's life had  been  at
   risk right from the beginning of his service.  The people threatening him
   were the appellant's father's and grandfather's cousins  who  worked  for
   the Taliban  and  Hizb-i-Islami.   Nevertheless,  he  had  completed  his
   military service and received his completion  certificate.   The  Taliban
   (that was, the family members) asked the appellant's father  to  ask  the
   appellant to  leave  the  army  but  he  refused.   Two  years  into  the
   appellant's service he married, but after 5 days' leave he returned again
   to his duties and his father was taken by the Taliban in that time.

48. The appellant was sent to serve in  Kunar  province;  while  there,  the
   appellant's uncle telephoned him to say that his father  had  been  taken
   and  to  stay  away  and  finish  his  army  service.   After  that,  the
   appellant's uncle would arrange for the appellant to go  somewhere  safe.
   The appellant's father had no active  part  in  politics  in  Afghanistan
   after the jihad against Russian troops  in  Afghanistan.   The  appellant
   said he had served in Ghazni, during the Karzai election  campaign,  then
   in Laghman, Jalalabad,  Khogiani,  Nooristan,  Zabul,  Jabal  and  Saraj.
   Apart from his wedding, he had not returned home during his service. News
   of the threats from his father's cousins came via the  appellant's  uncle
   who would telephone him with them.  He was told that if  he  renewed  his
   service contract with the army, family  members  would  be  killed.   The
   appellant was a non-commissioned officer and worked as an  engineer  with
   30 men under the appellant's command.  His work involved going to some of
   the front line areas and  establishing  checkpoints  with  the  Americans
   around the base camp.

49. At question 64 of the asylum interview, the appellant  said  that  while
   he was with the army he showed the Government  two  of  the  arms  depots
   which belonged to the Taliban and the Taliban were angry with him.  Hizb-
   i-Islami and the Taliban considered that he deserved to  die  because  of
   serving in the army of the non-believers and also because he  showed  the
   arms depots to the Government.  The appellant's father  had  known  about
   the arms depots for a long time when working  with  Hizb-i-Islami  during
   the days of the Jihad; they belonged to Commander Zardad who was  now  in
   detention in the United Kingdom.  Someone had  tipped  off  Hizb-i-Islami
   that it was the appellant who revealed  their  location.   The  appellant
   told his military commander,  who  sent  20  men  (Afghan   and  American
   soldiers) to accompany the appellant to the village to find  out  exactly
   what had happened.  The unit went to the village  chief  and  interviewed
   him; they were told that the appellant's father had been taken  at  night
   and that the chief was powerless.  That  was  about  12  days  after  the
   appellant's  father's  disappearance.   He  was  not  permitted  by   his
   Commander to see his family while in the  village;  he  returned  to  his
   work.

50. The appellant's father had  been  taken  by  the  Taliban  in  May  2004
   (though in his witness  statements  the  appellant  says  that  date  was
   erroneous and linked to the interpreter difficulties).  The appellant had
   finished his army training, and then decided to leave the country as  his
   mother told him his life was in danger. While  the  appellant  was  still
   undertaking his military service, his uncle  had  sold  a  piece  of  the
   appellant's  land,  which,  together  with  money   from   his   military
   colleagues, was enough to fund the journey via Iran  and  Turkey  to  the
   United Kingdom. The appellant had used an agent to organise his  journey,
   paying $14500 for the passage.

51. The appellant said if he had spent another week or two in  the  village,
   he would have been killed and if he returned he  was  sure  he  would  be
   slaughtered by the Taliban.  He had spoken to  his  Commander  about  the
   problem: he was referred to the joint Commander  and  met  him  twice  to
   discuss the issue.  No protection was available as 'this  was  a  problem
   faced by almost all the army  personnel'.   He  was  satisfied  with  the
   interview and repeated that he could not return, as he would put himself,
   the appellant's mother and his siblings  at  risk.   There  were  further
   documents which he might be able to obtain.

52. Wilson & Co, acting for the appellant, challenged the allocation of  the
   appeal to the Fast Track system, an  application  which  succeeded.   Two
   further witness statements must be considered as evidence-in-chief.

C.    First witness statement:  29 January 2007
53.   The appellant  confirmed  that  he  was  not  very  literate  and  had
   corresponding difficulty with dates although he could remember what order
   things happened in and roughly how long ago;  the  appellant  had  a  few
   years of schooling but had not completed his secondary education  because
   the  Government  stopped  paying  for  the  schoolteachers,  who  stopped
   attending the school to teach them.  He gave the  background  details  he
   had given previously, adding that although the village chief was  elected
   by the local Jirga, many locals remembered that he used to be with Hizb-i-
   Islami and considered that he had a secret  allegiance  to  the  Taliban.
   There were no other authorities in the village  and  the  nearest  police
   station was over two hours away.  He was the eldest boy  and  responsible
   for the family and his siblings, in the appellant's father's absence.

54. The appellant confirmed the details of  his  service  and  that  he  had
   joined up underage. He had three months' military training  at  the  Army
   College in Kabul, including a short course in basic English to facilitate
   communication with international troops.  Then he went  to  Pule  Charkae
   for two to three months' combat  training,  following  by  a  station  in
   Ghazni.  The appellant's account of his military service  was  identical.
   The appellant says that his unit came under attack from  the  Taliban  on
   many occasions and many colleagues were killed, especially by  mines.  It
   was worst in Kunar and Ghazni.      He confirmed that after  the  initial
   investigatory visit to the village, the Afghan National  Army  Commanders
   dropped the investigation into the appellant's father's disappearance.

55. The appellant's uncle had arranged for safe housing of  the  appellant's
   wife, mother and sisters.  He thought his wife might be at her  brother's
   house but was unsure.  The appellant's uncle said that if  the  appellant
   returned to the village he would be killed  'almost  instantly'  and  now
   that he was out of the army he was vulnerable and  unprotected.   He  had
   his army documents in Afghanistan and would try to get them.  A friend of
   his uncle's was in London and had contacted the uncle; the documents were
   on the way but, in the meantime,  bad  news  had  been  received  of  the
   appellant's brothers, who had gone missing when leaving school  and  were
   believed to have been forcibly recruited by the Taliban.   The  statement
   also deals with the journey and with the letter of refusal.

D.    Second witness statement:  25 May 2007
56. The second witness statement was described  as  supplementary,  made  to
   correct some errors in the first.  A correction to the  appellant's  army
   rank was minor.  He did not know what had happened to his brothers;  they
   were simply missing, and they could even be dead  at  the  hands  of  the
   Taliban.  There was very little news of the appellant's family.   He  had
   not brought his army documents with him on the journey because the  agent
   would not permit that, so he left them with his uncle, some directly  and
   some via a friend who took them to  Jalalabad  for  him.   The  appellant
   explained that he had adopted a personal name of  Qalamyar  but  that  he
   retained his given name on his army documents.  He had lied to  get  into
   the army; they accepted him because they  were  desperate  for  recruits.
   The appellant had been retained in the army for an extra two and  a  half
   months for landmine duties, along with many others.   He  reaffirmed  his
   fear on return.

E.    Oral evidence
57. The appellant adopted his evidence to date and  was  then  tendered  for
   cross-examination.  Yet  again,  there  were   some   difficulties   with
   interpretation, as a result of which the appellant  often  seemed  to  be
   answering the previous question and not  the  most  immediate  one.   The
   Tribunal was satisfied that we did obtain the appellant's evidence and we
   have put little weight on the repetition which was sometimes necessary to
   obtain it.

58. The appellant said that he first  received  threats  to  his  father  in
   relation to his Afghan  National  Army  service  about  two  years  after
   joining up.  He had been receiving what he described as  smaller  threats
   earlier, but then he received  a  letter  from  the  Taliban  threatening
   anyone who joined up.  It was at about the same time that he went home to
   obtain married, but ten days before his marriage, his father was forcibly
   taken by the Taliban (the appellant then corrected this to ten days after
   his marriage).

59. The Taliban had threatened him before the marriage, saying that if  they
   caught him, 'we will not leave it like  that  we  will  kill  you'.   The
   appellant went home secretly.  His uncle called him and told him that the
   threats were from his father's cousin.   The marriage was a small affair,
   with only the appellant's family and his in-laws' family present:  on the
   appellant's side, that was his father, his mother, his three sisters  and
   his three younger brothers. It was kept to the  minimum  so  that  nobody
   would know, and the appellant was only home for three days, spending  his
   nights somewhere else and only going to the family home in  the  daytime.
   He stayed with a friend at night;  he  was  not  afraid  in  the  daytime
   because he went home quietly and the Taliban were known to come  only  at
   night, on a predictable fortnightly schedule.

60. When the appellant had news of his father's abduction, he  reported  the
   matter to his commander, who sent about 20 soldiers to the  village,  and
   the appellant claims that it was then that he revealed  the  location  of
   the weapons depot. The commander told the Americans about  this  and  the
   search party for the appellant's father and the arms was a  mixed  Afghan
   National Army-US Army group, with two American vehicles. They  wanted  to
   learn as much as they could from the village, including how and when  the
   Taliban came, how his father had been kidnapped, and the  whereabouts  of
   the weapons depot.  The appellant was not permitted to visit  his  family
   while there.

61. The appellant's father had told him where the weapons  depot  was  about
   six months earlier in a telephone call. The appellant had  given  up  the
   information about eighteen days after his father was taken, being  posted
   three hours from Kabul in Ghazni.  They were very busy  with  the  Karzai
   election at the time, and the appellant 'just could not obtain any  time'
   to go and report the location earlier.  His father  did  not  report  the
   location himself because he was afraid of their village people.

62. The  army  questioned  the  village  chief,  Malik,  and  the  appellant
   believes that it was he who told the village that the  information  about
   the depot came from the appellant. Also, the appellant was seen with  the
   20-man party clearing the weapons out of the depot.  The threats from the
   Taliban continued and eventually they became aware that he  was  the  one
   who had given the information.  Now, the threats  said  that  they  would
   never give up and when he was found he would be slaughtered.

63. In relation to  the  extra  three  and  a  half  months,  the  appellant
   confirmed that he had been told there would be a short extension  to  his
   service; the reason was that they were needed to pick up ammunition  from
   another depot near Jabra-ul-Saraj where he was then serving, a  place  to
   the North of Kabul.  The appellant's unit had  been  trained  in  dealing
   with mined areas by the French and  Jabra-ul-Saraj  was  mined.   It  was
   likely to take some time, which was why their service was extended.

64. In answer to questions from the Tribunal, the  appellant  said  that  he
   had lost touch with his father and his brothers, and also had not been in
   contact with his wife.  There was no telephone facility where  she  lived
   in Tehzin.  They had been married for only three days and  did  not  know
   each other at all, so there was no contact of any sort; he had not  tried
   to get a message through.  He did not have her telephone number  and  she
   did not have his.  The appellant had managed  to  send  through  messages
   back to other members of his family by word of  mouth,  but  not  to  his
   wife.    Six days before our hearing, his paternal uncle in Jalalabad had
   telephoned the appellant, who asked about his brothers  and  sisters  and
   his family in general.  The uncle said that the  appellant's  mother  had
   gone to her brothers and his wife had returned to  her  own  brothers  in
   Tehzin.  There was no way one could telephone  there  as  Tehzin  had  no
   telephone facility or mobile relay station.  His  uncle  could  not  send
   through a message through to the wife as the uncle was in  Jalalabad  and
   the wife in Tehzin.

65. The appellant could not go  and  live  with  his  brother-in-laws.   The
   Taliban would not leave him alone, as they knew  he  had  served  in  the
   Afghan National Army and  disclosed  the  whereabouts  of  their  weapons
   depot.   They would not spare  his  life.  The  whole  village  knew  the
   appellant, indeed the whole country:  he had  served  in  Kabul,  Ghazni,
   Kurar, Laghman, Jalalabad, Nooristan and Khugjani.  He was known  in  all
   those places.

66. In re-examination, the appellant commented on his  May  2007  statement:
   Sorobi was a district and Tehzin was within  it.   The  town  of  Sorobi,
   where the school and the bazaar were, was two hours from  Tehzin,  though
   the distance was difficult for him to work out.  The country was hilly.

67. The appellant clarified that the depot he was clearing up in  his  extra
   service was in Jabra-ul-Saraj and nothing to do  with  the  ones  he  had
   disclosed in Tehzin.

68. The smaller threats began  five  or  six  months  into  the  appellant's
   service.

69. At the end of the appellant's evidence, Mr Jorro raised the  interpreter
   question.  The points of concern had been  dealt  with  as  the  evidence
   proceeded and the Tribunal indicated as we have already stated that  this
   would be taken into account when we came to assess credibility.

Submissions

Secretary of State's submissions

70. For the Secretary of State, Mr Deller helpfully indicated  that  it  was
   not by oversight that he had asked no questions about the cousin who  was
   in Taliban intelligence in Kabul.  That evidence stands unchallenged.  Mr
   Deller also confirmed that paragraph 12 of the letter of refusal  was  no
   longer relied upon and that the credibility of the  appellant's  military
   service was accepted, but that credibility was otherwise still in  issue.
   The letter of refusal took the appellant's claim  at  its  highest.   The
   objective evidence supported the account of the extra three  and  a  half
   months service, and he accepted that this was  reasonably  likely  to  be
   true.

71. Mr Deller relied on all the information  now  before  the  Tribunal  and
   asked the Tribunal not to  make  the  'schoolboy  error'  of  reaching  a
   credibility finding out of context.   The  Tribunal  should  have  proper
   regard to everything it had heard.  The appellant's account was vague and
   lacked clarity, suggesting that key elements of it might be  exaggerated.
   The appellant had left Afghanistan  very  shortly  after  completing  his
   military service and, despite the alleged telephone call from his  father
   some six months earlier, had delayed revealing  the  whereabouts  of  the
   weapons depots until very near his military service discharge  which,  Mr
   Deller suggested, simply did not ring true.

72. The appellant's evidence as to the reason for the visit of  20  soldiers
   to Tehzin had varied across his accounts; sometimes it was just  for  the
   weapons depots, but in the account before the Tribunal it  was  a  multi-
   purpose visit to seek information from the village chief and also try  to
   locate the appellant's kidnapped father.  That changed the focus  of  the
   story significantly, putting the concern about the abduction in  context.
   There had been threats against the appellant's family which, he  claimed,
   had been exacerbated on the basis  of  his  believed  disclosure  of  the
   weapons depot; Mr Deller suggested that the weapons depots element of the
   story was an embellishment.

73. The appellant should be treated as  a  man  who  was  simply  a  serving
   soldier with the Afghan National Army who had left Afghanistan  when  his
   military service ended.  He had  apparently  gone  home  to  get  married
   during the period when he claimed to be  receiving  threats  and  it  was
   beyond belief that he should show himself in daylight  when  the  village
   chief was apparently implicated in the village's links with Hizb-i-Islami
   and the Taliban.  The objective evidence and in particular  the  evidence
   of Mr Marsden was that serving soldiers (which the  appellant  then  was)
   were often attacked while on leave at home, and the appellant would  have
   been well aware of that.  He would not have shown  himself  in  his  home
   village if he seriously believed he was threatened.

74.  Other  credibility  issues  arose  under  s.8  Asylum  and  Immigration
   (Treatment of Claimants etc.) Act 2004; the appellant had  not  attempted
   to claim in Iran or  Turkey,  through  both  of  which  he  passed.   The
   question was not whether such a claim was bound to fail, but whether  the
   appellant made it.  Mr Deller accepted that this was not  a  particularly
   central element of his claim.

75. As regards the evidence from the Afghan  Academy,  Mr  Deller  suggested
   that it was vague and unsourced, which limited the evidential  weight  it
   could be given.  The evidence of the intelligence officer cousin  was  no
   more than that there was someone of that name in the right area, but that
   the family link could not be proven.

76. If the appellant were to be regarded simply  as  an  ex-Afghan  National
   Army member then the reprisal risks could be set out as follows -

   1) While serving with the Afghan National Army  -  there  was  heightened
      activity aimed at current security forces (the Army and  the  police),
      with  evidence  of  attacks  on  convoys  and  executions  of  service
      personnel while on leave.  Mr Deller accepted that there  was  a  risk
      and that there were those who meant  harm  to  serving  soldiers.   He
      would return to sufficiency of protection later in his arguments.

   2) After his Afghan National Army service the evidence of risk  was  that
      contained in Mr Marsden's report.  Mr Deller recognised  Mr  Marsden's
      experience and standing, and that in the modern age it  was  perfectly
      possible to keep abreast of events in Afghanistan over the internet as
      Mr Marsden had.  Mr Marsden's evidence was that there was hostility to
      ex-soldiers and that the rumour mill was active when strangers arrived
      in an area so that the information would reach the  persecutors.   His
      evidence was also that in the climate of impunity there was nothing to
      stop them carrying out their threats.  Mr Deller recognised  that  the
      appellant came from an area of heightened insurgent activity, a narrow
      pass leading to Kabul.  He suggested that the risk to  ex-soldiers  be
      treated on a case by case basis,  taking  into  account  the  security
      situation in the home area.  In the present case,  the  appellant  had
      not discharged the burden of showing a risk to him.

   3) If the Tribunal were not with him on the likelihood that the appellant
      had received  specific  family-targeted  threats,  then  the  evidence
      before us might be sufficient to engage international protection.   If
      the appellant were credible, the interest of Mr Malik and the  village
      ties generally took on a more threatening aspect.

   4) As regarded the weapons depot, Mr Deller accepted that in a  strategic
      area such as Tehzin, where the Taliban and Hizb-i-Islami were  active,
      the military effectiveness of  their  anti-Government  campaign  would
      have been significantly damaged by the  discovery  and  removal  of  a
      large depot or depots.  If the Tribunal accepted  that  the  appellant
      was seen as responsible for telling the Coalition Forces where it was,
      then that would be rather more risky.  He  accepted  that  there  were
      dumps which had been discovered in that area at about the right time.

77. As to sufficiency of protection, law and order in Afghanistan was  still
   a bleak picture.  If the insurgents had  an  individual  animus  then  Mr
   Deller accepted that the person threatened  would  be  unable  to  access
   effective protection unless he had substantial clout  of  his  own.   Two
   senior  politicians  had  been  killed  in  Kabul.   The  idea  of  total
   protection from non-State  actors  was  of  course  utopian  but  in  the
   appellant's home area, protection could not be regarded as a given for an
   ex-Afghan National Army soldier with  the  additional  grudge  which  the
   Taliban and Hizb-i-Islami were said to have against this man.

78. That brought us to the question of internal relocation.   There  was  no
   obvious reason why it should be unduly harsh  for  the  appellant  to  go
   somewhere  where  there  was  no  threat  or  alternatively   there   was
   sufficiency of protection.  Of course the appellant could not be expected
   to disguise his physical characteristics (Hysi v Secretary of  State  for
   the Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ 711),  but  the  characteristic  here
   relied upon was simply his military history.  He could not take back  his
   service, but his pride was not involved.   There  was  a  risk  of  local
   interest and the rumour mill would try to  place  new  people;  questions
   would be asked to establish who they were, but merely to be  at  risk  by
   reason of his Pashtun  ethnicity  was  stretching  too  far.   Mr  Deller
   submitted that if the appellant were not in his home area, even with  the
   help of the rumour mill the information was unlikely to emerge, or, if it
   did, to reach his intended persecutors.  There  was  no  real  risk  that
   people in Kabul would pass the information back to Tehzin.

79. Dealing next with the socio-economic  conditions  in  Kabul,  Mr  Deller
   recognised that there was a lack of accommodation but the appellant was a
   resourceful man with three and a quarter years  military  experience  and
   life experience.  He could network with other ex-servicemen  and  he  was
   employable.  His position was not as bleak as it was painted.

80. Mr Deller did not rely on internal relocation other than  to  Kabul,  on
   the particular facts of this appeal.  It was a question of fact  in  each
   individual case, he submitted, whether internal relocation other than  to
   Kabul was likely to be of use.  To  affect  the  outcome  of  an  appeal,
   internal relocation must both dispose of the risk and be reasonable.

Appellant's submissions

Skeleton argument
81. For the appellant, Mr Jorro had prepared a  skeleton  argument.   There,
   he set out the history and identified the issues:

     1) whether the appellant's account, on  which  his  asylum  claim  was
        based, was credible;
     2) whether on such credible account, the appellant was at real risk of
        serious harm at the hands of the Taliban or  Hizb-i-Islami  in  his
        home area in Afghanistan;
     3) whether, if at risk in his home area,  the  appellant  could  avail
        himself of sufficient protection from the Afghan State  authorities
        and/or from actors of protection (especially outside Kabul);
     4) if sufficiency of protection in the home area were  not  available,
        whether the appellant could safely,  and  without  undue  hardship,
        relocate  to  Kabul  or  elsewhere  in  Afghanistan  (the  internal
        relocation option); and if not
     5) Whether the appellant was  a  refugee,  alternatively  entitled  to
        humanitarian protection as defined by the  Qualification  Directive
        Regulations 2006 at  Regulation  2  and  in  HC  395  (as  amended)
        paragraph 339C).

82. Mr Jorro then set out the facts as  the  appellant  wished  them  found.
   The submissions proper began on  page  5  and  gave  detailed  references
   within the documents, to which we have had regard, but which it  was  not
   necessary to repeat here.  On credibility, Mr Jorro's submission was that
   the appellant's account had  been  very  consistent  throughout  and  was
   generally consistent with the objective evidence regarding recent  events
   in Afghanistan. The appellant had not claimed in Iran or  Turkey  because
   he feared refoulement to Afghanistan.

83. As to the risk from the Taliban and/or Hizb-i-Islami in the  home  area,
   the appellant's case was not that he feared death or Article 3 proscribed
   treatment merely on the grounds of being a former  Afghan  National  Army
   soldier.  He relied upon the highly personal and  particular  reasons  in
   his own case, namely (a) his disclosure of the arms depots, for which  he
   feared that one or both of those organisations would seek vengeance;  and
   (b) his father's cousins being members, in some cases senior members,  of
   the Taliban.  He was individually known and threatened,  and  his  father
   and younger brothers had already been abducted or killed.   There  was  a
   clear and  real  risk  in  the  home  area  from  powerful  and  ruthless
   organisations that would kill him or subject him to Article 3  proscribed
   treatment.

84. Mr Jorro sought to distinguish the findings relating to risk to  serving
   soldiers or police officers  in Fadli, Re Application for Judicial Review
   [2000] EWCA Civ 297 and Gedara, R (on the application of) v Secretary  of
   State for the Home Department [2006] EWHC 1690 (Admin) from the situation
   of the present  appellant.   He  also  relied  on  the  transposition  in
   domestic  United  Kingdom  law  of  European  Union   Council   Directive
   2004/83/EC by the Refugee Qualification Regulations  and  the  consequent
   amendments to HC 395.  Ex-soldiers, he contended, were entitled to access
   international protection at the same standard of proof as non-combatants.
    There was a clear risk of death or Article 3 proscribed treatment in the
   home area.

85. In  relation  to  sufficiency  of  protection,  Mr  Jorro  reminded  the
   Tribunal that the appellant no longer had  the  protection  of  his  army
   superiors; as an ex-soldier, he would be on his own.   The  Afghan  State
   authorities and international actors of protection were not in a position
   to assist him.

86. Internal relocation was not available, in his submission; the  appellant
   could not be expected to change or conceal his identity or to keep a  low
   profile such as to deny his individuality.  Hiding himself away in  Kabul
   or elsewhere in Afghanistan outside his home area was not the answer, and
   the expert evidence of Mr Marsden was that it was unrealistic in practice
   for new arrivals in an area not to attract attention.   On  his  credible
   evidence, the appellant was personally targeted and unsafe,  wherever  he
   went in Afghanistan (Bagdanavicius & Anor, R (On the  Application  of)  v
   Secretary of State for the Home Department [2003] EWCA Civ 1605).

87. Further or in the alternative, relying on AH Sudan [2007] EWCA Civ  297,
   the appellant contended that he was a person from a farming  family  with
   military experience and it was unduly harsh to expect him to relocate  to
   an urban life.  Jobs such as security work which might suit his  military
   experience would more readily bring him to the attention of Hizb-i-Islami
   or the Taliban and would be unsafe.    Outside  Kabul,  the  humanitarian
   situation in the rest of Afghanistan was such that  the  appellant  would
   not be safe alternatively it would be unduly harsh to expect him to  live
   there.  Internal relocation was not an option.

88. In conclusion, Mr Jorro contended that the appellant was  at  real  risk
   of persecution at the hands of the  Taliban  alternatively  Hizb-i-Islami
   and that he was a refugee entitled to the international protection  which
   the Refugee Convention of  1951  affords.    If  not,  he  was  certainly
   entitled to humanitarian  protection  as  defined  by  the  Qualification
   Directive Regulations 2006.

Appellant's submissions
89. In oral argument, Mr Jorro relied upon his skeleton  argument  and  made
   the  following  further  submissions.   It  was  now  accepted  that  the
   appellant was a former Afghan National Army member from  a  Hizb-i-Islami
   /Taliban family whose father had  fought  with  Zardad.    The  appellant
   would be perceived as a turncoat who had betrayed the family cause.   The
   Afghan Academy report was compelling and its author had been very careful
   not to say things which he did not believe to be true and verifiable.  As
   regards the cousin in Taliban intelligence in Kabul, 'cousin' was a vague
   term in Afghanistan and it seemed, from the Afghan Academy evidence, that
   a person did exist who would have been  some  sort  of  relative  of  the
   appellant's father.  There was strong corroborative evidence and  it  was
   an extra risk factor.

90. The appellant had joined the  Afghan  National  Army  in  the  teeth  of
   family opposition and his account had always turned on the weapons depots
   (always two, not just one).  Tehzin was an area where weapons depots were
   to be expected.  As to the  timing  and  distances  between  places,  the
   Tribunal should remember that  these  were  unasphalted  mountain  roads.
   Kabul sat in a bowl with mountains all around it.  Zardad was  linked  to
   Hekmatyar.  Some of the  appellant's  evidence  might  be  confusing  but
   viewed as a whole it was not discrepant with his earlier statements.   He
   had always said that Tehzin  had  no  telephone  and  that  he  had  been
   threatened throughout.  His father had been abducted and  he  knew  about
   the weapons depots:  revealing them was an act of vengeance.  It was true
   that the appellant had known where the weapons  depots  were  before  his
   father's abduction but he had no real motive to  reveal  them  until  his
   father disappeared.  The father's kidnap had not been challenged,  either
   in the letter of refusal or Mr Deller's cross-examination.

91. Mr Bahaar, a careful, truthful witness, had explained  his  sources  and
   confirmed the loss of one weapons depot in 2005 and two in 2006 from  the
   Tehzin area.  The appellant should not be penalised for failure to  claim
   in Turkey or Iran; he knew from the agent that they were unsafe and would
   not grant asylum to him.  There was no s.8 point there.  Mr  Jorro  asked
   the Tribunal to find the appellant credible.

92. Mr Jorro reminded the Tribunal that on the basis of a credible  account,
   Mr Deller had accepted that there would be a real risk in the  home  area
   because of the appellant's relatives and the disclosure  of  the  weapons
   depots.  There was no sufficiency of protection, as Mr Marsden's evidence
   set out, and it was axiomatic that the Taliban  and  Hizb-i-Islami  could
   target people in the home  area.   The  appellant's  father  and  younger
   brothers had disappeared.  There was no system of law and order in  place
   and no actors of protection as set out in  the  Qualifications  Directive
   Regulations (Reg. 4(2)); the situation in Afghanistan today did not  meet
   that standard.  He relied upon the decision of the  Court  of  Appeal  in
   Bagdanavicius and the guidance on imputed  political  opinion  in  K  and
   Fornah (Secretary of State for the Home Department v. K [2006] UKHL 46).

93. In relation to internal relocation, the appellant could not  go  to  his
   uncle's house in Jalalabad; it was a Pashtun area, a  Taliban  stronghold
   and he would be known immediately.  Mr Jorro asked the Tribunal  to  look
   at  the  current  OGN  which  stated  (paragraph  3.6.10)  that  internal
   relocation was not available in non-Pashtun areas or outside Kabul.

94. The appellant was also at real risk in Kabul for the reasons set out  in
   the skeleton argument, for this appellant who was not just an  ex-soldier
   but one with Taliban relatives and a cousin in the  Taliban  intelligence
   there.  That was not an answer to his refugee claim (see  the  Australian
   decision set out in the skeleton argument).  Kabul was  unsafe  for  him:
   the Country of Origin Information Report for April 2003 (still the latest
   report), showed at paragraph 8.08 that the Taliban was  growing  stronger
   and the situation was deteriorating.  The appellant could not be expected
   to conceal his true identity and would in  any  event,  have  to  explain
   himself if he arrived in a new area.  The ISAF in Kabul was  not  in  the
   business of protecting individuals and there was nothing in the  evidence
   to suggest that the appellant could join or access protection from  other
   NGOs as an individual, or as an ex-soldier. He would be more visible as a
   target there.  Mr Jorro relied upon paragraphs 21-22 of ZN

95. Following AH Sudan [2007] EWCA Civ 297  it  was  also  unduly  harsh  to
   expect him to live in Kabul; he would have to live in a city bulging with
   eight times its original population, no accommodation  or  work,  and  in
   slum conditions.

   Discussion
96. The Tribunal then reserved its determination,  which  we  now  give.  We
   reminded ourselves of the standard of  proof  (real  risk  or  reasonable
   degree of likelihood) and the burden of proof (which was  always  on  the
   appellant).  We have been greatly assisted by the  evidence  both  of  Mr
   Marsden and Mr Bahaar, both generally and, in the case of Mr  Bahaar,  in
   relation to the specific facts of the appellant's appeal.  We  considered
   first what general conclusions could be drawn as to the risk  to  members
   and former members of the Afghan National  Army  in  Afghanistan,  before
   proceeding to consider the individual circumstances of this appellant.

97. Having regard to Mr Deller's concession and to the evidence  before  us,
   we accepted that there was a risk of death or ill-treatment  of  soldiers
   while on active service:  such a  risk  to  a  country's  army  from  its
   opponents  is  a  normal  feature  of  military  service.   The   country
   background evidence indicated that the risk was at its  most  acute  when
   troops were deployed from one area to the other  and  when  they  visited
   their homes and families.  That risk was accompanied by a willingness  of
   the authorities to protect serving soldiers (as evidenced in this case by
   the efforts of the appellant's Commanders).  A country was  not  required
   to provide absolute protection for its citizens, and still less  for  its
   armed forces; the nature of military service was that armed conflict  and
   the risk of death  or  injury  in  service  formed  part  of  the  normal
   conditions of service.

98. No question of internal relocation  arises  whilst  on  active  service;
   that would involve desertion and put the soldier outside  the  protection
   of the Afghan State. Fadli, Re Application  for  Judicial  Review  [2000]
   EWCA Civ 297 considered a similar situation in Algeria -

      "17.  There will no doubt be a spectrum  of  situations  in  which  an
      Algerian soldier may find himself. At  one  end  he  will,  under  the
      command of his superior be pointing a gun at someone who is pointing a
      gun at him. At the other end a soldier might well be given periods  of
      leave when he would return to his village to see  his  family  and  be
      exposed to terrorist attacks by the GIA because he was a member of the
      army. Mr Blake submitted that if the evidence showed, as it  might  on
      examination, that the Algerian state was unable to give the  appellant
      practical protection against that risk on leave then  he  could  claim
      that he was exposed to persecution as a member of a particular  social
      group, namely, serving soldiers. The argument, if right, must  embrace
      times when a soldier is going out to a cinema  in  the  evening.  This
      will be in the middle of the spectrum. Perhaps precisely where  it  is
      will depend on whether the soldier is on call or not. In substance his
      submission  was  that  the  soldier  could  not  seek  the   surrogate
      protection of  the  international  community  if  the  hostile  forces
      remained on the battlefield but could do  so  if  the  hostile  forces
      moved off the battlefield and engaged in terrorist attacks against  in
      the private houses of the soldiery.

      18. In our judgment the Special Adjudicator was right to conclude that
      the Geneva Convention does not confer the status of refugee on someone
      who has a well founded fear of such things happening to him whilst  he
      is a soldier. The life of a soldier is a hazardous  one.  We  are  not
      persuaded that the Convention draws a distinction between, on the  one
      hand, the position of soldiers engaged  on  a  battlefield  in  combat
      against other soldiers observing the rules of war and,  on  the  other
      hand, soldiers engaged on internal security duties against terrorists.
      Breaches of  the  rules  of  war  are  regrettably  common.  To  allow
      soldiers' claims for asylum based on the failure by a State to provide
      practical protection to its soldiers against such an eventuality would
      we consider hinder the home state in providing the very protection for
      the generality of its citizens which the definition of refugee in  the
      Convention assumes that the home state should provide. It  would  give
      the GIA and those like them the power, by adopting terrorist  tactics,
      to weaken the power of the home state to provide  protection  for  its
      citizens.

      19. We do not accept Mr Blake's submission,  for  which  he  cited  no
      authority, that serving  soldiers  in  the  circumstances  of  Algeria
      either do or could constitute a "particular social group"  who  is  at
      risk of being "persecuted" for  the  purposes  of  the  definition  of
      refugee in the  Convention.  We  note  that  the  1997  guidelines  in
      relation to Algeria from the UNHCR, while suggesting  some  categories
      of persons who would benefit from a presumption that  they  should  be
      granted asylum status, do not suggest that those in the army fall into
      that category."

99. We next considered the position of those whose service had  come  to  an
   end.  In Gedara, R (on the application of) v Secretary of State  for  the
   Home Department [2006] EWHC 1690 (Admin), the High Court  considered  the
   position of an ex-policeman in Colombo, Sri  Lanka.    Whilst  on  active
   service, as here,  the  officer  had  sufficient  State  protection.   He
   objected  to  return  since  as  an  ex-policeman  he  felt  additionally
   vulnerable -

      "29.  The only reason advanced by the claimant for not  relocating  to
      another part of Sri Lanka, for example such as Colombo,  is  that,  in
      taking up some form of employment outside  the  police,  he  would  be
      "even more vulnerable to the LTTE". In my judgment, Ms Giovannetti  is
      correct when she submits that this is simply  not  borne  out  by  the
      objective evidence.  The  two  reports  from  Professor  Good  do  not
      identify any evidence to demonstrate there is a real risk of  harm  to
      the former intelligence officers in  Colombo.  In  his  first  report,
      Professor Good cited no  examples  of  former  police  officers  being
      victims. In his supplementary report  he  identified  one  case  of  a
      former police officer, Mr Rilvan, who  was  allegedly  killed  by  the
      LTTE. But the reports indicate that the police in Sri  Lanka  did  not
      believe that he was killed simply because of his  former  role  as  an
      intelligence officer as opposed to having been suspected by  the  LTTE
      of double crossing them. The incident did not take place  in  Colombo,
      which is the area identified by the Secretary of State as suitable for
      internal relocation by the claimant."

100. To establish risk post-service requires evidence and we note  that  the
   Court drew a distinction between the generalised  post-service  risk  and
   the risk for those who were known to have double-crossed the  insurgents,
   a differential analysis which was useful also in the present  appeal.  Mr
   Marsden indicated that the NGOs and other bodies of which  he  was  aware
   did not seek to record deaths and disappearances  of  ex-Afghan  National
   Army soldiers and none of the evidence before  us  deals  with  incidents
   occurring after the end of a person's service.  Although the standard  of
   proof  in  asylum  and  humanitarian  protection  appeals  was  low,  the
   appellant must nevertheless show a real risk or a  reasonable  degree  of
   likelihood of risk to ex-service personnel, and the evidence before us on
   post-service risk was nowhere near that.

101. However, where an individual was 'wanted' by  the  Taliban  or  Hizb-i-
   Islami, then the evidence was that the situation in  Afghanistan  remains
   sufficiently lawless that if he were found, there  would  be  nothing  to
   prevent them dealing with him as they thought  fit.   A  person  who  was
   wanted in his home area for a specific reason would be  able  to  show  a
   real risk of persecution (or  treatment  entitling  him  to  humanitarian
   protection, as appropriate) in his home area.

102. The next question was whether such a person could  relocate  away  from
   the risk and whether it would be unduly harsh to expect him or her to  do
   so.  Where there was an individual risk, it would be a question  of  fact
   whether internal relocation was an option.  In general, for a person with
   no particular profile, the Tribunal had held that there was  no  risk  in
   Kabul engaging the international protection Conventions (M v Secretary of
   State for the Home Department (Afghanistan) [2004] UKIAT 00035).

103. The authorities and  international  instruments  relating  to  internal
   relocation were reviewed by the Court of Appeal in  Januzi  v.  Secretary
   of State for the Home Department & Ors [2006] EWHL Civ 5  and  summarised
   by Bingham LJ as follows -

      "21...There can, however, be  no  absolute  rule  and  it  is,  in  my
      opinion, preferable to avoid the language of presumption. The decision-
      maker, taking account of all relevant circumstances pertaining to  the
      claimant and  his  country  of  origin,  must  decide  whether  it  is
      reasonable to expect the claimant to relocate or whether it  would  be
      unduly harsh to expect him to do so. The  source  of  the  persecution
      giving rise to the  claimant's  well-founded  fear  in  his  place  of
      ordinary domicile may be agents of the state authorised or directed by
      the state to persecute; or they may  be  agents  of  the  state  whose
      persecution  is  connived  at  or  tolerated  by  the  state,  or  not
      restrained by the state; or the persecution may be by  those  who  are
      not agents of the state,  but  whom  the  state  does  not  or  cannot
      control. These sources of persecution may, of course, overlap, and  it
      may on the facts be hard to identify the  source  of  the  persecution
      complained of or feared. There is, as Simon Brown LJ aptly observed in
      Svazas v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2002] 74 [2002] 1
      WLR 1891, paragraph 55, a spectrum of cases. The  decision-maker  must
      do his best to decide, on such material as is available, where on  the
      spectrum the particular case falls. The more closely  the  persecution
      in question is linked to the state, and the greater the control of the
      state over those acting or purporting to act on its behalf,  the  more
      likely (other things being equal) that a victim of persecution in  one
      place will be similarly vulnerable in another place within the  state.
      The converse may also be true. All must depend on a fair assessment of
      the relevant facts."

104. The most recent Country of Origin Information  Report  for  Afghanistan
   (April 2007) cites without comment or contradiction the following extract
   from the UNHCR Update on the Situation in Afghanistan  and  International
   Protection Considerations, published June 2005.

      "INTERNAL FLIGHT OR RELOCATION

      28.07 A UNHCR paper of June 2005 advised:
      "Given the  fragmented  nature  of  power  and  control  in  parts  of
      Afghanistan, an examination of the availability of internal flight  or
      relocation alternatives may appear  to  be  warranted.  UNHCR  however
      continues to recommend against the application of the internal  flight
      or relocation alternative in the context of Afghan claims, for reasons
      noted below.
      "The assessment of whether or not there is a relocation alternative in
      the individual case requires two main sets of analysis - its relevance
      and its reasonableness. For both, the personal  circumstances  of  the
      individual applicant and the conditions  in  the  area  to  which  the
      internal  flight  or  relocation  alternative  is  proposed  must   be
      examined. With regard to the 'relevance'  of  an  internal  flight  or
      relocation alternative, it is of particular importance to  assess  the
      willingness and the  ability  of  the  State  to  protect  from  risks
      emanating from non-State agents. Local commanders and armed groups act
      as  agents  of  persecution  in  the  Afghan  context  that  have  set
      themselves above the law, both at the local  and  central  levels.  In
      some cases, they are closely associated to  the  local  administration
      while in others they may be linked to and protected by  more  powerful
      and influential actors, including at the central level. As  a  result,
      they largely operate with impunity, with the State  authorities  being
      unable to  provide  protection  against  risks  emanating  from  these
      actors. In most instances,  the  State  is  still  unable  to  provide
      effective protection against  persecution  by  non-State  actors.  The
      links to other actors may,  depending  on  the  circumstances  of  the
      individual case, expose an individual  to  risk  beyond  the  zone  of
      influence of a local commander, including in Kabul.  Even  in  a  city
      like Kabul, which is divided into neighbourhoods (gozars) where people
      tend to know each other, the risk remains,  as  news  about  a  person
      arriving from elsewhere in the country travel [sic] fast.
      "Additional  to  the  'relevance'  of  internal  relocation   to   the
      individual case, it must  also  be  'reasonable'  for  a  claimant  to
      relocate to that location in order to overcome his or her well-founded
      fear of  persecution  elsewhere  in  the  country  of  origin.  It  is
      particularly with regard to this 'reasonableness analysis' that  UNHCR
      continues to advise against resort to the notion of an internal flight
      or relocation alternative in the Afghan context, considering  elements
      of safety and security, human rights standards as well as options  for
      economic survival during the relocation journey and  upon  arrival  at
      the destination of relocation. The traditional family, extended family
      and community structures of Afghan society continue to constitute  the
      main protection and coping mechanism in the current situation.  It  is
      these structures and links on which Afghans rely for their  safety  as
      well as for economic survival, including access to  accommodation  and
      an adequate level of subsistence. The protection provided by families,
      extended families and tribes is  limited  to  areas  where  family  or
      community links exist and  without  them,  a  relatively  normal  life
      without undue hardship at another location than one's place of  origin
      or  residence  is  unlikely.  As  documented  in  studies   on   urban
      vulnerability, the household and the extended family remains the basic
      social network in Afghanistan and there are indications that  existing
      traditional systems of sharing and redistribution function less in the
      extended urban  family.  It  would  therefore,  in  UNHCR's  view,  be
      unreasonable to expect any Afghan to relocate to an area to  which  he
      or she has no  effective  links,  including  in  urban  areas  of  the
      country."

      28.08 "It is not  difficult  to  track  people  down  in  Afghanistan,
      although it might take  time.  Neighbours  and  landlords  will  check
      people's backgrounds, because everyone thinks in  terms  of  security,
      and so they would want to check a newcomer's background in their  home
      area. Further, messages are sent across  the  country  via  chains  of
      communications based on personal contacts, and it would be natural  to
      investigate where someone was from in order  to  see  what  role  they
      could play in such a network. The postal  service  is  unreliable  and
      only delivers to the district centres, not to the  villages,  so  that
      travellers are often used to deliver messages and goods  to  relatives
      and friends."
                    (Dr Antonio Giustozzi, Afghanistan Notes, 28 June 2006)"

105. That extract supported the evidence of the  appellant  and  his  expert
   witnesses.  Outside Kabul, we accept that enquiries would be  made  about
   an individual's background and that the rumour mill would wish to satisfy
   itself as to whether an incoming unknown individual posed a risk to  that
   community.  We do not consider that (absent family connections who  could
   provide safety in a particular area) internal  relocation  outside  Kabul
   would be available to appellants with difficulties in their home areas.

106. We next considered whether internal relocation is  available  to  Kabul
   city.  The objective evidence is that in general  that  is  a  reasonable
   option, although (as stated in M), the situation in Kabul  may  be  harsh
   and unattractive.  We have  considered  whether  the  Court  of  Appeal's
   decision in AH Sudan [2007] EWCA Civ 297 is of such  general  application
   that a subsistence farmer from elsewhere within Afghanistan could not  be
   expected to undertake city living.  Such an approach if generally applied
   would, we suggest, be unrealistic;  in  much  of  the  third  world,  the
   breadwinner of the family would routinely  opt  to  relocate  to  a  city
   environment, with or without his family, in times of economic difficulty.
    We do not find that AH extends that far; it is a case on the  particular
   facts of the desperate situation in Khartoum and  we  are  not  satisfied
   that the Court  of  Appeal  intended  to  make  a  general  finding  that
   internationally no subsistence farmer could ever be expected to  relocate
   to a city environment.

107. However,  if  news  of  being  specifically  wanted  by  a  warlord  or
   commander is likely to reach Kabul, we accept that an appellant's  safety
   in Kabul cannot be satisfactorily  assured  to  the  domestic  protection
   standard set in Horvath v. Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
   [2000] UKHL 37.  ZN (Warlords, CIPU list not  comprehensive)  Afghanistan
   [2005]  UKIAT  00096,  approving  AF  (  "Warlords/commanders",  evidence
   expected) Afghanistan CG [2004] UKIAT 00284, says this -

      "10.  ... As we understand it, [the CIPU Country Report October  2003]
      and other main sources on Afghanistan fully recognise that even  under
      the  Kharzai  regime,  the  political  and   military   landscape   in
      Afghanistan remains dominated by a shifting  and  uncertain  array  of
      commanders, warlords or other chiefs. Even within Kabul  it  does  not
      appear that the authorities  are  able  to  entirely  prevent  warlord
      activities in connection with individual cases. ...

      21.   Turning to the second limb of the grounds of appeal, we consider
      it to be weak. The CIPU reference to a UN Security Council report  did
      not establish that the authorities in Kabul were capable of  affording
      adequate protection against a real risk of serious harm from non-state
      actors  in  every  case.  There  is  nothing  in  this  report   which
      contradicts the Adjudicator's assessment that it remains possible  for
      certain categories of persons to fall through protection gaps,  albeit
      the  latter  have  been  significantly  reduced:  see  para   8.   The
      Adjudicator made very clear that he did not dispute that, in the light
      of the objective evidence, the authorities,  supported  by  ISAF  were
      able  to  ensure  protection  for  the  generality  of  its  citizens,
      including the generality of Pashtuns. What he relied upon  was  rather
      that they would be ill-placed to afford protection to this  particular
      claimant. We think that this was a finding which on the  evidence  was
      entirely open to the Adjudicator, particularly given that Jan  Ahmed's
      men had already been  able  to  attack  persons  associated  with  the
      claimant and to raid the  claimant's  house  with  apparent  impunity.
      There  was  no  improper  application  of  Horvath  [2000]  INLR   239
      principles in this case."

108.  Evidence that  the  appellant  would  be  personally  pursued  remains
   necessary on the principles set out in AF.  Where such a real, individual
   risk is established, the evidence remains that the authorities  in  Kabul
   are not capable of individual protection to the Horvath standard and that
   the ISAF is  not  tasked  with  individual  protection  but  rather  with
   generalised peacekeeping within Kabul.  It would always be a question  of
   fact whether relocation to a city (in this case Kabul) is  reasonable  or
   is unduly harsh, both in relation  to  the  conditions  in  the  city  of
   relocation and the individual history and  aptitudes  of  the  particular
   appellant.

109. The following, in summary, are the Tribunal's general conclusions

      (1)   There is a risk to serving soldiers from the Taliban and Hizb-i-
      Islami, principally during troop movements and home visits.  A soldier
      cannot be expected to desert in order to access protection and in fact
      such protection would be unavailable to him as a deserter.

      (2)   There is always a risk to soldiers  of  a  country's  army  from
      rebel factions and the forces against which they are  fighting.   That
      is a risk which is assumed by those serving their country in its armed
      forces, and while on active service and with his unit, a  soldier  had
      sufficiency of protection.  Any risk which may arise during  his  home
      leave and troop movements is reasonable to the Horvath standard; total
      protection cannot be expected and  any  military  service  entails  an
      element of physical risk.

      (3)   After military service had ended, the country evidence  did  not
      support  a  continuing  risk  at  a  level  capable  of  engaging  the
      international protection  Conventions,  unless  there  are  individual
      factors which make the pursuit of the ex-soldier more likely.

      (4)   Where there are individual risk factors it is a question of fact
      whether the interest in the ex-soldier is likely to be confined to the
      home area or be more  widely  pursued.   In  particular,  elements  of
      'double cross' in relation to the Taliban or Hizb-i-Islami,  if  true,
      may  be  sufficient  to  elevate  the  risk  to  a  level  where   the
      international protection Conventions are engaged.

      (5)   Internal relocation to Kabul is  not  in  principle  impossible.
      Conditions in Kabul are not pleasant but they do not approach  the  AH
      level and unless there are particular reasons not to do so,  it  would
      not be unduly harsh to expect an appellant with no individual  profile
      to live in Kabul and assist in the rebuilding of his country.

       (6)  If there is a risk in the home area which is  not  localised  to
      that area, internal relocation outside Kabul is  unlikely  to  provide
      sufficiency of protection as the areas outside Kabul remain under  the
      control of  local  warlords,  and  the  population  is  suspicious  of
      strangers.

      (7)   Where there is individual risk not local to the home  area,  the
      safety of internal relocation to Kabul would be  a  question  of  fact
      based on the particular history of that individual  appellant  and  of
      the warlord or faction seeking to harm him.   The  country  background
      evidence did not as yet suggest that domestic protection in  Kabul  is
      sufficient to meet the Horvath standard where an  individualised  risk
      exists; the Afghan authorities did not have the resources  to  protect
      individuals, and  ISAF's  remit  is  generalised  and  not  individual
      protection.

The individual circumstances of this appellant
110. We considered that the appellant's account is  generally  credible  and
   very consistent across the various accounts.  He had 'double crossed' the
   Taliban and Hizb-i-Islami by revealing the location of the  arms  depots.
   He is an ex-soldier and his home area, Sorobi, is  an  area  of  enormous
   historical significance for Hizb-i-Islami  and  the  Taliban,  and  is  a
   mountain pass leading directly to Kabul.   The leaders in Sorobi would be
   well able to pursue  their  enquiries  within  Kabul  and  to  track  the
   appellant down there.

111. He cannot rely on his military service but could, and did, rely on  the
   personal risk caused by his having served in the  Afghan  National  Army,
   taken with the known (or  at  least  strongly  suspected)  fact  that  he
   revealed the location of the arms depots in Sorobi maintained  over  many
   years by the Taliban and Hizb-i-Islami.  The effect of that was to weaken
   them and  strengthen  the  coalition  and  Afghan  National  Army  forces
   significantly, and the objective evidence is that the dumps  existed  and
   were indeed revealed and cleaned out when the appellant  says  that  they
   were.

112. Accordingly, and having regard to the lower  standard  appropriate  for
   the international protection Conventions,  we  are  satisfied  that  this
   appellant had shown that there is a real risk or a reasonable  degree  of
   likelihood of persecution alternatively treatment contrary to Articles  2
   and 3 ECHR if he were to be returned to Afghanistan now, and humanitarian
   protection (which applies only to non-refugees) is not a relevant factor.

      DECISION
      1.    The appellant is a refugee as defined by the Geneva Convention
      and the Refugee or Person in Need of International Protection
      (Qualification) Regulations 2006;
      2.    The appeal is not entitled to humanitarian protection as defined
      in those Regulations; and
      3.    The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds.


      Signed
        Dated:   2 August 2007






      Senior Immigration Judge Gleeson
                            SCHEDULE OF MATERIALS
                             BEFORE THE TRIBUNAL



|                                                                          |
|Individual documents                                                      |
|          |Chronology                                   |                 |
|          |Bundle of documents and photographs          |Various          |
|          |evidencing military service with the Afghan  |                 |
|          |National Army (not disputed at hearing)      |                 |
|          |Screening interview                          |11  January 2007 |
|          |Statement of Evidence Form and asylum        |24  January 2007 |
|          |interview                                    |                 |
|          |Respondent's letter of refusal               |25  January 2007 |
|          |Appellant's witness statements               |29  January 2007 |
|          |                                             |25 May 2007      |
|          |Skeleton argument of Mr Peter Jorro          |29 May 2007      |
|                                                                          |
|Expert reports                                                            |
|          |Mr Peter Marsden                             |18 May 2007      |
|          |Mr Abdulmalik Bahaar of the Afghan Academy   |23 May 2007      |
|                                                                          |
|Country background evidence                                               |
|                                                                          |
|2005                                                                      |
|          |Amnesty International Annual Report          |23 May 2005      |
|                                                                          |
|2006                                                                      |
|          |Freedom House:  Freedom in the World report  |6 September 2006 |
|          |2006:  Afghanistan                           |                 |
|          |UN:  the situation in Afghanistan and its    |11 September 2006|
|          |implications for peace and security          |                 |
|          |Combined Forces Command:  Afghanistan:       |26 September 2006|
|          |extremists show no remorse for Afghan        |                 |
|          |citizens                                     |                 |
|          |IPS:  Afghanistan - Hope loses out to fear on|13 October 2006  |
|          |Kabul Streets                                |                 |
|          |International Crisis Group:  Countering      |2 November 2006  |
|          |Afghanistan's Insurgency:  No quick fixes    |                 |
|          |COEDMHA:  Continuing violence across         |7 November 2006  |
|          |Afghanistan leaves five dead                 |                 |
|          |US Institute of Peace:  Five Years after the |22 November 2006 |
|          |Fall of the Taliban:  Afghanistan and the War|                 |
|          |on Terrorism                                 |                 |
|          |Radio Free Europe:  neo-Taliban claim to have|27 November 2006 |
|          |killed four afghans over alleged spying for  |                 |
|          |US                                           |                 |
|          |Radio Free Europe:  district Chief  gunned   |8 December 2006  |
|          |down in Western Afghanistan                  |                 |
|          |Council on Foreign Relations (United States):|14 December 2006 |
|          |Afghanistan's new security threat            |                 |
|          |UNAMA:  Taliban suicide attack and United    |18 December 2006 |
|          |Kingdom ISAF firing upon Afghan civilians, 3 |                 |
|          |December 2006                                |                 |
|                                                                          |
|2007                                                                      |
|          |Human Rights Watch World Report 2007         |11  January 2007 |
|          |(Afghanistan)                                |                 |
|          |Radio Free Europe:  Afghanistan: US see      |15  January 2007 |
|          |increased Taliban threat in 2007             |                 |
|          |Radio Free Europe:  Ten Afghan labourers     |24  January 2007 |
|          |killed in suicide attack in southeast...as   |                 |
|          |Taliban claim responsibility                 |                 |
|          |Human Rights Watch: Afghanistan: slow        |30  January 2007 |
|          |progress on security and rights              |                 |
|          |Respondent's Country of Origin Information   |April 2007       |
|          |Report for Afghanistan                       |                 |

