
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

  MT (Article 1F (a) - aiding and abetting) Zimbabwe [2012] UKUT 00015(IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated   |
|On 11 October 2011                   |                            |
|                                     |............................|
|                                     |...........                 |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY
                        UPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE P R LANE
                                   Between

                                     MT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


   In the context of exclusion under  Article  1F(a)  of  the  1951  Refugee
   Convention (Article 12(2)(a) of  2004/83/EC  (the  Refugee  Qualification
   Directive)):


        i)  The requirement set out at Article 7(1)  of  the  International
           Criminal Court Statute (ICC Statute) that acts be  "...committed
           as part of a widespread or systematic  attack  directed  against
           any civilian population  with  knowledge  of  the  attack"  (the
           "chapeau requirement") is an essential element in the definition
           of a crime against humanity.


      ii)    In principle the question of whether acts are '...committed  as
           part of a widespread or systematic attacks directed against  any
           civilian population' is a matter that could  be  dealt  with  in
           future country guidance cases; although the question of  whether
           there exist acts with such a nexus must ultimately be decided on
           a case-by-case basis.

      iii)   Commission of a crime against humanity or other excludable  act
           can take the form of commission as an aider and  abettor,  as  a
           subsidiary (or non-principal) form of participation. Drawing  on
           international criminal law jurisprudence (as enjoined by R  (JS)
           (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2010] UKSC 15), aiding and abetting in  this
           context encompasses any assistance, physical  or  psychological,
           that has a substantial effect on the commission  of  the  crime,
           i.e. the contribution should  facilitate  the  commission  of  a
           crime in some significant way.

      iv)   The fact that the Article 7(1)(a)-(g)list  of  acts  capable  of
           being crimes against humanity does not include the "cover-up" of
           murders, whilst a surprising lacuna, should  not  be  filled  by
           judicial interpretation.


      v)     Duress is a defence to  international  criminal  responsibility
           (see Article 31(1)(d) of the ICC  Statute).  Again,  drawing  on
           international criminal law jurisprudence,   such  a  defence  is
           confined to situations where the defendant's freedom of will and
           decision is so severely limited  that  there  is  eventually  no
           moral  choice  of  counter  activity  available.  It  has   four
           components: the threat must be of imminent death  or  continuing
           or imminent serious bodily  harm;  the  threat  must  result  in
           duress causing the crime; a threat results in duress only if  it
           is  otherwise  avoidable  (i.e.  if  a  reasonable   person   in
           comparable circumstances would have  submitted  and  would  have
           been driven to the  relevant  criminal  conduct);  and  the  act
           directed at avoiding the threat must be necessary in terms of no
           other means being available  and  reasonable  for  reaching  the
           desired effect.

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Symes, Counsel, instructed by Birnberg Peirce &
Partners
For the Respondent:    Mr S Ouseley, Home Office Presenting Officer




                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1. The appellant is a national of Zimbabwe.  She arrived in  the  UK  on  13
August 2007 and claimed asylum on 25 March 2009. The basis of her claim  was
that in Zimbabwe she  had  been  a  police  officer  stationed  at  Bulawayo
between 2000 - 2007. In 2007 she found  herself   under  pressure  from  her
superiors to participate in various  acts  against  political  opponents  of
ZANU  PF,  including  attendance  at  MDC  rallies  where  police  beat  MDC
supporters with batons, two incidents  in  which  torture  was  used  (  the
"Stephen  Mhlanga  incident"  in  February  2007  and  the  "Gibson  Sibanda
incident" in April 2007) and in March 2007 she had also been ordered  to  go
to a village near Plumtree, where  30  people  had  been  killed  the  night
before by ZANU PF supporters, and bury the bodies  in  shallow  graves  (the
"Plumtree incident"). Despite the risks she had been able in  mid-July  2007
to desert and travel to Sudan, returning for a brief period  in  the  second
half of September in order to try, unsuccessfully, to  get  a  passport  for
her daughter. She had then travelled, via South Africa, to the UK.

2. On 18 January 2010 the respondent decided to remove  her  as  an  illegal
entrant  having  refused  to  grant  her  asylum.   At  the  same  time  the
respondent certified her claim under s.55 of  the  Immigration,  Asylum  and
Nationality Act 2006 because it was considered that Article  1F(a)  and  (c)
of the Refugee Convention operated so as to exclude her from the  protection
of  the  Refugee  Convention  because  there  were   serious   reasons   for
considering she had committed crimes against humanity.  Article  1F  of  the
Refugee Convention is as follows:

    "The provisions of this Convention shall not apply to any  person  with
    respect to whom there are serious reasons for considering that:


       (a)  He has committed a crime against peace, a war crime, or a crime
             against humanity, as defined in the  international  instruments
             drawn up to make provision in respect of such crimes;
       (b)  He has committed a  serious  non-political  crime  outside  the
             country of refuge prior to his admission to that country  as  a
             refugee;
       (c)  He has been  guilty  of  acts  contrary  to  the  purposes  and
             principles of the United Nations."


3. In R(JS) (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2010] UKSC 15  Lord  Brown  said  that  when
considering whether an applicant is disqualified from asylum  by  virtue  of
Article 1F(a)  the  starting  point  should  be  the  Rome  Statute  of  the
International Criminal Court  ("the  ICC  Statute").  Article  7(1)  of  the
Statute defines crimes against humanity as follows:


    "1.    For the purpose of this Statute 'crime against  humanity'  means
         any of the following acts when committed as part of a widespread or
         systematic attack directed against any  civilian  population,  with
         knowledge of the attack:

         (a)      Murder;
         (b)      Extermination;
         (c)      Enslavement;
         (d)      Deportation or forcible transfer of population;
         (e)      Imprisonment  or  other  severe  deprivation  of  physical
             liberty in violation of  fundamental  rules  of  international
             law;
         (f)      Torture
         (g)       Rape,  sexual  slavery,  enforced  prostitution,   forced
             pregnancy, enforced sterilization, or any other form of sexual
             violence of comparable gravity;
         (h)      Persecution against any identifiable group or collectivity
             on political, racial, national, ethnic,  cultural,  religious,
             gender as defined in paragraph 3, on other  grounds  that  are
             universally recognized as  impermissible  under  international
             law, in connection with any act referred to in this  paragraph
             or any crime within the jurisdiction of the Court;
         (i)      Enforced disappearance of persons;
         (j)      The crime of apartheid;
         (k)      Other inhumane acts of a similar  character  intentionally
             causing great suffering, or  serious  injury  to  body  or  to
             mental or physical health."

The first sentence of Art 7(1) comprises what  is  known  as  the  "chapeau"
requirement. ("Chapeau", we would observe, is used in this context  to  mean
"hat"/"covering" or text that prefaces particular provisions.)

4. The respondent also considered that her claim to  be  a  police  deserter
was not credible and that  she  would  face  risk  of  being  persecuted  on
return. Her appeal  against  this  decision  was  heard  by  the  First-tier
Tribunal (FTT) (Judge Pirotta) who in a determination notified  on  7  April
2010  upheld  the  certificate  and  dismissed  the  appeal.  Judge  Pirotta
considered that the respondent had shown that the  appellant  had  committed
crimes against humanity and so fell to be excluded under  Article  1F(a)  of
the Refugee Convention and that in any event she had  not  established  that
she was a police deserter or that the Zimbabwe authorities  would  view  her
adversely. The appellant was successful in obtaining a grant  of  permission
to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  In a response  dated  30  March  2011  the
respondent said she agreed with the contention  in  the  grounds  of  appeal
that the FTT judge had materially erred in law by failing  to  consider  the
issue of whether the appellant was entitled to  rely  upon  the  defence  of
duress in respect of the s.55(1)(a) certificate.  In a decision made  on  19
April 2011, the Upper Tribunal (UTJ Storey) decided that the FIT had made  a
material error of law as just described and set  aside  its  decision.   The
appeal now comes before this panel for us to re-make  the  decision.   In  a
case in which a certificate has been made in relation to an  asylum  appeal,
as here, the Upper Tribunal "must begin  substantive  deliberations  on  the
asylum appeal by considering the statements  in  the  Secretary  of  State's
certificate" and, if in agreement with the  certificate,  must  dismiss  the
asylum dimensions of  the  appeal  without  considering  any  of  its  other
aspects (s.12(2)(b) of the  Tribunals,  Courts  and  Enforcement  Act  2007;
s.55(5A) and s.55(4) of the 2006 Act).

5. In the decision finding a material error of law there was a clear  ruling
as to the material scope of the appellant's appeal.  It was noted  that  the
respondent had not sought to dispute before the FTT  judge  the  appellant's
evidence that she was a member of the police force in Zimbabwe between  2000
and September 2007 and that accordingly the present  hearing  would  proceed
to treat this much of her evidence as established.

6. Before proceeding further we should record our  thanks  to  both  parties
for  their  assiduous  preparation  and  helpful  skeleton   arguments   and
submissions.  With the agreement of both parties we made an anonymity  order
pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
whose contents included an order that all references  to  certain  specified
witnesses should be anonymised.

7. At the hearing we heard from a witness, W1, and from  the  appellant.  W1
is a person whom the Tribunal has accepted previously as an  expert  witness
on country conditions in Zimbabwe.   It  is  convenient  if  we  set  out  a
summary of W1's evidence when dealing with the expert evidence below.

The appellant

8. In her evidence to us the appellant  confirmed  that  her  ethnicity  was
Shona and her religion was Christian  (Roman  Catholic).   She  had  been  a
police officer in Bulawayo in the duty uniform branch.  She  had  not  voted
in any elections before joining the police, and police in Zimbabwe were  not
allowed to vote (she added later that no one in her family was  involved  in
politics).

9. In cross-examination the appellant was asked why, if she was  now  saying
she was just a uniformed  duty  officer,  she  had  said  in  her  screening
interview that she was a police  detective  and  submitted  a  January  2007
payslip describing her as being in criminal investigations.   She  said  she
had only been assigned to criminal investigations for  three  months,  being
trained during that time in fingerprint techniques and scene  of  the  crime
work.  (Later she added that during this time she had also  attended  courts
to present the police cases).  She said she had joined  the  police  because
she had been inspired by their crime-prevention role.  Until  2007  she  had
not come to understand that the police  force  had  a  record  of  brutality
against political opponents and others.  She  had  not  seen  anything  else
herself to suggest that this was the case before then, except when  it  came
to the Riot Squad.

10. Asked if she was not aware that the police  had  used  violence  in  the
2002 elections, she said she knew about that to some extent but she and  her
colleagues always believed the  MDC  were  making  up  claims  about  police
brutality.  She and  her  colleagues  did  not  discuss  political  matters.
Asked if she had ever witnessed ZANU-PF youth militia  being  "attached"  to
her police station, she said she had not although  she  had  seen  the  Riot
Squad being involved in dealing with riots and demonstrations.  Her work  in
the charge office meant she saw persons when they were  brought  in  to  the
police station for questioning and also afterwards when, and if,  they  were
charged/released.  She had seen MDC  activists  brought  in  to  the  police
station and being arrested and charged for public order  offences,  but  she
had never seen any of them  being  ill-treated.   The  questioning  of  such
people was done by the CID.  If someone who had been in  a  cell  complained
that they had been beaten, she and her colleagues told them  to  fill  in  a
form and raise the matter in court.  In her time as a police  officer,  only
one or two people had done that.  In the course of a year probably  no  more
than 4% of suspects had injuries when brought into custody.   Such  injuries
could be for pub fights and the like.  She had never  seen  someone  injured
after having been put in the cells.  She described her police station  as  a
ground floor building having 8 rooms comprising  a  main  office,  a  charge
office, an administration office, a CID room, a briefing room and a  general
kitchen.  At the back there were four cells.  She estimated that on  average
her station dealt with three detainees a day, 60-80 per month.

11.  Asked  if  she  had  heard  about  police  officers  being  sacked   or
disciplined for political reasons  in  2005-2006,  she  said  this  had  not
happened in her station but she had heard about it in 2006 over  the  police
radio and through  police  circulars.   She  was  also  aware  of  a  Police
Commissioner's  Directive  giving  instructions  about   the   transfer   of
political suspects.  She did not think that to be a police officer  she  had
to support ZANU-PF; she had been neutral; she did  not  support  any  party.
She had heard however that a police commissioner had said all police  should
be ZANU-PF.

12. Asked if she had ever arrested  any  ZANU-PF  supporters  she  said  she
never had.  When she first  became  aware  of  police  mistreatment  of  MDC
supporters in February 2007 she never thought  to  question  her  orders  as
this would have caused her superiors to think she supported  the  MDC.   She
did not know the political affiliation of  her  immediate  superior.   There
had only  been  two  occasions  when  she  had  been  asked  to  arrest  MDC
supporters.  On a third occasion she had feigned  illness.   She  was  never
suspended.

The Stephen Mhlanga incident, February 2007

13. The appellant then  described  the  first  incident  in  which  she  was
involved  in  such  an  arrest,  in  mid-February  2007,  involving  Stephen
Mhlanga.  She was with five other police who raided his house, arrested  him
and, en route back to the police station, took him to  a  bushy  area  by  a
river,  where  he  was  questioned  for  about  two  hours  about  his   MDC
connections.  She was the most junior officer there and her  role  was  just
taking notes.  Some of the  officers  there  were  verbally  aggressive  and
poked him and threatened to throw him in the river.   He  was  very  scared.
He gave them the information they wanted.  After they had taken him  to  the
police station he was put in the cells. She did not inquire if they had ill-
treated him there, although she knew he was released the next day.  She  did
not protest to her superiors about his  ill-treatment  as  they  would,  she
said, have labelled her as an MDC sympathiser.

The Gibson Sibanda incident April 2007

14. The next MDC arrest incident in which she was involved was  at  the  end
of April 2007, involving Gibson  Sibanda.   She  was  one  of  seven  police
officers present on a raid on his house.  Others had hit  him  with  batons,
but she had only slapped him.  She did not think  he  had  been  offered  or
received any medical treatment for his injuries.  After  the  interrogation,
conduct of his case was left to the detectives.  She saw him the  next  day.
She did not notice any new injuries.

15. She said that in 2007 she had  been  involved  in  policing  eleven  MDC
rallies/demonstrations.  She and her  colleagues  had  been  deployed  as  a
second  line  behind  the  Riot  Squad,  helping  chase  and  disperse   the
demonstrators.  Excessive  force  had  only  been  used  on  some  of  these
occasions.  The Riot Squad used tear gas and  batons;  they  needed  to  use
force against the MDC mob.  She did not participate in any beatings-up;  she
used her baton just as a form of prodding to encourage people  to  disperse.
Very few ZANU-PF supporters turned up or became confrontational towards  the
police.

The Plumtree incident, March 2007

16. The appellant was asked about the Plumtree incident which she  said  had
happened in March 2007 (i.e. after the Stephen Mhlanga incident  but  before
the Gibson Sibanda incident).  ZANU-PF supporters  had  gone  to  a  village
near Plumtree in the evening and set fire to houses of MDC supporters.  Some
30 were killed, including children.  When she got  there  it  was  the  next
morning and the village was deserted.  No one knew  where  the  perpetrators
had gone.  The CID officers present told her and others to bury  the  bodies
in shallow graves.  She was traumatised and shocked.  She did  not  try  and
quit the police straight afterwards because she was scared.

17. The appellant was then asked why, having travelled to Sudan on  13  July
2007, she had returned to Zimbabwe on 16 September.  Her  main  reason,  she
said was to try and get a passport for her daughter, and  also  to  see  her
mother.  She knew she was taking a risk but from what  she  had  heard  from
police colleagues that she had met by chance in Sudan, she  counted  on  her
employers not yet realising she had in fact deserted.  She had not told  her
employers she was going to leave.  She travelled on  a  passport  issued  in
Zimbabwe.

18. Asked why, after arrival in the UK  in October  2007  (and  even  before
she had claimed asylum on 25 March  2009)  she  had  gone  to  the  Zimbabwe
Embassy in London to renew her passport, she said she had  done  so  because
that was the only way of getting ID.  She believed it  was  safe  to  do  so
because she was in the UK. She was also asked why she had not gone  to  UKBA
to claim asylum earlier.  Initially she did not reply but went on to say  it
was because she thought her visa was still valid.  She agreed she  had  lied
to the supermarket company, Asda, when she had applied for a job  from  them
as in fact she knew her passport was not (as she had told  Asda),  with  the
Home Office.  She had not claimed asylum until she had been  arrested  while
working.  She had been told in Zimbabwe not to claim asylum as the CIO  back
in Zimbabwe would learn about that.

19. In reply to questions from the panel the appellant said that during  the
arrest of Gibson Sibanda she was one of two present who had not been  issued
with a baton.  It was in 2007 when  she  had  first  seen  circulars  giving
details of officers alleged to be MDC supporters.  Even before  seeing  them
she knew that it would be  risky  for  any  police  officer  to  question  a
beating-up of a suspect by the police.  Further, "a bell"  had  started  "to
ring" with  her  about  the  true  nature  of  police  mistreatment  of  MDC
supporters in early 2007 when she began  feigning  illness.   Once  she  had
used the sickness excuse one or two times, she thought she  should  not  use
it again.

20. Asked further about the Plumtree incident in March 2007  she  said  that
the police had tried to  carry  out  an  investigation  into  who  had  been
responsible for the killings. Her clear information when she went there  was
that it was ZANU-PF supporters who were responsible.   She  and  others  had
been  told  to  go  there  to  investigate  but  they  were  not  given  the
opportunity (she asked about taking photos, but was told there was not  much
point).  She agreed that burying bodies was a way  of  assisting  a  "cover-
up".  She knew she was "covering up" serious crimes.

21. She said that when she had left for Sudan in  July  2007,  she  believed
the ban on police resignations was still in place.

22. We heard oral submissions from the parties which  are  summarised  below
at  paras 58-73. At the end of the hearing we directed that the parties  had
permission to submit further case  law  and  submissions  dealing  with  the
possible crimes against humanity dimension of the appellant's  role  in  the
Plumtree incident in March 2007. We duly received further  submissions  from
both parties.

Background Evidence

23. It is not intended that we summarise each and every item  of  background
material; these are listed in Appendix C. It will  assist,  however,  if  we
summarise key parts of this  evidence  relating  to  police  activities  and
conduct in Zimbabwe in general and in Bulawayo in particular. These  furnish
a useful prologue to our summary of the expert evidence, which follow  them.


The Republic of Zimbabwe Police (ZRP)
24. In its  November  2005  report  the  Zimbabwe  Human  Rights  NGO  Forum
described the police as being divided into  specialised  units,  namely  the
Duty Uniform Branch (DUB), the Police Protection  Unit  (PPU);  the  Support
Unit (a paramilitary branch), Criminal Investigation Department  (CID),  the
Staff Branch and the Technicians Branch.  It describes the police  force  as
dominated by a "culture of impunity". The  March  2003  report  by  Zimbabwe
Human Rights NGO Forum on Torture by State Agents in  Zimbabwe,  June  2001-
April 2002  noted  that  in  2002  the  percentage  of  police  perpetrators
identified by victims  was  12%  (ZANU-PF  supporters  accounted  for  46%).
Numerous reports highlight the  fact  that  during  Operation  Murambatsvina
(Restore Order or Clean up  Filth)  in  May  2005,  which  according  to  UN
estimates left 700,000 people without homes  or  livelihoods,  most  of  the
widespread demolition of urban markets and homes had  been  carried  out  by
the police, with help from the army and National Youth  Service.  The  Human
Rights Watch report of May 2007 ("Bashing dissent") stated that  the  police
routinely used unnecessary force to disrupt peaceful  protests  and  subject
activists to severe beating and other mistreatment in police  custody.   The
culture of impunity within  the  police  is  also  the  main  theme  of  the
September 2009  Amnesty  International  document:  "Zimbabwe:  the  toll  of
impunity".

Bulawayo

25. According to the US State Department Report for 2002, in  November  2001
hundreds  of  war  veterans  and  ZANU-PF  supporters   attacked   shoppers,
schoolchildren and other persons in  Bulawayo,  causing  numerous  injuries.
No arrests were made.  A Human Rights Watch  Report  for  2009  ("Video  and
Shadow") notes that  in  2002  the  presence  of  youth  militia  increased,
particularly  in  Harare  and  Bulawayo.  A   "Zimbabwe:   Post-Presidential
Election Report" of May  2002  by  Physicians  for  Human  Rights,  Denmark,
documents an incident that year in Bulawayo  in  which  youth  militia  beat
nine people.  Initially uniformed police from the Support  Unit  watched  on
and did not intervene although they did later move in to rescue the nine.

26. Physicians for Human Rights Denmark in a 17 April 2003  report  entitled
"Peaceful Protest and Police Torture in the city of Bulawayo 24  February  -
25 March 2003" chronicle the detention of civilians at Queen's  Club  Sports
Ground during the above dates when Zimbabwe played  overseas  teams  in  the
World Cup cricket competition. It is stated that "the  current  authors  are
aware of 15 detainees in relation to the first  match  in  Bulawayo,  of  42
detainees in relation to the second and of 23 detainees in relation  to  the
third. All those detained have reported torture or  serious  ill-treatment".
The report went on to note that all the  interviewees  reported  that  their
abuse took place at least in part at Bulawayo Central Police  Station.   The
interrogators were said to be from the Law and Order section of  the  police
and those inflicting beatings being the CID.

27. A US State Department Report February 2005 says that at  this  match  80
persons were arrested.  This report also describes four women's  account  of
ill-treatment by police at Central Police Station, Bulawayo on 8 March  2003
following 21  arrests  at  an  international  women's  rally  demonstration.
There  were  similar  reports  of  police  ill-treatment  at  several  other
stations  in  Bulawayo,  including  the  Nkulumare  Police   Station   which
concerned the detention of seven civilians  on  18-19  February  2003.  This
report also notes that, in order to  put  pressure  on  the  church  not  to
criticise Mugabe, the government had charged the Catholic diocese  of  Hwnge
and the Catholic Mater Dei  Hospital  in  Bulawayo  for  allegedly  handling
foreign exchange illegally.

28. The 2006 Freedom House Report noted that Operation  Murambatsvira  began
on 19 May 2005 in  Harare  and  soon  spread  to  almost  every  urban  area
including Killney and Ngozi Mine (both suburbs of Bulawayo).   The  Zimbabwe
Human Rights NGO Forum  Political  Violence  Report  2005  records  that  in
September 2005 thirteen members of  Women  of  Zimbabwe  Arise  (WOZA)  were
arrested at a demonstration and spent the night in the cells.

29. The US State Department report of February 2007 records that on  16  May
2006 in Bulawayo three church  leaders  from  the  Christian  Alliance  were
briefly held accused of planning nationwide demonstrations in  commemoration
of the first anniversary of Operation Murambatsvina.  On 29  November  2006,
also in Bulawayo,  57  WOZA  demonstrators  were  arrested  for  holding  an
illegal demonstration and it was reported  some  were  assaulted  whilst  in
detention.

30. The Zimbabwean Human Rights NGO  Forum  Political  Violence  report  for
July 2006 notes demonstrations by students in March and by students and  the
Bulawayo Residents Association in June  2006.   The  Zimbabwe  Human  Rights
Forum report of December 2006 "Who  Guards  the  Guards?",  which  documents
reports of police human rights violations in that  period,  noted  that  the
majority were  from  Harare  and  that  there  were  "very  few  cases  from
Bulawayo" (although press reports  for  Bulawayo  were  nearly  10%  of  the
total).  A table in this report lists  five  names  of  police  perpetrators
from Bulawayo (the highest was from Harare: 27).

31.  The  Human  Rights  Watch  report  for  May  2007  ("Bashing  dissent")
documents mass  arrests  following  an  aborted  prayer  meeting  in  March,
including in Bulawayo.  The Zimbabwe Human Rights NGO Forum  in  a  December
2007 political violence report notes that in April 2007 82 members  of  WOZA
were arrested for protesting against incessant government cuts in 2007.   In
the course of the same series of incidents 6 members  of  WOZA  in  Bulawayo
were allegedly taken by force from their various  homes  by  the  police  in
vehicles bearing South African number plates to a secluded area 40  km  away
from Bulawayo.  They were questioned  about  the  whereabouts  of  the  WOZA
leaders.  They were not released until the next day.  Also in  2007,  on  19
April two National University of  Science  and  Technology  (NUST)  students
were  reportedly  abducted  and  tortured  by  suspected  CIO  operating  in
Bulawayo.  In May police dispersed students at NUST in Bulawayo.  In  August
at NUST a student representative  was  arrested  and  tortured  at  Bulawayo
Central Police Station. In October of the  same  year  police  arrested  158
members of WOZA in Bulawayo for protesting.

Expert Witnesses

32. The  appellant's  representatives  produced  written  reports  from  two
witnesses, W1 and W2.  In view of the anonymity order  it  is  inappropriate
to give any further particulars about them save to  say  that  both  parties
accepted they had relevant expertise based in part  on  their  own  contacts
within Zimbabwe with a wide range of actors.

W1: written reports

33. There were three reports from W1, the most relevant being that dated  14
April 2011, which set out his understanding of the  events  since  2007  and
the latest political situation in Zimbabwe.   Given  that  W1  in  his  oral
evidence and Mr Symes in his submissions did not seek  to  argue  that  this
evidence disclosed a greater degree of  risk  to  failed  asylum-seekers  on
return  than  identified  in  current  Tribunal  country  guidance,  it   is
unnecessary  to  say  anything  more  about  those  parts  of  this   report
addressing this aspect.

34. As to the earlier political history of Zimbabwe, W1 states in his  April
2011 report that in the last nine years  an  estimated  25,000  people  have
been the  victims  of  human  rights  abuses,  including:  endemic  torture,
beatings, murders and disappearances An estimated 200,000  became  displaced
persons.  Operation Murambatsvina in May 2005 saw widespread  demolition  of
urban markets and homes, most of them carried out by the  police  with  help
from the army and National Youth Service, and, according  to  UN  estimates,
left 700,000 people without homes or  livelihoods.   MDC  members  were  the
prime  targets.   The  state-sponsored  violence  was  compounded  by  total
impunity for state forces and their non-state surrogates.  A key feature  of
the ZANU style is the demand for overt loyalty.

35. As regards the police, from early 2000  there  was  evidence  of  police
refusal to  enforce  the  law  when  it  came  to  on-the-ground  operations
conducted by the youth militia.  One of W1's sources (cited  at  para  8.82)
said that the general public and low-level police were only mildly aware  of
police 'misdemeanours' prior to 2000, during the time when the police had  a
reasonably professional image.  But since 2000 all  senior  police  officers
have made plain their allegiance to ZANU-PF on a number of occasions.

36. In 2007 there had been attacks on police stations and a passenger  train
which the regime blamed on the MDC.

37. W1 cites one of his sources (his report para 84) stating that  it  would
be very unusual for someone working in the ZRP in the years  after  2000  to
have access to any media  other  than  pro-ZANU-PF  sources.   If  a  normal
police officer had no social  networks  (church,  family  or  other)  or  no
direct personal experiences of police misbehaviour, it was  highly  unlikely
he or she  would  have  reason  not  to  believe  the  propaganda  supplied.
Further, political tension was less in Matebeleland (of which  Bulawayo  was
a part) and there was a more limited ZANU-PF presence, with the result  that
much policing activity was devoted to  dealing  with  ordinary  criminality.
Being a serving police officer would mean that fellow  churchgoers  critical
of ZANU-PF were likely not to raise political matters with you.

38. A recent estimate was that since 2000  some  20,000  former  police  and
army staff from  all  levels  have  left  Zimbabwe  having  quit  government
service.  Many more may have left the services without being able  to  leave
Zimbabwe.  Overall, current staffing levels of the police are  about  30,000
and  the  army  about  35,000.   Thus  at  least  a  third   of   relatively
professional staff have  left  and  been  replaced  by  graduates  from  the
National Youth Service.

39. According to one of W1's sources (his report,  para  88)  there  were  a
number of periods when police  resignations  were  banned:  2001,  2002  and
following the 2005 election.  In 2002-2004 the problem of deserters had  led
to the creation of  a  "Commissioner's  pool"  to  retain,  but  quarantine,
senior officers suspected of insufficient loyalty.

40. The appellant's account of the AWOL procedures applied in her  case  was
found by one of W1's sources to be plausible.  It was  plausible  also  that
in 2007 someone with sufficient funds would have been able  to  sort  out  a
passport for a minor Zimbabwe national.  The legal requirement  was  that  -
assuming the parents were both in Zimbabwe - at least one should  attend  at
the passport office when applying or  otherwise  someone  with  a  power  of
attorney to act on their behalf.  Should an internal  police  procedure  for
an officer being AWOL be carried out, this would not  necessarily  interfere
with the Registrar General's procedure in issuing a passport, but since  the
passport office would be one of the first agencies to  be  told  of  someone
being AWOL, it would be advisable to avoid it.

41. In 2007, writes W1, Zimbabwe's border with Botswana was porous.

W1: emails etc.
42. W1 also produced copies of a number of emails and a "Note" from  one  of
his principal sources dated 7 October 2011 which described: 'youth  militia'
presence at police stations in Zimbabwe as being 'commonplace';  during  the
2005 elections violence being more limited in  Bulawayo;  and  during  2006-
2009 there being a significant shakeup of the  police  resulting  in  a  new
round of witch-hunting by  the  police  for  opposition  supporters.   A  10
October 2011 note from the same  source  stated  that  bringing  a  case  of
desertion from the police to court might result in imprisonment of not  more
than two years.  "However, other measures, non-judicial, are possible,  such
as harassment about housing, or debts real or alleged".

W1: oral evidence

43. W1 reminded the Tribunal that  his  report  produced  for  this  hearing
dated 10 March 2011 had been written before the Tribunal  had  reported  its
country guidance case EM and others (Returnees) Zimbabwe CG [2011]  UKUT  98
(IAC) on 14 March 2011; but he did not consider that  for  the  purposes  of
this appeal anything turned on any differences between the  views  expressed
in his report and the assessment made in EM.

44. Asked about developments in Zimbabwe post-EM, WI said that  ZANU-PF  had
sought to make political capital out of the events of  the  Arab  Spring  by
organising a petition against UN sanctions imposed on  the  Gadhafi  regime:
these sanctions were portrayed as a "western plot" and Mugabe  continued  to
voice  support  for  Gadhafi.  ZANU-PF  were   continuing   to   press   for
presidential elections this year rather than in 2012  and  had  been  behind
increased incidents of violence, particularly in Harare.

45. W1 said that from the very  beginning  of  Zimbabwe  as  an  independent
state the police force has been aligned with ZANU-PF.  Its ranks were  drawn
heavily from former liberation fighters but its politicisation  had  been  a
gradual process.  From 2000 the police had become more  involved  in  direct
violence against the MDC and had developed closer links with  ZANU-PF  youth
militia.  Youth training had started in 2003 and induction of youth  militia
into the police sped up in 2005.   At  the  same  time  there  had  been  an
ongoing struggle between those in  the  police  who  saw  their  role  as  a
professional body devoted to upholding law and order and  those  who  wanted
it to be a political tool of ZANU-PF.  The  picture  nationally  was  mixed,
with the police in some areas being able to maintain a  professional  ethos.
Attempts by some NGOs to provide human rights training  to  the  police  had
ceased in 1998/99.  The process of  politicisation  went  through  different
phases: very pronounced in 2002 around the elections that  year;  marked  by
less violence during the 2005 elections; in full  swing  during  2007.   The
high point was 2008 when there  were  increased  numbers  of  ZANU-PF  youth
militia who became police.

46. Mr Ouseley asked W1 about mention in his report that there were  various
periods when the government banned police resignations.  W1  said  that  the
ban on resignations was accompanied by  a  procedure  for  putting  officers
whose loyalty was suspect on watch; the numbers involved had  been  as  many
as  several  thousand.   He  confirmed  that  given  the  high   levels   of
bureaucratic  inefficiency,  it  was  quite  possible  that   the   Zimbabwe
authorities could take over 90 days  to  identify  certain  persons  in  the
police as deserters to the border and airport authorities.

47. Asked about levels of political violence  in  Bulawayo  since  2000,  W1
said that although in 2000-2002 there had  been  incidents  of  violence  in
that town, the fact that it was used as a commercial site by  white  farmers
and had been more sympathetic to the MDC position on most issues meant  that
ZANU-PF had accepted it would not win political control of  this  area.   He
did not accept that levels of police violence in Bulawayo had been  as  high
as in other areas.  He agreed  that  Zimbabwe-wide  the  great  majority  of
those in the police force and other areas of the security  sector  would  be
pro-ZANU-PF supporters.  He accepted that nevertheless  police  in  Bulawayo
would generally act under orders from the higher echelons of  the  ZRP.   It
was likely that all serving police would have been aware of statements  from
some senior government officials that all  police  should  support  ZANU-PF,
but statements from other senior officials had not been on the  same  lines.
It was also important to  bear  in  mind  that  there  were  differences  in
approach from different parts of the police, e.g. between those  responsible
for riot control and law and order on the one hand and those doing  ordinary
criminal investigation or traffic control work on the other.

48. W1 said he accepted that police officers in  Bulawayo  would  have  been
aware that there were police abuses  against  MDC  members  and  supporters,
especially during the policing of MDC  rallies;  but  sometimes,  especially
when it came to whites, they preferred to leave it to the youth militias  to
do the beating up.  Police virtually never arrested ZANU-PF members  or,  if
they did, the latter were released very quickly  without  follow-up.   After
the  2008  elections  there  were  general  amnesties  for   known   ZANU-PF
supporters.  From 2006 onwards there had been  an  increasing  incidence  of
ZANU-PF militia  being  "attached"  to  police  stations  to  help  them  in
policing MDC  rallies  etc.   Serving  police  officers  working  in  police
stations would have been told about this.

49. In reply to questions from the panel, W1 said that  up  until  2007  the
media in Bulawayo was very much monopolised by ZANU-PF papers  and  radio/tv
stations.  In 2007 there was a  well-known  incident  involving  a  Catholic
Archbishop speaking out against the Mugabe regime  and  youth  militia  were
deployed to try and obstruct his dissemination of pastoral messages.

W2
50. In a report dated 25 March 2010  W2  described  the  ZRP  as  comprising
various departments including the uniformed police,  Criminal  Investigation
Department (CID); Traffic police;  and  specialised  units  such  as  Police
Internal Security and Intelligence Unit (PISI) and the Riot Police.

51.  The  ZRP  has  a  "dual  tradition  of  following  professional  police
procedure in some instances and  abandoning  this  and  following  political
directions in others".  W2 described  2000-2002  as  a  transitional  period
which saw the most experienced policemen leaving and being replaced in  many
instances by former members of the youth brigades,  resulting  in  increased
levels of violence against criminals and political suspects by  the  police,
and a return to the utility of 1980s-style  state-sponsored  violence  as  a
political tool.

52. W2 said he was aware that in 2006 there  was  a  ZRP  directive  banning
resignations.  W2 said that for a member of the ZRP to refuse to  take  part
in  an  interrogation  if  called  upon  to  do  so  would  be  treated   as
insubordination, - the penalties for which would  range  generally  speaking
from a verbal or written warning,  to  a  forcible  transfer  or  dismissal;
there   can   also   be   harder   penalties,   including   a   fine,    and
arrest/imprisonment.  "If the person continued to refuse to  participate  in
interrogation they would presumably  be  suspected  of  having  a  political
agenda  and  supporting  the  opposition.   This   could   result   in   the
"defaulters" being arrested and imprisoned/tortured themselves".

53. W2 said that mass desertions and resignations of army and police  during
the last decade had led to the authorities clamping down on those trying  to
leave legally.   "If  MT  had  tried  to  resign,  it  is  likely  that  her
resignation would  have  been  blocked/rejected  and  she  would  have  been
questioned as to why she wanted to resign.  Her  political  loyalties  would
have been questioned, and she  would  have  had  to  'prove'  her  political
allegiance  by  participating  in  more  political   interrogations/violence
against opposition activists".

54. W2 assessed that  in  2000  and  2002  the  levels  of  police  violence
associated with the elections was just as high in Bulawayo as compared  with
other areas.  Around the 2005 elections  however,  Bulawayo  had  much  less
violence than the rest of the country.

55. W2 did not find it implausible that MT had only been asked  in  2007  to
get involved in violence against MDC activists.

56.  For  police  who  went  absent  without  leave  (AWOL),  W2  said   his
understanding  was  that  there  would  first  be  a  letter  sent  by   the
individual's branch/depot.  If that received no response, there  might  then
be a follow-up letter from a senior commanding officer, copied  to  all  the
main police depots in Zimbabwe advising them that the subject is AWOL.   The
family of the subject would also be notified.  In some instances, a  warrant
of arrest may be issued for desertion of duty.

57. W2 also dealt with risks the appellant was likely to face on  the  basis
she was a deserter.


Submissions

58. Mr Ouseley addressed us first on the issue of credibility.  He asked  us
to find that whilst it was accepted the appellant had been a member  of  the
ZRP from 2000-2007, she had not been able to give a credible account of  her
role whilst serving there.  She had only claimed asylum  after  having  been
arrested for illegally working.  She had given inconsistent  evidence  about
whether she was a duty officer (constable) or a detective  and  whether  she
had  seen  any  MDC  supporters  transferred  from  her  police  station  as
political suspects.  Her  account  of  having  no  awareness  of  the  close
interconnection between the police and ZANU-PF until early 2007  was  simply
not plausible.  To the extent  that  she  had  admitted  to  involvement  in
certain incidents involving mistreatment of MDC supporters, she had  clearly
sought to minimise her own level  of  participation  and  complicity  beyond
what was credible.  Only under questioning had she admitted  that  her  role
in the Plumtree incident was essentially to help "cover up" a  mass  murder.
On the strength of W1's evidence, it was not plausible she could  have  been
as unaware as she claimed of the long-standing political policy of  the  ZRP
to harass MDC supporters and of  the  significant  number  of  incidents  in
which police used unacceptable levels of violence  against  MDC  supporters.
W1's report had described an increasing  politicisation  of  the  Zimbabwean
police since 2000.  The police force had  been  staffed  from  its  creation
with war veterans and the police had  acquired  a  reputation  early  on  as
undisciplined, violent and corrupt.  Even those  who  tried  to  be  neutral
professionals would have known they had many colleagues who were not.

59.As to the letters the appellant had produced  from  the  Zimbabwe  police
saying that she was being treated as a deserter,  Mr  Ouseley  asked  us  to
find that they were not genuine and had been produced to  help  provide  the
appellant with a cover story.  For a genuine deserter to have gone  back  to
Zimbabwe within a few weeks of deserting would have been bizarre and  highly
risky.  On her own evidence she had no "Plan B" or story ready to  tell  the
Zimbabwe authorities if they had stopped her  at  the  point  of  return  or
subsequently - that was something which, if her account were true, she  must
have worried might happen.  Her attempt to explain why she had felt it  safe
to go to the Zimbabwe Embassy in London to renew her passport, when she  was
saying the authorities of that  country  would  have  classified  her  as  a
deserter, did not ring true; especially as  she  would  plainly  have  known
that some Zimbabwean CIO were active in the UK.

60. According to W2, Bulawayo had witnessed its share of  violence  used  by
the police and ZANU-PF  against  MDC  supporters  in  2000-2002  and,  at  a
reduced level, in 2005.  On the appellant's evidence most of  the  cases  of
arrests of MDC supporters in Bulawayo must have passed  through  her  police
station, yet she said she had seen nothing wrong except in two  cases.   The
truth was far more likely to  be  that  she  was  a  front-line  pro-ZANU-PF
police officer in an MDC stronghold.  The picture  she  sought  to  present,
that neither she nor her colleagues  ever  talked  about  politics  and  the
conflict between ZANU-PF and the MDC, was far-fetched.

61. As regards the appellant's attempts to say she had tried  to  desert  as
soon as she reasonably could, she would in  truth  have  known  well  before
2007 that she was working in a force that routinely ill-treated MDC  members
and from early 2007 would have had plenty of opportunity to  desert  earlier
than she said she did.  Regarding the first incident involving  maltreatment
of Stephen Mhlanga, even if it were accepted she  was  just  a  note  taker,
that was not a minimal role and her  presence  there  lent  support  to  the
torture used.  Similarly, even if during the  Gibson  Sibanda  incident  she
only slapped him, that was still behaviour that must  have  put,  or  helped
keep, that gentleman in a state of fear.  She was a team  player.   She  was
complicit.  She was there, voluntarily, participating in breaches  of  basic
human rights.

62. As regards whether the appellant's crimes  amounted  to  crimes  against
humanity, Mr  Ouseley  asked  us  to  regard  the  police  as  part  of  the
repressive apparatus of Mugabe's essentially one-party state which  from  an
early time had been used as a political tool to punish dissent from  ZANU-PF
policies.  There had been a targeting of many in the civilian population  on
a country-wide scale since 1988 and the level of impunity within the  police
and other security services was widespread and systematic.   The  background
evidence clearly established that the crimes committed against the  civilian
population  included  murder,  rape,  enslavement,  forcible   transfer   of
population and torture.

63. Turning to the issue of whether the appellant had a defence  of  duress,
Mr Ouseley accepted that this was a defence provided by the ICC  Statute  to
exclusion under Article 1F(a).

64. As regards mens rea, it was clear  from  R(JS)  (Sri  Lanka)  and  other
cases that mere membership of an organisation - in this  case  the  Bulawayo
branch of the ZRP  - was not enough.  But the appellant's  involvement  with
police abuses in Bulawayo went well beyond that.  To  have  been  called  to
attend at two torture scenes,  11  demonstrations  and  the  Plumtree  crime
scene, shows she must have  been  trusted  to  be  loyal.   She  voluntarily
joined a brutal police force, she had personal involvement  in  the  "cover-
up" of a mass murder and in two incidents of torture.  The  test  of  duress
is a high one requiring a person to show that not to  follow  an  order  put
them in grave and imminent peril.  Yet even after these  incidents  she  did
not leave immediately.

65. With  respect  to  the  Tribunal's  request  to  know  the  respondent's
position on Article 1F(b), Mr Ouseley said that clearly the crimes  she  had
been involved in  were  serious  and  the  context  was  non-political.   As
regards Article 1F(c), Mr Ouseley relied on  the  respondent's  Reasons  for
Refusal letter.

66. The thrust of Mr Symes' submissions was as follows.  We should find  the
appellant a credible witness.   She  had  afforded  viable  explanations  of
difficult points in her evidence.  The expert evidence of  W1  and  W2  bore
out that in Bulawayo even in 2002 and 2005 the number of  violent  incidents
directed against MDC or other opposition to ZANU-PF were  on  a  much  lower
level than in Harare.  Despite Mr Ouseley's attempts to re-characterise  it,
W1's evidence was that the politicisation of the  Zimbabwean  police  was  a
gradual process, and the struggle  between  professional  elements  and  the
more ZANU-PF- minded officers varied in nature  and  balance  from  area  to
area.  In Bulawayo the police could very  well  have  been  predominantly  a
body performing a public service.  W1 had said  it  was  entirely  plausible
that it might take  several  months  for  the  bureaucracy-prone  police  to
notify border posts about suspected or known  deserters  and  the  appellant
had a strong family motivation: to see her  mother  for  possibly  the  last
time and to try and help her daughter.  When assessing her  credibility,  it
had to be borne in mind that her  asylum  interview  had  failed  to  follow
proper procedures for suspected exclusion cases.  She  had  not  been  given
the  opportunity  to  detail  relevant   incidents   and   the   surrounding
circumstances.

67. As regards risk on return, it was entirely credible that she would  face
persecution   for  having  deserted,  being  liable  not  just  to  criminal
punishment under the Zimbabwean Police Act but also  adverse  treatment  for
having been disloyal.  Given the evidence that there was a  blanket  ban  on
resignations from the police force when she left Zimbabwe in  2007,  it  was
inevitable she would be classified as a deserter.  She  would  face  second-
stage interrogation on return and would  thus  experience  ill-treatment  at
the airport: see AA (Risk for  involuntary  returnees)  Zimbabwe  CG  [2006]
UKAIT 00061 and HS (Returning  asylum  seekers)  Zimbabwe  CG  [2007]  UKAIT
00094.  She could not be expected to lie.  By analogy with  Article  9(2)(a)
of 2004/83/EC  (the  Qualification  Directive),  she  was  someone  who  had
refused for legitimate reasons of conscience to  perform  acts  contrary  to
international  law.   If  W1's  figures  were  right,  there  had   been   a
significant number of  police  who  had  left  the  force  by  resigning  or
deserting when they could, and so this would be a sensitive point  with  the
Zimbabwe authorities, who would want to be seen to be cracking down.

68. Turning to exclusion and first of all  Article  1F(a),  Mr  Symes  first
submitted that the evidence clearly did not  establish  that  the  appellant
had been a (co-)principal in commission of  any  of  the  crimes  listed  in
Article 7 of the Rome Statute (for full  text  see  Appendix  A).   She  was
effectively  a  bystander  or  someone  with  only   minor   or   incidental
involvement.  She had not inflicted any significant  suffering.   There  was
neither actus reus nor mens rea for any torture.  The offence of aiding  and
abetting needed specific intent and that was lacking.  She had not  intended
to carry out torture or "cover up" evidence  of  murder.   At  Plumtree  she
arrived at the last minute  and  only  carried  out  orders.   She  was  not
reckless; she had done all she could to minimise her  own  involvement.   By
contrast with the appellant in SK (Article 1F(a) exclusion) Zimbabwe  [2010]
UKUT 327 (IAC), who had a high level of involvement in the  attacks  against
white farmers, the appellant in this case was in a very lowly position  with
limited  knowledge  of  wider  patterns  of  police   abuses   and   limited
involvement in any wrongdoings.

69. Clearly, following the guidance given by  the  Supreme  Court  in  R(JS)
(Sri Lanka) the respondent  could  not  deduce  her  complicity  as  a  non-
principal from the mere fact she was a serving police officer.   So  far  as
concerns whether she was involved in a joint criminal enterprise, the  legal
test was that she had contributed in a significant way.  That  was  not  the
case here.  As regards aiding and abetting, Mr Symes   added,  it  was  even
clearer that the legal test  here  required  a  "substantial  contribution".
Again that was not  the  case  here.   Her  involvement  was  low-level  and
involved no command responsibility.  She had decent motives for joining  the
police force and serving in it.  In the context of events  that  arose  from
early 2007 she did her best to minimise her role. She was unable  safely  to
extricate herself earlier than she did especially given that to have  spoken
out at any stage would  have  risked  making  herself  the  target  of  ill-
treatment as a traitor.  She had explained that after the Plumtree  incident
it had taken her some time to track down the details of her cousin,  so  she
could arrange exit to Sudan.

70. Also relevant were background factors such as the dominance in  Zimbabwe
media of ZANU-PF versions of events portraying MDC supporters  as  thugs  or
persons who falsely alleged police violence; and the evidence  showing  that
Bulawayo was relatively quiet in 2005 and  until  2007.   It  was  wrong  to
overlook that the vast majority of human  rights  abuses  committed  by  the
Zimbabwe regime  were  committed  by  the  Riot  Police  and  ZANU-PF  youth
militia, not the ordinary uniformed police.

71. The Court of Justice ruling in Cases C-101/09 and 57/09 known as  B  and
D v Germany (Area of Freedom, Security and Justice)  [2010]  EUECJ  C-101/09
(09 November 2010) disclosed that there was no high test of duress; para  97
suggested a lighter test.  In any event under the ICC Statute  she  met  the
test.  She suffered from ongoing threats.

72. Concerning Article  1F(c),  it  was  clear  from  the  Court  of  Appeal
judgment in Al-Sirri [2009] EWCA Civ 222 that for this sub-paragraph  to  be
engaged there had to be an international element; that was entirely  lacking
here.

73. As regards Article 1F(b), it was clearly perceived both under  the  1951
Convention and under Article 12 of the QD, that  only  very  serious  crimes
were covered.  Regarding the  exemption  in  the  latter  for  "particularly
cruel actions", it could not be said that any  of  the  appellant's  actions
fell into that category, which  envisaged  malice  and  personal  desire  to
harm.  Arguably when 1F(b) was involved the decision-maker had to take  into
account a wider range of factors than  under  1F(a).   Under  the  latter  a
crime had to be a listed crime.  Further and in  any  event,  the  case  law
made clear that when state actors were  involved  in  a  political  struggle
with other organised groups, their actions were covered by  the  "political"
proviso: see Lord Mustill in T [1996] 2 All ER 443.  Significantly the  Rome
Statute  only  dealt  with  politically  motivated  crime  as  a  crime   of
persecution.

Our Assessment

 Credibility

74. In examining the appellant's account we have looked at the  evidence  in
the round including the expert and  background  evidence,  and  applied  the
requisite standard of  proof,  bearing  in  mind  that  the  burden  on  the
appellant to prove entitlement to  international  protection  but  that  the
respondent bears the  burden  of  showing  that  the  relevant  exclusionary
provisions apply. In  addition  to  that  which  she  gave  before  us,  the
appellant's  evidence  is  contained  in  an   undated,   unsigned   initial
statement, her screening interview record  of  28  March  2009,  her  asylum
interview of 21 July 2009, her witness statement  of  20  August  2009,  her
witness statement of 10 March 2010; and the record of the evidence she  gave
before Judge Pirotta in the same month (on 23 March 2010).  We bear in  mind
that the record of her asylum interview does not show that she was given  as
full an opportunity as is envisaged in Asylum Policy Instructions to  answer
questions relating to her possible involvement in crimes  against  humanity.
At the same time, she was offered a break and took one  (see  Q84)  and  the
interview was plainly not rushed, taking a little over two hours.   We  also
bear in mind that in a case in which an appellant  gives  oral  and  written
evidence on different occasions stretching over a period of a  year  or  so,
one cannot expect total consistency of recall.  In this regard  it  is  fair
to say that  in  significant  (but  not  all)  parts  of  her  evidence  the
appellant has been broadly consistent in the story she has  given,  and,  in
relation to the bare fact that she had been  a  serving  police  officer  in
Bulawayo between 2000-2007, we consider that her description of  the  layout
of rooms and cells and similar details was  given  unhesitatingly  and  with
significant grasp of detail.

75. Notwithstanding such considerations,  we  are  not  satisfied  that  the
appellant has given us a wholly credible account.

76. Central to the appellant's account at interview, in her  latest  witness
statement and before the FTT judge, was that during her period as  a  police
officer at Bulawayo Central Station she was just a police  constable.   That
is not, however, how she described herself at  her  screening  interview  in
March 2009 when she stated that  she  was  a  police  detective  serving  in
Bulawayo and Harare.  A police detective, we are informed, is at  least  two
ranks above a police constable.  Nor is it the impression given by  the  ZRP
pay advice slip  dated  January  2007  which  refers  to  her  as  being  in
"Criminal  Investigation".   When  Mr  Ouseley  asked  her  about  this  the
appellant said, for the first time, that she had been  "attached"/(seconded)
to Criminal Investigations Department (CID) but only for three months.   She
was unable to explain to our satisfaction why she had not mentioned this  in
her asylum interview or her March 2010 witness statement or in her  evidence
before the FTT judge, on  each  occasion  when  she  had  said  without  any
qualification that she was a police constable.

77.  We  found  particularly  unsatisfactory  her  evidence  regarding   the
circumstances of her July 2007 trip and her return to Zimbabwe in  September
2007.  She said in her March 2009 statement that whilst  she  was  in  Sudan
the ZRP had written to her mother enquiring about her absence, but that  she
did not know they had done so until she arrived back at her mother's  house.
 (In her 2010 statement she said the ZRP letter was dated 9 August  and  had
been received in the second week of August).  However, she  also  said  that
immediately before she left Sudan she had asked her mother by phone  whether
the police had come looking for her and her mother had said 'no' (paras  12-
13).  If that were correct, she is asking us  to  believe  that  her  mother
neglected to tell her that there was in fact a letter addressed  to  her  as
the appellant's next-of-kin from the police, despite  the  appellant  having
specifically asked her mother a question about police interest.

78. One of the points of evidence on which the appellant has sought to  rely
in explanation of why she  felt  it  was  sufficiently  safe  to  return  to
Zimbabwe from the Sudan was  that  she  had  been  told  by  police  officer
colleagues she had by chance met there that it  would  take  quite  a  while
before they classified her as a deserter and notified  the  Zimbabwe  border
authorities of the same.  Indeed in her statement of 25 March  2010  and  in
her evidence  before  the  FTT  judge  she  sought  to  suggest  that  these
colleagues did not even tell her flatly that she was being  suspected  as  a
deserter ("...[the fellow officer] said he hoped she was not a  deserter  as
many had come to Sudan").  She said she understood him to  be  hinting  that
he knew she was being sought.  She placed this chance encounter  during  the
period when she first arrived in  Sudan  (para  49).   Yet  in  her  witness
statement earlier that month she described this chance encounter  as  taking
place in October 2007, i.e. after she had  returned  from  Zimbabwe  to  the
Sudan (para 10).  Not only is there an inconsistency in the timing  of  this
chance encounter, but what the appellant said about it in 2010  is  markedly
different from what she said in 2009.  In her asylum interview in  2009  she
was quite definite that this colleague had "highlighted to me he knew I  was
wanted as I had deserted Zimbabwe" (Q82) and, asked what her  response  was,
she replied "I panicked and I knew I was no longer safe in Sudan  because  I
did not know who was going to tell the  authorities  they  had  seen  me  in
Sudan" (Q88).  When asked whether she did not therefore feel  at  risk  when
she decided nevertheless to return to Zimbabwe, she said she had  considered
the matter "but I know that the system is very slow to inform  border  posts
and airport to publish my name as a deserter so I  just  took  advantage  of
that".  We fail to see how, if  she  truly  thought  the  authorities  would
learn from her colleagues in July, August or early September 2007  that  she
had actually left Zimbabwe and would straightaway take steps to  pursue  her
in the Sudan, she could have genuinely believed they would not at  the  same
time take immediate action to notify all relevant authorities in Zimbabwe.

79. In addition, there is also the chronology of this aspect of her  account
to consider.  She had left Zimbabwe for Sudan on the first  occasion  on  13
July 2007, returning on 16 September 2007.  That is over 8 weeks.   In  most
of her evidence the appellant has said that  she  counted  on  the  Zimbabwe
authorities being likely to take up to 3 months to alert border controls  of
her desertion.  She described the police  procedure  being  to  classify  an
officer  as  AWOL  after  an  initial  21  days  of  absence,  with  further
procedures taking another 90 days.  However, on the appellant's own  account
her own station had already put her on watch after she  had  submitted  five
sick notes early in 2007 in  order  to  avoid  carrying  out  police  duties
involving harassment of  MDC  supporters  and  so  her  station  was  likely
therefore to see her AWOL status as immediately confirming their  suspicions
that she was pro-MDC.  On her own account they did not in any event wait  90
days (or 111 days if one counts 90 days plus 21).  When  she  went  back  in
mid-September, i.e. around 56 days later, she said in her  asylum  interview
that she did not go to the passport office because the police  were  looking
for her.

80. We would also observe that if in fact the appellant knew  she  had  been
classified as a deserter but was simply counting on  the  tardiness  of  the
Zimbabwe authorities in notifying border controls of this, we do  not  think
she would have sought  to  give  the  additional  explanation  she  advanced
earlier in her screening interview.  After saying in Q2 that  she  had  been
led to believe colleagues in the police force in Zimbabwe had come  to  know
that she was in Sudan and so she felt she could  not  stay  there,  she  was
then asked why she had returned to Zimbabwe on 16 September.   She  replied:
"I just went there to check on my daughter.  I thought maybe  the  situation
may have settled.  However, it was still there so I went back  to  Sudan  on
27 September 2007".  If as she claimed, the clock was  running  down  before
police procedures resulted in her name  being  given  to  border  posts  and
immigration controls as a deserter, then it is difficult to  understand  how
she could have believed the situation may have been "settled".

81. There are also difficulties about what the appellant  said  she  did  on
return to Zimbabwe.  On her own account her principal reason for going  back
was to check on her daughter and sort out a passport for her.  Why  she  did
not take steps to sort out her  daughter's  passport  before  she  had  left
Zimbabwe the first time (she said  she  had  decided  to  leave  immediately
after the Plumptree incident in March 2007) or  why  she  did  not  consider
trying to sort out such problems whilst in the Sudan, using  trusted  family
as intermediaries, is unexplained.  The evidence given to W1  by  a  trusted
source was that a power of attorney could be  used  in  such  circumstances.
Moreover in her initial evidence she was adamant that when back in  Zimbabwe
she had not sought to hide.  At Q95 of her asylum  interview  she  said  she
had stayed for about 10 days and during this time she was able  to  go  out.
That is difficult to square with her evidence  later  on  in  the  interview
where she said she had not felt able to go to the passport  office  to  sort
out a passport for her daughter "after I heard that police were looking  for
me".  She had said she had learnt the police were looking for  her  the  day
she arrived back.

82. In her second statement the appellant's evidence  was  different  again.
She said she had not gone out except when taking the  trip  to  Botswana  to
get food for the family.  In addition she said that from 19 to 26  September
2007 (i.e. 3 days after her return)  she had gone to  a  friend's  house  in
Marondera (para 8).  In her earlier evidence by contrast  she  said  nothing
to suggest that during her 10 days back  she  stayed  anywhere  in  Zimbabwe
except at her mother's house.

83. As to the trip to Botswana in September 2007, we also find her  evidence
wanting.  On her  own  account  the  Zimbabwean  authorities  (at  least  in
Bulawayo) knew by then that she was a deserter  and  she  would  have  known
that by leaving Zimbabwe and returning again she would have to pass  through
border controls for a second time within a  few  weeks.   This  prompts  the
question as to why in such circumstances, even assuming there was an  urgent
need to buy food (to help the family cope with the food crisis),  she  would
not have tried to get someone else to go.  In her March 2010  statement  the
reason she gave for going herself was because her mother  was  too  old  and
did not drive, but on her own evidence she had  a  sister  and  other  close
family and  we  find  it  surprising  that  she  has  never  suggested  that
consideration had been given to finding someone else.  Mr Symes  has  sought
to highlight evidence that the Botswana border was 'porous'; that may be  so
but it was not suggested by the appellant that she knew or counted on that.

84. A further dimension of difficulty is that her account of the  extent  of
her involvement in police  mistreatment  of  MDC  supporters  has  not  been
consistent;  over  time  she  had  sought  to  qualify   and   minimise   it
significantly.  In her asylum interview in July 2009 she was asked a  number
of questions that arose out of her screening interview  statement  that  she
was "asked to go and beat people and torture people which I  did  not  agree
with".  At Q49 she was asked  whether  she  had  been  involved  in  beating
anyone.  She replied, "Yes we used to beat  up  people".   At  Q50  she  was
asked whether she could remember any specific incidents of this and gave  as
an example in reply the White City rally in February 2007 she had  mentioned
earlier.  Asked if she had beaten up any known MDC activists, she said  that
at rallies people were mixed "so you  didn't  know  who  you  are  beating".
When asked about whether she had been involved in torturing anyone she  gave
as an example the incident in  February  2007  [involving  Stephen  Mhlanga]
stating that she had been involved in torturing as part  of  a  group.   She
then described  Mhlanga  being  blindfolded  and  tortured.   Whilst  it  is
perfectly true that in  these  answers  the  appellant  does  not  expressly
confirm that she personally had done the  blindfolding  and  torturing,  she
said nothing to suggest she had not been  involved  in  doing  so  and  gave
these examples in reply to specific questions about whether  she  personally
had beaten people and tortured them.  In subsequent accounts,  by  contrast,
she was adamant, in relation to the White City rally that "I  did  not  beat
anyone" (para 7, 25 March 2010 statement).  Similarly, in  relation  to  the
Stephen Mhlanga incident her subsequent accounts portray her role  as  being
confined to taking notes and  saying  a  few  bad  words  to  him.   In  her
evidence before the FTT judge she said she did ask Mhlanga a few  aggressive
questions but her body language was  not  threatening  (para  49).   Leaving
aside that it is not immediately clear how, if  this  man  was  blindfolded,
her body language would be known to  him,  we  consider  that  this  revised
account, if true, was one she could and should have  given  earlier  in  her
asylum interview or August 2009 witness statement.

85. The appellant's consistent evidence as to the  state  of  her  knowledge
about Zimbabwe police mistreating political opponents was that  it  was  not
until 2007 that she realised this.  In her March  2010  statement  she  said
that up until that  date  she  perceived  the  police  to  be  generally  an
impartial law-enforcement body.  In submissions on behalf of  the  appellant
Mr Symes sought to argue that this account was  credible  and  supported  by
the background country evidence.  In particular he sought to  highlight  the
fact that in Bulawayo the evidence indicated that  the  police  there  until
2007 were  relatively  well-disciplined  and  relatively  professional.   He
highlighted her evidence that even though she knew that  there  had  been  a
significant number of violent incidents (stating  that  she  knew  the  2005
elections "had been very violent"), she believed  that  insofar  as  any  of
these were alleged  to  involve  police  brutality,  "the  MDC  were  making
incidents up" and she just accepted  the  government's  version.   She  also
said that she and  her  police  colleagues  did  not  discuss  the  violence
between themselves, nor did she hear  talk  about  it  at  church  or  other
community events (paras 2-5, statement of 10 March 2010).

86. We have several reactions to that submission.   First,  the  appellant's
evidence has been for the most part that her  understanding  of  the  police
role pre-2007 related to their role  in  Zimbabwe  generally,  not  only  or
specifically in Bulawayo; and  in  relation  to  the  national  picture,  we
cannot accept that anyone serving in the Zimbabwe police  at  the  country's
second largest police station would not have known that pre-2007  there  had
been a significant number of  incidents  in  which  police  encounters  with
political opponents of ZANU-PF had involved a notable use of force.

87. Second, whilst we can accept  that  she  may  have  thought  the  police
violence was a legitimate use  of  force  in  the  course  of  public  order
enforcement, we cannot accept that she was unaware that  such  violence  had
been inflicted by the police.

88. We are also unable to accept  her  claim  that  her  awareness  both  of
police abuse and her own  level  of  disagreement  with  it  was  a  gradual
process of disassociation which did not  crystallise  sufficiently  for  her
to decide to desert until mid-2007 (eg  para  15  of  her  statement  of  20
August 2009).  On her own account, even before the Stephen Mhlanga  incident
in mid-February 2007, her own unhappiness at being asked  to  take  part  in
operations involving violence towards MDC supporters,  had led her to  feign
illness on five occasions and to have been told by someone that as a  result
she had been placed under scrutiny.  That is to say, even before she  became
involved in the Mhlanga, Sibanda and Plumtree incidents,  her  evidence  was
that she felt disquiet: in her own words  to  us  (even  at  that  stage)  a
"bell" had "rung".  Further, on her  own  account,  despite  perceiving  the
most serious incident of all to be the Plumtree incident in March  2007  (in
her  witness  statement  for  March  2010  she  said  this  was  "the   most
traumatising and disturbing experience I have had  in  the  police  force  -
digging graves for unknown bodies and  burying  them  all  in  the  name  of
trying to cover up for ZANU-PF acts" (para 10),   she  continued  to  go  to
work normally and in the next month to take part in police dispersal of  the
MDC during a rally.

89. Part of our concerns about this aspect of her evidence  relates  to  her
own account of what she witnessed during her period  of  duty  in  Bulawayo.
In the course of her evidence she confirmed that she worked  at  the  city's
largest police station (the second largest in Zimbabwe) and that she  worked
in the charge office,  regularly  having  responsibility  for  dealing  with
arrested suspects when they were brought into the station or also when  they
were charged.  She also said in her witness statement of  August  2009  that
she had been instructed to  take  Mhlanga  to  the  cells,  leaving  further
interrogation to the CID.  Yet at the same time she  was  insistent  in  her
evidence before us that in her 7 years as a police officer at  this  station
(leaving aside the Stephen Mhlanga and Gibson Sibanda cases)  she  had  only
received a complaint from a suspect on one or two occasions  that  they  had
been ill-treated whilst in police custody  or  detention  and  she  did  not
suggest these were MDC-related.  This covered the  time  in  2007  when  the
police had attacked MDC supporters at the White City rally.   Even  allowing
for the fact that the two country experts who have written reports  for  her
case were not wholly ad idem about the level of police mistreatment  of  MDC
supporters in Bulawayo, we note that both they and other background  sources
(for the latter see paras 25-31 above) are clear that over  this  period  of
time there were significant incidents in which police used violence  against
MDC supporters and we do not find it credible she knew of none.


90. We  shall  need  to  consider  below  the  implications  for  our  above
assessment of her evidence for the issues of participation  and  complicity;
but our concern here is simply  to  make  clear  that  her  own  account  of
gradual realisation and gradual dissociation crystallising  in  mid-2007  is
not borne out by her own  narrative:  in  particular  by  the  time  of  the
Plumtree incident in March she could scarcely have had  a  higher  level  of
knowledge of the extent of police abuses or of repugnance to it,  yet  after
that she remained serving in the police and at the end of April went  on  to
participate  in  the   Sibanda   torture   incident   (albeit,   she   said,
reluctantly).

91. A further shortcoming in her evidence concerns the explanation she  gave
for why she felt able shortly after arrival in the UK to go to the  Zimbabwe
Embassy  in  London  to  renew  her  passport.   On  her  own  evidence  her
understanding at that time was that the Zimbabwe CIO was active in  the  UK,
indeed she had said she had avoided claiming asylum because  she  had  heard
there were Zimbabwe CIO patrolling UK airports.  She further  accepted  that
in  order  to  complete  particulars  to  obtain  a  passport  renewal,  the
Zimbabwean authorities needed to, and did, send a  form  to  her  sister  in
Zimbabwe (FTT determination, para 52).  We doubt  she  would  have  involved
her sister if she genuinely  believed  that  the  Zimbabwe  authorities  had
classified her as a deserter.  By this  time  it  had  been  several  months
since she had deserted.

92. A further concern we have relates to her explanation  for  why  she  had
not claimed asylum on arrival in September 2007.  On her  own  evidence  she
was clearly aware when she came that MDC members from Zimbabwe  had  claimed
asylum in the UK.  She said her reason for not claiming  was  not  ignorance
but fear  -  fear  that  the  Zimbabwean  CIO  kept  a  close  watch  on  UK
immigration controls and so would learn about her desertion.   If  she  felt
confident enough to visit the Zimbabwe Embassy in person we cannot see  that
she could genuinely have feared that contacting  the  UK  authorities  would
put her at risk.  The appellant clearly had time to plan her departure  from
Zimbabwe and particularly given her claimed realisation  by  early  to  mid-
2007 that MDC supporters were being persecuted, we do not accept  she  would
have lacked confidence that claiming asylum in the  UK  was  a  confidential
process.  Furthermore, we are quite satisfied she would have known that  her
UK visa had expired on 3 March 2008 and that in order to avoid  becoming  an
overstayer, she would need to make an application of  some  kind  to  secure
stay.

93. In considering the appellant's account in the light of the  evidence  as
a whole (and applying Tanveer Ahmed principles) we are not  able  to  accept
that the letters she produced from the Bulawayo police - one dated 9  August
2007 addressed to the appellant's mother and  signed  by  "N  Nsingo,  Chief
Inspector, Bulawayo Central Police Station",  the  other  dated  10  October
2007 addressed to  the  appellant  and  signed  by  "T  Gunguwo,  Inspector,
Administration, Bulawayo Central Police Station" - are reliable. We bear  in
mind that false documents can be obtained in Zimbabwe relatively easily  and
that in any event the appellant is likely to have colleagues  in  her  local
police station prepared to assist with such documentation. We  are  prepared
to accept, however, that the January 2007 pay advice  slip  is  genuine  and
indeed neither party sought to persuade us otherwise.

94. For all the above reasons (1)  we  consider  that  her  account  of  her
precise  role  as  a  serving  police  officer   between   2000-2007   lacks
credibility; and (2) we are fully satisfied that she  was  a  detective  and
that her involvement in police mistreatment of MDC  supporters  was  greater
than she claimed.  The matter of  the  timing  and  extent  of  her  greater
involvement  is  one  to  which  we  shall  turn,   when   considering   the
implications of our findings of fact for her legal position under  the  1951
Convention,  the Directive 2004/83/EC (the Refugee Qualification  Directive)
and Article 3 ECHR.

Application of the exclusion clauses

95. Our principal task is to decide whether there are "serious  reasons  for
considering" that the appellant has committed an  act  contrary  to  Article
1F: see Yasser Al_Sirri [2009] EWCA Civ 222 and R(JS) (Sri Lanka)  para  39.
In the 13 January 2010 Reasons for  Refusal  letter  the  respondent  stated
that there were serious reasons  for  considering  that  the  appellant  was
complicit in the crimes against humanity committed by  the  ZRP  during  her
period of service and she thereby stood to  be  excluded  from  the  Refugee
Convention under: (i) Article 1F(a)  of  the  1951  Convention  as  she  had
committed crimes against humanity as part of  a  joint  criminal  enterprise
and as an aider and abettor; and  (ii) Article 1F(c) because  she  had  been
guilty of acts contrary  to  the  purposes  and  principles  of  the  United
Nations.  The thrust of the  appellant's  appeal  is  that  neither  Article
1F(a) nor Article 1F(c) apply to her,  and  that  she  is  a  refugee  under
Article 1A(2).

Article 1F(b)

96. At the outset of the hearing we raised with the  parties  the  issue  of
whether  the  appellant  fell  (additionally  or   otherwise)   within   the
exclusionary scope of Article 1F(b): we had previously issued directions  to
ensure the parties made submissions as to the implications of the  Court  of
Justice ruling in B and D v Germany (Area of Freedom, Security and  Justice)
[2010] EUECJ C-101/09 (9 November 2010), which concerned Article  1F(b)  and
the equivalent provision of the Qualification Directive,  Article  12(2)(b).
In response, both parties made submissions, Mr Symes arguing that we  should
find that the appellant was not caught by Article  1F(b)  (we  have  already
noted his submissions on this at para 73) and Mr Ouseley arguing  we  should
find the opposite.

97. Neither party sought to submit that  it  was  impermissible  for  us  to
extend our inquiry to embrace Article 1F(b).   We  are  conscious,  however,
that in MH (Syria) DS (Afghanistan) [2009] EWCA Civ 226 the Court of  Appeal
was faced with a case in which the Secretary of State had sought to rely  as
a ground of appeal in the case of DS on the  contention  that  the  Tribunal
had erred in failing to consider categories of exclusion  under  Article  1F
other than crimes against humanity.  Richards LJ dealt with this  ground  as
follows:

    "74.   Despite the position taken by the Home Office Presenting Officer
         before the senior immigration judge, Mr Sheldon pursued  the  point
         before us.  He submitted that the immigration  judge  was  under  a
         duty to consider, in the light of her findings,  whether  the  case
         fell within Article 1F(b) or (c).   Where  Article  1F  issues  are
         obvious in the Robinson sense they must be taken  by  the  tribunal
         even if not raised by the parties: see Gurung paras 38, 47 and  92;
         Secretary of State for the Home Department v A (Iraq)  [2005]  EWCA
         Civ 1438, paras 27-30; and GH (Afghanistan) v  Secretary  of  State
         for the Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ 1603, para 16.   What  made
         the existence of an issue under Article 1F(b)  or  (c)  obvious  in
         this case was that DS was a member of an  organisation  engaged  in
         large-scale torture and that he was found to have known  about  the
         abuses.  The immigration judge was under an obligation to  consider
         the issue even though  the  Secretary  of  State's  case  had  been
         limited to Article 1F(a) and therefore, on the immigration  judge's
         findings, pitched too high.  Had she considered it, she  must  have
         concluded that the exclusion under Article  1F(c),  at  least,  was
         engaged.  Her failure to take the point of her own  motion  was  an
         error of law, and the senior immigration judge was  wrong  to  find
         otherwise.


    75.    I readily accept that the Secretary of State might  have  had  a
         case against DS under Article 1F(b) or (c)  had  the  evidence  and
         argument been presented in that way.  But that  was  not  the  case
         advanced.  The case was put squarely  on  participation  in  crimes
         against humanity, within Article 1F(a).  That was the basis of  the
         Secretary of State's original decision and of her case  before  the
         immigration judge.  That was the issue to which  the  evidence  and
         submissions on behalf of DS were addressed.  In order to  pursue  a
         case under Article 1F(b) or (c), the Secretary of State would  have
         had to give notice of the precise way in which the  case  was  put,
         and DS would  have  had  to  be  given  an  opportunity  to  obtain
         additional expert evidence and make further submissions.  That  was
         not done.  The issues arising  under  article  1F  are  potentially
         complex and the immigration judge could not sensibly reach  a  view
         on the application of Article 1F(b) or (c) simply on the  basis  of
         evidence and submissions directed to Article  1F(a).   If,  despite
         the way in which  the  Secretary  of  State's  case  was  put,  the
         immigration judge considered that Article 1F(b) or (c) ought to  be
         considered, it would have been open to her to invite the parties to
         deal with the issues, granting an appropriate adjournment  for  the
         purpose.  But it cannot be said that she was required  to  go  down
         that line, let alone that she was required to  determine  the  case
         under Article 1F(b) or (c) on the basis of the  existing  material.
         Even if the Secretary of State is entitled to rely on the  Robinson
         principle in relation to  an  issue  such  as  this,  which  it  is
         unnecessary to decide, the applicability of Article 1F(b)  and  (c)
         was not an obvious point (one with a strong  prospect  of  success)
         such as to engage the principle  and  to  require  the  immigration
         judge to take the point for herself.


    76.    Accordingly, the immigration judge did not fall into legal error
         by failing to take the point."


98. We are left in some doubt as to how this analysis applies  to  the  case
in hand.  Whilst Richards LJ states that in order to  pursue  a  case  under
one or more of the exclusion subcategories, the respondent  "would  have  to
give notice of the precise way in which the case was put",  he  went  on  to
accept that it would have been open to the tribunal judge in  any  event  to
invite the parties to deal with the issue, albeit "it  cannot  be  said  she
was required to go down that line..."  His Lordship added that even  if  the
respondent was entitled to rely on the Robinson  principle  in  relation  to
such an issue, the  applicability  of  the  two  further  subcategories  the
respondent sought to raise in the DS case was not obvious because there  was
no strong prospect of success.  In the  appellant's  case  by  contrast,  we
invited the parties to deal with the issue  and  both  were  given  adequate
time to address it.  Further, the Article 1F(b) point in her  case  was  one
which we viewed potentially as having strong prospects of success.   In  the
event, because of the conclusion we go on to reach in  relation  to  Article
1F(a) it is not necessary to reach a  definitive  decision  on  this  issue;
although we will address the appellant's position under 1F(b) on  an  obiter
basis.  We would, however, observe that  subject  to  issues  of  procedural
fairness and of real prospects of success, we  doubt  that  a  judge  tasked
with deciding whether mandatory exclusion clauses apply can fail to reach  a
decision on each of them, particularly in a case in which  the  only  reason
for finding that an appellant was not caught by Article  1F(a)  was  because
he or she failed to meet the chapeau requirements of the  latter  (viz.  the
requirement that acts falling with  Article  7(1)(a)-(k)  be  "committed  as
part of a widespread or systematic  attack  directed  against  any  civilian
population, with knowledge of the attack"). An  alternative  approach  would
run the risk of exempting from exclusion even a person who had  committed  a
crime  that  was  patently  a  serious  non-political  crime,  e.g.  murder,
torture, rape. On this  issue  we  regard  Gurung,  paras  38,  47,  92  and
Secretary of State for the Home Department v A (Iraq) [2005] EWCA Civ  1438,
paras 27-30 as being still good law.

Article 1F(c)

99. It is convenient next to dispose  of  the  other  exclusion  subcategory
involved in this case - Article 1F(c).  As already noted, this  was  one  of
two Article 1F subcategories expressly applied  by  the  respondent  in  the
reasons for refusal decision.  In relation to cases  falling  under  Article
1F(c) the principal UK authority is Al-Sirri [2009] EWCA  Civ  307.   Sedley
LJ, whilst rejecting the appellant's contention that  this  subcategory  was
confined to persons deploying state power, also considered that in order  to
give effect to the "purposes and  principles"  requirement  the  case  would
need to have an international dimension: see paras 32, 51.  In  the  absence
of further argument from the parties  we  incline  to  the  same  view.  (We
observe that very recently  in SS (Libya) v Secretary of State for the  Home
Department [2011] Civ 1547 Carnwath LJ noted that on the  issue  of  whether
Article 1F(c) imports an international dimension requirement, Sedley  LJ  in
Al Sirri "did not need to express a definitive view for the purpose  of  the
case before him"; but the same  is  true  of  Carnwath  LJ's  own  expressed
doubts in SS (Libya) about there being such a requirement; and,  we  further
observe,  submissions before his court on the issue centred chiefly  on  the
discrete matter of whether such a requirement was a necessary  part  of  the
definition of terrorism: see paras 16, 27.) There  has  been  no  suggestion
that in Zimbabwe cases  there  is  the  requisite  international  dimension.
Accordingly we conclude that  Article  1F(c)  has  no  application  to  this
appellant.

100. Subject to what we have said above regarding Article  1F(b)  this  case
turns, therefore, on Article 1F(a).

Specific observations on legal framework and case law

101. With limited exceptions, we do not propose to set out in  the  body  of
the decision either the relevant legislative materials or the  most  salient
principles identified in case law; although purely for  the  convenience  of
the reader we include these in Appendices.   We  take  the  view  that  when
dealing with exclusion cases tribunal judges  should  take  these  materials
and that guidance as an essential starting point.  After  a  lengthy  period
following the reporting of  Gurung  (IG  (Exclusion,  Risk,  Maoists)  Nepal
[2002] UKIAT 04870) on 14 October 2002,  the Supreme  Court  in  R(JS)  (Sri
Lanka) has now settled most of the issues about which there was  uncertainty
and it is unnecessary to set out their guidance in  the  main  body  of  the
determination. As already noted,  this  guidance  clearly  directs  that  we
should treat the source of applicable norms when applying Article  1F(a)  of
the 1951 Convention as being those set out in  the  ICC  Statute:  in  R(JS)
(Sri Lanka), the Supreme Court regarded  Art  12(3)  of  the  Qualification
Directive as offering no more than a shortened  version  of  the  provisions
found in Art 25(3) of the ICC Statute: see e.g.  Lord Brown at para  33.  In
what follows we need only deal with the more specific legal  issues  arising
in this case (which as we shall see turn mainly on  criminal  responsibility
in the form of aiding and abetting and not, as in R(JS)(Sri Lanka) on  joint
criminal enterprise). In that regard we should mention that  we  made  clear
to the parties at the end of the hearing that to  assist  us  in  evaluating
their submissions (which in Mr Symes' case included  extensive  citation  of
the case law of the various  international  criminal  tribunals),  we  would
have regard to academic authority; and in what follows we refer  in  several
places  (without  identifying  the  authors  of  particular   chapters   and
sections), to the leading textbook by Otto Triffterer  (ed),  Commentary  on
the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court, 2nd  ed,  2008.  There
is first of all, however, one general matter concerning the  guidance  given
in R(JS) (Sri Lanka) that needs emphasising.

B and D v Germany

102. In the Appendices we include extracts from the judgment  of  the  Court
of Justice in B and D v  Germany.   Although  that  considered  two  Article
1F(b) (Article 12(2)(b)) cases it sought to give guidance  relating  to  key
elements of the international crimes encompassed by Article 1F as  a  whole.
Unlike a judgment of the European Court of Human Rights,  judgments  of  the
Court of Justice are binding on us and so, if  there  were  any  significant
differences between the guidance given in R(JS) (Sri Lanka) and B and D,  we
would have to follow the latter.

103.  Further,  as  Sedley  LJ  acknowledged  in  Al-Sirri  and  Lord  Brown
acknowledged in R(JS) (Sri Lanka), as a result of the coming into  force  of
the Qualification Directive, the legal rules we must  apply  are  those  set
out  in  Article  12  of  the  Qualification  Directive  (Article  11  where
exclusion from subsidiary protection is concerned).  The  Supreme  Court  in
R(JS) (Sri Lanka) formulated their reasons without the benefit of the  Court
of Justice ruling now to hand.  Now we have  that  ruling  it  is  essential
that we apply it and the simplest way to do that is to  draw  directly  upon
its formulation of the relevant legal tests, although we would note that  we
see no significant difference between its guidance and that given  in  R(JS)
(Sri Lanka). We turn therefore to consider the principal legal  issues  that
we need to address in this case.

Duress

104. The basis of the appellant's appeal is two-limbed.   Mr  Symes  submits
that she did not participate in crimes against humanity so as  to  meet  the
requirements of criminal liability within the meaning of  the  ICC  Statute,
but that even if she did, she  had  a  ground  for  excluding  her  criminal
responsibility, namely a defence of duress. It is convenient to address  the
duress issue first and in  this  context  we  shall  set  out  the  relevant
statutory provisions in the main body of the determination.  Article  31  of
the ICC Statute in its relevant parts provides:

    "Article 31
    Grounds for excluding criminal responsibility

    (1)     In  addition  to   other   grounds   for   excluding   criminal
         responsibility provided for in this Statute, a person shall not  be
         criminally responsible if, at the time of that person's conduct:
              ...
         (d)      The conduct which is alleged to constitute a crime  within
             the jurisdiction of  the  Court  has  been  caused  by  duress
             resulting from a threat of imminent death or of continuing  or
             imminent serious bodily harm against that  person  or  another
             person, and the person  acts  necessarily  and  reasonably  to
             avoid this threat, provided that the person does not intend to
             cause a greater harm than the one sought to be avoided.   Such
             a threat may either be:


             (i) made by other persons; or
             (ii)       constituted  by  other  circumstances  beyond  that
                  person's control.


    (2)    The Court shall determine the applicability of the  grounds  for
         excluding criminal responsibility provided for in this  Statute  to
         the case before it.


    (3)    At trial, the Court may consider a ground for excluding criminal
         responsibility other than those referred to in  paragraph  1  where
         such a ground is derived  from  applicable  law  as  set  forth  in
         Article 21.  The procedures relating to the consideration of such a
         ground shall  be  provided  for  in  the  Rules  of  Procedure  and
         Evidence."


105. As regards duress, the appellant accepted that she could  not  rely  on
the "only following orders" defence under Article 33 of the ICC Statute,  as
orders to commit genocide and crimes  against  humanity  are  by  reason  of
their subject matter deemed  "manifestly unlawful".  Rather,  her  case  was
that the context in which she operated constituted  a  threat  of  at  least
serious bodily harm against her, she being  a  mother  with  a  daughter  to
think about; that in this context  she  acted  proportionately  (failing  to
beat people at demonstrations, slapping  rather  than  beating  a  detainee,
recording events rather than  taking  a  more  active  role)  and  that  the
consequences were not greater than the risk avoidance  for  her  (she  would
have been branded as a traitor and be at risk of ill-treatment herself).

106. We believe we can dispose  of  the  duress  claim  relatively  briefly.
Article 31(1)(d) of the ICC  Statute  makes  clear  that  duress  can  be  a
defence to  international  criminal  responsibility..  In  draft  Article  9
(dealing  with  'Exceptions  to  the  principle  of   responsibility')   the
International Law Commission (ILC) UN  GAOR  Supp.No.10:  UN  doc.  A/42/10/
(1987) at 18 noted that for 'coercion to be considered as an exception,  the
perpetrator of the incriminating act must be able  to  show  that  he  would
have placed himself in grave imminent  and  irremediable  peril  if  he  had
offered any resistance'. Whether it is a complete  defence  and  whether  it
can apply in all types of cases remains unsettled:  see  the  Trial  Chamber
discussions in Prosecutor v Endermovic (IT-96-22) 7 June 1997 (a case,  like
all the other overseas cases to which we refer elsewhere  in  this  decision
-unless otherwise specified- decided by the International Criminal  Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia or ICTFY). It  appears  uncontroversial,  however,
that such a defence is confined to situations where the defendant's  freedom
of will and decision is so severely limited  that  there  is  eventually  no
moral  choice  of  counter  activity  available;  and  that  it   has   four
components: the threat must be of imminent death or continuing  or  imminent
serious bodily harm; the threat must result in duress causing the  crime;  a
threat results in duress only if  it  is  otherwise  avoidable  (i.e.  if  a
reasonable person in  comparable  circumstances  would  have  submitted  and
would have been driven to  the  relevant  criminal  conduct);  and  the  act
directed at avoiding the threat must be  necessary  in  terms  of  no  other
means being available and reasonable for reaching the desired effect.

107. Assuming for the moment that  the  appellant  did  participate  in  the
crimes against humanity alleged by the respondent, we consider the  evidence
to demonstrate that at no point was the appellant in a situation of  duress.
First of all, we find that at no point  was  she  faced  with  a  threat  of
imminent death or of  continuing  or  imminent  serious  bodily  harm.   The
background evidence does not show  that  police  officers  who  resigned  or
deserted - and there were very significant numbers of them - ordinarily  met
with threats of ill-treatment and, even assuming that a small  number  were,
that such threats faced by them were imminent.  Both experts  described  the
likely reaction by the authorities to desertions  as  likely  to  vary  from
judicial (prosecution and imprisonment) to other non-judicial measures  such
as quarantining and harassment about  housing  and/or  debts.  Both  experts
also described the police procedure in relation to those who  went  AWOL  as
allowing 21 days before any step was taken, then  a  further  period  of  90
days to complete other  steps.   Whilst  neither  ruled  out  that  possible
reactions to desertion could include ill-treatment, neither  suggested  that
the evidence demonstrated that was a real risk for the generality of  police
deserters or that even if ill-treatment would be carried out,  it  would  be
immediate.  Nor did the appellant herself suggest that she  was  aware  that
police deserters had faced imminent repercussions.

108. Secondly, and in  any  event,  for  the  appellant's  account  to  have
established duress it would have been necessary to  postulate  that  if  she
had taken any kind of avoidance action during  the  torture  of  Mhlanga  or
Sibanda (or  at  Plumtree)  (e.g.  feigning  sick,  pointing  out  that  the
Zimbabwean Police Act proscribed such conduct, saying  she  felt  unable  to
participate), that she would immediately have faced  a  threat  of  imminent
harm.  Far more likely is that she would have been suspended  or  threatened
with disciplinary action and at  some  later  stage  difficulties  may  have
worsened. The evidence simply does not support the idea that  the  immediate
or short-term reaction would have been imminent harm.

109.  As  we  have  already  emphasised  when  assessing   the   appellant's
credibility, we are not able to accept that there was a  significant  period
of time during 2007 when the appellant was unaware that she was taking  part
in police actions that were abusive and that it was only  in  mid-July  that
she was in a position  to  make  a  moral  choice  not  to  participate  any
further. In our judgment she  must  have  known  from  early  2007  (if  not
before) that she was engaged in abusive conduct and  had  had  available  to
her for some time means for avoiding such  conduct.  On  our  findings,  the
plain fact of the matter is that she  never  turned  her  mind  to  possible
avoidance of participation in abusive conduct.

Crimes against humanity: the chapeau requirement

110. In the Reasons  for  Refusal  letter  and  submissions  the  respondent
identified background country evidence  that  supported  her  view  that  in
Zimbabwe during the period relevant to the appellant's case (2000-2007)  the
state authorities, including the police, were engaged in acts as defined  in
Article  7(1)(a)-(k)  of  the  Rome  Statute  "...committed  as  part  of  a
widespread or systematic attack directed  against  any  civilian  population
with knowledge of the attack".  Indeed Mr Ouseley  maintained  that  such  a
pattern of attacks had been occurring since Mugabe came  to  power  in  1980
and he pointed to the  violent  action  taken  by  the  Zimbabwean  military
against  the  Ndebele  ethnic  group  in  Matabeleland   between   1983-1987
resulting in the deaths of between 10,000-20,000 civilians.  He  also  cited
the Tribunal case of SK (Article 1F(a) exclusion) Zimbabwe [2010] UKUT  327,
in  which  Ouseley  J  followed  Mitting  J  (and  the  latter's  order  for
reconsideration) in regarding it as "beyond doubt" that the Mugabe  regime's
attacks on white farmers and their workers constituted  an  attack  directed
against the civilian population so as to meet  the  Article  7(1)  "chapeau"
requirement (paras 4, 12, 35-39). Given that  the  respondent  identified  a
considerable body of background country evidence in support of its  position
and that Mr Symes expressly eschewed arguing that  the  chapeau  requirement
was not met in this case, we do not consider there is any need in this  case
to conduct any further examination of this issue.  Two general  observations
are, however, in order.

111.  First,  the  chapeau  requirement  is  an  essential  element  in  the
definition of a crime against humanity and if not met the acts specified  in
Article  7(1)(a)-(k)  do  not  constitute  such  a  crime,  no  matter   how
reprehensible they may be.  As stated in Triffterer, p.168, the  chapeau  of
paragraph 1 establishes the  jurisdictional  threshold  of  the  Court  over
crimes against humanity under the Statute.  Article  7(1)  has  to  be  read
together with the Elements of Crimes  document  which  the  ICC  adopted  in
September 2002 and which under Article 21 of the  Statute  is  part  of  the
first rank of legal sources to which that court shall have regard.

112. Second, in  the  nature  of  such  a  requirement,  background  country
evidence will play a critical part in deciding whether it  is  met.   It  is
clear from decisions of the International Criminal  Court  -  see  e.g.  the
decision on post-election violence in Kenya (Situation  in  the  Repubic  of
Kenya  (Decision  Pursuant  to  Article  15  of  the  Rome  Statute  on  the
Authorisation of an Investigation into the  Situation  in  the  Republic  of
Kenya (ICC-01/09; 31  March  2010))  -  and  other  international  tribunals
dealing with international criminal  liability  that  the  fact-finder  will
need to make specific findings not only on intention and knowledge but  also
on the temporal and geographical scope of such crimes and  (in  relation  to
their material scope) identify why in particular it is considered that:  (i)
there is an attack on the civilian population (or part  of  it);  (ii)  that
the  attack  consists  in  a  course  of  conduct  involving  the   multiple
commission of crimes against humanity; (iii) there is a plan  or  policy  of
the State or  organisation  involved;  (iv)  that  the  state  has  actively
promoted or encouraged such an attack; (v) that there  is  a  widespread  or
systematic attack where the perpetrators knew this, or intended the  conduct
to be part of such an attack.  These are  not  considerations  to  be  taken
lightly: the international  community  through  treaties  such  as  the  ICC
Statute has not seen it as appropriate to designate discrete  acts  such  as
torture and rape as "crimes against humanity" per se.  It has reserved  this
designation  for  "macro-crimes"  in  which  the  actors  concerned  possess
resources on a large scale and use them  to  humanity's  detriment.  At  the
same time, case law has established that crimes against humanity  can  occur
even in the absence of an armed conflict and it is not  required  that  each
act listed in Article 7(1) occurring within  the  attack  be  widespread  or
systematic, providing that the acts form  part  of  an  attack,  with  these
characteristics. Additionally, the commission of a single act,  e.g.  murder
or torture, in the context  of  a  broader  campaign  against  the  civilian
population, can constitute a crime against humanity  (Tadic  Trial  Chamber,
IT-94-T, 7 May 1997, para 649). In view of what we go on  to  say  below  at
paras 123- 125, it is important to  emphasise  as  well  that  for  a  crime
against humanity to arise under the ICC Statute there must also  be  an  act
within the listed acts specified in Article 7(1)(a)-(f).

113.  In  several  cases  that  have  already  come  before  UK  courts  and
tribunals, there has been an issue of whether the  chapeau  requirement  was
met, see e.g. in MH (Syria) [2009] EWCA Civ 226 the Court  of  Appeal  found
that there was a sufficient  evidential  basis  to  justify  an  Immigration
Judge in finding it had been  met  in  relation  to  the  role  of  KhaD  in
Afghanistan, particularly during  the  1980s.   In  Azimi-Rad  (Art.1F(a)  -
complicity - Arts 7 and 25 ICC Statute)  Iran  [2011]  UKUT  339  (IAC)  the
Upper Tribunal was satisfied that it was reasonably open to the  immigration
judge on the background evidence before her to conclude that  the  Basij  in
Iran had in the relevant period committed multiple crimes against  humanity.
 However, in such cases the challenge  was  confined  to  an  error  of  law
challenge and the issue was not whether the tribunal would have reached  the
same conclusion had they been themselves the fact-finder.   By  contrast,  a
tribunal judge who has a  fact-finding  role  will  need  to  apply  anxious
scrutiny to assess for  himself  whether  the  background  country  evidence
establishes the chapeau requirement,  even  if  the  parties  agree  between
themselves that it is established.

114. Third, in principle the question of whether acts are  '...committed  as
part of a widespread or systematic attacks  directed  against  any  civilian
population' (the Article 7(1) chapeau requirement) is a  matter  that  could
be dealt with in future country guidance cases;  although  the  question  of
whether there exist acts with such a nexus must always be decided on a case-
by-case basis. (Although not a decisive consideration, we  would  also  note
that because assessing Article  1F(a)  criminal  responsibility  necessarily
involves assessment of evidence of past  events,  there  is  not  the  added
difficulty often confronted in country guidance cases of assessing  risk  of
such events happening in the future.)

International criminal responsibility

115. In the appellant's case the three  issues  relating  to  her  potential
liability for a crime or crimes against humanity under Article 7(1)  of  the
ICC Statute are threefold:

    (i)     Has she committed any excludable acts as a (co-) principal?


    (ii)    If not excludable as a (co-) principal, has she  committed  any
        excludable acts as a non-principal (as an aider or abettor)?


    (iii)   In any event, does she have a defence of duress?


116. We have already dealt with (iii).

117. In relation to (i), it is important to bear in mind  that  Article  25,
which   encapsulates   the   basic   concepts   of    individual    criminal
responsibility, refers to three forms of perpetration: on one's  own,  as  a
co-perpetrator or through another person (perpetration by means): see  R(JS)
(Sri Lanka), paras 16-19. Plainly  in  the  appellant's  case  we  are  only
concerned with co-perpetration. So far as co-perpetration is concerned,  the
Tadic Appeals Chamber in Prosecutor v Tadic, 15 July  1999,  (1999)  9  IHRR
1051 distinguished three categories of  collective  criminality:  the  basic
form (where the participants act on the basis of a common design  or  common
enterprise and with a common intention); the  systemic  form  (where  crimes
are committed by units on the basis of a common plan -  viz.  the  so-called
concentration camp cases) and the extended joint enterprise  (where  one  of
the co-perpetrators actually engages  in acts going beyond the  common  plan
but  still  constituting  a  natural  and  foreseeable  consequence  of  the
realisation of the plan). Again, on the facts of  the  appellant's  case  we
are only concerned with the basic form of co-perpetration.

118. R(JS) (Sri Lanka) is, of course,  primarily  a  case  about  the  basic
form, known as "joint criminal enterprise" (jce), which Lord Brown  at  para
34 noted is wider in scope than any recognised basis  for  joint  enterprise
criminal liability under domestic law. For there to be jce there must  be  a
plurality of persons who act on an  explicit  or  implicit  common  plan  or
purpose, and  the  accused  must  take  part  in  this  plan,  at  least  by
supporting or aiding its realisation. There must be a shared intent  on  the
part of the co-perpetrators. On the basis of leading  cases,  in  particular
Prosecutor v Kordic and Cerkez Trial  Chamber  (IT-95-14/2),   Prosecutor  v
Krnojelac Trial Chamber (IT-97-25-A, 15 March 2002)  and  the  Prosecutor  v
Krstic Trial Chamber (IT-98-33) cases, responsibility  as  a  co-perpetrator
requires being more than a mere accomplice and requires participation of  an
extremely significant nature and at a leadership level.

119. Art 12(3) of the Qualification Directive  provides  that,  inter  alia,
Article 1F(a) applies  not  only  to  those  who  personally  commit  crimes
against humanity but also those "who instigate or otherwise  participate  in
the commission of [crimes against humanity]". This is consistent  with  the
approach adopted in the ICC Statute. Art 25(3)(a)-(d) of  this  Statute  lay
down, in effect, in descending  order  the  level  of  involvement  that  an
individual must have to be criminally responsible.   Article  25(3)(b)  sets
out the different forms of participation and  Article  25(3)(c)  establishes
individual criminal responsibility if a person  "aids,  abets  or  otherwise
assists..." as a subsidiary form of participation. (It is not  necessary  in
the context of this case to seek to address the meaning  of   "or  otherwise
assists" as a form of participation.).  Aiding  and  abetting  differs  from
joint criminal responsibility (jce) in  that  whilst  the  former  generally
only requires the knowledge that the  assistance  contributes  to  the  main
crime,  participation  in  jce  requires  both  a  common  purpose  and   an
intentional contribution of the participant (Triffterer, pp. 756-758)  to  a
group crime. Aiding and abetting encompasses  any  assistance,  physical  or
psychological, that has a  substantial  effect  on  the  commission  of  the
crime. Article 2 para 3(d) of the 1996 Draft Code requires that  aiding  and
abetting should be "direct and substantial", i.e.  the  contribution  should
facilitate the commission of a crime in "some significant  way".  The  Trial
Chamber in Tadic II, the Trial Chamber in the  Prosecutor  v  Naletilic  and
Martinovic (IT-98-34) cases and the Appeal Chamber in Prosecutor  v  Akeyesu
(Case No. IT-95-14/l-T), paras 484, 706) interpreted "substantial"  to  mean
that the contribution has an effect  on  the  commission,  that  is  have  a
causal relationship with the result and it included within the concept  "all
acts of assistance by words or acts that lend encouragement or support".  In
Prosecutor v Furundzija (IT-95-17/1-T, 10 December 1998),  paras  199,  232,
273-4,  the Trial Chamber said that assistance need not be tangible:  "moral
support and encouragement" can suffice, albeit it must "make  a  significant
difference to the commission of the criminal  act  by  the  principal":  see
also Prosecutor v Brdanin (IT-99-36-A, Appeal Chamber,  3  April  2007)  and
Prosecutor  v  Perisic  (IT-04-81-T,  6  September  2011).   The   requisite
knowledge may be inferred from all relevant circumstances, i.e.  it  may  be
proven by circumstantial evidence (Prosecutor v Tadic, para 689;  Prosecutor
v Akeyesu para 498). With these  essential  elements  in  mind  we  turn  to
consider what is said in this case as to whether the  appellant  was  a  co-
perpetrator in a jce and/or as an aider or abettor.

 Joint criminal enterprise (jce) and aiding and abetting
120. It is not wholly clear whether the respondent seeks to  argue  in  this
case that the appellant can be excluded on the basis of any  acts  committed
by her as an aider and abettor only or also as a co-principal.  In  para  69
of the Reasons for Refusal  letter  the  respondent  does  allege  that  the
appellant has  committed  crimes  against  humanity  "as  part  of  a  Joint
Criminal Enterprise", but the reasoning leading up  to  this  allegation  is
equally consistent with the appellant being merely  an  aider  and  abettor.
Paragraphs 66-69 state:


    "66.   You did not specify what role you held when you were involved in
         torturing people as a group, however you have portrayed yourself as
         a willing individual.  It is considered that you were at  the  very
         least acquiescing to the international crimes committed during this
         period by the Zimbabwean Republic Police, and that  you  aided  and
         abetted in the commission of such crimes by  arresting  people  and
         being involved in their torture, as well as raiding people's  homes
         on  the  basis  of  their  political  views.   Furthermore,  it  is
         considered that you took  part  in  such  activities  without  much
         difficulty in terms of your conscience as you stated that following
         torturing an individual 'we taken them back to the cells and  knock
         off duty and continue what you are doing' (AIR Q60).


    67.    Your admittance [sic] that you took  part  in  the  beating  and
         intimidation of MDC supporters and disrupted anything  to  do  with
         MDC (AIR Q25) relates to your role as a police officer in  the  ZRP
         between February 2000 and June 2007.  You describe  being  directly
         involved in physical attacks against opposition supporters and have
         been involved in torture as part of a group (AIR  Q53).   You  have
         admitted your involvement in disrupting MDC  rallies  using  batons
         (AIR Q32).  You also coherently and  consistently  described  being
         told to beat up MDC supporters, raid their houses and disrupt their
         rallies.


    68.    It is considered that you were complicit because you had been  a
         participating and knowing member of the Zimbabwean Republic Police.
          You  participated  in  a  number  of  police  raids,  beating  and
         incidents of torture.  It is noted that, despite claiming that  you
         did not approve of participating in such activities,  it  took  you
         seven years to disassociate yourself from such activities.  On  the
         basis of your own evidence and the  available  objective  evidence,
         there are serious reasons for  considering  that  between  February
         2000 and June 2007, you were  individually  criminally  responsible
         for the crimes against humanity of torture and other inhumane  acts
         of a similar character intentionally causing  great  suffering,  or
         serious  injury  to  body  or  to  mental  or  physical  health  in
         accordance with Article 25  of  the  International  Criminal  Court
         Statute.


    69.    Accordingly, there are serious reasons for considering that  you
         were complicit in the crimes  against  humanity  committed  by  the
         Zimbabwe Republic Police during your period of service and in  turn
         it is considered  that  you  warrant  exclusion  from  the  Refugee
         Convention  under  Article  1F(a)  of  the  1951   United   Nations
         Convention and there are serious reasons for considering  that  you
         have committed crimes against humanity as part of a Joint  Criminal
         Enterprise."

121. Whilst Mr Ouseley did not resile as such from the same position  during
the  proceedings  before  the  Upper  Tribunal,  the  main  burden  of   his
submissions was that the appellant was guilty of an Article 1F(a)  crime  as
an aider and abettor, not as a participant in a jce.  Bearing  in  mind  the
emphasis in leading cases on the need for co-principals to have  some  level
of leadership role, we have reached the conclusion that in relation  to  the
appellant the allegation of co-perpetration cannot be  made  out  as  it  is
common ground that, even if she was  in  fact  a  detective  rather  than  a
constable, she could not be said to have  held  any  significant  leadership
role and her own accounts, even keeping in mind that in  our  judgement  she
has sought to downplay her own role, do not  suggest  that  in  any  of  the
incidents in which she was involved that potentially qualify as  acts  under
Article 7(1)(a)-(k),  she  played  a  leading  role.  Accordingly  we  shall
proceed on the basis that Article 1F(a) can  only  be  applied  against  the
appellant if it is shown that she was  an  aider  and  abettor.  As  already
noted, for a person to be an aider  and  abettor  it  is  not  necessary  to
establish a common purpose.

Excludable acts
122. It was  common  ground  between  the  parties  that  there  were  three
possible types of acts capable of  constituting  a  crime  against  humanity
engaged by the facts of the appellant's  case:  Article  7(1)(f)  (torture);
Article 7(1)(b) (persecution) and Article 7(1)(k) (other inhumane acts of  a
similar character intentionally causing great suffering, or  serious  injury
to body or to mental or physical health).

123. We would only note here  that  in  seeking  to  identify  the  possible
events in which it could be said the appellant may have committed such  acts
as principal  or  aider  and  abettor,  Mr  Symes'  skeleton  argument  list
enumerated beatings, torture, violent disruption of around 11  MDC  rallies;
arrest and ill-treatment of Stephen Mhlanga and Gibson Sibanda; and  general
actions of the police.  There was no  mention  of  her  involvement  in  the
Plumtree incident, notwithstanding that she  herself  described  it  as  the
worst incident she had experienced.  It was partly with a view  to  ensuring
that our inquiry extended to consider the possible status of  this  incident
as a crime against humanity that we  sought  further  submissions  from  the
appellant's  representatives  (with  provision  for  a  respondent's  reply)
regarding relevant case  law/academic  authority  on  "cover  ups"  of  mass
murder. In response Mr Symes referred us to  case  law,  in  particular  the
case of Prosecutor v Blagojovic (IT-02-60-T,  17  January  2005),  which  he
submitted  established  that  it  was  not  possible   to   categorise   the
appellant's participation in  the  Plumtree  incident  as  a  crime  against
humanity, as the only relevant act was murder; whereas it was  not  possible
for there to be "ex post facto" aiding and abetting of  murder.  He  pointed
out, correctly, that the respondent had never  alleged  that  the  appellant
was party to the plan formed by the group of persons,  whom  she  understood
to be ZANU-PF  members,  who  murdered  the  villagers  near  Plumtree.  Her
wrongdoing could only consist in her involvement in the "cover-up" of  those
murders. Mr Ouseley did not add any observations on this matter.

124. We are bound to say, leaving aside for the moment the issue of  whether
the appellant  possessed  some  form  of  criminal  responsibility  for  her
actions at  Plumtree,  that  we  are  somewhat  bemused  to  find  that  the
enumerated list of excludable acts in Article 7(1)(a)-(k) does  not  include
any crimes that have any obvious relationship to  the  "covering  up"  of  a
murder (e.g. conspiracy to pervert the course  of  justice,  destruction  of
evidence, suppression of evidence, unlawful handling of bodies). We did  not
find much assistance from any of the case law so far as we  could  learn  of
it from standard textbooks such as Triffterer. To our mind  there  are  only
two alternatives: either acts relating to "cover-up" of a murder are  to  be
seen as falling within the definition of "persecution"  or  "other  inhumane
acts" or they are not included. Our reason for considering there to be  such
a dichotomy is based primarily on Article 22(2) of the  ICC  Statute,  which
enjoins  that  criminal  law  provisions  may  not  be  interpreted  to  the
detriment of an accused and extended  by  analogy  and  on  the  fact  that,
according to Triffterer, p.536: "Theoretically, the development  of  changes
in humanitarian law, for instance defining crimes  against  humanity  -  not
yet falling within the jurisdiction of the Court, cannot be blocked  by  the
Statute. However, from the practical point of view, it can be expected  that
on subject matters the Statute deals with in a  comprehensive  way,  such  a
progressive development outside the possibilities provided for by review  or
an amendment of the Statute appears improbable".  As  glaring  a  lacuna  as
the "cover-up" of mass murder appears to us to  be,  we  cannot  contemplate
seeking to extend the list of crimes by judicial interpretation.

125. Turning to the former possibility, regarding "cover-up" of mass  murder
as either persecution or an ("other) inhumane acts...", we do  not  consider
the respondent has furnished enough evidence for us  to  be  satisfied  that
the role played by the appellant and the other police called  to  the  scene
amounted to persecution within the Article 7(1)(b)  definition.  So  far  as
the subjects  of  harm  are  concerned,  the  persons  murdered  were  self-
evidently already dead and it is not clear that burying  them  could  easily
be described as cruel infliction of harm or  suffering.  We  have  no  doubt
that  such  actions,  even  if  not  witnessed,  must  have   been   acutely
distressing for the victim's loved ones, but the act  of  burial  in  itself
may even be said to have a humane element, in ensuring bodies are  not  left
to flies and carrion. In  the  absence  of  either  fuller  evidence  and/or
clearer submissions from the respondent  responding  to  Mr  Symes'  further
submissions on this matter, we are not persuaded that we  should  categorise
the appellant's involvement in the Plumtree incident as being  in  itself  a
crime against humanity. The mass murder which took place there plainly  was,
but not the appellant's involvement in it.  The fact that it took place  and
the appellant participated in it in the way she described  remains  relevant
to our assessment of the general nature  of  her  participation  in  various
incidents between February and July 2007. It  is  also  a  matter  we  shall
return to when dealing with Article 1F(b) on an obiter  basis.  However,  it
cannot in itself constitute a crime against humanity.  Given  this  finding,
we would only  reiterate  our  surprise  that  the  ICC  Statute's  list  of
excludable acts that  are  necessary  (but  not  sufficient)  to  constitute
crimes against humanity should not include ones expressly dealing  with  the
"cover-up" of mass murder. Indeed, more generally  we  know  only  too  well
from history that repressive regimes will sometime go to  great  lengths  to
destroy, suppress or otherwise "cover up" evidence of their perpetration  of
evil acts.

 Aiding and abetting
126. Mr Symes sought to persuade us that the  appellant's  participation  in
the two incidents  of  torture  (the  Stephen  Mhlanga  and  Gibson  Sibanda
incidents) and in 11 rallies in Bulawayo in the  first  half  of  2007   was
only ever at a level of participation falling short of aiding and  abetting.
In our judgment, however, the evidence firmly establishes that  she  was  an
aider and abettor.

127. In general terms we  are  first  of  all  satisfied  that  (so  far  as
concerns her level of involvement) in 2007 the appellant held  the  rank  of
detective rather than constable. That was the way  she  described  her  rank
when she filled in the  SEF  form  and  her  pay  advice  slip  she  herself
submitted corroborated that. We make no finding on  for  how  long,  by  the
beginning of 2007, she had held this rank, but we reject her claim that  she
held this post only on a temporary basis  for  three  months.  We  are  also
satisfied that throughout 2007 the appellant in fact  knew  full  well  that
the ZRP of which she was a part  played an active part  in  abusive  conduct
towards the MDC and other opponents of ZANU PF and  the  Mugabe  leadership.
We do not accept that the appellant did not become  aware  of  this  in  her
early years as a police officer (she joined in 2000). In  particular  we  do
not accept that the sizeable degree of state control over  the  media  would
have meant she was unaware that  the  ZRP  was  involved  in  a  significant
number of incidents in various parts of Zimbabwe in which the police  played
an oppressive role. We do not, for example, consider  that  she  would  have
been unaware of the background supporting role played by the  police  during
Operation Murambatsvina in 2005. We note that she herself had  said  in  the
course of her different accounts that the 2005 elections  were  violent  and
we do not find it credible  that  she  believed  the  MDC  were,  routinely,
falsely portraying the police as being responsible for the violence.

128. We also reject the appellant's claim that by virtue of being a  serving
police officer in Bulawayo she understood her role,  and  the  role  of  her
fellow police officers in that city more generally,  to  be  merely  one  of
impartial law-enforcement. We  do  not  doubt  that  much  of  her  function
between 2000-2007 was routine police work involving protection of the  local
population against crime etc. However, we do not accept that  her  role  did
not also involve participation in police harassment and the use of  violence
against MDC and other political opponents of Mugabe and ZANU  PF.  As  noted
earlier, it is clear that although the  number  of  incidents  was  less  in
Bulawayo than in Harare, it remains that during the  period  prior  to  2007
there were a number of recorded  incidents  in  which  the  police  took  an
active part in arresting and detaining opposition supporters, including  the
very high-profile World Cup cricket  incidents  which  took  place  in  late
February/early March  2003 at Queen's Club Sports ground  in  Bulawayo  when
police  made  arrests  of  a  very  significant  number  of   demonstrators,
significant numbers of whom were detained and ill-treated whilst  in  police
detention. We remind ourselves of the evidence recorded at para 26 above  in
the form of the Physicians for Human Rights Denmark  17  April  2003  report
entitled "Peaceful Protest and Police Torture in the  city  of  Bulawayo  24
February - 25 March 2003" whose findings on  these  arrests  specified  that
all the detainees interviewed by them reported  being  ill-treated  and  all
said that their abuse took place  at  least  in  part  at  Bulawayo  Central
Police Station.  In this regard we note that throughout this period she  was
stationed at the main police station in Bulawayo  and  on  her  own  account
worked for much of that time in the charge office; so that in our  judgement
she would have known of the comings and  goings  of  a  great  many  of  the
persons arrested and detained.

 129. Moving to the events of 2007, bearing in mind our earlier findings  on
the appellant's credibility, we are  quite  satisfied  in  relation  to  the
Stephen Mhlanga incident which occurred in mid-February 2007  that  she  was
herself present at the  scene  and   was  someone  along  with  her  fellow-
officers in a position of authority and that, whether or not  her  principal
job during this incident was taking notes, she  was  fully  aware  that  her
colleagues were inflicting ill treatment  on  this  man:  she  herself  made
threats to him whilst he was blindfolded and  her threats, along with  those
made by her colleagues, put him in fear that he was going to be thrown  into
the river to drown if he did not co-operate  with  them  in  giving  certain
information. In this regard we attach significant weight to  the  fact  that
in her asylum interview she did not seek to distance herself from  the  ill-
treatment inflicted on this man and at no  point  sought  to  say  that  the
collective "we" did not include herself: e.g. at Q49. In our  judgement  her
conduct during this incident amounted to facilitation of the  commission  of
the crime of torture in a significant way. We  are  further  satisfied  that
her involvement in this incident was  with  specific  intent  to  contribute
substantially to it and  that  her  role  assisted  the  common  purpose  of
putting this man in fear of his life.

130.  For  reasons  given  earlier  we  leave  aside  in  this  context  the
appellant's involvement in the Plumtree incident.

131. As regards the Gibson Sibanda incident, which took place at the end  of
April 2007, we do not accept the appellant's claim that she did not carry  a
baton at the time or that her role in this  incident  was  merely  slapping.
Once again we attach significant weight to  the  fact  that  in  her  asylum
interview she did not seek to qualify her reference to her being part  of  a
number of police officers who beat this man. On  her  own  account  she  was
present at the incident, was one of a number of police officers there  in  a
position of authority and was fully aware that what  was  being  visited  on
this man by the officers present, including  herself,  amounted  to  serious
harm. In our judgement it is incontrovertible that her actions  during  this
incident had a substantial effect on the commission of the crime of  torture
which took place. We are entirely satisfied that her participation  in  this
incident amounted to the aiding and abetting of a crime against humanity.

132. Bearing in mind Mr Symes' citation in the course  of  his  response  to
our request for further submissions (see  above  para  123)  of  two  recent
cases  dealing  with  aiding  and  abetting,   Prosecutor  v   Perisic   and
Prosecutor v  Brdanin,  ,  we  should  also  record  that  we  are  entirely
satisfied that our finding that during both the Stephen Mhlanga  and  Gibson
Sibanda incidents the appellant aided and abetted the commission of a  crime
against  humanity,  is  entirely  consistent  with  these  and  other  cases
referred to earlier.

133. In light of the above it is unnecessary for us to  decide  whether  the
appellant's involvement in an estimated 11 rallies in  Bulawayo  during  the
course of the first half of 2007 also amounted to aiding and abetting  of  a
crime (or crimes) against humanity. We would record, however, that  here  we
find once again that the account she gave at her asylum  interview  gives  a
more accurate portrayal than her later versions (in which she sought to  say
that she was merely prodding demonstrators to move them on).  We  note  that
at more than one of these rallies the evidence  indicates  that  the  police
used a significant amount of violence  against  demonstrators.  On  her  own
account in her asylum interview the police role in the White City  rally  in
February  2007  involved  beating  people  (Q50).  We  do  not  accept   the
appellant's later accounts that the police violence used was committed  only
by the Riot Squad: on her own account she  came  into  direct  contact  with
demonstrators and was not simply in lines behind the Riot Squad.

Article 1F(b)
134. Although it is unnecessary for us to decide, we may say  that  we   are
also satisfied on that the above acts, taken together with  the  appellant's
involvement in the Plumtree  incident,  amounted  to  serious  non-political
crimes falling within Article 1F(b) of the 1951 Convention.  We  agree  with
Mr Symes'  submission  that  in  assessing  what  constitutes  a  '...  non-
political crime' we must apply (albeit in this context only) a principle  of
proportionality, but we cannot accept his  analysis  of  what  that  concept
entails in the present case. In particular we do not accept  his  contention
that we should regard the appellant's excludable acts as  political  crimes.
Even if he is right in asserting that as state  actors  the  ZRP  should  be
seen as playing a political role in relation to those  they  harmed  in  the
ways specified (see  above  para  73),  we  note  that  the  acts  concerned
involved, inter alia, participation in acts of torture  and  ill  treatment.
Such acts are contrary to peremptory norms of international law and  in  our
judgement they cannot for that reason be  regarded  as  proportionate,  non-
political, enforcement of the law.

135. In this regard we have taken account of Mr Symes' submission  that  the
appellant's acts should not be regarded as non-political  because  they  did
not  fall  within  the  description  given  in  Article  12(2)(b)   of   the
Qualification Directive, namely "particularly cruel actions".  It  seems  to
us that the latter reference is  essentially  a  gloss  on  the  meaning  of
"serious" and we have no doubt that torture falls into  that  category;  but
in any event we do not understand Article 12(2)(b) to contain an  exhaustive
definition of non-political crimes. The essence of  any  definition  of  the
"non-political"  category  must  have  regard  to  whether  any  purportedly
political  act  is  proportionate.  In   our   judgement   the   appellant's
involvement in two incidents of torture does not  meet  the  proportionality
standard.

Decision on the certificate

136. For the above reasons  we  agree  the  statement  in  the  respondent's
certificate that  the  appellant  committed  excludable  acts  falling  with
Article IF(a). There are serious reasons for considering she did  so  as  an
aider and abettor. Accordingly we must dismiss the asylum dimensions of  the
appeal without considering any other aspect of the case (s.12(2)(b)  of  the
Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007;  s.55(5A)  and  s.55(4)  of  the
2006 Act).

137. Even had we found that the appellant did not fall  within  any  of  the
exclusion clauses and had accordingly not agreed the s. 55  certificate,  we
do not find that she faced a real risk of persecution. Likewise  we  do  not
find that the appellant faces a real risk of serious harm (under Article  15
of  2004/83/EC,  the  Refugee  Qualification  Directive)  or  of   treatment
proscribed by Article 3 of the ECHR. On the basis of our  findings  of  fact
she is a person who was a serving police officer in  Zimbabwe  and  she  has
failed to show that she left that service in  adverse  circumstances  either
by deserting or otherwise showing disloyalty to the regime. We consider  her
subsequent  conduct,  returning  to  Bulawayo,   Zimbabwe   from   adjoining
countries on two occasions and then, once in the UK going personally to  the
Zimbabwe Embassy in London to  renew  her  passport,  confirms  us  in  that
opinion. It also follows from our assessment that even if she  was  required
to prove loyalty to ZANU PF  and  the  Mugabe  regime,  she  would  have  no
difficulty in doing so. Applying the guidance given  in  EM  (Zimbabwe),  we
find that she would not be at risk on return. There is nothing  to  indicate
that her involvement in crimes against humanity will result  in  any  action
being taken against her in Zimbabwe in the future.

138. The evidence relating to the appellant's personal circumstances do  not
disclose that her removal would breach her Article 8 right  to  respect  for
family or private life.

139. For the above reasons:

The First-tier Tribunal materially erred in law  and  its  decision  is  set
aside.

The  decision  we  re-make  is  to  agree  the  Secretary  of  State's  s.55
certificate.

The appellant's appeal is dismissed on asylum, humanitarian  protection  and
human rights grounds.




Signed                                             Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Storey

           Appendices


   Appendix A. Legal provisions


   Refugee Convention


   The Refugee Convention sets out:


           "Article 1
           ...
           F. The provisions of this Convention  shall  not  apply  to  any
              person with respect to whom there  are  serious  reasons  for
              considering that:


              (a)            He has committed a crime against peace, a  war
                    crime, or a crime against humanity, as  defined  in  the
                    international instruments drawn up to make provision  in
                    respect of such crimes;
              (b)            He has committed a serious non-political crime
                    outside the country of refuge prior to his admission  to
                    that country as a refugee;
              (c)            He has been guilty of  acts  contrary  to  the
                    purposes and principles of the United Nations."


   Domestic Regulations
   The Refugee or Person in Need of International Protection (Qualification)
   Regulations 2006 provides:


           "Exclusion
           7.-
           (1)         A person is not a refugee, if he  falls  within  the
                 scope of Article 1 D, 1E or 1F of the Geneva Convention.
           (2)         In the construction and application of Article 1F(b)
                 of the Geneva Convention:
                 (a)   the reference to serious non-political crime includes
                       a particularly cruel action, even if it is  committed
                       with an allegedly political objective;
                 (b)   the reference to the crime  being  committed  outside
                       the country of refuge prior to  his  admission  as  a
                       refugee shall be taken to mean the  time  up  to  and
                       including the day on  which  a  residence  permit  is
                       issued.
           (3)         Article 1F(a) and (b) of the Geneva Convention shall
                 apply to a person who instigates or otherwise  participates
                 in the commission of the crimes or acts specified in  those
                 provisions."


   Qualification Directive
   The Qualification Directive (Directive 2004/83) sets out at Article 12:


           "Article 12
           ...
           2.          A third country national or a  stateless  person  is
                 excluded from being  a  refugee  where  there  are  serious
                 reasons for considering that:
                 (a)   he or she has committed a crime against peace, a war
                     crime, or a crime against humanity, as defined in  the
                     international instruments drawn up to  make  provision
                     in respect of such crimes;
                 (b)   he or she  has  committed  a  serious  non-political
                     crime outside the country of refuge prior  to  his  or
                     her admission as a refugee; which means  the  time  of
                     issuing a residence permit based on  the  granting  of
                     refugee status; particularly cruel  actions,  even  if
                     committed with an allegedly political  objective,  may
                     be classified as serious non-political crimes;
                 (c)   he or she has been guilty of acts  contrary  to  the
                     purposes and principles of the United Nations  as  set
                     out in the Preamble  and  Articles  1  and  2  of  the
                     Charter of the United Nations.


        3. Paragraph 2  applies  to  persons  who  instigate  or  otherwise
              participate in the commission of the crimes or acts mentioned
              therein."
      ICC Statute
    Relevant provisions from the ICC Statute  and  the  Elements  of  Crime
    document adopted in 2002 include the following:
           "Article 21
           Applicable law
           1.         The Court shall apply:
                 (a)    In the first place, this Statute, Elements of Crimes
                     and its Rules of Procedure and Evidence;
                 (b)   In the second place,  where  appropriate,  applicable
                     treaties and the principles and rules of international
                     law,  including  the  established  principles  of  the
                     international law of armed conflict;
                 (c)    Failing that, general principles of law  derived  by
                     the Court from national laws of legal systems  of  the
                     world including, as appropriate, the national laws  of
                     States that would normally exercise jurisdiction  over
                     the crime, provided  that  those  principles  are  not
                     inconsistent with this Statute and with  international
                     law   and   internationally   recognized   norms   and
                     standards.
           ...
           Article 22
           Nullum crimen sine lege
           1. A person shall  not  be  criminally  responsible  under  this
           Statute unless the conduct in question constitutes, at the  time
           it takes place, a crime within the jurisdiction of the Court.
           2. The definition of a crime shall  be  strictly  construed  and
           shall not be extended by analogy.  In  case  of  ambiguity,  the
           definition shall be interpreted in favour of  the  person  being
           investigated, prosecuted or convicted.
           3. This article shall not affect  the  characterization  of  any
           conduct as criminal under  international  law  independently  of
           this Statute."

"Crimes against humanity" (Art 7)

Article 7 of the ICC Statute defines  a  "crime  against  humanity"  in  the
following terms:

         "Article 7

         Crimes against humanity

         1.       For the purpose of this Statute 'crime  against  humanity'
             means any of the following acts when committed as  part  of  a
             widespread or systematic attack directed against any  civilian
             population, with knowledge of the attack:

             (a)       Murder;
             (b)       Extermination;
             (c)       Enslavement;
             (d)       Deportation or forcible transfer of population;
             (e)       Imprisonment or other severe deprivation of physical
                  liberty in violation of fundamental rules of international
                  law;
             (f)       Torture
             (g)  Rape,  sexual  slavery,  enforced  prostitution,   forced
                  pregnancy, enforced sterilization, or any  other  form  of
                  sexual violence of comparable gravity;
             (h) Persecution against any identifiable group or collectivity
                  on  political,   racial,   national,   ethnic,   cultural,
                  religious, gender as defined  in  paragraph  3,  on  other
                  grounds that are universally recognized  as  impermissible
                  under  international  law,  in  connection  with  any  act
                  referred to in this paragraph  or  any  crime  within  the
                  jurisdiction of the Court;
             (i)       Enforced disappearance of persons;
             (j)       The crime of apartheid;
             (k) Other inhumane acts of a similar  character  intentionally
                  causing great suffering, or serious injury to body  or  to
                  mental or physical health.

         2.  For the purpose of paragraph 1:

             (a)       'Attack directed against  any  civilian  population'
                  means  a  course  of  conduct   involving   the   multiple
                  commission of acts referred to in paragraph 1 against  any
                  civilian population, pursuant to or in  furtherance  of  a
                  State or organizational policy to commit such attack; ...
             (e)       'Torture' means the intentional infliction of severe
                  pain or suffering, whether  physical  or  mental,  upon  a
                  person in the custody or under the control of the accused;
                  except that torture shall not include  pain  or  suffering
                  arising only from, inherent in or  incidental  to,  lawful
                  sanctions; ...
             (g)        'Persecution'  means  the  intentional  and  severe
                  deprivation   of   fundamental    rights    contrary    to
                  international law by reason of the identity of  the  group
                  or collectivity ..."


   Elements of Crime document


   The ICC adopted its Elements of Crime document in September  2002  (which
   under Article 21 of the Rome Statute is part of the first rank  of  legal
   sources to which that Court shall have regard). It sets out:


          a) The provisions are to be strictly construed (7.1);


          b) The requirement of knowledge  of  an  attack  on  the  civilian
             population should not be taken  as  requiring  proof  that  the
             perpetrator had knowledge of all characteristics of the  attack
             or the precise details of the plan or policy of  the  State  or
             organization (7.2);

          c)  Throughout  the  "Elements"  provided,  that  the  conduct  be
             committed as part of a widespread or systematic attack directed
             against a civilian population where the perpetrator knew  this,
             or intended the conduct to be part of such an attack;


          d)  As  to  intent,  the  "mental  element  is  satisfied  if  the
             perpetrator intended to further such an attack." (7.3);


          e) 'Attack directed against a civilian population' in this context
             means a course of conduct involving the multiple commission  of
             crimes against humanity against any civilian population,  where
             the State actively promoted or encouraged such an attack;


          f) As to the crime of torture:

             -    Persons were "in the custody or under the control  of  the
                 perpetrator": 7(1)(f);


            -    Such pain or suffering did not arise only  from,  and  was
                 not  inherent  in  or  incidental  to,  lawful   sanctions:
                 7(1)(f)."

          g) As to the crime of persecution:

             -      The   perpetrator   severely   deprived,   contrary   to
                 international law,  one  or  more  persons  of  fundamental
                 rights: 7(1)(h);


             -    The perpetrator targeted such person or persons by  reason
                 of the identity of a group or collectivity or targeted  the
                 group or collectivity as such: 7(1)(h);


             -    Such targeting was based on political,  racial,  national,
                 ethnic, cultural, religious, gender, or other grounds  that
                 are   universally   recognized   as   impermissible   under
                 international law: 7(1)(h);


             -    The conduct was  committed  in  connection  with  any  act
                 referred to in article 7, paragraph 1, of  the  Statute  or
                 any crime within the jurisdiction of the Court: 7(1)(h).


          h) As to the crime of other inhumane acts:


             - The perpetrator inflicted great suffering, or serious injury
               to body or to mental or physical  health,  by  means  of  an
               inhumane act: 7(1)(k);


             - Such act was  of  a  character  similar  to  any  other  act
               referred to in article  7,  paragraph  1,  of  the  Statute:
               7(1)(k);

             - The perpetrator was aware of the factual circumstances  that
               established the character of the act: 7(1)(h).


 "Criminal responsibility" (Art 25)

Article 25 sets  out  the  circumstances  in  which  an  individual  may  be
"criminally responsible" for a crime against  humanity  falling  within  Art
7.  It provides as follows:

         Article 25

         Individual criminal responsibility

         1. The Court shall have jurisdiction over natural persons  pursuant
             to this Statute:

         2.       A person who commits a crime within  the  jurisdiction  of
             the Court shall be individually  responsible  and  liable  for
             punishment in accordance with this Statute.

         3.       In  accordance  with  this  Statute,  a  person  shall  be
             criminally responsible and liable for punishment for  a  crime
             within the jurisdiction of the Court if that person:

             (a)       Commits such a  crime,  whether  as  an  individual,
                  jointly with another or through another person, regardless
                  of whether that other person is criminally responsible;
             (b)       Orders, solicits or induces the commission of such a
                  crime which in fact occurs or is attempted;
             (c)       For the purpose of facilitating  the  commission  of
                  such a crime, aids, abets  or  otherwise  assists  in  its
                  commission  or   its   attempted   commission,   including
                  providing the means for its commission;
             (d)       In any other way contributes to  the  commission  or
                  attempted commission of such a crime by a group of persons
                  acting with a common purpose.  Such contribution shall  be
                  intentional and shall either:

                  (i)  Be made with  the  aim  of  furthering  the  criminal
                      activity or criminal purpose of the group, where such
                      activity or purpose  involves  the  commission  of  a
                      crime within the jurisdiction of the Court; or
                  (ii)       Be made in the knowledge of  the  intention  of
                      the group to commit the crime ..."

Mental element

Article 30 deals with the mental element:

         Mental element

         1.       Unless otherwise provided, a person  shall  be  criminally
             responsible and liable for punishment for a crime  within  the
             jurisdiction of the Court only if the  material  elements  are
             committed with intent and knowledge.

         2.       For the purposes of this  article,  a  person  has  intent
             where:

             (a)       In relation to conduct, that person means to  engage
                  in the conduct;
             (b)       In relation to a consequence, that person  means  to
                  cause that consequence or is aware that it will  occur  in
                  the ordinary course of events.

         3.       For  the  purposes  of  this  article,  'knowledge'  means
             awareness that a circumstance  exists  or  a  consequence  will
             occur in the ordinary course of events. 'Know' and  'knowingly'
             shall be construed accordingly."



Grounds for excluding criminal responsibility (including duress)

Article 31 of the ICC Statute provides:

           "Article 31
           Grounds for excluding criminal responsibility
           1.  In  addition  to  other  grounds  for   excluding   criminal
           responsibility provided for in this Statute, a person shall  not
           be criminally responsible if,  at  the  time  of  that  person's
           conduct:
           ...
           (d)   The conduct which is alleged to constitute a crime  within
                 the jurisdiction of the Court has  been  caused  by  duress
                 resulting from a threat of imminent death or of  continuing
                 or imminent serious bodily  harm  against  that  person  or
                 another  person,  and  the  person  acts  necessarily   and
                 reasonably to avoid this threat, provided that  the  person
                 does not intend to cause a greater harm than the one sought
                 to be avoided. Such a threat may either be:
                 (i) Made by other persons; or
                 (ii)  Constituted  by  other  circumstances   beyond   that
                 person's control.


           2.    The Court shall determine the applicability of the grounds
               for excluding criminal responsibility provided for  in  this
               Statute to the case before it.
           3.    At trial, the Court may consider a  ground  for  excluding
               criminal responsibility other  than  those  referred  to  in
               paragraph 1 where such a ground is derived  from  applicable
               law as set forth in article 21. The procedures  relating  to
               the consideration of such a ground shall be provided for  in
               the Rules of Procedure and Evidence."






Appendix B: Relevant Case Law

R(JS) (Sri Lanka) [2010] UKSC 15 (17 March 2010)

In R(JS) (Sri Lanka) Lord Brown stated:
   1. (3) The correct approach to article 1F
     1. There can be no doubt, as indeed article 12(3) of the Qualification
        Directive provides, that article 1F disqualifies not  merely  those
        who personally commit war crimes but also those "who  instigate  or
        otherwise participate in the commission of [such] crimes".  Article
        12(3) does not, of course, enlarge the application of  article  1F;
        it merely gives expression to what is already  well  understood  in
        international law. This is true too of paragraphs (b), (c) and  (d)
        of article 25(3) of the ICC Statute, each of which recognises  that
        criminal responsibility is engaged by persons other than the person
        actually committing the crime (by pulling the trigger, planting the
        bomb or whatever) who himself,  of  course,  falls  within  article
        25(3)(a). Paragraph (b) encompasses those  who  order,  solicit  or
        induce  (in  the  language  of  article  12(3)  of  the  Directive,
        "instigate") the commission of the crime; paragraph (c)  those  who
        aid,  abet,  or  otherwise  assist  in  its  commission  (including
        providing the means for this); paragraph (d) those who in any other
        way intentionally contribute to its commission (paras (c)  and  (d)
        together  equating,  in  the  language  of  article  12(3)  of  the
        Directive, to "otherwise participat[ing]" in the commission of  the
        crime).
     1. All  these  ways  of  attracting  criminal  liability  are  brought
        together in the ICTY Statute [see para  129  of  JS]  by  according
        individual criminal responsibility under article 7(1) to anyone who
        "planned, instigated, ordered, committed  or  otherwise  aided  and
        abetted in the planning, preparation or execution" of the  relevant
        crime. The language  of  all  these  provisions  is  notably  wide,
        appreciably wider than any recognised basis  for  joint  enterprise
        criminal liability under domestic law. That, it  seems  to  me,  is
        what the German court was saying, at para 21 of the BverwG judgment
        (cited at para 14 above) when holding that  the  exclusion  "covers
        not only active terrorists and participants in the criminal  sense,
        but also persons who perform advance acts in support  of  terrorist
        activities."
     1. It must surely be  correct  to  say,  as  was  also  said  in  that
        paragraph,  that  article  1F  disqualifies  those  who   make   "a
        substantial contribution to" the crime, knowing that their acts  or
        omissions will facilitate it. It seems to  me,  moreover,  that  Mr
        Schilling, the UNHCR Representative, was similarly correct  to  say
        in his recent letter that article 1F responsibility will attach  to
        anyone "in control of the funds" of an  organisation  known  to  be
        "dedicated to achieving its aims through such violent crimes",  and
        anyone  contributing  to  the  commission  of   such   crimes   "by
        substantially assisting the organisation to  continue  to  function
        effectively  in  pursuance  of  its  aims".  This  approach  chimes
        precisely with that taken by the Ninth  Circuit  in  McMullen  (see
        para 106 of Gurung cited above): "[Article  1F]  encompasses  those
        who provide [the gunmen etc] with the physical, logistical  support
        that enable modern, terrorist groups to operate."
     1. Of course, criminal responsibility would only attach to those  with
        the necessary mens rea (mental element). But, as article 30 of  the
        ICC Statute makes plain, if a person is aware that in the  ordinary
        course of events a particular  consequence  will  follow  from  his
        actions, he is taken to have acted with both knowledge and  intent.
        (I would for this reason reject the respondent's criticism  of  the
        omission from paragraph 21 of the German court's  judgment  of  any
        separate  reference  to  intent;  that   ingredient   of   criminal
        responsibility is already encompassed within the  Court's  existing
        formulation).
     1. Similarly, and I think consistently with this, the ICTY Chamber  in
        Tadic defines mens rea in a way which  recognises  that,  when  the
        accused is participating in  (in  the  sense  of  assisting  in  or
        contributing to) a common  plan  or  purpose,  not  necessarily  to
        commit any specific  or  identifiable  crime  but  to  further  the
        organisation's aims by committing article 1F crimes  generally,  no
        more need  be  established  than  that  the  accused  had  personal
        knowledge  of  such  aims  and  intended  to  contribute  to  their
        commission.
     1. Returning to the judgment below with these considerations in  mind,
        I have to say that paragraph 119  does  seem  to  me  too  narrowly
        drawn, appearing to confine article  1F  liability  essentially  to
        just the same sort of joint criminal enterprises as would result in
        convictions under domestic law.  Certainly  para  119  is  all  too
        easily read as  being  directed  to  specific  identifiable  crimes
        rather than, as to my mind it should be, wider concepts  of  common
        design, such as the accomplishment of an organisation's purpose  by
        whatever means  are  necessary  including  the  commission  of  war
        crimes. Put simply, I would  hold  an  accused  disqualified  under
        article 1F  if  there  are  serious  reasons  for  considering  him
        voluntarily to  have  contributed  in  a  significant  way  to  the
        organisation's ability to pursue  its  purpose  of  committing  war
        crimes, aware  that  his  assistance  will  in  fact  further  that
        purpose.
     1. It would not, I think, be helpful to expatiate  upon  article  1F's
        reference to there being  "serious  reasons  for  considering"  the
        asylum-seeker to have committed a war crime. Clearly  the  Tribunal
        in Gurung (at the end of para 109)  was  right  to  highlight  "the
        lower standard of proof applicable in  exclusion  clause  cases"  -
        lower than that applicable in actual war crimes trials. That  said,
        "serious reasons for considering" obviously imports a  higher  test
        for exclusion than  would,  say,  an  expression  like  "reasonable
        grounds  for  suspecting".  "Considering"  approximates  rather  to
        "believing" than to "suspecting". I am inclined to agree with  what
        Sedley LJ said in Yasser Al-Sirri v Secretary of State for the Home
        Department [2009] EWCA Civ 222, para 33: "[the phrase used] sets  a
        standard above mere suspicion. Beyond this, it is a mistake to  try
        to paraphrase the straightforward language of  the  Convention:  it
        has to be treated as meaning what it says."
     1. In the result I would dismiss this appeal but vary the order  below
        to  provide  that  in  re-determining   the   respondent's   asylum
        application, the  Secretary  of  State  should  direct  himself  in
        accordance with this Court's judgments, not those of the  Court  of
        Appeal."
B and D v Germany

The Court of Justice of the European Union has  considered  exclusion  on  a
single occasion, in B and D v Germany  (C-57/09  and  C-101/09;  9  November
2010). It found that:

        a)  International  terrorist  acts  are  generally   speaking   and
           irrespective  of  any  State  participation,  contrary  to   the
           purposes and principles of the United Nations;


        b) Exclusion cannot occur until an  individual  assessment  of  the
           specific facts of each case has taken place;


        c) The mere fact of membership of an organisation which features on
           a  Common  Position  or  a  Framework  Decision  unconnected  to
           Directive 2004/83 cannot automatically  mean  that  that  person
           must  be  excluded  from  refugee  status  pursuant   to   those
           provisions;


        d) Inclusion in a  Common  Position  indicates  that  a  group  has
           committed  acts  falling  within  the  scope  of  the  exclusion
           provisions;


        e) For exclusion to operate, it must be  possible  to  attribute  a
           share of the  responsibility  for  the  acts  committed  by  the
           organisation to the individual whilst they were a member [95];


        f) Relevant  factors  are  the  true  role  played  by  the  person
           concerned in the perpetration  of  the  acts  in  question,  his
           position within the organisation, the  extent  of  knowledge  he
           had, or was deemed to have, of its activities, any  pressure  to
           which  he  was  exposed,  and  other  factors  likely  to   have
           influenced his conduct [97];


        g) Article 12(b) and (c) of Directive 2004/83  are  intended  as  a
           penalty for acts committed in the past;


        h) Exclusion from refugee status is not conditional on an existence
           of a present danger to the host State;


        i)  Exclusion  from  refugee  status  is  not  conditional  on   an
           assessment of proportionality  in  relation  to  the  particular
           case."



                         Appendix C: LIST OF DOCUMENTATION CONSIDERED

|     |Document                                           |Date          |
|Item |                                                   |              |
|1    |Amnesty International, "Zimbabwe: Fear for safety  |20 April 2000 |
|     |of farming communities and opposition political    |              |
|     |activists in rural areas"                          |              |
|2    |Amnesty International, "Zimbabwe: Terror tactics in|8 June 2000   |
|     |the run-up to parliamentary elections, June 2000"  |              |
|3    |Zimbabwe Human Rights NGO Forum, "Report on        |29 July 2000  |
|     |political violence in Bulawayo, Harare, Manicaland,|              |
|     |Mashonaland West, Masvingo, Matabeleland North,    |              |
|     |Matabeleland South and Midlands"                   |              |
|4    |Amnesty International, "Amnesty International      |2001          |
|     |Report 2001: Zimbabwe"                             |              |
|5    |US Department of State, "Country Reports on Human  |4 March 2002  |
|     |Rights Practices: Zimbabwe"                        |              |
|6    |Physicians for Human Rights, Denmark, "Zimbabwe:   |21 May 2002   |
|     |Post Presidential Election March to May 2002:      |              |
|     |"We'll make them run""                             |              |
|7    |Amnesty International, "Zimbabwe: The toll of      |25 June 2002  |
|     |impunity"                                          |              |
|8    |Mashonaland Programme of the AMANI Trust, "Beating |25 June 2002  |
|     |your opposition. Torture during the 2002           |              |
|     |Presidential campaign in Zimbabwe"                 |              |
|9    |Zimbabwe Human Rights NGO Forum, "Organised        |June 2002     |
|     |Violence and Torture (OVT)" Human Rights Monitor   |              |
|     |No. 27                                             |              |
|10   |Zimbabwe Human Rights NGO Forum, "Torture by State |March 2003    |
|     |Agents in Zimbabwe: January 2001 to August 2002"   |              |
|11   |The Solidarity Peace Trust, "Peaceful protest and  |17 April 2003 |
|     |police torture in the City of Bulawayo: 24 February|              |
|     |to 25 March 2003"                                  |              |
|12   |America.gov / US Department of State, "U.S. Sternly|5 June 2003   |
|     |Rebukes Zimbabwe's Brutality Toward Protesting     |              |
|     |Citizens"                                          |              |
|13   |Human Rights Watch, "Under a Shadow: Civil and     |6 June 2003   |
|     |Political Rights in Zimbabwe"                      |              |
|14   |The Zimbabwe Situation, "Annan voices concern about|June 2003     |
|     |reports of possible violence in Zimbabwe (UN News  |              |
|     |Centre)" "Mugabe crushes protest marches           |              |
|     |(Telegraph)" "Zimbabwe situation catastrophic:     |              |
|     |Downer (ABC News Australia)" "Zimbabwe opposition  |              |
|     |vows to push on with protests (Reuters)" "Mugabe's |              |
|     |forces fire on student protesters (The Times)"     |              |
|15   |Amnesty International, "Zimbabwe: Southern African |21 August 2003|
|     |leaders must forcefully condemn human rights       |              |
|     |abuses"                                            |              |
|16   |Amnesty International, "Zimbabwe: Unfair trial of  |24 December   |
|     |Roy Bennet, MP"                                    |2004          |
|17   |US Department of State, "Country Reports on Human  |28 February   |
|     |Rights Practices: Zimbabwe "                       |2005          |
|18   |The Redress Trust / AMANI Trust, "Torture in       |June 2005     |
|     |Zimbabwe, Past and Present: Prevention, Punishment,|              |
|     |Reparation?"                                       |              |
|19   |The Guardian, "Monster of the moment"              |1 July 2005   |
|20   |Zimbabwe Human Rights NGO Forum, "Political        |14 November   |
|     |Violence Report - September 2005"                  |2005          |
|21   |Human Rights Watch, "Zimbabwe: Evicted and         |30 November   |
|     |Forsaken"                                          |2005          |
|22   |Zimbabwe Human Rights NGO Forum, "Zimbabwe: Facts  |November 2005 |
|     |and Fictions: An Audit of the Recommendations of   |              |
|     |the Fact-Finding Mission of the African Commission |              |
|     |on Human and People's Rights"                      |              |
|23   |Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada, "Zimbabwe:|22 June 2006  |
|     |The National Youth Service (NYS) training program; |              |
|     |the type of training involved; age of participants;|              |
|     |whether the training program is mandatory; whether |              |
|     |there are exemptions; and the penalty for refusing |              |
|     |to serve or for desertion (2001-2006)"             |              |
|24   |Zimbabwe Human Rights NGO Forum, "Political        |14 July 2006  |
|     |Violence Report - May 2006"                        |              |
|25   |Zimbabwe Human Rights NGO Forum, "Political        |11 September  |
|     |Violence Report - July 2006"                       |2006          |
|26   |Human Rights Watch, ""You Will Be Thoroughly       |November 2006 |
|     |Beaten" - The Brutal Suppression of Dissent in     |              |
|     |Zimbabwe"                                          |              |
|27   |Mail & Guardian, "Report slams Zimbabwe police     |14 December   |
|     |torture"                                           |2006          |
|28   |Zimbabwe Human Rights NGO Forum, "Who guards the   |December 2006 |
|     |guards? - Violations by Law Enforcement Agencies in|              |
|     |Zimbabwe, 2000 to 2006"                            |              |
|29   |Freedom House, "Zimbabwe"                          |2006          |
|30   |Zimbabwe Human Rights NGO Forum, "Political        |23 January    |
|     |Violence Report - November 2006"                   |2007          |
|31   |The Zimbabwean, "CIO flood Jozi to spy on          |15 February   |
|     |deserters"                                         |2007          |
|32   |Human Rights Watch, "Zimbabwe: Security Forces     |28 March 2007 |
|     |Extend Crackdown to Public"                        |              |
|33   |Amnesty International, "Zimbabwe: Fear of torture" |5 April 2007  |
|34   |GlobalResearch.ca, "The Battle over Zimbabwe's     |13 April 2007 |
|     |Future"                                            |              |
|35   |Human Rights Watch, "Bashing Dissent - Escalating  |May 2007      |
|     |Violence and State Repression in Zimbabwe"         |              |
|36   |Zimbabwe Human Rights NGO Forum, "At Best a        |August 2007   |
|     |Falsehood, at Worst a Lie"                         |              |
|37   |Reuters, "Zimbabwe police torture women activists" |10 October    |
|     |                                                   |2007          |
|38   |Mail & Guardian, "Zim dismisses MDC violence claims|25 October    |
|     |as 'hearsay'"                                      |2007          |
|39   |Zimbabwe Human Rights NGO Forum, "Political        |13 February   |
|     |Violence Report - December 2007"                   |2008          |
|40   |Maravi blog, "(Herald) UN publicly fingers MDC-T   |1 May 2008    |
|     |for violence"                                      |              |
|41   |Thaindian News, "Zimbabway's ruling party says     |1 May 2008    |
|     |presidential run-off vote necessary"               |              |
|42   |Institute for War and Peace Reporting (UK),        |13 May 2008   |
|     |"ZANU-PF Sees Police as Captive Vote"              |              |
|43   |The Telegraph, "Mugabe regime to rig parliament    |9 June 2008   |
|     |with arrests"                                      |              |
|44   |Gowans blog, "Violence in Zimbabwe and the MDC and |25 June 2008  |
|     |its Social Imperialist Supporters"                 |              |
|45   |Maravi blog, "(Herald) MDC-T violence claims       |9 July 2008   |
|     |dismissed"                                         |              |
|46   |War Resisters' International (UK), "Zimbabwe army  |2 March 2009  |
|     |starts recruitment drive among rural youths after  |              |
|     |one-third of soldiers deserted"                    |              |
|47   |Hatnews, "MDC official detained over violence"     |16 March 2009 |
|47   |Jane's Sentinel, "Security Assessment - Southern   |22 April 2009 |
|     |Africa"                                            |              |
|48   |NewZimbabwe.com, "CIO grills Mandaza over          |11 December   |
|     |Murambatsvina"                                     |2009          |
|49   |NewZimbabwe.com, "MDC accused of lying over cause  |11 December   |
|     |of Tsvangirai aide's death"                        |2009          |
|50   |Zimbabwe Broadcasting Corporation, "MDC-T violence |3 February    |
|     |threats a fantasy: ZRP"                            |2011          |
|51   |The Zimbabwe Mail, "Zanu PF: MDC started violence" |9 February    |
|     |                                                   |2011          |
|52   |The Herald, "MDC's election manifesto synonymous   |10 February   |
|     |with violence"                                     |2011          |
|53   |AllAfrica.com / The Herald, "Zimbabwe: MDC-T       |15 February   |
|     |Accused of Peddling Falsehoods Over Political      |2011          |
|     |Violence"                                          |              |
|54   |Email to W1                                        |15 April 2011 |
|55   |Foreign and Commonwealth Office, "Human Rights in  |30 June 2011  |
|     |Countries of Concern: Quarterly Update on Zimbabwe,|              |
|     |June 2011"                                         |              |
|56   |Email to W1                                        |10 October    |
|     |                                                   |2011          |
|57   |Email to W1                                        |10 October    |
|     |                                                   |2011          |
|58   |African Commission on Human and Peoples Rights,    |Undated       |
|     |"Executive Summary of the Report of the            |              |
|     |Fact-finding Mission to Zimbabwe 24th to 28th June |              |
|     |2002"                                              |              |
|59   |United Nations, "Report of the Fact-Finding Mission|Undated       |
|     |to Zimbabwe to assess the Scope and Impact of      |              |
|     |Operation Murambatsvina by the UN Special Envoy on |              |
|     |Human Settlement Issues in Zimbabwe, Mrs Anna      |              |
|     |Kajumulo Tibaijuka""                               |              |
|60   |Zimbabwe Human Rights NGO Forum, "Political        |Undated       |
|     |Violence Report - 1-31 March 2003"                 |              |
|61   |Zimbabwe Human Rights NGO Forum, "Political        |Undated       |
|     |Violence Report - 1-30 April 2003"                 |              |







