

Asylum and Immigration Tribunal

                 RP (EEA Regs - worker - cessation) Italy [2006] UKAIT 00025

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 18 January 2006                              |On  10 March 2006          |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                  dr h h storEY (senior immigration Judge)
                   Mr GERAINT JONES QC (Immigration Judge)


                                   Between



                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:       Miss C Bayati, Counsel, instructed by Scudamores
Solicitors
For the Respondent:   Miss J Webb, Home Office Presenting Officer

1.   A person who has been a worker within  the  meaning  of  Community  law
      does not cease to be a worker simply by virtue of falling  unemployed,
      but he must be able to show that he has been  genuinely  seeking  work
      and has not effectively abandoned the labour market.

2.   In assessing  whether a person has satisfied the condition that  he  is
      or  has  remained  a  worker,  the  national  court  must   base   its
      examination on objective criteria and  assess  as  a   whole  all  the
      circumstances of the case relating to the nature of both that person's
      activities  whilst  in  the   Member   State   and   any    employment
      relationship(s)  at issue.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1.  The appellant is an Italian  national  born  on  8  July   1967.   He
      arrived in the UK on 30 April 1999.  On 4 December 2004 he applied for
      an EEA residence permit and residence documents  for  his  spouse  and
      dependant.  On 7 June 2005 the respondent decided to refuse to issue a
      residence permit under Reg 29 of the Immigration  (European   Economic
      Area) (Amended) Regulations 2003; with reference to   Regulation  5(1)
      of  the   Immigration  (European   Economic  Area)  Regulations   2000
      (hereafter 'the 2000  Regulations').  The  appellant  appealed.  In  a
      determination sent out on 19 October 2005 the  Immigration  Judge,  Mr
      C.G. Kelsey, dismissed his appeal.

   2.   The appellant successfully applied for an order for reconsideration.
      The Immigration Judge gave two principal reasons  for  dismissing  the
      appellant's appeal. Firstly the appellant had failed  to  furnish  any
      evidence in response to the request by the respondent and  had  failed
      to gave a satisfactory explanation for this failure.  Secondly and  in
      any event, he did not consider  the  appellant  had  shown  he  was  a
      qualified person within the meaning of Reg 5 of the 2000  Regulations.
      He noted that after arriving in the UK at the end of  April  1999  the
      appellant had only worked a total of about four months since then.  He
      continued:

             'I note from the  European Court  of  Justice  case  [C-413/01
             Ninni-Orasche case] that  a period of two and  a  half  months
             work could  confer  on  a  person  the  status  of  a  worker,
             providing that the activity performed was not purely  marginal
             and ancillary. I have no information or  case  law  to  define
             further what might be called marginal  or  ancillary.  In  any
             event, the appellant clearly needs to comply with paragraph  5
             of the  2000 Regulations, and to bring  himself  within  those
             regulations. The appellant has not satisfied me  that  he  has
             not ceased to be a qualified person. To prove that he is still
             qualified he  would  need  to  show  that  he  is  temporarily
             incapable of work and as a result of illness or  accident,  or
             show that he is involuntarily unemployed. The evidence appears
             to show  that  the  appellant  has  been  claiming  incapacity
             benefit for over two and a half years. I  would  not  normally
             consider that to come within the  definition  of  "temporarily
             incapable". The appellant has  not  provided  any  information
             from a medical  practitioner or a  report,  showing  what  his
             incapacity is or when he might be fit again for work.  Nor can
             the appellant in my view   satisfy  the  burden  of  proof  in
             showing that he  is  involuntarily  unemployed.  The  evidence
             produced as to his efforts to obtain work are  few  in  number
             and totally inconclusive.  There is no evidence as to how many
             job applications he made, or interviews he attended.'

3.   By virtue of the appellant's  appeal  failing,  the  Immigration  Judge
      considered that the appeals of his dependants also failed. In the case
      of the appellant's partner, she failed for the additional reason  that
      she was not a spouse.

4.   The grounds of reconsideration contended  that  the  Immigration  Judge
      erred in law in failing to find that the  appellant  was  a  qualified
      person within the  meaning  of  Regulations  5  and  15  of  the  2000
      Regulations. The grounds break down into  three  principal  ones.  The
      first ground placed focus  on  the  appellant  being   regarded  as  a
      worker. Given that the Immigration Judge had  accepted  the  appellant
      worked full time for a total of four months, he was wrong to  consider
      that case law on whether part-time work was 'marginal  and  ancillary'
      was relevant.  The second  ground  looked  at  the  treatment  by  the
      Immigration Judge of the position  of the appellant  at  the  date  of
      decision.   Had the Immigration Judge recognised  that  the  appellant
      had continued to be a worker until he was awarded incapacity  benefit,
      he would then have been obliged to accept that at the date of decision
      the appellant was involuntarily unemployed by virtue  of  his  medical
      condition, which prevented him from taking up employment. Further, the
      evidence showed that previously he had applied for jobs albeit he  had
      not been selected.

5.   The third ground was set out as follows:

             'In  any  event,  even  if  the  appellant   is   "permanently
             incapable" to work as the judge speculated (paragraph 17), the
             applicant is entitled to [a] residence permit  under  257(iii)
             of the Immigration Rules.  The rule says: '...  the  following
             persons will be permitted to remain in the   UK   indefinitely
             ... an EEA national who has been continually resident in   the
             United Kingdom for at least two years, and who has  ceased  to
             be employed owing [to] a permanent incapacity for  work.'  The
             appellant has been in the UK  for  more  than  two  years  and
             receiving incapacity benefit after  he  had  worked  for  four
             months in the UK".'

6.   Before proceeding further we should set out the relevant provisions  of
      the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2000.  Regulation
      5 states:

             "'Qualified  person'


             (1)   In these Regulations, 'qualified person' means a  person
                  who is an EEA national and in the United Kingdom  as -


                  (a)  a worker;
                  (b)  a self-employed person;
                  (c)  a provider of services;
                  (d)  a recipient of services;
                  (e)  a self-sufficient person;
                  (f)  a retired person;
                  (g)  a student; or
                  (h)  a self-employed person who has ceased  activity;   or
                     who is a person to whom paragraph (4) applies.


             (2)  A worker does not cease to be a qualified  person  solely
                  because -


                  (a)  he is temporarily incapable of work as  a  result  of
                     illness or accident;  or
                  (b)  he is involuntarily unemployed, if that fact is  duly
                     recorded by the relevant employment office.


             (3)  A self-employed person does not cease to be  a  qualified
                  person solely because he is temporarily incapable of  work
                  as a result of illness or accident.


             (4)  This paragraph applies to -


                  (a)  the family member of a qualified person  referred  to
                     in paragraph (1)(h), if -


                     (i)   the qualified person has died;  and
                     (ii)  the family member was residing with him  in  the
                         United Kingdom  immediately before his death;


                  (b) the family member of a qualified person referred to in
                     paragraph 1(b)   where-


                     (i)   the qualified person has died;
                     (ii)  the family member resided with  him  immediately
                         before his death;  and
                     (iii)  either-
                         (aa) the qualified person had resided continuously
                              in the United Kingdom;  or


                         (bb)  the death was the result of an  accident  at
                              work or an occupational disease;  or


                         (cc)  his surviving spouse  is  a  United  Kingdom
                              national.'

             (5)  For the purposes of paragraph (4)(b), periods of  absence
                  from the United Kingdom  which do not exceed three  months
                  in any year or periods of absence from the United  Kingdom
                  on military service are not to be taken into account.'

7.    The 2000 Regulations implement a number of   EU  instruments  relating
      to the freedom of movement  of  workers  and  related  categories.  At
      paragraph 3(1)(a) they state that 'In these Regulations - (a) 'worker'
      means a worker within the meaning of Art 39 of the EC Treaty'.

8.   We should perhaps mention that as from 30 April  2006  almost  all   of
      these  provisions  are  to  be  repealed  and  replaced  by  Directive
      2004/38/EC on the right of citizens of the Union and their families to
      move and reside freely within the  territory  of  the   Member  States
      amending  Regulation  (EEC)  No.  1612/68  and  repealing   Directives
      64/221/EEC, 72/194/EEC, 73/148/EEC, 75/34/EEC, 90/364/EEC, 90/365/EEC,
      93/96/EEC: for text see Phelan pp. 1034-1059.

Our Assessment
9.   We do not consider that the Immigration  Judge  erred  in  law  in  his
      analysis of the appellant's working history.   He  can  be  criticised
      for failing to spell out in what way the ECJ case law  on  work  which
      was 'marginal and ancillary' applied to the facts of this case. But in
      our view he was right  to  treat   such  case  law  as  relevant.  The
      assertion that such case law is exclusively confined to part-time work
      is untenable. The ECJ formulation of the 'marginal and ancillary' test
      treats it as a test to be  made  of  work  of  all  kinds.  Thus,  for
      example, in  Case  197/86 Brown v  Secretary  of  State  for  Scotland
      [1988] ECR 3205 (para 21) it is stated:

             'The concept of a worker within the  meaning of Article  8  of
             the Treaty and of  Regulation  No.  1612/68  has  a  Community
             meaning.    Any  person  who  pursues  an  activity  which  is
             effective and genuine, to the exclusion of activities on  such
             a small scale  as  to  be  regarded  as  purely  marginal  and
             ancillary, is to be treated as a worker'.

10.  Certainly the 'marginal and ancillary' test has obvious and  particular
      application to part-time work, but the  way  in  which  the   ECJ  has
      formulated the 'genuine and effective' test plainly does  not  confine
      it to that.

11.  However, we consider that the Immigration Judge did err in law  in  his
      approach to the appellant's position in relation to Article 5  of  the
      2000 Regulations.  He purported  to  dismiss  the  appeal  under  5(2)
      because he considered the appellant could not bring himself within the
      definition of a 'qualified  person'  in  respect  of  whether  he  was
      temporarily  incapable  of  work  or  involuntarily  unemployed.   But
      Regulation 5(2)  is  concerned  only  with  identifying  two  specific
      circumstances in which a person does  not  cease  to  be  a  qualified
      person; and, in relation to those circumstances, the  subparagraph  is
      limited to identifying  that  they  cannot  on  their  own  constitute
      reasons for deciding  that  a  person  has  ceased  to  be  a  worker.
      Regulation  5(2)  is  not  intended   to   define   exhaustively   the
      circumstances which can mean that a person has ceased to be a  worker.
      Furthermore, before addressing Reg 5(2), the Immigration Judge  should
      have made clear findings on the logically prior  question  of  whether
      the appellant had ceased to be a worker for generic reasons.

12.  Thus we consider that this was a material error of law on the  part  of
      the Immigration Judge since  the  basis  on  which  he  dismissed  the
      appeal, namely Regulation 5(2) of the  2000 Regulations, was  not  one
      he could logically proceed under without first  deciding  whether  the
      appellant had  ceased to be a worker at the relevant time for  generic
      reasons.

13.  Having decided there  was  a  material  error  of  law,  we  turned  to
      consider  what  decision  we  should  substitute  for  that   of   the
      Immigration Judge. We saw no reason to  adjourn,  as  the  appellant's
      representatives had had ample opportunity to furnish further  evidence
      and had done so.   We also had the benefit of full  submissions   from
      both parties.

Appellant's employment and claiming history
14.  There is some doubt as  to  the  precise  details  of  the  appellant's
      employment and claiming history.  From his  witness  statement  of  15
      September 2005 and accompanying documents,  we  derive  the  following
      main points:

      (i)     He arrived in the  UK   on  30  April  1999.  He  was  already
          suffering from  social phobia (Social Anxiety),  having  been   on
          medication for a long time.


      (ii)    From 3 June 1999 - 20 July 1999 he worked as a kitchen  porter
          at Nando's  Chicken  Land.   He  saw  his  GP  at  this  time  who
          prescribed medication.


      (iii)   From 20 July 1999 - 12  October  1999  he  worked  in   Sticky
          Fingers restaurant in Kensington.


      (iv)    He then worked for a week as a technician at a computer design
          company.  He  had  been  dismissed  but,  after  challenging  this
          decision, he received four weeks wages from his  employers  in  an
          agreed  settlement.    (The   chronology   from    him   and   his
          representatives says the date was in  September 2001,  but  a  P45
          they submitted specifies the date he left his previous  employment
          as being 28 August 2001.  In our view nothing turns on this  small
          difference.)


      (v)     After he was dismissed he claimed  unemployment  benefit  (Job
          Seekers  Allowance) 'for a while'.


      (vi)    In 2002, following suggestions from the  Job  Centre  that  he
          could claim incapacity benefit, he applied  for  and  was  awarded
          incapacity benefit for a year. Previously, during   2001,  he  had
          attended Coping Skills courses and Anxiety Management classes.


      (vii)   He applied for a residence permit for himself and  his  family
          on 4 December 2004.

      (viii)  We remind ourselves here that the  date  of  decision  on  his
          application was 7 June 2005.


15.  From the above summary one can see that  the  appellant  has  not  been
      able to state when in  2002  he  began  claiming  incapacity  benefit.
      However, he has submitted  a number  of letters  from  Jobcentre  Plus
      from which  it would appear that he had also been in  receipt  of  Job
      Seekers' Allowance for some period or periods prior to his one week of
      employment in August/September 2001.  It would  also  appear  that  he
      continued to be in receipt of Job Seekers' Allowance until at least 14
       April 2002 (this is what is stated on one of the P45s submitted)  and
      that the earliest documented  mention  of  him  being  in  receipt  of
      incapacity benefit is 10 January  2003 in  the  form  of  a   Benefits
      Agency letter. Additionally, in support of  his  claim  to  have  been
      actively seeking work during all his periods of  employment  up  until
      the time he was awarded incapacity benefit,  he  has  submitted  seven
      letters relating to job applications or inquiries.

16.   We  find  it  quite  remarkable  that  the  appellant    through   his
      representatives has not been able to assist the court better  than  he
      has  as regards his work-seeking and claiming history. It  would  have
      only required one letter to Jobcentre Plus to elicit  confirmation  of
      precisely how long the appellant has been in receipt  of  Job  Seekers
      Allowance and for what periods and how long he had been in receipt  of
      incapacity benefit.  He has had  ample opportunity to  adduce  further
      evidence.   Nevertheless we have to reach a decision on such  evidence
      as is before us.

17.  Despite the  gaps in the evidence submitted regarding  the  appellant's
      work-seeking and claiming history, the  following  background  matters
      are not in dispute:

18.  Firstly, since arriving in  April 1999 the appellant  has  only  worked
      for a total of around eighteen weeks, and, since  October 1999, he had
      only worked just the one week in  August/September 2001.

19.  Secondly, although it is the appellant's contention that up  until  the
      point when he became incapable of work he was actively  seeking  work,
      in support of this contention he has only been able to produce letters
      relating to three job applications or enquiries for 1999  (one  on  19
      July 1999, one on 26 July 1999, one on 16 November 1999), one for 2000
      (on 13 June 2000) and three for 2002 (one on 3 April 2002, one  on  26
      April 2002 and one on 30 May 2002).


20.  Thirdly, for some or all of the period when unemployed, at least  until
      14 April 2002,  he  claimed  Job  Seeker's  Allowance.   Job  Seeker's
      Allowance, of course, is only awarded to persons able to show they are
      available to work: so much was  agreed  by  the  parties  during  oral
      submissions as being an accepted fact.

21.  Fourthly, the appellant appears to have suffered   from  social  phobia
      (Social  Anxiety) even before he came to the  UK.   Whilst  there  did
      come a point when  this  condition  was  found  to  prevent  him  from
      working, this  point was not reached until at the  very  earliest,  14
      April 2002. (Given the job enquiry of 30 May  2002,  it  was  probably
      later than 14 April 2002, but we shall assume the  April date as being
      the most favourable to the appellant's case.)

22.  Fifthly, although we do not have full evidence,  it would  appear  that
      from some point in 2002, 14 April 2002 at the earliest, the  appellant
      has been assessed as incapable of work and for that reason in  receipt
      of incapacity benefit, and that this continues to be the case.

The  applicable legal framework
23.  The question arises, what are we to make of  these  background  matters
      in relation  to  the  central  question   before  us  of  whether  the
      appellant  was a worker at the date of decision?  It was agreed by the
      parties that the  date of decision was the material date, although for
      completeness we shall also have regard to the situation as at the date
      of application.

24.  From established case law we extract the following principles.

25.  The Court has consistently held  that  the  concept  of  worker  has  a
      Community meaning and must not be interpreted in a restrictive manner:
      (Case 53/81 Levin v Secretary of State for Justice [1982] ECR 1035).

26.  There is no  single  definition  of  worker/employed  or  self-employed
      person in Community law; it varies according to the area in which  the
      definition is to be applied (Case C-985/96 Martinez Sala [1998] ECR 1-
      2691, paragraph 31).  In  this  case  the  decision  appealed  against
      relates to United Kingdom Regulations implementing  a  number  of  EEC
      measures, including Council  Regulation (EEC) No. 1612/68.

27.  The essential characteristic of an employment is  that  for  a  certain
      periods  a person performs services for and  under  the  direction  of
      another person in return for  which  he  receives  remuneration  (Case
      197/86 Brown v Secretary of State for Scotland [1988] ECR  3205  (para
      21).

28.  A person becomes a worker  through  economic  activity  establishing  a
      genuine link with the labour market (Case C-138/02 Collins v Secretary
      of State for Work and Pensions [2004] ECR 1-2703).

29.  Having acquired the  status  of  worker  for  the  purpose  of  Council
      Regulation (EEC) No. 1612/68, a  person  who  then  ceases  employment
      retains that status whilst unemployed and looking for  work.  It  does
      not matter that the employment was left voluntarily, so  long  as  the
      circumstances of leaving indicate that the person  still  intended  to
      remain in the labour market (Lair v Universitat Hannover   [1988]  ECR
      3161, ECJ considered) (paragraph 21).

30.  However, EU rules on freedom of movement  of  workers  cover  only  the
      pursuit of effective and  genuine  activities,  to  the  exclusion  of
      activities on such a small scale as to be regarded as purely  marginal
      and ancillary  (judgment in Case 523/81 Levin v  Staatssecretaris  van
      Justitie [1982] ECR 1035, paragraph 17).

31.  Further, there is no legal principle in EU law that a  person  who  has
      become a worker within the meaning of Community law continues to be  a
      worker  irrespective  of  his  subsequent  history  of  employment  or
      unemployment.

32.  Whilst to continue to be a worker it is not necessary that a person  is
      employed, it is necessary that there be on his part no abandonment  of
      the labour market. In Raulin v Minister van Onderwijs en Wetenschappen
      (Case C-357/89 [1992] ECR 1027) it is stated:

             '14. The national  court  may,  however,  when  assessing  the
                  effective and genuine nature of the  activity in question,
                  take account of the irregular nature and limited  duration
                  of the services actually performed under  a  contract  for
                  occasional employment. The fact that the person  concerned
                  worked only a very limited number of  hours  in  a  labour
                  relationship may be  an  indication  that  the  activities
                  exercised are purely marginal and ancillary. The  national
                  court may also take account, if appropriate, of  the  fact
                  that the person must remain available for work  if  called
                  upon to do so by the  employer'.

33.  Thus the duration of the activities  pursued by  the  person  concerned
      is a factor which may be taken into account by the national court when
      assessing whether  these  activities   are  effective  or  genuine  or
      whether on the contrary they are on  such  a  small  scale  as  to  be
      regarded as purely marginal and ancillary.

34.  In assessing whether a person is or remains a  worker,  account  should
      be  taken  of  all  the  occupational  activities   which  the  person
      concerned has pursued within the territory of the  host  Member  State
      but not  the  activities   which  he  has  pursued  elsewhere  in  the
      Community (Raulin, paragraph 19).

35.  In assessing  whether a person has satisfied the condition that  he  is
      or  has  remained  a  worker,  the  national  court  must   base   its
      examination on objective criteria and  assess  as  a   whole  all  the
      circumstances  of  the  case  relating  to  the  nature  of  both  the
      activities concerned and the  employment relationship  at issue (Ninni-
      Orasche Case C-413/01).

36.  A person cannot qualify as a worker or continue to qualify as a  worker
      by an abuse of rights characterised by attempts  to  seek  or  perform
      work which are not genuine. In assessing the  genuine nature of  work-
      seeking activities, it is proper to have regard  to  what  evidence  a
      person provides (Case C-292/89 R v  Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal,  ex
      parte Antonissen [1991] ECR 1-745).

Our conclusions
37.  Applying these principles to  the  facts  of  this  case,  we  are  not
      satisfied that the appellant  was still a worker either at the time he
      applied for a residence permit (4 December 2004) or  at  the  date  of
      decision (7 June 2005).

38.  We are prepared to accept that he had been a worker within the  meaning
      of EU law for a certain limited period after arrival  in  the  UK.  In
      this  regard we note that during his first five-and-a-half  months  in
      the UK, i.e. between his date of arrival in the UK on  30  April  1999
      and 14 October 1999, he was employed for all but the first month.   In
      that period we accept  he established a genuine link with  the  labour
      market.

39.  However, as already noted, the fact that he  was  a  worker  then  does
      mean that he is necessarily to be regarded as a  worker   indefinitely
      thereafter. Our examination must be based on  objective  criteria  and
      look at all the circumstances of his case relating to his work-seeking
      and  his  employment   relationships   as   well   as   his   personal
      circumstances. Several observations are in order here.

40.  Considering the period he has been in the UK,  up  until  his  date  of
      application  for a residence permit, between  30  April  1999  and   4
      December 2004, some four years seven months, the appellant has  worked
      for only  four-and-a-half months.  Even limiting the  relevant  period
      up until the date when he  was  considered   eligible  for  invalidity
      benefit (and so incapable of work) between 30 April 1999 and   at  the
      earliest, 14 April 2002, some two years ten months, he had only worked
      for four-and-a -half months.

41.  Since 1999, during which year he worked for most of the period  between
      arrival in the UK and mid-October 1999, he has  only  worked  for  one
      week. There is some issue as to whether he was unfairly dismissed from
      this brief employment in  August/September 2001 but on his own account
      the settlement he agreed was limited to payment to him of  his  period
      of notice (four weeks).  We regard that employment, even though it was
      full time for its short duration, as being  marginal  and   ancillary.
      Hence we think that by the end of 2001 he had ceased to  be  a  worker
      within the meaning of the 2000 Regulations and  underlying   Community
      Law.

42.  It is the appellant's position that throughout the period when  he  has
      been  unemployed up until the time he became eligible  for  incapacity
      benefit (which he placed at  some  time  in  2002),  he  was  actively
      seeking work. However, the only evidence he has  produced  in  support
      consists of a limited number of letters. Only one  relates  to   2000,
      there are none for 2001, and only three for 2002.  In  our  view  this
      evidence indicates that after October 1999 efforts to seek  work  were
      half-hearted and spasmodic.  We note further that there is nothing  to
      suggest that  these letters  were   an  illustrative  rather  than  an
      exhaustive list since, by virtue of claiming Job  Seekers'  Allowance,
      the appellant should have been in a position to document all  his  job
      enquiries, four of which post-dated 1999.

43.  In such circumstances we are satisfied that the  appellant  had  ceased
      to be a  worker well before he became eligible for incapacity  benefit
      (he became so eligible either in 2002 or early  2003).

44.  Miss Bayati  has  submitted  that  the  appellant  should  be  seen  as
      continuing to be   a  worker  up  until  the  date  when  he  received
      incapacity benefit by virtue of a combination of  (i)  the  fact  that
      during the periods when he was  unemployed  he  was  actively  seeking
      work;  and (ii) the fact that he was incapable  of  work  for  medical
      reasons.

45.  However, as we have already indicated, when examining  his  history  of
      seeking work, we do not consider that it was  sufficiently  sustained.
      We agree in this respect with the Immigration Judge's observations  at
      paragraph 17:  'The evidence produced as to his efforts to obtain work
      are few in number and totally inconclusive'.   It  is  true  that  the
      appellant has maintained that he was continuously seeking  work,  but,
      properly weighed, the evidence simply does not bear this out.

46.  Miss Webb sought to argue that in examining whether the  appellant  had
      ceased to be a worker, we should not only  focus  on  his  periods  of
      employment and unemployment, but also on his  periods  in  receipt  of
      incapacity benefit.

47.   Miss  Bayati  on  the  other  hand  contended  that  eligibility   for
      incapacity benefit  is  dependent  on  the  Department  of   Work  and
      Pensions being satisfied that an appellant is incapable of work and it
      was wrong that one arm of the United Kingdom government   should  seek
      to argue (as did Miss  Webb) that another arm charged  with  assessing
      incapacity for work was wrong to assess the appellant was incapable of
      work during the relevant period. In the  event  we  did  not  find  it
      necessary to decide  this issue as we were satisfied the appellant had
      ceased to  be  a  worker  before  the  time  when  he  first  obtained
      incapacity benefit.

48.  At this point we need to clarify further  here  the  question  of   the
      precise period during which the  appellant  has  been  in  receipt  of
      incapacity benefit.  On the appellant's own account,  his  last  short
      period of work in 2001 was followed by  a  period  of  receiving   Job
      Seeker's Allowance. He then shifted over to  incapacity  benefit.   In
      his statement of 15 September  2005 he stated that:

             'After I was dismissed I  claimed  unemployment  benefit  (Job
             Seekers  Allowance)  for  a  while.  The  Job  Centre   people
             suggested that I  should claim incapacity benefit as I was not
             able to concentrate and they knew that I was under medication.
             Therefore I applied for incapacity benefit in 2002.   The  Job
             Centre people sent me to their doctor for an assessment and  I
             (sic) was found that I met the  threshold of incapacity  under
             the  PCA.    The  Job  Centre  Plus  people  would  assess  my
             eligibility for incapacity at least for each year.'

49.  Up to this point we have assumed in the  appellant's  favour  that  the
      date on which he first received incapacity  benefit  could  have  been
      as early as April 2002. However, so far as the date of receipt of this
      benefit (as opposed to date of application for it) is  concerned,  the
      strict evidential position is  that  the  earliest  reference  to  the
      appellant being in receipt of incapacity benefit is a letter from  the
      Benefits Agency dated January  2003 referring to payment of incapacity
      benefit being included with his income support.  Thereafter there is a
      letter of 9 September 2005 from Job Centre Plus stating that they  can
      'confirm that you have been receiving incapacity benefit  as  follows:
      From 15/4/2004 to 13/4/2005 and from 14/4/2005 continuous.'

50.  Depending therefore  whether  we  accept  the  earliest  possible  date
      (April 2002) or the more likely evidential date  (January  2003),  the
      appellant has spent either two and a  half  years  (October   1999  to
      April 2002) or three years two months (October 19099 to January  2003)
      being professedly available  for work but not in work.

51.  This bring us back to the point that, although the  appellant  says  he
      was actively looking for work, there is insufficient  evidence  before
      us to accept that as a fact.

52.  Miss Bayati  maintains,  however,  that  the  appellant's  work-seeking
      activities have to be placed in the context that he  has  had  medical
      problems for a  long  time.  That  he  has  had  medical  problems  is
      confirmed by his eventual receipt  of  incapacity  benefit.   However,
      there is nothing before us  to  indicate  that  prior  to  receipt  of
      incapacity benefit the appellant's medical problems prevented him from
      actively seeking work. In this regard we agree  with  the  Immigration
      Judge that the appellant, despite having been  clearly  asked  by  the
      respondent to produce a letter or report confirming the nature of  his
      illness, failed to do so. His own evidence about his medical problems,
      together with the Trainee Clinical Psychologist's letter of  12  March
      2001, the  Newton Medical Centre letter  of  6  August  2001  and  the
      Occupational Therapist letters of 10 August 2001 does demonstrate that
      he was having problems with social phobia and needed  assistance  with
      developing coping skills, but it  does  not   show  that  during  this
      period he was unable to work.

53.  For the above reasons we have concluded that well before  the  date  of
      application (and the  date of decision) the appellant had ceased to be
      a worker and thus he did not fall within the provision of Reg 5(1)  of
      the  2000 Regulations. As such,  his  position  did  not  need  to  be
      considered under  the  provisions  of   Reg  5(2)  since  the   latter
      presupposes a person being a worker and who then  becomes  temporarily
      incapable of work or involuntarily unemployed.

54.  As conceded by Miss Bayati, the appeals of the  appellant's  dependants
      must fall along with his appeal.

55.  There remains the third ground  of  appeal  which  contended  that  the
      appellant should nevertheless  be  able  to  succeed  under  paragraph
      257(iii) of the  Immigration  Rules   by  virtue  of  being   'an  EEA
      national who has been continuously resident in the United Kingdom  for
      at least two years, and who has ceased  to  be  employed  owing  to  a
      permanent incapacity for work'.

56.  We can be brief in respect of this ground since, whilst  the  appellant
      has demonstrated that for some time he has been  regarded  by  the  UK
      Department of Work and Pensions as  incapable  of  work,  he  has  not
      produced any evidence to show that  he  has  been  considered   to  be
      permanently incapable of work. If such a decision had  been  taken  it
      would be reflected in the  evidence we have about the   current  basis
      on which he receives incapacity benefit. It is not.

57.  For the above reasons we have concluded that:

      The Immigration Judge materially erred in law.
      The decision we substitute for that of the  Immigration  Judge  is  to
      dismiss the appeal.




Signed                                           Date

Dr H H Storey
Senior Immigration Judge
