

Asylum and Immigration Tribunal

                                               JC (Part 9 HC395- burden of
                       proof) China [2007] UKAIT 00027

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 17 November 2006                             |On 08 March 2007           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       Senior Immigration Judge Storey
                                Dr T Okitikpi
                               Miss V S Street


                                   Between

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, Guangzhou
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:       Mr C Lam,  Counsel, instructed by Amie Tsang & Co.

For the Respondent:     Mr M Raj, Home Office Presenting Officer

Paragraph 320 of Statement of Changes of Immigration Rules  HC395  sets  out
general  grounds for refusal of entry or leave to enter additional to  those
(mainly substantive) grounds set  out  in  parts  2-8  of  these  rules.  In
relation  to  all  the  general  grounds  contained  in  part  9,  including
paragraph 320(15), the burden of  proof  rests  on  the  decision  maker  to
establish any contested precedent fact.

If an appellant has failed to meet  the  requirements  of  the   Immigration
Rules set out in Parts 2-8, then he cannot succeed, even  if  it  transpires
that paragraph 320 (15) grounds  have  been  wrongly  applied  against  him.
However,  where there is an overlap in the reasons  given  for  finding  the
requirements of the substantive immigration rules (in  this  case  paragraph
128) not to be met and  those  given  for  finding  that  paragraph  320(15)
applies, an error  in  the  latter  may  (depending  on  the  facts  of  the
individual case) infect the former.



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The appellant is a citizen of  China.  He  seeks  reconsideration   of  a
determination  of Immigration Judge  Shanahan notified on 6  February   2006
dismissing his appeal against a decision  of  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer
(ECO) Guangzhou dated  15  February  2005  refusing  to   grant   him  entry
clearance  as a  work  permit  holder.   The  respondent  decided  that  the
appellant did not meet the requirements of   paragraph  128  and  also  fell
foul of paragraph 320(15) of the Immigration Rules  HC  395.  Paragraph  128
states:

    "Requirements for leave to enter the United  Kingdom  for  work  permit
    employment


    128. The requirements to be met  by  a  person  coming  to  the  United
        Kingdom to seek or take employment (unless he is otherwise eligible
        for admission for employment under these Rules or is  eligible  for
        admission as seaman under contract to join  a  ship  due  to  leave
        British Waters) are that he:


        (i)       holds a valid Home Office work permit;  and
        (ii)      is not of an age which puts him  outside  the  limits  for
            employment; and
        (iii)    is capable of undertaking the employment specified  in  his
            work permit; and
        (iv)    does not intend to take employment except  as  specified  in
            his work permit;  and
        (v)   is able to maintain and accommodate himself and any dependents
            adequately without recourse to public funds; and
        (vi)    in the case of a person in possession of a work permit which
            is valid  for a period of 12 months or less,  intends  to  leave
            the United Kingdom at the end of his approved employment; and
        (vii)  holds a valid United Kingdom entry  clearance  for  entry  in
            this capacity except where he  holds a work permit valid for   6
            months or less or he is a British National (Overseas), a British
            protected person or a person who under the  British  Nationality
            Act 1981 is a  British subject."

2. Paragraph 320(15), the other ground of refusal, is  one  of  the  general
grounds of refusal set out at part 9 of  the  Immigration  Rules  HC395.  It
states that entry clearance should normally be refused if:

     "whether or not to the holder's knowledge, the making of false
    representations or the failure to disclose any material fact for the
    purpose of obtaining an immigration employment document;"

The structure of part 9
 3. Apart from the case of RM (Kwok On Tong:HC395  para  320)  India  [2006]
UKIAT 00039 and BA(321A Immigration Rules mandatory)  Nigeria  [2006]  UKAIT
00080, there is little case law on the general grounds of refusal. What  was
reported under the former IAT  (we  bear  in  mind  for  example   Olufosoye
[1992] Imm AR 141, Tekere (01/TH/174) and Dube (2002) UKIAT 01367),  relates
to versions of the Immigration Rules quite different from the current  ones.
 Part 9 of the HC395 Rules contains "general grounds"  for  the  refusal  of
entry clearance, leave to enter (320, 321), cancellation of leave  to  enter
or remain (321A) and variation of leave to enter or remain (322).  (It  also
deals at paragraph 323 with grounds on which leave to enter  or  remain  may
be curtailed, but these are left to one side here, as they possibly  have  a
unique status). The opening sentence of paragraph 320 states:

    "In addition to the grounds for refusal of entry or leave to enter  set
    out in parts 2-8 of these Rules, and subject to  paragraph  321  below,
    the following grounds for the refusal of entry clearance  or  leave  to
    enter apply."




4. Several features of these general grounds need clarifying.

5. First, each identifies an additional legal basis of  the  decision;  they
are not a set of extra reasons.

6. Second, although they are grounds "additional"  to  specific  substantive
grounds under parts 2-8 of the Immigration Rules that  does  not  mean  they
cannot form a stand alone basis for refusal; they can.  For  example,  if  a
person seeks entry for a purpose not covered by  the  immigration  rules,and
so paragraph 320(1) applies, that  means  he  must  be  refused  (Indeed,  a
decision taken on such a ground is one of those which cannot be appealed  on
immigration grounds alone: see s.88 (2)(d) of the  Nationality,  Immigration
and Asylum Act 2002 (the "2002 Act".))  It  follows  from  this  that  if  a
person is refused on one or more substantive grounds under Parts 2-8 and  on
one or more general ground under part 9, he has  two  hurdles  to  surmount.
Even if he can show on appeal that one of the two grounds  (the  substantive
and the general) is wrong, he will still fail to meet  the  requirements  of
the Immigration Rules if the other ground is made out; and  so,  his  appeal
under the Immigration Rules will fail.

7. Third, they fall  into  two  categories:  grounds  in  respect  of  which
refusal is mandatory (320(1)-(7), 321A(1)-(6),  322(1))  and  grounds  which
give discretion (expressed as "should normally be  refused"),  (320(8)-(21),
321, 322(2)-(11), 323).

8. Fourth, they are a mixed bag and do not easily fit into neat  categories.
Some are sui generis and have been added  over  time  in  response  to  very
specific circumstances: e.g. paragraph 320(4) dealing  with  Channel  Tunnel
arrivals. Many are concerned  with  documentation.  They  represent,  as  it
were, the list of general grounds which the Home Secretary currently  thinks
must or should operate to complement the substantive immigration rules.

9. Fifth (assuming both substantive and general  grounds  are  being  relied
on), there is really no hard and fast rule for immigration judges  to  adopt
so far as concerns the order in which the should be addressed. The  subject-
matter of the general grounds is too diverse for there to be  such  a  rule.
The Home Office IDIs advise  their  staff,  at  least  in  respect  of  some
subparagraphs, to first address the  substantive  rather  than  the  general
requirements of the Rules (in parts 2-8), but  they  primarily  advise  that
for pragmatic reasons (less scope for argument on appeal). Much will  depend
on which general ground is matched with  which  substantive  requirement(s).
However, where the general ground is one in mandatory form, taking it  first
would seem logical since a decision  on  that  may  be  dispositive  of  the
appeal - or may indeed establish ineligibility  for  an  appeal:  see  above
paragraph 6.

10. Sixth, in relation to all of the general grounds the burden of proof  is
on  the  decision-maker  (entry  clearance  officer,  immigration   officer,
Secretary of State) to establish the facts relied upon. Their common  thread
is that they depend for their validity on the decision-maker being  able  to
establish a precedent fact. Unless it is not contested, the  precedent  fact
needs to be established for the duty or power to be  exercised.  As  can  be
seen from their early formulation  as  "general  considerations"  (see  e.g.
HC509, HC510), the general grounds, now found at part 9 of HC395,   seek  to
cover circumstances where the Home Secretary considers that a person  should
not succeed under the Immigration Rules even though he  meets  the  ordinary
substantive requirements. They are general grounds for  saying  "no".  (That
in respect of such grounds  the  decision-maker  is  put  to  proof  may  be
thought salutary, since otherwise their operation could create an  executive
"override" capable of undermining the efficacy of the substantive rules.)

11. Another reason why the burden rests on the decision-maker is  that  each
of these grounds alleges in one way or another a failing or a wrongdoing  on
the part of an applicant. As regards failings, they refer to an  applicant's
failure  to  give  information,  furnish  documents,  give  undertakings  or
consent or respond to a request to attend an interview  (320(3),  (5),  (8),
(8A), (10), (14), (16), (20), 321A(6), 322(9),  322(11),  322(10)),  failure
to  show  acceptable  intentions  (320(4),  (9)),  restricted  returnability
(320(13),  321(iii),  322(8)),  failure  to  observe  the  time  limits   or
conditions attached to any grant of  leave  to  enter  or  remain  (320(11),
322(3)), failure by a sponsor to give an undertaking to be  responsible  for
maintenance and accommodation (322(16)), failure by the person concerned  to
honour any declaration or undertaking given as to intended  duration  and/or
purpose of stay (322(7), (322(6)), refusal to undergo a medical  examination
(320(17),  (321(iii)),  undesirability  of  admission  for  medical  reasons
(321A(3)) and failure to maintain or accommodate himself and any  dependants
without recourse to public funds (322(4)).

12. As regards wrongdoings, they cover  persons  subject  to  a  deportation
order  or  exclusion  personally  directed  by  the   Secretary   of   State
(320(2)(6),  321(iii),  321A(4)),  persons  whose  character,   conduct   or
associations or the fact that they represent a threat to  national  security
makes permitting them to remain undesirable (322(5)),  the  obtaining  of  a
previous leave to enter or remain by  deception  (320(12)),  the  making  of
false representations or giving of false information or failure to  disclose
any material  fact  for  the  purposes  of  obtaining  employment  documents
(320(15), (321(i), 321A(2), 322(2)), a change in circumstances  since  entry
clearance was issued or leave given (321(ii),  321A(1)),  commission  of  an
offence punishable with a term of 12 month  imprisonment  (320(18))  or  the
existence of a criminal record (321(iii)) and exclusion deemed conducive  to
the public good (320(19), 321A(5)).

13. So far as the standard of proof is concerned, we consider that what  the
Immigration Appeal Tribunal said in Olufosoye [1992] Imm AR 141 still  holds
good: "insofar as the justification consists of deception or other  criminal
conduct the standard of proof will be at the higher end of the  spectrum  of
balance of probability" (see also R v IAT ex parte Nadeem Tahir  [1989]  Imm
AR 98 CA). This approach reflects  that  of  the  House  of  Lords  in  R  v
Secretary of State for the Home Department ex p.Khawaja [1984] AC 74 and  is
consistent with subsequent case law (see e.g.  Bishop [2002]  UKIAT  05532).
In  R (AN & Anor) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2005]  EWCA
Civ 1605 Richards LJ stated at [62]:  "Although  there  is  a  single  civil
standard of proof on the balance of probabilities, it  is  flexible  in  its
application. In particular, the more serious  the  allegation  or  the  more
serious the consequences if the allegation is proven, the stronger  must  be
the evidence before a court will find the allegation proved on  the  balance
of probabilities".

14. Each of  the  general  grounds  has  an  exclusionary,  rather  than  an
inclusionary, intent. The applicant is not showing why he qualifies;  rather
the decision-maker is seeking to show why he  is,  or  should  normally  be,
disqualified.

15. However, once the decision-maker establishes the underlying  facts,  the
burden shifts to the appellant. It shifts to the  appellant  even  when  the
general ground concerned  is  discretionary,  stating  that  refusal  should
normally be refused.  That  follows  from  the  fact  that  the  legislative
structure of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  requires  the
appellant to prove that the decision was not  in  accordance  with  the  law
(including the immigration rules) or that a discretion exercised  in  making
a decision should have been exercised differently.

16. Returning to paragraph 320(15), we remind ourselves that it states  that
entry clearance should normally be refused if:

     "whether or not  to  the  holder's  knowledge,  the  making  of  false
    representations or the failure to disclose any material  fact  for  the
    purpose of obtaining an immigration employment document;"

17. As such, it belongs to a subgroup of grounds in respect of  which  there
is an exclusionary discretion ("should  normally  be  refused").  Since  the
ground is one which requires establishment of  a  precedent  fact,  in  this
case false representations having been made, the burden of establishing  the
fact lies on the decision-maker. RM gives important guidance on this  rule's
application. At paragraph 14 the Tribunal makes the point that where any  of
the (mandatory) subparagraphs (1) to (7) of paragraph 320 applies,  a  grant
of entry clearance would necessarily be not  in  accordance  with  the  law.
Where,  however,  the  facts  indicate  an  application  of  (discretionary)
subparagraphs 320(8) to (21), then:

    "...the  position  is  quite  different.  Under  those   subparagraphs,
    although the presumption is clearly against entry clearance,  there  is
    no bar on a grant of entry clearance. A grant of entry clearance  would
    not therefore conflict with  the  Rules,  and  an  Immigration  Judge's
    finding that circumstances apply to  the  case  does  not  prevent  him
    allowing an appeal".

The appellant's case
18.  The  Immigration  Judge  upheld  the  decision  of  the  ECO  on   both
substantive and general grounds: he found, in view of his limited  level  of
skills that the  appellant  did  not  meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph
128(iii) "is capable of undertaking the employment  specified  in  the  work
permit" and 128(iv) "does not intend to take employment except as  specified
in the work permit".  And he found that the  appellant  was  caught  by  the
exclusionary provisions of paragraph  320(15)  because  he  had  made  false
representations to obtain his  work  permit.  In  this  regard  he  attached
weight to the ECO's evidence  that when   a  site  visit  was  paid  to  the
appellant's place of work in  China, the appellant  and  his  employer  knew
about  this beforehand and falsely represented things as a result.

19. The grounds for reconsideration  attacked  both  findings.   When  these
came before Senior Immigration Judge Chalkley he found no arguable merit  in
the grounds which attacked the Immigration Judge's conclusion  on  paragraph
128.   Reconsideration was ordered solely on the  paragraph   320(15)  point
of challenge.

20. At the outset of the hearing before us we pointed  out  to  the  parties
that  it  seemed  to  us  that  when  ordering  reconsideration  the  Senior
Immigration Judge concerned had overlooked that  reconsideration  only  lies
where there is a real possibility  that  upon  reconsideration  a  different
decision may be made: see Rule 26(6) of the Asylum and Immigration  Tribunal
(Procedure) Rules 2005.  What we had in mind was that  an  appellant  cannot
succeed in an appeal  under  the  Immigration  Rules  unless  he  meets  all
relevant requirements of those Rules: see RM; and  secondly,  that,  in  the
context of this case the Immigration Judge (like the respondent) had  relied
on a failure to meet two sets of requirements:  those  under  paragraph  128
and those under  paragraph  320(15).  Accordingly,  even  if  Mr  Lam  could
persuade us that paragraph   320(15)  was  wrongly  relied  on,  the  appeal
could still  not succeed, by virtue of the fact that  no arguable  error  of
law  had  been  found  in  the  Immigration  Judge's   conclusion  that  the
requirements  of paragraph  128 were not met.

21. However, the appellant's grounds of appeal to the Immigration Judge  had
disputed the ECO's reason under both paragraph  128 and 320(15) and, on  the
basis of the approach set out by  the  Court  of   Appeal  in   DK  (Serbia)
[2006] EWCA Civ 1747 (approving AH (Scope of  Section  103  reconsideration)
Sudan [2006] UKAIT 00038), we considered we should not  shut  the  appellant
out from seeking to persuade us that the  Immigration  Judge's   conclusions
on paragraph  128 were also legally flawed.

22. Mr Lam sought to persuade us that the way in which  paragraphs  128  and
320(15) had been applied in this case meant that they had to be  treated  as
inextricably  linked  and  so,  if  we  found  that  the  Immigration  Judge
materially erred in law in finding that paragraph    320(15)  applied,  then
we were obliged to find his assessment of the appellant's case  in  relation
to the requirements of paragraph 128 similarly flawed.

23. We are prepared to accept  that  the  Immigration  Judge's  reliance  on
paragraph 320(15) was flawed. In forming this view we particularly  bear  in
mind the following. Firstly paragraph 320(15) is  not  one  of  the  general
grounds on which entry clearance or leave to enter is to be refused (i.e.  a
mandatory refusal ground), but only one on which entry  clearance  or  leave
to enter should normally be refused (i.e. a discretionary  refusal  ground).
That is relevant because it is not at  all  evident  that  the  ECO  or  the
Immigration  Judge  recognised  that  they  were  exercising  discretion  as
opposed to applying a mandatory  rule.    Secondly,  the  Immigration  Judge
himself disagreed with the respondent's view  that  the  appellant  and  his
employer between them had colluded over  the  site  visit  and  had  falsely
represented what the appellant actually did:  see paragraph 32. Thirdly,  he
did not accept that the appellant's National  Occupational  Skills  Standard
Certificate was false: see paragraph   39.   Bearing  in mind that when  the
respondent alleges false representations it is  at  least  for  him  in  the
first instance to establish the precedent  facts  on  which  he  relies,  we
think the Immigration Judge erred in upholding  the  respondent's   reliance
on  320(15).

24. However, this still leaves the fact that the appellant was found not  to
have met the requirements of paragraph 128.

25. We  cannot  accept  Mr  Lam's  argument  about  the  interdependency  of
paragraphs 320(15) and 128 in the abstract. The most obvious distinction  is
the one we have just identified:  the application of the burden of proof  is
different for each. For one  the  burden  is  on  the  respondent  to  first
establish the facts on which he relies; for the other the burden  rest  with
the appellant to prove his case. Hence even where the  reasons  for  finding
that paragraph 320(15) applies are exactly  the  same  as  the  reasons  for
finding paragraph  128 requirements are not  met,  the  outcome  under  each
paragraph may not necessarily be the same, depending on how  application  of
the burden of proof moderates the assessment.  Further, whereas  one  cannot
succeed  under  paragraph  128  unless  one  meets  all  its   requirements,
application of paragraph 320(15), as we  have  seen,  imports  a  discretion
(albeit one which should normally lead to refusal).

26. Nevertheless, we do accept that in certain cases depending on the  facts
the two provisions may be closely interrelated: when for  example,  the  use
of false representations also demonstrates that the appellant does not  have
the capability or the requisite intention to undertake  the  work  specified
(paragraph 128(iii) and (iv)).  More  generally,  if  an  immigration  judge
decides that (for example) dishonesty alleged  under  paragraph  320(15)  is
not established, that may sometimes incline him to  take  a  different  view
than he would otherwise as to the appellant's  credibility  in  relation  to
substantive requirements of the Rules, especially those concerned  with  the
appellant's intentions.

27. However, as Mr Lam conceded, on the facts of this case, the reasons  the
Immigration Judge gave for concluding that the  appellant did not  meet  the
requirements   of  paragraph   128  (at  least  under  the  only   contested
requirement, subparagraph (iii)), existed independently of the  reasons  for
considering he had used false representations.   Thus  in  paragraphs  31-40
the Immigration Judge relied on the evidence indicating that  the  appellant
had poor knowledge of storage and hygiene, that he  practiced  poor  hygiene
at his restaurant and that the state  of  the  restaurant  "seriously  calls
into question  the appellant's  skills  knowledge  and  experience  of  good
hygiene practices".

28. Mr Lam's argument might have been  capable  of  showing  interdependence
between  the  findings  on  false  representations  and  paragraph   128(iv)
relating to intention to perform the specific  employment.  But  that  still
left subparagraph 128(iii), which  is  the  only  relevant  subparagraph  of
paragraph 128 with which we are concerned in this case.

29. Accordingly, we  consider  that  this  application  for  reconsideration
cannot succeed. The appellant was properly found unable to meet one  of  the
essential requirements of paragraph 128: errors in the  immigration  judge's
reasoning in respect of paragraph 320(15) did not infect  his  reasoning  in
respect of paragraph 128. Hence the  appellant's  appeal  was  bound  to  be
dismissed.

30. Thus, even though the Immigration Judge erred in law in concluding  that
the appellant stood to be refused entry clearance for the additional  reason
of having used false representations  contrary to paragraph   320(15),  this
was  not  a  material  error.  The  Immigration  Judge's    conclusions   on
paragraph 128 were ones which were open to him on the evidence.

31. It follows that the decision of the Immigration  Judge  to  dismiss  the
appellant's appeal must stand.


Signed                                  Date
Senior Immigration Judge Storey



