


                                             Asylum and Immigration Tribunal

   LG and CC (EEA Regs: residence; imprisonment; removal) Italy [2009] UKAIT
                                                                       00024

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Taylor House                         |                             |
|On 22 and 23 April 2009                       |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                   LORD JUSTICE CARNWATH, SENIOR PRESIDENT
                       SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE ALLEN
                      SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE P R LANE

                                   Between

                                     LG
                                     CC
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                          Secretary of State


Representation:

For Appellant LG:            Ms C. Hulse, Counsel, instructed by Messrs
Duncan Moghal
For Appellant CC:            Mr M. Karnik, Counsel, instructed by Messrs
Paragon Law
For the Secretary of State:  Mr T. Eicke, Counsel, instructed by the
Treasury Solicitor


Time spent in prison does not count towards the acquisition of the level  of
protection  afforded  to  an  EEA  national  by  regulation  21(4)  of   the
Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006,  even  for  a  person
who has a right of permanent residence in the United Kingdom.

A clear distinction is required to be drawn  between  the  three  levels  of
protection against removal introduced in the 2006  Regulations,  each  level
being intended to be more stringent and narrower than the immediately  lower
test.






                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


Introduction

1.    LG and CC are EEA nationals who the Secretary  of  State  has  decided
    should be deported from the United Kingdom.  Their  cases  come  before
    this Tribunal on  the  reconsideration  of  earlier  determinations  to
    dismiss their respective  appeals  against  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decisions.

2.    Both of the appeals raise issues  concerning  the  interpretation  and
    application of Directive 2004/38/EC of 29 April 2004 ("the  Directive")
    and the Immigration (European Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006  ("the
    Regulations"): specifically, what constitutes residence for the purpose
    of establishing a right of permanent residence in a host  Member  State
    (here, the United Kingdom); what constitutes residence for the  purpose
    of being able to invoke the protection against  expulsion  provided  by
    regulation  21(4)(a);  and  generally  as  to  the  correct  means   of
    undertaking the procedures laid down in regulation 21 in  the  case  of
    the expulsion of EEA nationals. We have set out the relevant  parts  of
    the  Directive  and  the  Regulations   in   the   Appendix   to   this
    determination. To avoid duplication, we have  found  it  convenient  to
    refer generally to the provisions and terminology of  the  Regulations,
    except where the nature of the  discussion  focuses  attention  on  the
    Directive.

3.    The appeal in the case of LG was remitted  to  this  Tribunal  by  the
    Court of Appeal in LG (Italy) v Secretary of State [2008] EWCA Civ 190.
    The issues before the Court of Appeal were first, whether, on the basis
    that, as found  by  the  AIT,  LG  satisfied  the  ten  year  residence
    criterion under the 2006 Regulations, the AIT had been entitled in  law
    to hold that there were 'imperative grounds'  of  public  security  for
    removing him; and secondly under a respondent's notice, whether the AIT
    erred in law in holding  that  LG  satisfied  the  ten  year  residence
    criterion in view of the fact that for the preceding seven years he had
    been in prison.

 4.   At paragraph 14 Carnwath LJ noted the following:

        "14.     As appears from the emphasised words above  in  Regulation
             21(1)-(4), the 2006 Regulations have introduced a new hierarchy
             of levels  of  protection,  based  on  criteria  of  increasing
             stringency:


             (1)  A general criterion that removal may be justified 'on  the
                 grounds  of  public  policy,  public  security  or   public
                 health';


             (2)  A  more  specific  criterion,  applicable  to  those  with
                 permanent rights of residence, that they may not be removed
                 'except on serious  grounds  of  public  policy  or  public
                 security';


             (3)  The most stringent criterion, applicable to a person  'who
                 has resided in the United Kingdom for a  continuous  period
                 of at least ten years prior to the relevant decision',  who
                 may not be removed except on 'imperative grounds of  public
                 security'.


             The Regulations provide no further guidance on the  meaning  of
             these expressions."

5.    At paragraph  31,  Carnwath  LJ  stated  that  on  the  basis  of  the
    relatively limited arguments that had been  heard  he  would  not  feel
    confident in attempting to lay down any definitive guidance  and  would
    not in any event wish to do so until the Secretary of State had reached
    a more settled view both of the legal interpretation  of  the  relevant
    provisions and the policy considerations governing their application in
    practice. The case was remitted to enable that to happen. CC's case has
    been listed at the same hearing, since it raises issues which overlap.

6.    Some further insight into the legislative history  of  Article  28  of
    the Directive is to be found in the  Common  Position  (EC)  No  6/2004
    adopted by the Council on 5 December 2003.  There was a  difference  of
    view between the  Council  and  the  Commission  as  to  the  level  of
    protection that was appropriate, as appears from the following comment:-



        "Article 8: The Council is almost unanimously against the  absolute
        protection against expulsion, although it has accepted an increased
        protection for Union citizens who have been  residing  for  a  long
        period in the host Member State.   After  the  acquisition  of  the
        right of permanent residence, Union citizens may be  expelled  only
        on serious grounds of public policy or public security."


7.    The background was explained by the Commission  in  its  communication
    to the European Parliament of 30 December 2003:-

        "Article 28(2): The Member States were almost  unanimously  opposed
        to absolute protection against expulsion for Union citizens and the
        members of their families who have acquired the right of  permanent
        residence in the host Member State.  However,  they  did  agree  to
        increased protection for Union citizens who have lived for a number
        of years in the host Member  State.   Consequently  the  compromise
        included in  the  common  position  takes  the  form  of  increased
        protection depending on the length of residence in the territory of
        the host Member State.


        Once they have acquired the right of permanent residence,  citizens
        of the Union and the members of their families may be expelled only
        for  particularly  serious  reasons  of  public  policy  or  public
        security.


        After ten years of  residence  in  the  host  Member  State,  Union
        citizens can  be  expelled  only  for  overriding  public  security
        reasons...."


8.    The fact that the final text represented  a  compromise  may  help  to
    explain some of the difficulties in the drafting, but  provides  little
    help in resolving them.

9.    We have been referred to the Commission's 2008 report to  the  Council
    and Parliament on the working of the Directive, to which we will return
    below (paragraph 53). At this stage, we note the following comment:-

      "Member States remain competent to define and modify the  notions  of
         public policy and public security.  However, implementation may not
         trivialise the difference between the scope of  Article  28(2)  and
         Article 28(3), or extend the concept of public security to measures
         which should be covered by public policy."





Facts and appeal histories

LG

10.   LG is a citizen of Italy who was born on  18  October  1969.   He  has
    lived in the United Kingdom since at least 1987.  On 9 October 2001  LG
    was convicted at Leicester Crown Court of robbery and  grievous  bodily
    harm with intent.  He was  sentenced  to  twelve  years'  imprisonment,
    reduced on appeal to a term of nine years.  On  10  November  2005  the
    Secretary of State decided that, in view of  this  conviction,  it  was
    conducive to the public good to make a deportation order in respect  of
    LG.  The basic facts of these offences were that, in the early hours of
    Saturday 29 January 2000, LG had followed a 66 year old retired man and
    attacked him from behind, inflicting serious head and facial  injuries,
    including a fracture of the skull.  LG robbed the victim of his wallet,
    leaving him lying in the road.

11.   The sentencing judge described LG's offences as "a brutal,  senseless,
    cowardly attack upon an elderly gentleman" and told the appellant  that
    "you are a thoroughly dangerous man...I don't  think  for  offences  of
    robbery of this type it gets much worse".

12.   LG's criminal history had begun in August 1996, when he was  convicted
    of obtaining property by deception and  ordered  to  pay  compensation.
    The following month, he  was  convicted  on  two  counts  of  obtaining
    services by deception and ordered  to  pay  a  fine,  compensation  and
    costs.  A month after this, he was convicted of two counts of obtaining
    property by deception, for which he was  ordered  to  pay  a  fine  and
    compensation.  In August 1997, LG was convicted on two counts of  theft
    and one count of robbery, receiving a sentence of three  years  and  28
    days' imprisonment.

13.   LG appealed against the decision to make  a  deportation  order.   His
    appeal was heard at Newport on 15 December 2005 by the  Tribunal  ("the
    first Tribunal").  His appeal was dismissed.   Reconsideration  of  the
    first Tribunal's  decision  was  ordered  under  section  103A  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and, on 8  December  2006,
    it was found that the first Tribunal had materially erred in law.   The
    reconsideration hearing was adjourned in order for findings of fact  to
    be made and a fresh decision taken, whether to  allow  or  dismiss  the
    appeal.

14.   The adjourned hearing took place at Newport on 5 January  2007  before
    an Immigration Judge and a non-legal member ("the second Tribunal"). In
    the determination which followed  that  hearing,  the  second  Tribunal
    accepted "on the balance of the evidence" that LG had  had  ten  years'
    continuous residence in the United Kingdom  for  the  purposes  of  the
    appeal (paragraph 56).  Accordingly, pursuant to  regulation  21(4)(a),
    the decision that the appellant should be deported could not  be  taken
    "except on imperative grounds of public security".

15.   At paragraph 67, the second Tribunal found that LG:

      "... has been convicted of  grave  offences  and  we  find  that  the
         appellant has not shown that he does not pose  a  risk  of  further
         harm to the public by way of further offending and, moreover,  that
         the evidence before us suggests that this  appellant  does  pose  a
         continuing risk particularly when he does not appear to accept that
         he committed the grave offence of grievous bodily harm with  intent
         on this 66 year old man in the circumstances which were  proved  at
         the Crown Court".

16.   The Tribunal concluded, at paragraph 69:

      "... that the Secretary of State has met  the  evidential  burden  of
         showing that there are imperative grounds of  public  security  for
         removing this appellant from the United Kingdom to Italy".

17.   On appeal to the Court of Appeal (see above), the Court held that  the
    second Tribunal had erred in law in relation to  its  approach  to  the
    issue of whether, if the "ten  year  test"  applied,  the  decision  to
    remove LG could properly be said to be on imperative grounds of  public
    security.  The Court accordingly remitted the appeal to  the  Tribunal.
    In doing so, however, it expressly left open the  question,  raised  by
    the Secretary of State for the first time before the Court  of  Appeal,
    whether the second Tribunal had been right to conclude that  the  level
    of protection based on ten years' residence  applied  at  all  in  this
    case.

18.   We will need to return in more detail to the  evidence  in  LG's  case
    when we have considered the legal issues.


CC

19.   CC is a citizen of Portugal born on 15 November  2004.   All  that  is
    known about his arrival in the United Kingdom is that  he  is  said  to
    have come here at some time in 2002.  He was said to be  seeking  work.
    According to the Secretary of State's letter of 20  September  2007  to
    CC, the latter claimed that he had mostly  been  in  full-time  factory
    work since  arriving  in  the  United  Kingdom.   However,  documentary
    evidence of CC's employment in the  United  Kingdom,  in  the  form  of
    payslips and P45 forms, commences only on 6 May  2004  and  ends  on  1
    September 2006.  National insurance records for 2006/2007 record CC  as
    being unemployed from 11 September  2006.   According  to  a  Probation
    Service report filed on 15  February  2007,  CC  had  appeared  in  the
    criminal courts on a total  of  eleven  occasions  since  2003,  for  a
    variety of offences including  theft,  possession  of  Class  A  drugs,
    damaging property,  breach  of  a  community  order,  being  drunk  and
    disorderly, being in possession of an  offensive  weapon  and  using  a
    false  instrument.   This  offending  had  been  dealt  with  by  means
    including   conditional   discharge,   probation   and   three    days'
    imprisonment.   On  26  July  2006  CC  was   convicted   at   Grantham
    Magistrates' Court of exposure, sexual assault on a female  and  common
    assault.  He was  sentenced  at  Lincoln  Crown  Court  to  22  months'
    imprisonment.  The order for CC's imprisonment  is  dated  16  February
    2007, although Mr Karnik's skeleton argument states that  CC  had  been
    detained since January 2007.  He was released on 17 October 2007.

20.   On 20 September  2007  the  Secretary  of  State  decided  to  make  a
    deportation order in respect of CC.  He appealed against that  decision
    and his appeal was heard at Nottingham by the Tribunal  ("the  original
    Tribunal") on 22 November 2007.  The original Tribunal  dismissed  CC's
    appeal.  In its  determination,  the  original  Tribunal  addressed  Mr
    Karnik's submission that CC could be deported only on  serious  grounds
    of public policy or public security (regulation 21(3)) because  CC  had
    acquired a right of permanent residence under regulation 15(1)(a); that
    is to say, by residing in the United Kingdom for a continuous period of
    five years.  Even leaving aside the problem of when CC arrived  in  the
    United Kingdom, it can immediately be seen that Mr Karnik's  submission
    to the original Tribunal (and to us) stands or  falls  on  whether  the
    period of imprisonment spent by CC, following his convictions  in  July
    2006, is to be taken into account in calculating  the  period  of  five
    years mentioned in regulation 15(1)(a).

21.   It is relevant to observe that,  before  the  original  Tribunal,  the
    argument appears to have been advanced that CC was a "worker  or  self-
    employed person  who  has  ceased  activity",  so  as  to  fall  within
    regulation 15(1)(c).  The original Tribunal rejected  that  submission,
    which was not advanced before us; rightly so, since it is plain that CC
    could not fall within the definition of "worker or self-employed person
    who has ceased activity", as defined in regulation 5.

22.   The original Tribunal rejected the submission that CC had  acquired  a
    right of permanent residence  in  the  United  Kingdom.   The  original
    Tribunal found that "at best, the appellant has an  extended  right  of
    residence in terms of Regulation 14 which like Regulation 15 is subject
    to Regulation 19(3)(b) which provides that the appellant  can  only  be
    removed if justified on the grounds (as  opposed  to  serious  grounds)
    under Regulation 21(3) of public  policy,  public  security  or  public
    health" (paragraph 28 of the determination).  It was on that basis that
    the original Tribunal assessed the position of CC.  Notwithstanding the
    fact that CC had entered what the original Tribunal considered to be an
    apparently stable relationship with a female British citizen,  and  had
    not committed any further offence since his release  from  prison,  the
    original Tribunal was troubled by CC's failure to accept responsibility
    for the offences that had caused his imprisonment for 22  months.   The
    original Tribunal did not  accept  that  he  had  given  up  drugs  and
    drinking to excess (paragraph 35).   It  did  not  consider  that  CC's
    relationship with his  present  partner  had  removed  or  reduced  his
    propensity to re-offend, particularly bearing in mind that the offences
    were committed when CC was already in that relationship (paragraph 32).
     The original Tribunal concluded that  CC  represented  a  genuine  and
    sufficiently serious threat such as to justify  his  deportation  under
    regulation 21.  CC's "past  and  escalating  behaviour  does  in  these
    particular circumstances establish a future risk to society such as  to
    justify   his   deportation   which   is   proportionate   given    the
    circumstances".

23.   So far as Article 8 of the ECHR was concerned, the  original  Tribunal
    accepted at paragraph 40 that CC enjoyed family life with  his  partner
    but took into account the fact that the partner had told  the  original
    Tribunal "that if necessary, she would  go  to  Portugal  to  join  the
    appellant there, following her surgery for removal of an ovarian  cyst.
    [The partner] is  epileptic,  however  there  was  no  suggestion  that
    whatever medication and treatment she requires will not be available in
    Portugal."  The original Tribunal concluded that CC's removal would not
    be disproportionate, either by reference to  regulation  21(5)  or,  if
    different, by reference to Article 8.

24.    The  Tribunal  refused  to  order  reconsideration  of  the  original
    Tribunal's decision but on 4 February  2008  such  reconsideration  was
    ordered by Wyn Williams J. Unfortunately, the judge did not explain his
    reasons for finding a material error of law. This  is  the  basis  upon
    which CC's appeal comes before us.


The issues

25.   We now summarise the issues which arise  under  the  Regulations.   Ms
    Hulse, on behalf of LG, submitted that the second Tribunal was right to
    find that he could be deported only on "imperative  grounds  of  public
    security" (regulation 21(4)), but that the second  Tribunal  materially
    erred in law in the way it approached that test.  On behalf of  CC,  Mr
    Karnik submitted that the original Tribunal erred in law in  concluding
    that CC had not acquired a right of permanent residence  and  therefore
    failed to consider whether there were "serious grounds of public policy
    or public security", which required his deportation (regulation 21(3)).
     For the Secretary of State, Mr Eicke submitted that neither LG nor  CC
    had acquired a right of permanent residence and that LG had also failed
    to show ten years' residence for the purposes of regulation 21(4).

26.   The following questions are therefore posed:-

        (a) What constitutes  residence  for  the  purposes  of  regulation
             15(1)(a) - right  of  permanent  residence  after  five  years'
             "legal" residence in the United Kingdom?


        (b) What constitutes residence for the purposes of regulation 21(4)
             -  protection  from  expulsion  where  there  is   ten   years'
             residence?


        (c) What is the correct meaning and  application  of  the  test  of
             serious grounds of public  policy  and  public  security  under
             regulation 21(3)?


        (d) What is the correct meaning and  application  of  the  test  of
             imperative  grounds  of  public   security   under   regulation
             21(4)(a)?


      The word "legal" in question (a) is taken from  Article  16.  We  will
    need to discuss further below (paragraphs 46ff) the precise content  of
    that term.

27.   Questions (a)  and  (b)  both  have  what  might  be  described  as  a
    qualitative and a temporal aspect.  The qualitative aspect  relates  to
    the nature of the residence needed to be  shown.   In  particular,  the
    question arises as to whether  time  spent  in  prison  in  the  United
    Kingdom following conviction for an offence can count towards the  five
    year and ten year periods.

28.   The temporal aspect raises two  issues:  first,  in  relation  to  the
    right of residence, the question  of  commencement,  and  secondly,  in
    relation to the 10-year period, the  end-date.  The  first  relates  to
    whether and to what extent regard is to be had to any period before  30
    April 2006, when the Regulations came into  force,  or  to  any  period
    before 2 October 2000, when the Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2000  came  into  force.   The  significance  of  the  2000
    Regulations  arises  from  paragraph  6  of  Schedule  4  to  the  2006
    Regulations (see Appendix A).

29.   However, even if regard can be had to periods before those dates,  the
    further question arises as to whether the right of permanent  residence
    created by the Directive is one that can arise  only  on  or  after  30
    April 2006.  In OP (EEA; permanent rights of residence) Colombia [2008]
    UKAIT 00074, the Tribunal decided that question in the affirmative.

30.   Before returning to the four questions, it is convenient to deal  with
    two very recent authorities, which have narrowed the  issues  which  we
    have to decide.


Two recent Court of Appeal authorities

Lassal - commencement date

31.   The commencement  issue  has  in  the  event  been  resolved  for  the
    purposes of this appeal by a concession  by  the  Secretary  of  State,
    following a recent Court of Appeal judgment,  Secretary  of  State  for
    Work and Pensions v Lassal [2009] EWCA Civ 157.

32.    Mr  Eicke's  initial  stance  was  that  the  five  year  period  for
    establishing a right of permanent residence  could  not  begin  to  run
    until the coming into force of the 2000 Regulations. This itself was by
    reason of what he categorised as  a  domestic  "concession",  by  which
    activity or residence in the United Kingdom in accordance with the 2000
    Regulations  fell  to  be  counted  for  the  purposes  of   the   2006
    Regulations. (2006 Regulations Schedule 4,  paragraph  6).  Applying  a
    similar approach to the ten year period, he would have  submitted  that
    it was necessary to show residence in the United Kingdom for ten  years
    starting with the coming into  force  of  the  2000  Regulations  on  2
    October 2000, and that therefore that provision could have no relevance
    until at earliest October 2010.

33.   So far as concerns the five year period, Mr Eicke's  initial  approach
    was consistent with the decision of the Tribunal in OP (EEA;  permanent
    right of residence) Colombia [2008] UKAIT  00074.  There  the  Tribunal
    held that, since  the  right  of  permanent  residence  is  a  specific
    creature of the Directive, that right can crystallise only on or  after
    30 April 2006, even though the effect of paragraph 6 of Schedule  4  to
    the 2006 Regulations is to enable residence in the  United  Kingdom  in
    accordance  with  the  2000  Regulations  to  count  as  residence   in
    accordance with the 2006 Regulations.

34.   On the second day of the hearings,  Mr  Eicke  informed  the  Tribunal
    that the Secretary of State could not sustain these positions,  in  the
    light of the judgment of the Court of Appeal in  Lassal.  Although  the
    decision in that case was to refer certain issues to the European Court
    of Justice, the Court made clear its view on the issue of commencement.



35.   The case concerned a French national, Miss Lassal, who had resided  in
    the United Kingdom as a worker  since  September  1999,  save  for  ten
    months commencing February 2005 when she had  returned  to  France  for
    personal reasons. The question was whether she had acquired a permanent
    right to reside in the United Kingdom, having regard to the  fact  that
    she had not completed five years' continuous residence on or  after  30
    April 2006. Arden LJ gave the judgment  of  the  Court  explaining  the
    reasons for making the reference. In so doing she gave the Court's view
    of the Secretary of State's submissions as to commencement:-

        "3.      The SSWP argues that the new right of permanent  residence
             which art 16 confers applies only where a person has  completed
             five years' continuous residence on or after the implementation
             date.  The SSWP fears that, if a person can qualify  under  art
             16 through residence wholly before the implementation date, art
             16(4) would not apply. If art 16(4) does not apply,  she  could
             acquire permanent residence even if, subsequent  to  completion
             of five years' continuous residence, she had been  outside  the
             United Kingdom for two years or more.
             We would reject the  SSWP's  interpretation  of  art  16.   The
             object of  the  Citizenship  Directive  is  to  facilitate  the
             integration into the host member state of  workers  and  others
             having strong links through residence with it.  To achieve that
             aim, it is necessary to interpret art 16 so that the  right  of
             permanent residence can be acquired on the implementation  date
             in reliance on residence before that date.  This does not  make
             art 16 impermissibly  retrospective.   Moreover,  if  the  five
             years' residence has to be completed after that  date,  workers
             who  may  have  built  up  many  years'  residence  before  the
             implementation date will be unable to take advantage of art  16
             until (in the case of  United  Kingdom)  30  April  2011.   The
             SSWP's interpretation would weaken rather than  strengthen  the
             right of  residence  of  Union  citizens,  as  the  Citizenship
             Directive intends.  As to art 16(4), we consider that this must
             apply consistently whether a person  completes  her  qualifying
             period  of  continuous  residence  before,  on  or  after   the
             implementation date.  Accordingly, in our judgment,  art  16(4)
             must be interpreted so  that  it  applies  to  both  groups  of
             persons." (emphasis added)


36.   She went on to explain  that  the  Court  felt  it  right  to  make  a
    reference, because some of the issues related to  those  considered  by
    the House of Lords in McCarthy v SSHD [2008] EWCA Civ 641, in  which  a
    reference had been made and which was  currently  before  the  European
    Court (see paragraph 52 below), and  because the Court of Appeal  "does
    not consider the question  of  the  temporal  scope  of  the  right  of
    permanent residence to be acte claire" (paragraph 4 of the  Reason  for
    Making a Reference). Mr Eicke submitted that  the  judgment  in  Lassal
    should be treated as binding this Tribunal on the  commencement  issue.
    He accordingly conceded that, consistently with that  judgment,  regard
    could be had to periods before  the  coming  into  force  of  the  2000
    Regulations.

37.   Whether this Tribunal is formally bound by the judgment in Lassal  is,
    perhaps, a moot point, given that the Court  of  Appeal  in  that  case
    stayed the proceedings until the European Court of Justice has given  a
    preliminary ruling on the question referred  to  it  by  the  Court  of
    Appeal. However, at the very least such a formal expression of view  by
    the Court of Appeal is  of  great  persuasive  force.  We  are  content
    therefore to accept the Secretary of State's concession. This means, by
    implication,  that  for  the  purposes  of  the  present  appeals,  the
    Secretary of State has effectively conceded that, on this issue, OP  is
    wrong.  We proceed on that basis.

HR (Portugal) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 371

38.   After the hearings on 22 and 23 April, the Court of  Appeal  delivered
    its judgments in HR (Portugal) [2009] EWCA  Civ  371.  We  invited  the
    parties to make written submissions as to the significance of this case
    for LG and CC. Mr Karnik and Mr Eicke have each supplied us with  their
    submissions. Ms Hulse did not consider it necessary for her to  do  so.
    We have taken the submissions into account and will address them in due
    course. At this point it is unnecessary to do more  than  set  out  the
    essential facts and the conclusion of the Court.

39.    HR was a citizen of Portugal who claimed to have come to  the  United
    Kingdom in 1992. Although in possession of a national insurance number,
    there was no evidence that he had worked in this country. By  contrast,
    his criminal record was both long and serious. It was contended on  his
    behalf that, because he had been in the United Kingdom  for  ten  years
    (albeit much of the time in prison),  HR  could  be  deported  only  on
    imperative grounds of public security, as required by Article  28.3(a).
    The Court of Appeal rejected that submission. HR's time in prison could
    not count for that purpose. We shall return to his case in due course.

40.   It is important for present purposes to  note  the  relatively  narrow
    basis on which the case proceeded. The Court of Appeal approached  HR's
    case on the basis that he was a person who "has never worked  here  and
    has evidently devoted his life to crime"  (paragraph  44;  Sedley  LJ).
    Further, Counsel for HR accepted that his  time  in  prison  would  not
    count for the purpose of establishing a right of  permanent  residence,
    which had to  be  "legal",  that  is  "for  the  purposes  of  availing
    themselves of the rights and freedoms conferred by the Treaty". Indeed,
    he accepted the AIT's finding that HR never did satisfy that condition,
    even when not in prison (paragraph 31, Elias LJ). The case advanced  on
    behalf of HR was that the 10-year period was different,  since  Article
    28.3(a)  was  not  expressly  subject  to  a  similar  requirement   of
    lawfulness; accordingly, for that purpose residence in Article  28.3(a)
    meant no more than ten years' physical presence, even if a  significant
    part of that time had been spent in prison.

41.   This  interpretation  was  rejected  by  the  Court.  In  the  leading
    judgment, which held that the same requirement of  "legality"  governed
    both periods. Stanley Burnton LJ said:

         "21. Recital 23 is implemented in Articles 16 and 28.2; recital 24
        is implemented in Article 28.3. What is significant in  recital  24
        is, first, the linkage with recital 23, signalled by  "Accordingly"
        and the comparative adjective "greater" applied  to  "integration".
        "Integration" itself is explained in  recital  23.  It  relates  to
        "persons who, having availed themselves of the rights and  freedoms
        conferred on them by the Treaty, have become  genuinely  integrated
        into the host Member State". These  recitals  show  that  what  was
        intended was  a  progression  in  the  restrictions  on  expulsion,
        depending on the degree of integration of a person in  the  country
        in which he is present as  demonstrated  by  the  duration  of  his
        residence in the exercise of Treaty rights. In my view  it  follows
        that the Member States did not intend the restriction on  expulsion
        envisaged in recital 24 to be applicable to someone  who  does  not
        qualify for the protection envisaged by recital  23.  It  is  clear
        from recital 24 that the reason for the restriction on the right of
        the state to expel someone who has been in this  country  for  many
        years is his integration into this country.  Recital  24  does  not
        envisage that the restriction  on  expulsion  to  which  it  refers
        should be applicable to a person who has not availed himself of the
        rights and freedoms conferred on him by the Treaty,  but  has  been
        compulsorily detained in this country.


         22. If I read Article 28.3 literally, and  assume  that"  resided"
        means no more than "been present in", there is no qualification  to
        the period of his presence in this country, and no  link  with  the
        requirements of Article 16 that he  should  have  resided  in  this
        country "legally". It is clear from recital 23  that  "legally"  in
        Article 16 means "in  the  exercise  of  the  rights  and  freedoms
        conferred on them by the Treaty, as was held by the Tribunal in  GN
        (EEA Regulations:  Five  years'  residence)  Hungary  [2007]  UKAIT
        00073. If the appellant's submission is well-founded, a person  who
        has been in this country for 11 years, of which  8  were  spent  in
        prison, is not entitled to the right of permanent residence, and is
        therefore not protected by Article  [28.2],  but  is  protected  by
        Article [28.3], and cannot be removed except on imperative  grounds
        of public security. The consequence is manifestly inconsistent with
        recitals 23 and 24. So  is  the  fact  that  it  is  impossible  to
        consider the Appellant to have been integrated into this country as
        envisaged by recitals 23 and 24."

42.   Thus the ratio of the decision is that, in respect of the  quality  of
    residence, no distinction is to be drawn between the five year and  ten
    year periods, notwithstanding the absence from the latter of an express
    reference to the need for it to be "legal". That accords with the  view
    we had reached before seeing the judgments.

43.   As to whether time spent in prison can ever count towards  the  period
    of residence for either purpose, the judgments are more  equivocal.  In
    view of the concession made by counsel for HR, this  question  did  not
    need  to  be  decided.  Elias  LJ  placed  particular  weight  on  that
    concession (paragraph 31), although he agreed  generally  with  Stanley
    Burnton LJ. Sedley LJ expressed  more  doubt  as  to  the  question  of
    interpretation but commented that:

      "... the facts of the present case can fall only on one side  of  the
         line, wherever it is drawn, since HR has never worked here and  has
         evidently devoted his life to crime." (paragraph 44)

44.   Therefore, we think that the case must  be  read  as  to  some  extent
    turning on its own facts and the submissions made. Furthermore, as will
    be seen, the Court was not referred to  a  line  of  European  case-law
    which is potentially relevant, a least in relation to  a  claimant  who
    (unlike  HR)  had  qualified  as  a  worker  before   his   period   of
    imprisonment. Accordingly,  while  acknowledging  the  guidance  to  be
    gained from the Court of Appeal judgments, we cannot avoid the need  to
    reconsider the issues for ourselves.

45.   We now turn to the four questions summarised above,  to  be  addressed
    as questions of principle, before applying the answers to the facts  of
    the two cases before us.


Question (a) - What constitutes residence for  the  purposes  of  regulation
15(1)(a) - right of permanent residence after five  years'  legal  residence
in the United Kingdom?

"Legal" residence

46.    As already noted, we have used the expression  "legal  residence"  in
    question (a) because  Article  16.1  accords  the  right  of  permanent
    residence to "Union citizens who have resided legally for a  continuous
    period of five years in the host  Member  State".  Regulation  15(1)(a)
    does not use that or any equivalent term, but requires the five  years'
    residence in the  United  Kingdom  to  be  "in  accordance  with  these
    Regulations". It is necessary to consider whether there is any material
    difference between the two expressions.

47.   The Secretary of State's position is that there is no difference.   In
    order to  acquire  a  right  of  permanent  residence,  a  person  must
    demonstrate that, during any period upon which it is sought to rely for
    the purpose of establishing the requisite five years' residence, he  or
    she was in the United Kingdom, exercising a Treaty right;  that  is  to
    say as a "qualified person" within the meaning of regulation 6 (e.g.  a
    job seeker, worker or student) or as a relevant family member of such a
    person (within the scope of the Regulations). The  expression  used  by
    the Regulations is consistent with recital 17 of the  Preamble  to  the
    Directive which speaks in the same context of five years residence  "in
    compliance with the conditions laid down in this Directive".

48.   Ms Hulse and Mr  Karnik,  on  the  other  hand,  contended  that  this
    interpretation is too narrow.   Although  neither  submitted  expressly
    that mere physical  presence  in  this  country  was  sufficient,  both
    contended that rights of residence in host Member States, deriving from
    the Treaty, were wider in nature and that, even if a person  could  not
    at any particular point in time be described as  a  "qualified  person"
    etc., he or she might nevertheless be lawfully in  the  United  Kingdom
    for the purposes of the Directive and the Regulations.

49.   This issue in our view must now be regarded as settled,  at  least  up
    to the Court of Appeal. We have  already  noted  Stanley  Burnton  LJ's
    statement in HR (Portugal) that:

      "it is clear from recital 23 that 'legally' in Article 16  means  'in
         the exercise of the rights and freedoms conferred on  them  by  the
         Treaty', as was held by the Tribunal in GN (EEA  Regulations:  five
         years' residence) Hungary [2007] UKAIT 00073" (paragraph 22).

50.   The quotation from recital  23  is  taken  from  the  passage  dealing
    generally with integration, and is arguably wider than the  formula  in
    recital 16, which relates to the right  of  permanent  residence.  That
    refers specifically to compliance with the conditions of the  Directive
    rather than to rights under the Treaty. However, since  the  point  had
    been conceded, and nothing turned on the different wording,  there  was
    no need for the Court to discuss it in any detail.

51.   The same point was also addressed by the Court of Appeal  in  McCarthy
    v SSHD [2008] EWCA Civ  641.   The  appellant  was  a  citizen  of  the
    Republic of Ireland and a British citizen.  Whilst accepting  that  she
    was not a "qualified person" within the meaning of the Regulations, the
    appellant asserted that she had acquired a right of permanent residence
    under regulation 15 as an EEA national who had resided lawfully in  the
    United Kingdom for a continuous period of five years.  The Secretary of
    State refused her application for a residence permit and  she  appealed
    to the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal.  Her appeal  was  dismissed  on
    reconsideration.  At paragraph 31 of the judgment, Pill LJ held:-

            "I agree with the conclusions of the  Tribunal.   The  Directive
             creates and regulates rights of  movement  and  residence  for
             Union citizens.  The lawful residence contemplated in  article
             16 is residence which complies with community law requirements
             specified in the Directive and does not cover residence lawful
             under domestic law by reason of  United  Kingdom  nationality.
             Article 3 provides in terms  that  the  Directive  applies  to
             Union citizens who reside in a Member State 'other  than  that
             of which  they  are  a  national'.   The  expression  'resided
             legally'  in  article  16  should,  in  my   view,   be   read
             consistently with, and in the sense, of  preamble  17  of  the
             Directive,  that  is  residence  'in   compliance   with   the
             conditions laid down in this Directive'.  The repeated use  in
             the Directive of the expression 'host Member  State'  supports
             that conclusion.  It indicates rights to be enjoyed in  Member
             States  other  than  that  of  nationality;  the  word  'host'
             suggests that the Union citizen is a 'guest', an inappropriate
             expression for persons in the state of their own nationality."

52.   That passage confirms the position taken by  the  Secretary  of  State
    before us. It is necessary to observe that, on appeal to the  House  of
    Lords, a reference was made to the European Court  of  Justice  ("ECJ")
    under Article 234 of the Treaty.  The nature of the reference, however,
    makes it plain that the position of Mrs McCarthy, as a dual  Irish  and
    United  Kingdom  national,  was  considered   to   be   of   particular
    significance.  The first question referred relates to  whether  such  a
    person who has resided in the United Kingdom for her entire life can be
    said to be "a beneficiary" within the  meaning  of  Article  3  of  the
    Directive.  The second question is whether "such a person" has  resided
    legally within the United Kingdom for the purpose of Article 16 of  the
    Directive.  However, those points do not detract in our view  from  the
    authority of McCarthy, on the construction of the  term  "legally"  for
    our purposes.

53.   We should add  for  completeness  that  in  the  2008  Report  of  the
    Commission, to which we  have  already  referred,  the  only  criticism
    levelled at the United Kingdom in respect of the implementation of  the
    right of permanent residence (paragraph 3.7)  relates  to  whether  the
    government should have taken account of periods of  residence  acquired
    by EU citizens before the UK acceded to  the  EU.   Immediately  before
    that passage we find  that  "Hungary  makes  [the  right  of  permanent
    residence] incorrectly conditional upon conditions related to the right
    of residence".  Exactly  what  Hungary  has  done  in  this  regard  is
    unclear; but it would appear to involve making  the  retention  of  the
    right of permanent residence, once acquired, dependent  upon  continued
    compliance with the conditions that relate to the enjoyment of  an  EEA
    right of residence under Article 6 or Article 7 of the  Directive  (ie.
    precisely the rights contained in regulations 13 and 14). Article  16.4
    expressly  provides  that,  once  acquired,  the  right  of   permanent
    residence shall be lost "only through  absence  from  the  host  Member
    State for a period exceeding two consecutive years".  Article  16.4  is
    exactly transposed by regulation 15(2).

54.   In the circumstances, had the Commission been  in  any  way  concerned
    with the wording of regulation 15(1)(a), one would have  expected  them
    to have said so in their Report.  The fact that they have not  done  so
    provides some reassurance for the Secretary of State's interpretation.

Imprisonment following period of work

55.   It is necessary now to deal with a number of authorities of  the  ECJ,
    which are relied upon by LG and CC in support of the  proposition  that
    imprisonment following criminal conviction may constitute residence for
    present purposes, at least in  relation  to  a  person  who,  prior  to
    imprisonment, was a worker within the meaning  of  Article  39  of  the
    Treaty. As already noted, these authorities were not cited to the Court
    in HR (Portugal), and were not relevant on the facts of that case.

56.   The first material case, Nazli [2000] ECR I-957, was concerned with  a
    particular context, that of Turkish nationals under the  special  rules
    (under the EEC Turkey Association Agreement) providing for their access
    to employment in Member States.  However,  as  will  be  seen,  it  was
    treated in later cases as of general application under Article 39.  The
    relevant provision was Article 6(1) of Decision  No  1/80  of  the  EC-
    Turkey Association Council, which provides:

        "Subject to Article 7 on free access to employment for  members  of
        his family, a Turkish worker duly registered as  belonging  to  the
        labour force of the Member State:


           -     shall be entitled in that Member State, after  one  year's
               legal employment, to the renewal of his permit to  work  for
               the same employer, if a job is available;


           -     shall be entitled in that Member State after  three  years
               of legal employment and subject to the priority to be  given
               to workers of Member States of the Community, to respond  to
               another offer of employment, with an employer of his choice,
               made  under  normal  conditions  and  registered  under  the
               employment services of that State, for the same occupation;


           -     shall  enjoy  free  access  in  that  State  to  any  paid
               employment  of  his  choice,  after  four  years  of   legal
               employment" [the "third indent"].

57.   Mr Nazli, a Turkish national, had been in continuous  paid  employment
    in Germany since 1979, and from May 1989 he  had  held  a  work  permit
    unlimited in duration and  entirely  unconditional.   In  1992  he  was
    implicated in a case  of  drug  trafficking  in  Germany  and  detained
    pending trial from December 1992 to January 1994. In April 1994, he was
    sentenced to a term of imprisonment of 21 months, which  was  suspended
    in full because the offence had been an isolated one and Mr  Nazli  was
    well-integrated socially and had found work again immediately after his
    release. However, his application for an  extension  of  his  residence
    permit was later rejected by the department responsible for the control
    of  aliens,  which  also  simultaneously  ordered  his  expulsion  from
    Germany.

58.   Amongst  the  questions  referred  to  the  ECJ  was  whether,  having
    achieved the legal status conferred by  the  third  indent  of  Article
    6(1), a Turkish worker should forfeit that status subsequently if he is
    detained on suspicion of having committed  a  crime  for  which  he  is
    ultimately convicted and given a suspended prison sentence.  The  Court
    answered that question in the negative, holding that he  did  not  lose
    his status as a worker during his imprisonment, provided he found a new
    job within  a  reasonable  period  after  his  release.  The  essential
    reasoning appears from the following passage of the judgment:

        "38.     ...Article 6 of Decision No 1/80 relates not only  to  the
             situation where a Turkish worker is in  active  employment  but
             also to the situation  where  he  is  incapacitated  for  work,
             provided that his incapacity is only temporary, that is to  say
             it does not affect his fitness to continue exercising his right
             to  employment  granted  by  that  decision,  albeit  after   a
             temporary break in his employment relationship...


        39. Thus, while the right of residence as a corollary of a right to
             join the labour force  and  to  be  actually  employed  is  not
             unlimited, the rights granted by Article 6(1)  of  Decision  No
             1/80 are necessarily lost only if the worker's inactive  status
             is permanent.


        40. In particular, while  legal  employment  for  an  uninterrupted
             period  of  one,  three,  or  four  years  respectively  is  in
             principle required in order for the rights provided for in  the
             three indents of Article 6(1)  to  be  established,  the  third
             indent of that provision  implies  the  right  for  the  worker
             concerned, who is already duly integrated into the labour force
             of the host Member State, to take a temporary break from  work.
             Such a worker thus continues to be duly registered as belonging
             to the labour force of that State providing  that  he  actually
             finds another job within a  reasonable  period,  and  therefore
             enjoys a right to reside there during that period.


        41. It follows from the foregoing considerations that the temporary
             break in the period of active employment of  a  Turkish  worker
             such as Mr Nazli while he is detained pending trial is  not  in
             itself capable of causing him to forfeit the  rights  which  he
             derived directly from the  third  indent  of  Article  6(1)  of
             Decision  No  1/80  provided  he  finds  a  new  job  within  a
             reasonable period after his release.


        42. A person's temporary absence as a result of detention  of  that
             kind does not in any way  call  into  question  his  subsequent
             participation in working life, as is moreover  demonstrated  by
             the main proceedings, where Mr Nazli looked for work and indeed
             found a steady job after his release..."

59.   In Orfanopoulos and Oliveri  [2004]  ECR  I-5257,  the  same  line  of
    reasoning was applied to the question of deportation  of  nationals  of
    Member States. The Court was  concerned  with  the  cases  of  a  Greek
    national and an Italian national, both of whom lived  in  Germany.   Mr
    Orfanopoulos had been in that  country  for  almost  30  years,  having
    arrived  as  a  teenager.   Mr  Oliveri  had  been  born   there.    Mr
    Orfanopoulos had been refused an extension  of  his  residence  permit.
    His employment in Germany had been interrupted by periods of  prolonged
    unemployment, including periods of imprisonment and hospitalisation  as
    a result of drug addiction. In 2001  his  expulsion  from  Germany  was
    ordered and he was informed that he would be deported at the end of his
    latest sentence of imprisonment.  Mr  Oliveri  also  had  been  a  drug
    addict and had committed numerous offences, in respect of some of which
    he had been  imprisoned.   In  2000  his  expulsion  from  Germany  was
    ordered.

60.   A number of questions were posed to the ECJ by the German  courts,  in
    respect of both cases.  Much of the ECJ's judgment is taken up with the
    issue of whether deportation of  a  national  of  a  Member  State  can
    properly be based on reasons of a general preventative nature  and,  in
    particular,  whether  automatic  deportation   following   a   criminal
    conviction is compatible with Community  law.   The  Court  found  that
    general  prevention  could  not  be  relied  upon,  particularly  where
    deportation was,  under  national  law,  an  automatic  consequence  of
    conviction (paragraph 68, citing Nazli).

61.   However, the Court also addressed  the  effect  of  their  periods  of
    imprisonment on their status as workers, in the context of  the  rights
    derived from Articles 18 and 39 of the Treaty. In the following passage
    Nazli was treated as applicable:-

        "49.     So far as concerns migrant workers who are nationals of  a
             Member State, their  right  of  residence  is  subject  to  the
             condition that the person remains a worker or, where  relevant,
             a person seeking employment  (see  to  that  effect,  KC-292/89
             Antonissen [1991] ECR I-745, paragraph 22), unless they  derive
             that right from other provisions of Community law...


        50. Moreover, in respect more particularly of  prisoners  who  were
             employed before their imprisonment, the fact  that  the  person
             concerned was not available on  the  employment  market  during
             such imprisonment does not mean, as a general rule, that he did
             not continue to be duly registered as belonging to  the  labour
             force of the host Member State  during  that  period,  provided
             that he actually finds another job  within  a  reasonable  time
             after his release (see, to that effect, KC-340/97 Nazli  [2000]
             ECR I-957, paragraph 40).


        51. It is clear that Mr Orfanopoulos has made use of the  right  to
             freedom  of  movement  for  workers  and  has  pursued  several
             activities  as  an  employed  person  in  Germany.   In   those
             circumstances, it must be held that Article 39 EC and Directive
             64/221 apply  in  circumstances  such  as  those  of  the  main
             proceedings in KC-482/01..."


62.   In the case of Mr Oliveri there was insufficient information  for  the
    Court to determine the issue.

63.   Dogan [2005] ECR  I-6237  was  another  case  relating  to  a  Turkish
    national who, after four years of  legal  employment  in  Austria,  had
    acquired the right of free access to any paid employment of his  choice
    under the third indent of Article 6(1). It was held  that  he  did  not
    forfeit that right solely because of a period of imprisonment, even for
    several years. It was a strong case, because he had  lived  in  Austria
    for some 27 years and had been legally employed there "for many  years"
    (paragraph 7 of the judgment).  His family had been authorised to  join
    him in Austria in 1975 or 1976.  The case arose from the fact that,  in
    March 1999,  he  was  sentenced  to  three  years'  imprisonment.   The
    judgment is significant because it was confirmed both  that  the  Nazli
    principle was of general effect, and that  it  applied  following  even
    relatively lengthy terms of imprisonment. The court said:-

        "22.     As is  clear  from  joined  cases  C-482/01  and  C-493/01
             Orfanopoulos and Oliveri [2004] ECR I-5257, paragraph  50,  the
             reasoning in Nazli cannot  therefore  be  understood  as  being
             limited to the particular circumstances of that case, depending
             on the fact that the  worker  in  question  had  been  detained
             pending trial for more than a year and then given  a  suspended
             sentence.  On the contrary, the same reasoning is applicable in
             its entirety, for the same reasons, to a temporary absence from
             the labour force due to the completion of  a  prison  sentence.
             More particularly, the fact that the imprisonment prevents  the
             person concerned from working,  even  for  a  long  period,  is
             irrelevant if it does not preclude  his  subsequent  return  to
             working life...."

64.   We accept that this line of authorities is of potential importance  in
    the present context. It shows that in certain  circumstances  a  person
    who has acquired rights of  free  movement  under  Article  39  in  his
    capacity as a "worker" will not lose that status merely  because  of  a
    period during which he is forcibly  deprived  by  imprisonment  of  the
    ability to work. The same approach should arguably be applicable to the
    definition of a "worker" under the instant Directive.  Imprisonment  in
    itself would not mean that residence ceases to  be  "legal",  and  thus
    falls to be disregarded  for  the  purposes  of  deciding  whether  the
    necessary periods of residence have been achieved.

65.   However, none of the cases was, or could be, directly  concerned  with
    the means of establishing a right of permanent residence under the 2004
    Directive, which was not in force at the time.  Nazli  and  Dogan  were
    concerned with the Turkey Association Agreement, under which  a  worker
    who satisfies the four year requirement acquires an accrued right. That
    seems closely analogous to the right of permanent residence  which  can
    now be acquired by EEA nationals under Article  16  of  the  Directive.
    One can readily understand why a Turkish worker who has such an accrued
    right should not have that  right  automatically  extinguished  by  any
    period of imprisonment. Indeed, such a failure to differentiate between
    accrued and conditional rights appears to be  precisely  the  criticism
    made by the Commission of Hungary's  implementation  of  the  Directive
    (see paragraph 53 above).

66.   In Orfanopoulos and Oliveri, the same reasoning  was  applied  in  the
    context of  the  Treaty  to  EEA  nationals  who  had  been  imprisoned
    following conviction.  Although the right of  permanent  residence  did
    not then exist, Mr Orfanopoulos had been living and working in  Germany
    for a far longer period than would have been necessary to satisfy  that
    test. It is not surprising that the Court in effect  decided  that  his
    status was sufficiently settled not to  be  disrupted  by  three  years
    imprisonment. However, as Mr Eicke says, the case  was  concerned  with
    whether the individuals were at the relevant time  wholly  outside  the
    remit of EU law, and the  protection  against  removal  on  grounds  of
    public policy, public security or public health, and not  whether  they
    had acquired some enhanced status by reason of past residence.

67.   It does not in our view  follow  that  the  same  approach  is  to  be
    applied to the acquisition of the new  right  of  residence  under  the
    Directive. For that purpose it becomes particularly important that  the
    quality of residence required during the five years is such as to  meet
    the objective of the Directive to  recognise  genuine  integration  and
    enables the test to be applied with certainty. The criterion adopted in
    Orfanopoulos would be difficult to apply as a test for deciding whether
    a period of imprisonment counts towards the five year period in Article
    16 of the Directive.  The deciding authority would in each case have to
    wait until  "a  reasonable  time"  after  the  release  of  the  person
    concerned (whatever that might be),  before  establishing  whether  the
    period of imprisonment counted towards the five years. The effect would
    be to impede the ability of Member States to take  expulsion  decisions
    in the cases  of  persons  whose  crimes  resulted  in  imprisonment  -
    precisely the category of persons in respect of whom expulsion  may  be
    most necessary.

68.   There is a further consideration which argues  against  treating  this
    line of cases as relevant to  the  test  for  the  right  of  permanent
    residence.  The approach of the Directive is to review and  codify  the
    existing Community legislation on the rights of movement and residence.
    That is plain from its Preamble.  Article 7.1 defines  those  having  a
    right of residence for more than three months. Article 7.3  contains  a
    list of circumstances in which a person who is "no longer a worker"  is
    to retain the status of worker (implemented in the  United  Kingdom  by
    regulations 5 and 15(1)(c)). They include, for example, (a) the case of
    a person "temporarily unable to work as the result  of  an  illness  or
    accident", and (b) that of a person in "involuntary unemployment" after
    having been employed for more than a year who is registered as  a  job-
    seeker". They do not include a person who is  prevented  from  work  by
    imprisonment.  These  specific  definitions  and  protections  make  it
    potentially misleading to rely on more  general  concepts  of  "worker"
    used in other contexts. Conversely, as Mr Eicke submits, if it had been
    intended that a person who had previously been a worker, but  was  then
    imprisoned, should nevertheless retain the status of  a  worker  during
    his imprisonment, one would expect to see  express  provision  to  that
    effect in Article 7.3.

69.   For these reasons, we conclude that there is nothing in this  line  of
    cases which would justify us departing from  the  principle  which  was
    conceded  and  formed  the  starting-point  for  the  decision  in   HR
    (Portugal).  We proceed on the basis therefore that time in prison does
    not count towards the  five  year  period  of  residence  required  for
    acquisition of a permanent right.

Alternative arguments for CC

Council of Europe Convention on the Transfer of Convicted Persons

70.   It is convenient at this point to  note,  in  order  to  dismiss,  two
    alternative arguments of Mr Karnik. The first relied upon  the  Council
    of Europe's Convention on the Transfer of Sentenced Persons  (21  March
    1983) in support of the proposition that  an  EEA  national  serving  a
    sentence of imprisonment in the United  Kingdom  is  lawfully  resident
    within the scope of Article 16.1 of the Directive. We do  not  see  how
    any rights under this Convention can be  relevant  to  legal  residence
    under Article 16.1, which as already made  clear,  means  residence  in
    accordance with a right described in the Directive.

71.   In any event, it  is  not  possible  to  infer  from  this  Convention
    anything that can be properly categorised as a right  of  residence  by
    reason of imprisonment.  The Convention provides a mechanism whereby  a
    person sentenced in the territory of a party to the Convention  may  be
    transferred to the  territory  of  another  party,  if  the  States  in
    question agree and the sentenced person consents.  Mr Karnik  submitted
    that the requirement of the prisoner's consent indicated a right of the
    prisoner to reside in the State that had imprisoned  him.   We  do  not
    agree.  A person who has no right to be in the United Kingdom, but  who
    is serving a sentence of  imprisonment  here,  remains  in  the  United
    Kingdom not because of any right that he has but, rather, as  a  result
    of the right of the host State to punish him for his crime.   The  fact
    that such a prisoner may not be regarded as being in the United Kingdom
    unlawfully in no sense means that his  presence  in  prison  is  to  be
    regarded as lawful for other purposes (see Abdirahman [2007]  EWCA  Civ
    657).

Regulation 19(3)

72.   Secondly, Mr Karnik argued that the logic of the Secretary of  State's
    submissions regarding the position of serving prisoners was  that  such
    persons should be removable under regulation 19(3)(a), since  they  had
    no right  to  reside  under  the  Regulations  once  they  began  their
    sentences.  However, in both of the present cases the decision to  make
    the deportation order was specifically taken under regulation 19(3)(b),
    which applies where the person concerned:-

      "would otherwise be entitled to reside in the  United  Kingdom  under
         these Regulations but the Secretary of State has decided  that  his
         removal is justified  on  the  grounds  of  public  policy,  public
         security or public health in accordance with regulation 21".

73.   It is true that the deportation  decisions  in  both  of  the  present
    cases were made at a time when each of the appellants was still serving
    his sentence and when, on the basis of the Secretary of State's stance,
    neither was exercising a right of residence under the Directive or  the
    Regulations.  We do  not,  however,  consider  that  the  Secretary  of
    State's  decision  to  proceed  under  regulation  19(3)(b)  shows  her
    interpretation of regulation 15(1)(a) to be incorrect.  We have already
    seen how, in the case of a person who was, for example, a worker  prior
    to imprisonment, the use of regulation 19(3)(b) produces a result which
    is in accordance with ECJ case law, by ensuring  that  the  deportation
    decision is subject to the relevant general principles in Article 27 of
    the Directive.  The Tribunal is also aware that the Secretary of  State
    regularly resorts to deportation, where a person is in  theory  subject
    to administrative removal under  section  10  of  the  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 1999. In short, the fact that the  Secretary  of  State  has
    used regulation 19(3)(b) does not compel the conclusion Mr Karnik urged
    us to draw.


Question (b) - What constitutes residence for  the  purposes  of  regulation
21(4)(a):  protection  from  expulsion  where  there  has  been  ten  years'
residence?

The effect of imprisonment

74.   As has been seen, at least part of the answer  to  this  question  has
    been provided by the decision of the Court of Appeal in HR  (Portugal).
    That establishes that, at least in relation to a  person  who  has  not
    worked in this country and who has not acquired a  right  to  permanent
    residence, time spent in prison does not count  towards  the  ten  year
    period required. That is not, however, because during that time  he  is
    not "resident" in the UK, but because it is not  "relevant  residence":
    that is, residence in exercise of the rights and freedoms conferred  in
    the Treaty (paragraph 23 Stanley Burnton LJ, paragraphs 35-7 Elias LJ).



75.   However, we have found it less easy to apply the reasoning to a  case,
    in which a person has already lived and worked in this country for five
    years before his imprisonment,  so  as  to  acquire  here  a  right  of
    permanent residence. Once that right has been  acquired,  it  could  be
    argued, there is no reason to regard time spent in prison as ceasing to
    be residence in pursuance of that right. It is therefore residence  "in
    accordance with the rights of residence as set out in  the  Directive",
    and should in principle count for  the  purposes  of  establishing  ten
    years' residence.  As Recital (18) says:

        "(18)    In order to be a genuine vehicle for integration into  the
             society of the host Member State in  which  the  Union  citizen
             resides, the  right  of  permanent  residence,  once  obtained,
             should not be subject to any conditions."

                 76.   On  the  other  hand,  even  if  time  in  prison  is
    accepted as continuing to be pursuant to the right of residence, it can
    hardly be said to be an exercise of "the rights and freedoms" conferred
    by the Treaty, or as contributing  in  any  way  to  the  objective  of
    integration. The argument would also have surprising results. A  person
    who, one month after acquiring the permanent right, is then  imprisoned
    for five years, would become automatically entitled to the higher level
    of protection at  the  end  of  his  sentence,  without  his  level  of
    integration having in any way improved since he acquired the  permanent
    right.  Accordingly,  although   there   are   arguable   grounds   for
    distinguishing such a case from the facts of HR  (Portugal),  we  think
    they are insufficient to justify us adopting a different approach, with
    the result that time in prison does not count towards  the  acquisition
    of the higher level of protection, even for someone who has a right  of
    permanent residence.

 The correct "end date" for the ten year period in regulation 21(4)(a)

77.   The question whether prison counts also  has  relevance  to  the  last
    aspect of this question which we have to consider, relating to the  end
    date for the 10 year period. Article 28 of the  Directive  concerns  an
    expulsion decision.  Article 28.3(a) applies the most  stringent  test,
    of imperative grounds of public security, in the case of those (adults)
    who "have resided in the host Member State for the previous ten years".
     Regulation 21(4)(a) implements this by referring to the  EEA  national
    as having "resided in the United Kingdom for a continuous period of  at
    least ten years prior to the relevant decision" (our emphases).

78.   Thus it is clear that the period of residence that gives rise  to  the
    test of imperative grounds runs backwards in time from the date of  the
    expulsion decision.  This temporal requirement does not  apply  to  the
    five year test. It is not clear from the contemporary materials or  the
    Preamble why this difference  was  made  between  the  two  tests.  The
    Commission's report treats the two tests as differing only in length of
    time. The Preamble to the Directive refers simply  to  "Union  citizens
    who have resided for many years in the territory  of  the  host  Member
    State", without mentioning an end-date.

79.   One can understand the reason for having some  link  between  the  ten
    year period and the date of decision. Otherwise, for example, a  person
    who had been lawfully resident for ten years in the United Kingdom  and
    then absent for 20 years, before returning here for a brief period  and
    committing a serious criminal offence,  for  which  he  is  imprisoned,
    would be able to enjoy the highest degree of protection from expulsion,
    even though his degree of integration in the United Kingdom was (in the
    light of his long absence) very limited.

80.   On the other hand the end-date requirement  may  also  have  anomalous
    and harsh results. Since most expulsion decisions of this kind will  be
    taken in respect of persons  who  have  been  imprisoned  for  criminal
    offences, the consequence of not treating time in prison  as  residence
    for the purposes of Article 28.3, even for those who have  a  right  of
    permanent residence, may mean that its practical value is much reduced.
    It would mean that such a person would be  unable  to  demonstrate  the
    requisite ten years' residence, however long and blameless his previous
    residence in the United Kingdom, and however short his time in prison.

81.   However, these potentially harsh  results  may  be  mitigated  if  the
    specific temporal rules are seen in context. Once a permanent right  of
    residence has been acquired it is not lost as a result of imprisonment.
    Expulsion must be justified by "serious grounds" of public security  or
    public policy. Furthermore the decision must  be  consistent  with  the
    principle of proportionality and have regard to:

      "the person's length of residence in the United Kingdom, the person's
         social and cultural integration into the  United  Kingdom  and  the
         extent of the person's links with his country of origin."

82.   Thus, even if the highest level of protection is not  available  as  a
    matter of right, a person's period of residence is  still  relevant  in
    deciding whether his expulsion would be disproportionate on  the  facts
    of his case. Where a person  has  become  fully  integrated  into  this
    country by more than  ten  years  residence,  particularly  if  he  has
    severed any links with his country of origin, it  would  be  consistent
    with the purpose of the Directive (as stated in the Preamble) to  apply
    a  stringent  test,  which  may  be  equivalent  in  practice  to   the
    "imperative grounds" test.

 83.  There is also the  following  point.  Article  33  prevents  expulsion
    orders being issued as a penalty or legal consequence  of  a  custodial
    penalty, unless they conform to Articles 27 to 29. If such an expulsion
    order is enforced more than two years after it is  issued,  the  Member
    State must check that the individual  "is  currently  and  genuinely  a
    threat to public policy or public security" and  must  assess  "whether
    there has been  a  material  change  in  the  circumstances  since  the
    expulsion order was issued". The existence of  this  provision  in  the
    Directive suggests that, at least where the decision to  deport  arises
    as a  result  of  a  recommendation  from  the  sentencing  court,  the
    Secretary of State should make that decision as close  as  possible  to
    the beginning of any custodial sentence for the offence. In the case of
    a person who has 10 years or more relevant residence before  committing
    an offence which causes a decision to deport, such an  approach  should
    enable the person to invoke the protection of regulation 21(4)(a).

The application of our conclusions to the facts of LG and CC

84.   Before turning to questions (c) and (d), we must  first  consider  how
    our conclusions as to the interpretation of the residence  requirements
    apply in the two cases  before  us,  in  order  to  determine  on  what
    criteria the decision to deport either of them should be based.

LG

85.    It is clear that LG has lived in the United Kingdom  since  at  least
    1987.  In fact, LG's evidence to the  first  Tribunal  and  the  second
    Tribunal was that he had been in the United Kingdom since  1985.   LG's
    account, which has not been challenged by the Secretary  of  State,  is
    that his parents died whilst he was  a  child  and  that,  following  a
    period when he was looked after by a relative in Italy, he came to  the
    United Kingdom to be looked after by his  aunt.   The  second  Tribunal
    recorded at paragraph 32 of its determination that LG had been  granted
    a residence permit in 1990, valid until 1995,  and  that  he  "did  not
    obtain another document after this because he was told that it was  not
    necessary  once  five  years  had  expired".   The  second   Tribunal's
    reference to national insurance records relates to  the  material  sent
    under cover of a fax of 4 January 2007 from  HM  Revenue  and  Customs.
    These records extend back to the tax year 1985-1986.  They  demonstrate
    that LG was in paid employment in each of the tax years beginning  with
    1987-1988 and ending 1993-1994.  There was further economic activity in
    1996-1997, 1998-1999  and  1999-2000.   The  first  Tribunal  found  at
    paragraph 15(6) of its determination that:-

        "The appellant claims to have been a postman from 1990 to 1991;  he
        was employed  by  Next  plc  from  1991  to  1993;  owned  his  own
        restaurant from 1994 to 1996; and worked for a  marketing  company,
        FDS Ltd from 1997  to  1998.   No  evidence  has  been  adduced  to
        contradict that employment record and so I (sic)  find  on  balance
        that the appellant was so employed."

86.   At some point LG married in the United Kingdom  but  was  divorced  in
    1996.  Although there was a child of the marriage, LG has not seen  his
    son since 1999.  LG asserts that his criminality began at a  time  when
    both his business and  his  marriage  were  in  difficulties.   He  was
    released from prison in the summer of 2007.

87.   The circumstances of LG's arrival as a  minor  orphan  in  the  United
    Kingdom, the  issue  to  him  of  a  residence  permit,  and  his  pre-
    imprisonment  employment  record,  not  challenged  before  the   first
    Tribunal and the second Tribunal, show on the balance of  probabilities
    that (given the retrospective reach of the Regulations as  conceded  by
    the Secretary of State) LG had acquired what the Regulations require us
    to  recognise  as  a  right  of  permanent  residence  before  he   was
    imprisoned. We find further that he had been  resident  here  for  more
    than ten years before his first imprisonment.

88.   Although, during his term of imprisonment, LG did not enjoy,  and  was
    not exercising, any of what can be called  the  conditional  rights  of
    residence, he did not lose his right of permanent  residence.  However,
    for the reasons we have given, his time in prison did not count for the
    purpose of establishing ten years' residence  prior  to  the  expulsion
    decision. Accordingly he was not entitled as of right  to  the  highest
    level of protection, represented by the "imperative grounds" test.  For
    that reason we do not agree with the conclusion of the second  Tribunal
    on this issue.

89.   However, he retained his right to  the  second  level  of  protection,
    which required "serious grounds of public policy or security". Further,
    the decision to remove had to be proportionate, having  regard  to  the
    extent of his ties with this country and his lack of ties  with  Italy.
    We shall return to that issue.


CC

90.   The decision to deport CC was made on 20 September 2007.   CC  asserts
    that he arrived in the United Kingdom in 2002.  He has not put  forward
    any evidence as to when in that year he might  have  arrived.   CC  has
    failed on balance to show that, as at the date of decision, he had been
    physically present in the United Kingdom for a period  of  five  years.
    For that reason alone, CC cannot show he acquired a right of  permanent
    residence in the United Kingdom.

91.   However, even if that were otherwise, on the view  we  have  taken  of
    the relevant provisions, CC's period of  imprisonment,  in  respect  of
    offences for which he was convicted, cannot count towards the  relevant
    five year period.

92.   On any view, therefore, CC had no entitlement  to  invoke  the  second
    level of protection  against  expulsion  ("serious  grounds  of  public
    policy or public security") contained in regulation 21(3).

93.    The Secretary of State was, accordingly, justified  in  deporting  CC
    by reference to the ordinary test, that is, if she  could  show  simply
    that there were grounds of public policy,  public  security  or  public
    health (regulation 21(1), (2), (5) and (6)).  That is  the  basis  upon
    which the original Tribunal proceeded  to  consider  CC's  appeal.   We
    consider  below  whether  the  original  Tribunal  erred  in   law   in
    approaching this issue.


Questions  (c)  and  (d)  -  the  meaning  of  the  "serious  grounds"   and
    "imperative grounds" tests.

94.   We now turn to the content of  the  tests  at  the  second  and  third
    level, and the difference between them.

95.   The  starting-point  for  our  consideration  of  that  issue  is  the
    judgment of the Court of Appeal, by which the case was remitted to this
    Tribunal. In the leading judgment, at paragraph 31, Carnwath LJ  stated
    that on the basis of the relatively limited  arguments  that  had  been
    heard he would not  feel  confident  in  attempting  to  lay  down  any
    definitive guidance and would not in any event wish to do so until  the
    Secretary of State had reached a more settled view both  of  the  legal
    interpretation of the relevant provisions and the policy considerations
    governing their application in practice.   However,  he  set  out  some
    relevant considerations, including comments on the guidance give in the
    then current version of the Department's manual:

        "32.     The following points should be taken into account:


             1)   Weight must be given to different  tests  within  the  new
                 hierarchy.   The  words  'imperative  grounds   of   public
                 security' at the third level are clearly intended to embody
                 a test which is both more stringent and narrower  in  scope
                 than 'serious grounds of public policy or public  security'
                 at the second level.


             2)   'Public security' is a familiar expression,  but  it  does
                 not appear to have been subject of judicial definition.   I
                 see no reason to equate it with 'national security'.   That
                 expression was discussed in Secretary  of  State  v  Rehman
                 [2001] UKHL 47, where Lord Slynn said:


                    'There must be some possibility of risk or danger to the
                    security or well-being of the nation which the Secretary
                    of State considers makes it  desirable  for  the  public
                    good  that  the  individual   should   be   deported...'
                    (paragraph 15)


                 'Public security' to my mind is  a  broader  concept.   The
                 earlier version of the manual referred in  this  connection
                 to -


                    '... national security matters, or crimes  that  pose  a
                    particularly serious risk to the safety of the public or
                    a section of the public'.


                 The words 'risk to the safety of the public or a section of
                 the public' seem  to  me  reasonably  consistent  with  the
                 ordinary understanding of 'public security'.  In the latest
                 version of the manual, the utility of that  description  is
                 reduced, because it is used for the second  level,  'public
                 policy or public security', without distinction between the
                 two parts.


             3)   The word 'imperative', as a distinguishing feature of  the
                 third level, seems to me to connote a very high  threshold.
                 The earlier version of the manual treats it  as  equivalent
                 to 'particularly serious'.   In  the  latest  version,  the
                 expression 'particularly serious  risk'  is  used  for  the
                 second level.  The difference between the two levels,  that
                 is, between 'serious' and 'imperative', is said to be  'one
                 of severity', but there is no indication why  the  severity
                 of  the  offence  in  itself  is  enough  to  make  removal
                 'imperative'.


             4)   The same thinking is reflected in the examples of offences
                 given in the manual.  Both levels require a serious offence
                 linked to a propensity to re-offend.  The second  'serious'
                 level encompasses 'a violent  offence  carrying  a  maximum
                 penalty of 10 years'; the third 'imperative' level requires
                 not only a maximum penalty of 10 years but also  an  actual
                 sentence of at least five years.  It is not clear  why  the
                 mere fact that a five year sentence has been imposed should
                 make removal 'imperative'.


             5)   Neither version of the Manual seems to me to give adequate
                 weight to the distinction between levels two and three,  or
                 to the force of the word 'imperative'.  To my mind there is
                 not simply  a  difference  of  degree,  but  a  qualitative
                 difference: in  other  words,  level  three  requires,  not
                 simply a serious matter of public  policy,  but  an  actual
                 risk to public security, so compelling  that  it  justifies
                 the exceptional course of  removing  someone  who  (in  the
                 language of the  Preamble  to  the  Directive)  has  become
                 'integrated' by 'many years' residence in the host state."

96.   At paragraph 40 of the judgment, he said that it  would  be  difficult
    for the Tribunal or the  Court  to  give  clearer  guidance  until  the
    Secretary of State, who has primary responsibility under the  Directive
    for determining issues  of  public  policy  and  public  security,  had
    herself reached "a coherent and settled view".

97.   Steps have  since  been  taken  by  those  acting  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State, to address the concerns of the Court of Appeal  and
    enable the Secretary of State to reach an informed view on the relevant
    issues.  These steps and the resulting conclusions are described  in  a
    witness statement made by Seonaid Webb of the UK Border  Agency,  dated
    15 August 2008. (We  understand  that  this  statement  was  also  made
    available to the Court of Appeal in HR (Portugal).)

98.   The Secretary of State caused to be sent out a detailed  questionnaire
    about the legislation and practice of other Member States in  order  to
    see  whether  there  was  any  consensus  about  the  construction  and
    permissible limits of the relevant provisions  of  the  Directive.   We
    have been provided with a copy of the questionnaire.  As at the date of
    the witness statement, some 12 of the 27 Member States had responded to
    the questionnaire.  Ms Webb states at paragraph 15 that in  considering
    the responses it had become clear that there was no  commonly  accepted
    understanding as to the issues  in  the  case  either  as  regards  the
    residence  requirement,  which  we  deal   with   elsewhere,   or   the
    construction of the terms "serious grounds of public policy  or  public
    security" and "imperative grounds of public security".

99.   It seems that only three of the Member States  who  responded  to  the
    questionnaire have defined any of these terms in legislation or  policy
    instructions:

     - In Austria, a "long term resident - EU"  may  only  be  expelled  if
       continued residence would constitute a  "serious  threat  to  public
       order or security", which is "deemed to exist" following  conviction
       for certain defined crimes. "Imperative grounds of public  security"
       arise where the  individual's  continued  residence  "constitutes  a
       sustainable and serious threat to public order or  security  of  the
       Republic of Austria."

     - Finland has not defined "serious grounds of public policy or  public
       security" but has defined "imperative grounds of public security" in
       its forthcoming Aliens Act (due to enter into force in the spring of
       2009) at section 168(5) thus:

         "Imperative grounds as laid  down  in  sub-Sections  3  and  4  are
         considered to exist when an EU citizen is guilty of an act which is
         punishable by no less than one year of imprisonment, and  where  he
         or she, on grounds of the seriousness of the crime or of  continued
         criminal activity, is considered a danger to  public  security,  or
         where there are grounds for suspecting that he or she is  seriously
         endangering the national security of Finland or another state."

     - Germany also has no definition of "serious grounds of public  policy
       or public security" but "imperative grounds of public security"  are
       equated with "compelling grounds of public safety", subject  to  the
       following definition:

         "Compelling grounds of public safety can only apply if  the  person
         concerned has been unappealably sentenced to a  prison  term  or  a
         term of youth custody of at  least  five  years  for  one  or  more
         intentionally committed offences or preventive detention  has  been
         ordered  in  connection  with  the  most  recent   and   appealable
         conviction, the security of the  Federal  Republic  of  Germany  is
         affected or the person concerned poses a terrorist threat  [Section
         6(5)  of  the  Gesetz  ber  die   allgemeine   Freizgigkeit   von
         Unionsbrgern (Act on  the  general  freedom  of  movement  for  EU
         citizens)]."

100.  Ms Webb comments that these definitions are thought to  be  consistent
    with the approach adopted by the Secretary of State in her policy,  and
    that generally the thresholds adopted,  at  least  in  the  context  of
    imperative grounds of public security,  are  significantly  lower  than
    those adopted by the Secretary of State. It does not appear that any of
    this legislation has been interpreted in any of the national courts  of
    the three countries in question, or  that  elsewhere  in  the  national
    courts of those  or  other  Member  States  there  have  been  judicial
    decisions which provide any guidance on the  meaning  of  the  relevant
    terms.

101.  Ms Webb confirms that the Secretary of State's "coherent  and  settled
    view" on the issues in the appeal is as currently formulated in the  UK
    Border  Agency's  Criminal  Casework  Directorate  Case  Owner  Process
    Instructions (the Instructions) at 2.2.2 under the heading "Stage One".
     The relevant parts  of  this  are  set  out  at  Appendix  B  to  this
    determination. Ms Webb explains  that  this  has  been  revised  taking
    account of the Court of Appeal's guidance  in  LG  (Italy),  which  the
    Secretary of State accepts.  In particular, there is agreement with the
    conclusion of Carnwath LJ that the word "imperative"  denotes  a  "very
    high  threshold",  being  limited  to  EC  nationals  "who  have  taken
    advantage of the freedom of movement under the Treaty to  become  fully
    integrated into the host country".

102.  We are grateful to Ms Webb and  her  colleagues  for  undertaking  the
    researches set out above and for  providing  us  with  the  conclusions
    which  the  Secretary  of   State   reached   following   her   further
    consideration. This material is of some assistance,  even  if  only  as
    showing  that  there  appears  to  be   no   consistent   approach   to
    interpretation  of  these  provisions  in  other  Member  States.   The
    Secretary of State has a margin of appreciation in  the  interpretation
    of the relevant provisions, but at the  end  of  the  day  we  have  to
    interpret them in light of our understanding of Community  Law,  taking
    account of her views.

103.  We return to the hierarchy of levels of protection summarised  by  the
    Court of Appeal (as quoted at the outset of  this  determination).   It
    has been clear, at least since the decision of the Court of  Appeal  in
    Bouchereau [1981] 2 All  ER  924  that  the  notion  of  public  policy
    presupposes the existence of a genuine and sufficiently serious  threat
    to the requirements of public policy affecting one of  the  fundamental
    interests of society.   In  Orfanopoulos  and  Oliveri,  the  Court  of
    Justice emphasised (at paragraph 67) that:

        "The existence of a previous criminal  conviction  can  justify  an
        expulsion only insofar as the circumstances which gave rise to that
        conviction are evidence of personal conduct constituting a  present
        threat to the requirements of public policy."


104.  This, then is the test in what might be called  the  lowest  level  of
    case (level 1).  We are clear that, as it was put at paragraph 32(1) in
    LG, "weight must be given to different tests within the new hierarchy",
    and that each level is intended to be more stringent  and  narrower  in
    scope than the immediately lower test.  The Secretary of State was  not
    asked to provide her view of level one, though it can be seen from  the
    Instructions that it is defined in terms  requiring  the  Case  Owner's
    satisfaction that the person's conduct represents  a  genuine,  present
    and sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting  one  of  the  fundamental
    interests of  society,  echoing  the  wording  of  Article  27  of  the
    Directive, and that any offence meeting the criteria for  consideration
    for deportation might constitute a crime within  the  scope  of  public
    policy or public security.

105.  Even at this lowest level of the hierarchy it is necessary to bear  in
    mind the requirement set out at Article 27(2)  of  the  Directive  that
    measures taken on grounds of public  policy  or  public  security  must
    comply with the principle of  proportionality  and   be  based  on  the
    personal conduct of the individual concerned. Regard must also  be  had
    to the considerations referred  to  in  Article  28(1),  including  the
    length of time the individual has  resided  in  the  territory  of  the
    Member State,  his/her  age,  state  of  health,  family  and  economic
    situation, social and cultural integration into the host  Member  State
    and the extent of his/her links with the country of origin.

106.  The threat in the "serious grounds" category (level 2) requires to  be
    differentiated from that posed in a level 1 case, bearing in mind  that
    a level 2 person has acquired a permanent right  of  residence  in  the
    United Kingdom.  We can  see  from  the  section  of  the  Instructions
    concerning level 2 that a conviction for any  of  a  number  of  listed
    offences might constitute "serious grounds".  We see merit to the  list
    of offences as a means of differentiating between level 1 and level  2,
    but it must be emphasised that it is  the  present  risk  arising  from
    conviction for the offence in question that must be established. As the
    Instructions recognise, the list of offences represents guidance rather
    than  prescription,  but  properly  represents  a   higher   level   of
    seriousness.  One can imagine, for example, a serial  shoplifter  being
    properly removable under level 1, but being unlikely to  represent  the
    level of risk that is required to be posed in the case of a person with
    a right of permanent residence.

107.  Turning to the third level ("imperative grounds"), the  relevant  part
    of the guidance (see Appendix B) reads as follows:

        "If an EEA national with permanent residence has resided in the  UK
        for a continuous period of at least ten years prior to  a  decision
        to deport (not including time spent in custody),  he  may  only  be
        deported on imperative grounds of public security...


        Imperative  grounds  of  public  security  will  involve   national
        security matters, or crimes that pose a particularly  serious  risk
        to the safety of the public or a section of the public.  Imperative
        grounds in  this  respect  might  be  where  the  person  has  been
        convicted of murder, a terrorism  offence...,  a  drug  trafficking
        offence..., a serious immigration offence..., or a  serious  sexual
        or violent offence carrying a  maximum  penalty  of  ten  years  or
        more... and been sentenced to five years or more..."

108.  It is to be noted that the list of offences is the  same  as  that  in
    respect of serious grounds of public policy  or  public  security,  the
    difference between them being that in the case of imperative grounds of
    public security the person in question will have been  sentenced  to  a
    custodial sentence of five years or more.   The  other  distinction  is
    that "imperative grounds of public  security",  are  said  to  "involve
    national security matters or crimes that pose  a  particularly  serious
    risk to the safety of the public or a  section  of  the  public".  This
    follows the formula used in an earlier version of the  guidance,  which
    was accepted by Carnwath LJ as "reasonably consistent with the ordinary
    understanding of 'public security'" (see paragraph 95 above).

109.  We observe, first, that notwithstanding  our  conclusion  on  question
    (b), the unqualified exclusion of "time spent in custody" probably goes
    too far. As Sedley LJ indicated  at  paragraph  45  of  HR  (Portugal),
    "acquittals following remands  in  custody"  will  require  "judge-made
    adjustments" to the principle that time spent in prison is not relevant
    residence.

110.  Secondly, we cannot accept the elevation of  offences  to  "imperative
    grounds" purely on the basis of a custodial sentence of five  years  or
    more being imposed.  As was said by Carnwath LJ in  LG  (see  paragraph
    32(3)), there is no indication why  the  severity  of  the  offence  in
    itself is enough to make  removal  "imperative"  in  the  interests  of
    public security.  Such  an  offence  may  be  the  starting  point  for
    consideration, but there must be something more, in scale or  kind,  to
    justify the  conclusion  that  the  individual  poses  "a  particularly
    serious risk to the safety of the public or a section of  the  public".
    Terrorism  offences  or  threats  to  national  security  are   obvious
    examples, but not  exclusive.  Serial  or  targeted  criminality  of  a
    sufficiently serious kind may also meet the test. However, there  needs
    to be some threat to the public or a definable section  of  the  public
    sufficiently serious to make  expulsion  "imperative"  and  not  merely
    desirable as a matter of policy,  in  order  to  ensure  the  necessary
    differentiation from the second level.

111.  It is instructive to compare  this  approach  to  that  of  the  three
    Member States whose stated practices have been noted above:

     - The Austrian legislation appears to set an even higher threshold  in
       that it requires a threat  to  "public  order  or  security  of  the
       Republic  of  Austria".  As  Carnwath  LJ  observed  in  LG  (Italy)
       (paragraph 95 above) "public security"  is  not  necessarily  to  be
       equated with "national security".


     -  The  Finnish  test  links  the  offence  to  the  duration  of  the
       imprisonment but also requires that the person, on  grounds  of  the
       seriousness of the crime, or  of  continued  criminal  activity,  is
       considered "a danger to public security" or that there  are  grounds
       for suspecting that he or she is "seriously endangering the national
       security of Finland or another state".  This is consistent with  our
       approach, in that the  criminal  conviction  is  not  sufficient  in
       itself, but the statute gives no further guidance as to the  meaning
       of "public security".


     - The German test substitutes the term "compelling grounds  of  public
       safety", which  it  appears  to  equate  with  either  a  conviction
       carrying a sentence of at least five years, or  something  affecting
       the security of the Federal Republic or a terrorist threat. If  this
       is intended to have the effect that  the  conviction  is  enough  in
       itself, that would not be consistent with our approach.


The application of our findings to the facts in the cases of LG and CC

LG

112.  As noted earlier, the second Tribunal found that LG had  acquired  the
    requisite ten years' residence as at the date of the decision to deport
    him, and accordingly could only be deported on  imperative  grounds  of
    public security.  Even applying that test, it determined that that LG's
    expulsion was permitted by the Directive.  It  agreed  with  the  trial
    judge that LG was a dangerous man.  A probation report dated 17  August
    2006 stated that:

      "in respect of controlling anger and aggression, [LG] does  not  seem
         to have made any further progress in reducing the unacceptable risk
         of re-offending which was identified".

113.  The second Tribunal concluded that LG continued to pose  a  continuing
    risk of harm to the public (paragraph 67). It found that LG:

      "has been convicted of grave offences and we find that the  appellant
         has not shown that he does not pose a risk of further harm  to  the
         public by way of further offending and, moreover, that the evidence
         before us suggests that this appellant does pose a continuing  risk
         particularly when he does not appear to accept  that  he  committed
         the grave offence of grievous bodily harm with intent  on  this  66
         year old man in the circumstances which were proved  at  the  Crown
         Court".

114.  The Tribunal accordingly concluded, at paragraph 69:

      "... that the Secretary of State has met  the  evidential  burden  of
         showing that there are imperative grounds of  public  security  for
         removing this appellant from the United Kingdom to Italy".

115.  The Court of Appeal did not in terms make a positive ruling that  this
    aspect of the Tribunal's reasoning was itself  erroneous  in  law.  The
    legal deficiency which justified allowing the appeal lay in the failure
    of the Secretary of State to provide a coherent policy  foundation  for
    considering  the  issue.  However,  it  is  implicit  that  the  second
    Tribunal's decision was erroneous for the same reason. If necessary, we
    would hold that there was a material error of  law  in  the  Tribunal's
    failure to explain its jump from the risk of potentially  serious  harm
    from further offending, to the conclusion that there were  "imperative"
    grounds of public security to justify removal.

116.  On the view we have taken, the second Tribunal was wrong to apply  the
    highest  level  of  protection.  However,  even  if  one  judges  their
    reasoning by reference to the second level of protection, which  arises
    because of LG's  position  as  a  person  with  a  right  of  permanent
    residence (a factor the second Tribunal did not appreciate), they erred
    in our view in failing to consider the particular circumstances of LG's
    position, his long residence in this country, including more  than  ten
    years' residence before any offences were committed, and  his  lack  of
    links with Italy.

117.  This  failure  meant  that  the  second   Tribunal's   assessment   of
    proportionality was fatally flawed. In our view, even acknowledging the
    seriousness of the offence in  2000,  and  the  possible  risk  of  re-
    offending, we do not think that expulsion is a  proportionate  response
    for someone who came here as a child, has acquired a right of permanent
    residence in this country, has lived here for some 15 years before  the
    crime was committed, and has no significant links with Italy. In such a
    case we think that public policy  considerations  should  carry  little
    weight. As to public security, in one sense, of  course,  any  risk  of
    further offences as brutal as  that  committed  in  2000  represents  a
    threat to public safety, but that threat is no different in  kind  than
    is presented, unfortunately, by many other offenders for whom expulsion
    is not an available response. For these reasons we do  not  think  that
    the decision to deport LG was justifiable. On the facts as at the  date
    of the hearing in January 2007, LG  was  entitled  to  succeed  in  his
    appeal.

118. Since there is no suggestion that LG  currently  presents  any  greater
    societal threat than he did at that date, we see no need to adjourn  to
    make any further findings  of  fact.  LG's  appeal  thus  falls  to  be
    allowed.

CC

119.  CC may not be deported unless there  are  grounds  of  public  policy,
    public security or public health  precluding  his  removal,  he  having
    failed to establish that he had been in the  United  Kingdom  for  five
    years at the date of decision in his case and since, in any event,  his
    periods of imprisonment could not be counted as legal residence for the
    purposes of regulation 15(1)(a).

120.   The  original  Tribunal  was  concerned  by  his  failure  to  accept
    responsibility for the offences that had caused him  to  be  imprisoned
    for 22 months, did not accept that he had given up drugs  and  drinking
    to excess and did not consider that his relationship with  his  present
    partner had removed  or  reduced  his  propensity  to  re-offend.   The
    Tribunal concluded that  he  represented  a  genuine  and  sufficiently
    serious threat such as to justify his deportation under regulation  21.
    Mr Karnik argued that  this  conclusion  was  flawed,  given  that  the
    reference to "medium risk" in  the  OASys  report  indicates  that  re-
    offending is "unlikely unless there is a change  of  circumstances"  as
    defined in National Probation Service Circular 10/2005.  He also argued
    that the assessment of proportionality by the Tribunal was  flawed,  in
    failing to give proper weight to a published policy of the Secretary of
    State indicating that normally a sentence  of  two  years  would  be  a
    prerequisite for deportation proceedings to be considered.  It was also
    contended that reliance was placed  by  the  Tribunal  upon  sentencing
    remarks in  respect  of  a  sentence  that  was  passed  in  error  and
    subsequently  rescinded  as   recorded   at   paragraph   30   of   the
    determination.

121.  We note, however, that in February 2007  CC's  Probation  Officer  had
    concerns regarding his insight into his behaviour,  acceptance  of  his
    behaviour and attitude towards women.  Bearing that in  mind,  together
    with the Tribunal's concerns set out above, we do not consider that any
    of the matters raised by Mr Karnik amount to  material  omissions  from
    the Tribunal's  reasoning.   The  original  Tribunal  was  entitled  to
    conclude that CC's past and escalating behaviour represented  a  future
    risk to society, and a  sufficiently  serious  threat  to  justify  his
    deportation, and hence to dismiss his  appeal  under  the  Regulations.
    The decision in that regard is free from material legal error.


Article 8

122.  The original Tribunal accepted that CC enjoys  family  life  with  his
    partner.  It took into account that  she  said  in  evidence  that,  if
    necessary, she would go to Portugal to join  CC  there,  following  her
    surgery for removal of an ovarian cyst.  The Tribunal  noted  that  his
    partner is  epileptic,  but  there  was  no  suggestion  that  whatever
    medication and  treatment  she  required  would  not  be  available  in
    Portugal.  In assessing the Article 8 claim, the Tribunal also bore  in
    mind the factors it had taken into account in  assessing  the  relevant
    issues under regulation 21(5).

123.  In his skeleton argument, elaborated in oral  submissions,  Mr  Karnik
    argued that the rights of CC's partner had not been taken into  account
    in the Article 8 assessment.  She had lived in the  UK  for  30  years,
    with family and relatives here, and there was no  indication  that  any
    equivalent to the disability benefit she receives in the  UK  would  be
    available in Portugal.

124.  Nevertheless we consider the Tribunal was entitled  to  attach  weight
    to the fact that CC's partner said that if necessary she  would  go  to
    join him in Portugal, following her operation.  Taking account of  that
    factor and the other material, we consider that the assessment  of  the
    Article 8 claim at paragraphs 40 and 41 of the determination  was  open
    to the Tribunal,  and  that  no  error  of  law  in  its  reasoning  or
    conclusions has been identified.  It follows that the determination  of
    the original Tribunal, dismissing  CC's  appeal,  does  not  contain  a
    material error of law, and accordingly we order that it shall stand.

References to the European Court of Justice

125.  We referred earlier  to  the  references  to  the  European  Court  of
    Justice made by the House of Lords in McCarthy and the Court of  Appeal
    in Lassal.  Although neither party has requested a reference,  we  have
    considered whether there is anything in the proceedings before us  that
    calls for the Tribunal to make such a reference, or otherwise to  delay
    deciding the consideration of either of the appeals, pending  responses
    from the European Court on the references that have already been made.

126.  We have concluded that it is unnecessary for us, of  our  own  motion,
    to make any reference or to delay  completion  of  the  reconsideration
    process in  either  appeal.   So  far  as  the  qualitative  nature  of
    questions (a) and (b) above is concerned, we have benefited  from  very
    full submissions from Counsel, together with relevant  materials.   Our
    findings are generally in accordance with the judgments in McCarthy and
    HR (Portugal). We also take note of the fact that in  the  latter  case
    the Court of Appeal felt able to decide the matter without the need for
    a reference.

127.  As for the reference made in Lassal, we have been  able  to  base  our
    decision on the concession which the Secretary of State was prepared to
    make without waiting for the decision of the ECJ.  Accordingly  it  has
    not been necessary for us to determine that issue, or to wait  for  any
    ECJ judgment before doing so.

128.  In the case of CC,  his  failure  to  show  on  balance  that  he  was
    physically present in the United Kingdom  for  five  years  before  the
    decision to deport means that he cannot in any event  demonstrate  that
    he has a right of permanent residence, entitling him to the application
    of the test of serious grounds of public  policy  or  public  security.
    This would not make this a suitable case for the ECJ to consider any of
    the issues which have been raised regarding the interpretation  of  the
    second or third level tests.


Funding

129. The Tribunal hereby orders that the appellants'  costs  in  respect  of
    the  applications   for   reconsideration,   and   of   the   resulting
    reconsiderations (including the preparation  therefor)  shall  in  each
    case be paid out of the relevant fund, within the meaning of rule 33 of
    the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

                                 Appendix A

                               The legislation


The EU Treaty

      The  following  Articles  of  the  Treaty  establishing  the  European
    Community are relevant:-

        "Article 18


        1.       Every citizen of the Union shall have the  right  to  move
             and reside freely within the territory of  the  Member  States,
             subject to the limitations and conditions  laid  down  in  this
             Treaty and by the measures adopted to give it effect....




        Article 39


        1.       Freedom of movement for workers shall  be  secured  within
             the Community.


        2.       Such freedom of movement shall entail the abolition of any
             discrimination based on  nationality  between  workers  of  the
             Member States as regards  employment,  remuneration  and  other
             conditions of work and employment.


        3.        It  shall  entail  the  right,  subject  to   limitations
             justified on grounds  of  public  policy,  public  security  or
             public health:


             (a)  to accept offers of employment actually made;


             (b)  to move freely within the territory of Member  States  for
                 this purpose;


             (c)  to stay in a Member State for the purpose of employment in
                 accordance with the provisions governing the employment  of
                 nationals of that State laid down  by  law,  regulation  or
                 administrative action;


             (d)  to remain in the territory of a Member State after  having
                 been employed in that State, subject  to  conditions  which
                 shall be embodied in implementing regulations to  be  drawn
                 up by the Commission.


        4.        The  provisions  of  this  article  shall  not  apply  to
             employment in the public service."

Directive 2004/38/EC

The relevant parts of the Preamble to the Directive are the following:-

        "(1)     Citizenship of the Union confers on every citizen  of  the
             Union a primary and individual right to move and reside  freely
             within the territory of  the  Member  States,  subject  to  the
             limitations and conditions laid down in the Treaty and  to  the
             measures adopted to give it effect....


        ...


        (17)     Enjoyment of permanent residence  by  Union  citizens  who
             have chosen to settle long term in the host Member State  would
             strengthen the feeling  of  Union  citizenship  and  is  a  key
             element in promoting social  cohesion,  which  is  one  of  the
             fundamental objectives of the  Union.   A  right  of  permanent
             residence should therefore be laid down for all Union  citizens
             and their family members who have resided in  the  host  Member
             State in compliance with  the  conditions  laid  down  in  this
             Directive during a continuous  period  of  five  years  without
             becoming to subject to an expulsion measure.


        (18)     In order to be a genuine vehicle for integration into  the
             society of the host Member State in  which  the  Union  citizen
             resides, the  right  of  permanent  residence,  once  obtained,
             should not be subject to any conditions.


        ...


        (23)     Expulsion of Union citizens and their  family  members  on
             grounds of public policy or public security is a  measure  that
             can seriously harm persons who, having  availed  themselves  of
             the rights and freedoms conferred on them by the  Treaty,  have
             become genuinely integrated into the host  Member  State.   The
             scope  for  such  measures  should  therefore  be  limited   in
             accordance  with  the  principle  of  proportionality  to  take
             account of the degree of integration of the persons  concerned,
             the length of their residence in the host Member  State,  their
             age, state of health, family and  economic  situation  and  the
             links with their country of origin.


        (24)     Accordingly, the greater  the  degree  of  integration  of
             Union citizens and their family  members  in  the  host  Member
             State, the greater the degree of protection  against  expulsion
             should be.  Only in exceptional circumstances, where there  are
             imperative grounds of  public  security,  should  an  expulsion
             measure be taken against Union citizens who  have  resided  for
             many years in the  territory  of  the  host  Member  State,  in
             particular  when  they  were  born  and  have   resided   there
             throughout  their  life.    In   addition,   such   exceptional
             circumstances should also apply to an expulsion  measure  taken
             against minors, in order to  protect  their  links  with  their
             family, in accordance with the United Nations Convention on the
             Rights of the Child, of 20 November 1989."

      The relevant provisions of the Directive itself are:-

        "Article 1


        Subject


        This Directive lays down:


        (a) the conditions governing the exercise  of  the  right  of  free
             movement and residence  within  the  territory  of  the  Member
             States by Union citizens and their family members;


        (b) the right of permanent residence in the territory of the Member
             States for Union citizens and their family members;


        (c) the limits placed on the rights set  out  in  (a)  and  (b)  on
             grounds of public policy, public security or public health.


        ...




        Article 7


        Right of residence for more than three months


        1.  All Union citizens shall have the right  of  residence  on  the
             territory of another Member State  for  a  period  longer  than
             three months if they:


            (a)  are workers or self-employed persons in  the  host  Member
                 State; or


            ...


        3. For the purposes of paragraph 1(a), a Union citizen  who  is  no
             longer a worker or self-employed person shall retain the status
             of  worker   or   self-employed   person   in   the   following
             circumstances:


             (a)  he/she is temporarily unable to work as the result  of  an
                 illness or accident;


             (b)  he/she is in duly recorded involuntary unemployment  after
                 having been  employed  for  more  than  one  year  and  has
                 registered as a job-seeker  with  the  relevant  employment
                 office;


             (c)  he/she is in duly recorded involuntary unemployment  after
                 completing a fixed-term employment contract of less than  a
                 year or after having become involuntarily unemployed during
                 the first twelve months and has registered as a  job-seeker
                 with the relevant employment office.   In  this  case,  the
                 status of worker shall be retained for  no  less  than  six
                 months;


             (d)  he/she embarks on vocational training.  Unless  he/she  is
                 involuntarily unemployed, the retention of  the  status  of
                 worker shall require the training  to  be  related  to  the
                 previous employment.


        4. By way of derogation from paragraphs 1(d) and 2 above, only  the
             spouse, the registered partner provided for in Article  2(2)(b)
             and dependent children shall have the  right  of  residence  as
             family members of a Union citizen meeting the conditions  under
             1(c) above.  Article 3(2)  shall  apply  to  his/her  dependent
             direct relatives in the ascending lines and  those  of  his/her
             spouse or registered partner.


        Article 16


        General rule for Union citizens and their family members


        1. Union citizens who have resided legally for a continuous  period
             of five years in the host Member State shall have the right  of
             permanent residence there.  This right shall not be subject  to
             the conditions provided for in Chapter III.


        ...


        3. Continuity of residence  shall  not  be  affected  by  temporary
             absences not exceeding a total of six  months  a  year,  or  by
             absences of a longer duration for compulsory military  service,
             or by one absence of a maximum of twelve consecutive months for
             important reasons such as  pregnancy  and  childbirth,  serious
             illness, study or vocational training, or a posting in  another
             Member State or a third country.


        4. Once acquired, the right of permanent residence  shall  be  lost
             only through absence from the host Member State  for  a  period
             exceeding two consecutive years.


        ...


                                 CHAPTER VI
             RESTRICTIONS ON THE RIGHT OF ENTRY AND THE RIGHT OF
                RESIDENCE ON GROUNDS OF PUBLIC POLICY, PUBLIC
                          SECURITY OR PUBLIC HEALTH


        Article 27


        General principles


        1. Subject to the provisions of this  Chapter,  Member  States  may
             restrict  the  freedom  of  movement  and  residence  of  Union
             citizens and their family members, irrespective of nationality,
             on grounds of public policy, public security or public  health.
             These grounds shall not be invoked to serve economic ends.


        2. Measures taken on grounds of public policy  or  public  security
             shall comply with the principle of proportionality and shall be
             based exclusively on the personal  conduct  of  the  individual
             concerned.   Previous  criminal  convictions   shall   not   in
             themselves constitute grounds for taking such measures.


           The personal conduct of the individual concerned must  represent
             a genuine, present and sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting
             one of the fundamental interests  of  society.   Justifications
             that are isolated from the particulars of the case or that rely
             on considerations of general prevention shall not be accepted.


        ...
        Article 28


        Protection against expulsion


        1.       Before taking an expulsion decision on grounds  of  public
             policy or public security, the host  Member  State  shall  take
             account of considerations  such  as  how  long  the  individual
             concerned has resided on its territory, his/her age,  state  of
             health, family and  economic  situation,  social  and  cultural
             integration into the  host  Member  State  and  the  extent  of
             his/her links with the country of origin.


        2.       The host Member State may not take an  expulsion  decision
             against Union citizens or their family members, irrespective of
             nationality, who have the right of permanent residence  on  its
             territory, except on serious grounds of public policy or public
             security.


        3. An expulsion decision may not be taken against  Union  citizens,
             except if the decision is based on imperative grounds of public
             security, as defined by Member States, if they:

             (a)  have resided in the host Member State for the previous  10
                 years; or


             (b)  are a minor, except if the expulsion is necessary for  the
                 best interests of the child, as provided for in the  United
                 Nations Convention  on  the  Rights  of  the  Child  of  20
                 November 1989.


         Article 33


         Expulsion as a penalty or legal consequence


         1. Expulsion orders may not be issued by the host Member State as a
             penalty or legal consequence of a  custodial  penalty,  unless
             they conform to the requirements of Articles 27, 28 and 29.

         2. If an expulsion order,  as  provided  for  in  paragraph  1,  is
             enforced more than two years after it was issued,  the  Member
             state Shall check that the individual concerned  is  currently
             and genuinely a threat to public policy or public security and
             shall assess whether there has been any material change in the
             circumstances since the expulsion order was issued.


Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006

      The relevant provisions of the Regulations are as follows:-

        "General interpretation


        2. -(1) In these Regulations-

        "EEA decision" means a decision under these Regulations that
        concerns a person's-


             ...


             (c) removal from the United Kingdom;


             ...


        "EEA national" means a national of an EEA State;


        "EEA State" means-


             (a)  a member State, other than the United Kingdom;


             (b)  Norway, Iceland or Liechtenstein; or


             (c)  Switzerland;


        ...


        Continuity of residence

        .3. -(1) This regulation applies for  the  purpose  of  calculating
             periods of continuous residence in  the  United  Kingdom  under
             regulation 5(1) and regulation 15.

        (2)      Continuity of residence is not affected by -


             (a)  periods of absence from the United Kingdom  which  do  not
                 exceed six months in total in any year;


             (b)  periods of absence from the  United  Kingdom  on  military
                 service; or


             (c)  any one absence from  the  United  Kingdom  not  exceeding
                 twelve months for an important reason such as pregnancy and
                 childbirth, serious illness, study or  vocational  training
                 or an overseas posting.


        (3)      But continuity of residence  is  broken  if  a  person  is
             removed from the United Kingdom under regulation 19(3).


        ...


        'Worker or self employed person who has ceased activity'


        5.       -(1) In these Regulations, "worker or self-employed person
             who has ceased activity" means an EEA national  who  satisfies
             the conditions in paragraph (2), (3), (4) or (5).


        (2)      A person satisfies the conditions in this paragraph if  he
             -


             (a)       terminates his activity as a worker or  self-employed
                 person and -


                  (i)  has reached the age at which  he  is  entitled  to  a
                      state pension on the date on which he  terminates  his
                      activity; or


                  (ii) in the case of a worker, ceases working to take early
                      retirement;


             (b) pursued his activity as a worker or  self-employed  person
                  in the United Kingdom for at least twelve months prior  to
                  the termination; and


             (c) resided in the United Kingdom continuously for  more  than
                  three years prior to the termination.


         (3)      A person satisfies the conditions in this paragraph if -


             (a) he terminates his activity in  the  United  Kingdom  as  a
                 worker or self-employed person as a result of a  permanent
                 incapacity to work; and


             (b) either -


                  (i)  he resided in the  United  Kingdom  continuously  for
                      more than two years prior to the termination; or


                  (iii)      the incapacity is the result of an accident  at
                      work or an occupational disease that entitles him  to
                      a  pension  payable  in  full  or  in  part   by   an
                      institution in the United Kingdom.


         (4)      A person satisfies the conditions in this paragraph if -


             (a) he is active as a worker or self-employed person in an EEA
                 State but retains his place of  residence  in  the  United
                 Kingdom, to which he returns as a rule  at  least  once  a
                 week; and


             (b) prior to becoming so active in that EEA State, he had been
                 continuously resident and continuously active as a  worker
                 or self-employed person in the United Kingdom for at least
                 three years.


         (5)      A person who satisfies the condition in  paragraph  (4)(a)
             but not the condition  in  paragraph  (4)(b)  shall,  for  the
             purposes of paragraphs (2) and (3), be treated as being active
             and resident in the United Kingdom during any period in  which
             he is working or self-employed in the EEA state.


         (6)      The conditions in paragraph (2) and (3) as  to  length  of
             residence and activity as a  worker  or  self-employed  person
             shall not apply in relation to a person whose spouse or  civil
             partner is a United Kingdom national.


         (7)      For the purposes of this regulation -


             (a) periods of inactivity for reasons not of the person's  own
                 making;


             (b) periods of inactivity due to illness or accident; and


             (c)  in  the  case  of  a  worker,  periods   of   involuntary
                  unemployment duly  recorded  by  the  relevant  employment
                  office,


             shall be treated as periods of activity as a worker  or  self-
             employed person, as the case may be.




        'Qualified person'


        .6. -(1) In these Regulations, "qualified person"  means  a  person
             who is an EEA national and in the United Kingdom as-


             (a)  a jobseeker;


             (b)  a worker;


             ...


        (2)      A person who is no longer working shall not  cease  to  be
             treated as a worker for the purpose of paragraph (1)(b) if-


             (a)  he is temporarily unable to  work  as  the  result  of  an
                 illness or accident;


             (b)  he is in  duly  recorded  involuntary  unemployment  after
                 having been employed in the United Kingdom,  provided  that
                 he  has  registered  as  a  jobseeker  with  the   relevant
                 employment office and-


                 (i)   he was employed for one year or more before  becoming
                     unemployed;


                 (ii)  he has been unemployed for no more than  six  months;
                     or


                 (iii)       he can provide  evidence  that  he  is  seeking
                     employment in the United Kingdom  and  has  a  genuine
                     chance of being engaged;


             (c)   he  is  involuntarily  unemployed  and  has  embarked  on
                 vocational training; or


             (d)   he  has  voluntarily  ceased  working  and  embarked   on
                 vocational  training  that  is  related  to  his   previous
                 employment.


        ...


        (4)      For the purpose of paragraph (1)(a), 'jobseeker'  means  a
             person  who  enters  the  United  Kingdom  in  order  to   seek
             employment  and  can  provide  evidence  that  he  is   seeking
             employment and has a genuine chance of being engaged.


        ...


                                   PART 2


                                 EEA RIGHTS

        Right of admission to the United Kingdom


        .11. -(1) An EEA national must be admitted to the United Kingdom if
             he produces on  arrival  a  valid  national  identity  card  or
             passport issued by an EEA State.


        ...
        ...


        Initial right of residence


        .13. -(1) An EEA national is  entitled  to  reside  in  the  United
             Kingdom for a period not exceeding three  months  beginning  on
             the date on which he is admitted to the United Kingdom provided
             that he holds a valid national identity card or passport issued
             by an EEA State.


        ...


        Extended right of residence


        .14. -(1) A qualified person is entitled to reside  in  the  United
             Kingdom for so long as he remains a qualified person.


        ...




        Permanent right of residence


        .15.-(1) The following persons shall acquire the right to reside in
             the United Kingdom permanently-


             (a)  an EEA national who has resided in the United  Kingdom  in
                 accordance with these Regulations for a  continuous  period
                 of five years;


             (b)  a family member of an EEA national who is not  himself  an
                 EEA national but who has resided in the United Kingdom with
                 the EEA national in accordance with these Regulations for a
                 continuous period of five years;


             (c)  a worker or self-employed person who has ceased activity;


             (d)  the family member of a worker or self-employed person  who
                 has ceased activity;


             (e)  a person who was the family member of a  worker  or  self-
                 employed person where-


                 (i)   the worker or self-employed person has died;


                 (ii)  the family member resided with him immediately before
                     his death; and


                 (iii)       the worker or self-employed person had  resided
                     continuously in the United Kingdom for  at  least  the
                     two years immediately before his death  or  the  death
                     was  the  result  of  an  accident  at  work   or   an
                     occupational disease;


             (f)  a person who-


                 (i)   has resided in the United Kingdom in accordance  with
                     these Regulations for  a  continuous  period  of  five
                     years; and


                 (ii)  was, at the end of that period, a family  member  who
                     has retained the right of residence.


        (2)      Once acquired, the right of permanent residence under this
             regulation shall be lost only through absence from  the  United
             Kingdom for a period exceeding two consecutive years.


        (3)      But this regulation is subject to regulation 19(3)(b).


        ...




                                   PART 4


                    REFUSAL OF ADMISSION AND REMOVAL ETC

        Exclusion and removal from the United Kingdom


        .19. -(1) A person is not entitled to be  admitted  to  the  United
             Kingdom  by  virtue  of  regulation  11  if  his  exclusion  is
             justified on grounds  of  public  policy,  public  security  or
             public health in accordance with regulation 21.
        ......
        ...


        (3)      Subject to paragraphs (4) and (5), a person who  has  been
             admitted to, or acquired a  right  to  reside  in,  the  United
             Kingdom under these Regulations may be removed from the  United
             Kingdom if-


             (a)  he does not have or ceases to have a right to reside under
                 these Regulations; or


             (b)  he would otherwise be entitled to  reside  in  the  United
                 Kingdom under these Regulations but the Secretary of  State
                 has decided that his removal is justified on the grounds of
                 public  policy,  public  security  or  public   health   in
                 accordance with regulation 21.






        ...


        Decisions taken on public policy, public security and public health
             grounds


        .21. -(1) In this regulation a "relevant  decision"  means  an  EEA
             decision taken on the grounds of public policy, public security
             or public health.


        (2)      A relevant decision may not be  taken  to  serve  economic
             ends.


        (3)      A relevant decision may not  be  taken  in  respect  of  a
             person with a permanent right of residence under regulation  15
             except on serious grounds of public policy or public security.


        (4)      A relevant decision may not be taken except on  imperative
             grounds of public security in respect of an EEA national who-


             (a)  has resided in the United Kingdom for a continuous  period
                 of at least ten years prior to the relevant decision; or


             (b)  is under the age of 18, unless the  relevant  decision  is
                 necessary in his best interests, as  provided  for  in  the
                 Convention on the  Rights  of  the  Child  adopted  by  the
                 General Assembly of the United  Nations  on  20th  November
                 1989.


        (5)      Where a relevant decision is taken on  grounds  of  public
             policy or public security it shall, in  addition  to  complying
             with the preceding paragraphs of this regulation, be  taken  in
             accordance with the following principles-


             (a)   the  decision  must  comply   with   the   principle   of
                 proportionality;


             (b)  the decision must be based  exclusively  on  the  personal
                 conduct of the person concerned;


             (c)   the  personal  conduct  of  the  person  concerned   must
                 represent  a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious
                 threat  affecting  one  of  the  fundamental  interests  of
                 society;


             (d)  matters isolated from the particulars of the case or which
                 relate to  considerations  of  general  prevention  do  not
                 justify the decision;


             (e)   a  person's  previous  criminal  convictions  do  not  in
                 themselves justify the decision.


        (6)      Before taking a relevant decision on the grounds of public
             policy or public security  in  relation  to  a  person  who  is
             resident in the United Kingdom the  decision  maker  must  take
             account of considerations such as the  age,  state  of  health,
             family and economic  situation  of  the  person,  the  person's
             length of residence in the United Kingdom, the person's  social
             and cultural integration into the United Kingdom and the extent
             of the person's links with his country of origin.




        ...


        ...


        ...


                                 SCHEDULE 4


                           TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS


        Interpretation


        .1.      In this Schedule-


             (a)  the '2000 Regulations'  means  the  Immigration  (European
                 Economic Area) Regulations 2000...


        ...


        Periods of residence under the 2000 Regulations


        .6. -(1) Any period during which a person carried out  an  activity
             or was resident in the United Kingdom in  accordance  with  the
             2000 Regulations shall be treated as a period during which  the
             person carried out that activity or was resident in the  United
             Kingdom in accordance with these Regulations for the purpose of
             calculating periods  of  activity  and  residence  under  these
             Regulations."




                                 Appendix B


                     UKBA Criminal Casework Directorate
                       Case Owner Process Instructions


        "Stage one.


        2.2.2 In considering whether to deport  a  person  who  is  an  EEA
        national, Case Owners must consider whether  deportation  would  be
        compatible with EU  law  (see  regulation  21  of  the  Immigration
        (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 and the  associated  case
        law.  For more detailed guidance refer to the ECI on deportation of
        EEA nationals).


        Under EU law, a decision to deport must be taken on the grounds  of
        public policy, public security or public health.


        To determine whether a person can be deported on grounds of  public
        health  Case  Owners  should  refer  to   the   European   Casework
        Instructions on the deportation of  EEA  nationals.   This  can  be
        found on the Horizon website using  the  following  link:  European
        Casework Instructions - IND Horizon.


        To determine whether a person can be deported on grounds of  public
        policy or public security, Case Owners must be satisfied  that  the
        person's conduct represents a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently
        serious threat  affecting  one  of  the  fundamental  interests  of
        society.


        Any offence meeting the criteria for consideration for  deportation
        might constitute a crime within  the  scope  of  public  policy  or
        public security.  Public security will  involve  national  security
        matters, but may also involve crimes that pose a wider risk to  the
        safety of the public or a section of the public.


        Case Owners should then look at whether the person has a  permanent
        right of residence in the UK.  If they have,  then  there  must  be
        serious grounds of public policy or public security.


        A conviction for murder, a terrorism offence [footnote 3:  offences
        committed under the Terrorism Act 2000, the  Anti-Terrorism,  Crime
        and Security Act 2001, the Prevention of Terrorism Act 2005 and the
        Terrorism  Act  2006.   Where  any  of  these  offences  have  been
        committed, Case Owners should check circumstances  with  SSCU.],  a
        drug trafficking offence [footnote 4: as set out in Schedule 2 para
        1 of the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002], a serious immigration offence
        [footnote  5:  Section  25,  Section  25A,  Section  25B   of   the
        Immigration Act 1971 and Section 4 of the  Asylum  and  Immigration
        (Treatment of Claimants) Act 2004], or a serious sexual or  violent
        offence carrying a maximum penalty of ten years or  more  [footnote
        6: offences in Schedule 15 of the Criminal Justice  Act  2003  that
        are defined as serious in  Section  224  of  the  same  Act]  might
        constitute serious grounds of public policy or public security.


        If an EEA national with permanent residence has resided in  the  UK
        for a continuous period of at least ten years prior to  a  decision
        to deport (not including time spent in custody),  he  may  only  be
        deported on imperative grounds of public security.


        An EEA national under the age of 18 may also only  be  deported  on
        imperative grounds of public security  unless  [sic]  in  the  best
        interests of the child (as provided for in the UN Convention on the
        Rights of the Child 1989).


        Imperative  grounds  of  public  security  will  involve   national
        security matters, or crimes that pose a particularly  serious  risk
        to the safety of the public or a section of the public.  Imperative
        grounds in  this  respect  might  be  where  the  person  has  been
        convicted of murder, a terrorism offence [footnote 3 as  above],  a
        drug  trafficking  offence  [footnote  4  as  above],   a   serious
        immigration offence [footnote 5 as above], or a serious  sexual  or
        violent offence carrying a maximum penalty of  ten  years  or  more
        [footnote 6 as above] and been sentenced to five years or more.


        In  all  cases  the  person's  conduct  must  also  demonstrate   a
        propensity to re-offend.  While previous convictions  and  criminal
        history may be taken  into  account  when  considering  a  person's
        propensity to re-offend they should not be looked at  in  isolation
        [footnote 8: Although in general a finding of a present  threat  to
        public policy implies the existence in the individual concerned  of
        a propensity to act in the same way in the future  it  is  possible
        that following a particularly heinous crime past conduct alone  may
        constitute a present threat to the requirements of  public  policy.
        Where Case Owners consider that they are faced  with  such  a  case
        they should consult senior caseworkers].


        Evidence demonstrating a propensity to re-offend could be found in:


        1. Court reports


        2. Risk of harm or  re-offending  assessments,  including  Offender
             Assessment System.


        3. Parole board reports.


        4. Statements by prison, probation or police officers.


        5. Medical reports.


        Where the person is under the supervision of an Offender Manager in
        the National Offender Management Service (NOMS), then the  offender
        manager should be consulted about evidence regarding propensity  to
        re-offend.


        Once it is established that the threat posed by a person is
        sufficient in principle to justify his deportation on grounds of
        public policy or security under EU law, then there will be a
        presumption that the public interest requires deportation.
