

Asylum and Immigration Tribunal

 HH & others (Mogadishu: armed conflict: risk) Somalia CG [2008] UKAIT 00022


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |                             |
|On 19 to 22 November 2007                     |                             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                       SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE STOREY
                      SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE P R LANE
                             MRS L R SCHMITT JP

                                   Between

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For appellant H: Mr J Collins, Counsel, instructed by Sheikh & Co.
For appellant S: Mr R Young, Solicitor of Sheikh & Co.
For appellant A: Mr I Maka, Counsel, instructed by Messrs Sultan Lloyd
For the respondent:    Mr J Swift, Mr S Wordsworth & Ms D J Rhee, Counsel,
                    instructed by the Treasury Solicitor.


         (1)   In  deciding  whether  an  international  or  internal  armed
    conflict exists for the purposes of paragraph 339C of  the  Immigration
    Rules and the Qualification Directive (but not for  any  wider  purpose
    outwith the jurisdiction  of  the  Tribunal),  the  Tribunal  will  pay
    particular regard to the definitions to be found in  the  judgments  of
    international tribunals concerned with international  humanitarian  law
    (such as the Tadic  jurisdictional  judgment).  Those  definitions  are
    necessarily imprecise  and  the  identification  of  a  relevant  armed
    conflict is predominantly a question of fact.

         (2)  It will in general be very difficult for a person  to  succeed
    in a claim to humanitarian protection solely by reference to  paragraph
    339C(iv) of the Immigration Rules and article 15(c) of  the  Directive,
    ie. without showing a real risk of ECHR article 2 or article 3 harm.

    (3) Applying  the  definitions  drawn  from  the  Tadic  jurisdictional
    judgment, for the purposes of paragraph 339C of the  Immigration  Rules
    and the Qualification Directive, on the evidence before us, an internal
    armed conflict exists in Mogadishu. The zone of conflict is confined to
    the city  and  international  humanitarian  law  applies  to  the  area
    controlled by the combatants, which comprises the city,  its  immediate
    environs and the TFG/Ethiopian supply base of Baidoa.


    (4) A person is not  at  real  risk  of  serious  harm  as  defined  in
    paragraph 339C by reason only of his or her presence in  that  zone  or
    area.


    (5) Neither the TFG/Ethiopians nor the Union of Islamic Courts and  its
    associates are targeting clans or groups for serious harm. Whilst  both
    sides in the conflict have acted from time to time in such a way as  to
    cause  harm  to  civilians,  they  are  not  in  general  engaging   in
    indiscriminate violence.


    (6) Clan support networks  in  Mogadishu,  though  strained,  have  not
    collapsed. A person from a majority clan or whose background  discloses
    a significant degree of assimilation with or acceptance by  a  majority
    clan will in general be able to rely  on  that  clan  for  support  and
    assistance, including at times of displacement as a result of  security
    operations, etc. Majority clans continue to have access to arms, albeit
    that their militias no longer control the city.


    (7) A member of a minority clan or group who has no  identifiable  home
    area where majority clan support can be found will  in  general  be  at
    real risk of serious harm of being targeted by criminal elements,  both
    in any area of former residence and in the event (which  is  reasonably
    likely) of being displaced as described  in  sub-paragraph  (6)  above.
    That risk is directly attributable to the person's ethnicity and  is  a
    sufficient differential feature to engage the  Refugee  Convention,  as
    well as article 3 of the ECHR and paragraph 339C/article 15(c)  of  the
    Qualification Directive  (but  for  the  first  sub-paragraph  (ii)  of
    paragraph 339C).


    (8) The evidence discloses no other  relevant  differentiating  feature
    for the purposes of those Conventions and the Directive.


    (9)  The issue of whether a person from a minority clan or group  falls
    within sub-paragraph (7) above will often need  specific  and  detailed
    consideration. The evidence suggests that certain minority  groups  may
    be accepted by the majority clan of the area in question, so as  to  be
    able to call on protection from that clan. On the current evidence,  it
    may therefore not be appropriate to assume that a finding  of  minority
    group status in southern Somalia is  itself  sufficient  to  entitle  a
    person to  international  protection,  particularly  where  a  person's
    credibility is otherwise lacking.


    (10)  Subject to sub-paragraph (9) above,  outside  Mogadishu  and  its
    immediate  environs,  the  position  in   southern   Somalia   is   not
    significantly different from that analysed in NM and Others (Lone women-
    Ashraf) Somalia CG [2005] UKIAT 00076


    (11)  Air travel to and  from  Mogadishu  has  not  been  significantly
    interrupted; nor has the mobile telephone network in southern Somalia.


    (12) Subject to  what  is  said  above,  NM  continues  to  be  country
    guidance. However, FK (Shekal Ghandershe) Somalia CG [2004] UKIAT 00127
    is not to be relied on  as  authority  for  the  proposition  that  all
    members of the Sheikhal Jasira or the Sheikhal Ghandershe are  as  such
    entitled to international protection  as  unprotected  minorities.  The
    evidence on  which  the  Tribunal  in  AA  (Risk-Geledi-Benadiri  Clan)
    Somalia  [2002]  UKIAT  05720  reached  its  conclusions  is  also  now
    materially out of date and unreliable and should no longer be followed.


             ..................................................


Notes: (1) "R" or "A" followed by a number refers to the ring binder of
       documents produced by the respondent or the appellants, as the case
       may be.
          (2) For ease of reference certain spellings have been
       standardised, including in passages directly quoted.




                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

1.    The appellants are female citizens of Somalia.  Appellant H, who  gave
    her date of birth as 3 February 1967, claimed to have  arrived  in  the
    United Kingdom in 2005 for the purposes of family reunion.  On  26  May
    2006 she was convicted at Croydon Crown Court  and  sentenced  to  nine
    months imprisonment for the offence of seeking leave to remain  in  the
    United  Kingdom  by  means  which  included   deception.    The   court
    recommended that appellant H should be deported.  She appealed  against
    that decision, asserting that  she  was  an  Ashraf  and  would  suffer
    persecution or  other  serious  harm,  if  returned  to  Somalia.   The
    original Tribunal, sitting at Birmingham in March 2007,  did  not  find
    the appellant to be  credible  as  regards  her  Ashraf  ethnicity  or,
    indeed, anything else about her  claim,  apart  from  her  coming  from
    Mogadishu.  On 19 June 2007 the  Tribunal,  on  reconsideration,  found
    that there was a material error of law  in  the  determination  of  the
    original Tribunal,  concerning  its  assessment  of  the  risk  to  the
    appellant, as a woman, returning to Mogadishu as at March 2007.  It  is
    common ground that this is the only matter which is capable in  law  of
    preventing appellant H's deportation.

2.    Appellant S entered the United Kingdom on 14 January 2004 and  claimed
    asylum two days later.  Her claim having been refused on 31  May  2005,
    she appealed to the Tribunal which, by a determination that followed  a
    hearing before an Immigration Judge  in  October  2005,  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal.

3.    On 24 October 2006,  the  Tribunal,  on  reconsideration,  found  that
    there was  a  material  error  of  law  in  the  determination  of  the
    Immigration Judge.  Senior Immigration Judge Jarvis's  reasons  for  so
    finding are as follows:-

    "1.    The Appellant is a citizen of Somalia, whose date  of  birth  is
         given as 10 April  1976.  She  claims  to  have  experienced  being
         persecuted and other serious harm in the past  in  Somalia  and  to
         have a well-founded fear of being persecuted and of  other  serious
         harm in Somalia, should she be returned there,  together  with  her
         dependent child, by  reason  of  her  membership  of  the  minority
         Sheikhal Jasira clan, at the hands of members  of  majority  clans,
         from whom the authorities are unable to protect her and her  child.
         On 31 May 2005 the Respondent refused to grant leave  to  enter  or
         remain in the UK on refugee or human rights grounds.

      2.    The Appellant appealed.  Immigration  Judge  Goldfarb  dismissed
         the Appellant's appeal in a determination issued in  October  2005.
         The Appellant then sought and obtained an order for reconsideration
         from Senior Immigration Judge Lane which is dated 28 October  2005.
         It was found to be arguable that the Immigration Judge had erred in
         law in

            . her approach to the expert report of Dr Luling
            . failing to have any regard to the explanation  given  by  the
              Appellant for not attending for a language test
            . misapplying evidence as to the Sheikhal Loboge sub-clan
            . concluding that the Appellant was a dependent of her uncle in
              Saudi Arabia
            . concluding that the  Appellant  was  not  telling  the  truth
              regarding her raising of funds to travel.


    3.      Mr R Young  of  Sheikh  and  Co.  appeared  on  behalf  of  the
         Appellant. He relied upon the  grounds.  Although  the  expert  had
         stated that the Appellant's knowledge of her  clan  was  'scrappy',
         the Immigration Judge had completely failed to  take  into  account
         that she also found it to be accurate and that it was  likely  that
         the Appellant is a member of the Sheikhal Jasira.  There  had  been
         consideration of extracts from the report only and the evidence had
         not been considered in the round. There had been  failure  to  note
         that the Appellant appears to speak the Af Reer Hamar dialect which
         is the dialect of the Benadiri.

      4.    As to the language  test,  the  Immigration  Judge  had  clearly
         failed to take  into  account  the  fact  that  the  Appellant  had
         explained that she did  not  know  what  was  required  of  her  in
         relation to a language test.  It appears that  the  Respondent  and
         the Immigration  Judge  have  misapplied  the  evidence  about  the
         Sheikhal Loboge, mistakenly, it seems, believing that the Appellant
         was in some way claiming something that she was  not,  and  wrongly
         holding that against her. The Appellant had clearly stated that her
         clan is not affiliated  to  the  other  clans  known  as  Sheikhal,
         including the Loobogey (i.e.Loboge). Dr Luling in her expert report
         makes clear that the Sheikhal  of  Jasira  and  the  Gandershe  are
         ethnically distinct from other groups such as the Sheikhal  Loboge.
         The Immigration Judge had been referred to  two  decisions  of  the
         Tribunal in which preference had been given to the evidence  of  Dr
         Luling as opposed to that in the Joint British Danish,  Dutch  Fact
         Finding Mission to Nairobi.

    5.     There was  nothing  implausible,  Mr  Young  submitted,  in  the
         Appellant having been able to buy jewellery. Her husband  was  said
         to have been working illegally and he could have bought it for her.
         It was not implausible that  the  jewels  were  sold  to  fund  the
         travel.


    6.     The Immigration Judge was wrong to conclude that  the  Appellant
         had lived without difficulties from 1991 until 1995 as this was not
         her evidence (see paragraph 33). Further, this finding  contradicts
         paragraph  37  where  the  Immigration  Judge  herself  notes   the
         difficulties that the Appellant had referred to. Without more  from
         the Judge than her finding that the Appellant  did  not  experience
         'the level of difficulty that one would have  expected'  ,  it  was
         impossible to know what level of difficulty the Judge had in  mind,
         and therefore  impossible  to  know  what  impact  the  Appellant's
         evidence would have had, had the Judge taken it  into  account.  As
         the matter turns upon the findings as  to  credibility,  these  are
         said to be material matters rendering the determination unsafe  and
         unsustainable.


    7.     Mr Peter Deller, Senior Presenting Officer, submitted  that  the
         ground relating to the non-participation in the language test would
         not make a significant difference as not much turns upon it. As  to
         the funds for the journey, it was possible that the  husband  could
         have saved money, but it was not central. However, so  many  points
         were not clear. No strong reason was given for rejecting the expert
         evidence of Dr Luling. The reference simply to the 'scrappy'  point
         was not a proper approach  by  the  Immigration  Judge.  Mr  Deller
         accepted  that  the  determination   was   inadequately   reasoned.
         Paragraph 30 was very troubling. It was difficult to see the  stage
         at which the expert evidence was considered  as  the  Judge  simply
         seems to recite the Respondent's letter of  refusal.  Nor  was  the
         reasoning adequate in relation to what was said to have happened to
         the Appellant between 1991 and 1995.


    8.     Mr Deller submitted that he could not seek  to  argue  that  the
         determination be upheld, but neither did he  have  instructions  to
         concede the clan membership.  It  was,  however,  accepted  by  the
         Respondent that the Appellant is a Somali national.


    9.     In all the circumstances, I find, for all the  reasons  advanced
         by both parties, as summarized above, that  the  Immigration  Judge
         did fall into material error of law and that  the  way  forward  in
         this case is for there to be a full  second  stage  reconsideration
         hearing,  before  an  Immigration  Judge  or  Judges   other   than
         Immigration Judge Goldfarb, when all issues will be at large,  save
         that it is accepted by the  Respondent  that  the  Appellant  is  a
         Somali national."


4.    Unlike appellant H, who was properly found by  the  original  Tribunal
    not to be a member of the Ashraf but, rather, a member of some majority
    clan, it is common ground that one of the issues to be decided by  this
    Tribunal is whether appellant S is a member of the Sheikhal Jasira.

5.    Appellant A was born on 1 June 1976.  She claims to have  entered  the
    United Kingdom in February 2004, using a passport to which she was  not
    entitled, accompanied by three dependants.  She  claimed  asylum  on  5
    February 2004 and, when that claim was refused the following month, she
    appealed to an adjudicator, who dismissed her appeal in a determination
    promulgated in June 2004.  She then successfully sought  permission  to
    appeal against the Adjudicator's determination and the resulting appeal
    to the Immigration Appeal Tribunal was pending when, on 5  April  2005,
    that body ceased to exist and the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  came
    into being.  On 26 July 2005  the  Tribunal  found  that  there  was  a
    material error of law in the  Adjudicator's  determination,  concerning
    the assessment of risk on return as a member of "the Ashraf clan".  The
    reconsideration was then completed by an Immigration Judge, following a
    hearing on 28 October 2005.  He found that, despite the appellant being
    of Ashraf ethnicity, "she has had the support of the majority clan  and
    I believe that such support would still be available to her" (paragraph
    18 of his determination).  However, by an order made by consent  on  27
    June 2006, the Court of Appeal allowed the appellant's  appeal  against
    the determination of the Immigration Judge and remitted the  matter  to
    the Tribunal for reconsideration.  The  respondent  consented  to  that
    course because  it  was  considered  that  the  Immigration  Judge  had
    provided insufficient reasons to enable the parties to  understand  the
    basis upon which he reached his conclusion; in particular,  whether  or
    to what extent the Immigration Judge was proceeding on the basis of the
    Adjudicator's findings of fact.  It  remains  common  ground  that  the
    appellant is an Ashraf.

6.    Whilst on the subject of common ground between the  parties  to  these
    appeals, it is relevant to record that, in the light of  the  Court  of
    Appeal judgment in AG (Somalia) and Others v Secretary of State for the
    Home Department [2006] EWCA Civ 1342, no reliance  was  placed  by  the
    appellants upon any risk that they might face in  travelling  from  any
    hypothetical point of return, such  as  the  international  airport  in
    Mogadishu, to their home areas.  In none of the  three  cases  has  the
    respondent actually set removal directions, giving details of the place
    in Somalia to which the appellant is proposed to be  removed.   In  the
    case of AG, Hooper LJ, having noted that directions for the appellant's
    removal would be given to Somalia, found that:-

    "13.   No such removal directions have so far  been  given  and  it  is
         accepted that such a direction must be given before the appellant's
         return to Somalia could be effected.  It is also accepted that such
         a removal direction may, as a matter of law, be open  to  challenge
         before a court or tribunal ...


      ...


    15.    In cases involving Somalia  it  would  be  unrealistic  for  the
         Secretary of State to make firm plans for the  appellant's  removal
         to Somalia as long ago as 22 January 2004.  A week is not  only  a
         long time in politics but it is also a long time in the life  of  a
         country as sad and war torn as Somalia.  It follows, so it seems to
         me, that a tribunal or court asked  to  resolve  issues  under  the
         Refugee Convention or under the Human Rights Convention  will  have
         to approach the matter on the basis that  precise  directions  will
         only be given after the appellate routes have been exhausted."


7.    At paragraph 25 Hooper LJ considered the submission on behalf  of  the
    appellant that, absent an undertaking  from  the  respondent  that  the
    latter would give  adequate  time  for  the  making  of  the  telephone
    arrangements  for  the  appellant's  protection,  once  returned,   the
    Tribunal could not exclude the risk that the appellant would  not  have
    time to set  in  motion  the  necessary  arrangements  for  protection.
    Hooper LJ then continued as follows:

    "30.   I had thought at first that the respondent should be invited  to
         give the necessary undertakings and that, in  the  absence  of  any
         undertakings, the appeal might well have to  be  allowed.   I  have
         concluded that undertakings are not  necessary.  If  and  when  the
         respondent  makes  a  removal  direction  for  the  appellant,  the
         respondent  must  take  into  account,  if  the  circumstances   in
         Mogadishu have not changed much to the better, that an  unannounced
         deposit would put  the  appellant  at  real  risk,  absent  special
         factors.  The respondent must  also  take  into  account  that  the
         appellant must be given an opportunity  to  make  arrangements  for
         protection at the airport and on his way home.  That means that the
         appellant must be told, in advance of his removal, at which airport
         or landing strip it is intended to leave him.   Ms  Webber  rightly
         reminded us of the strong criticisms  of  the  practice  of  giving
         insufficient notice to proposed returnees:   see  e.g.  R  (on  the
         application of Karas and Another) v. SSHD [2006] EWHC 747  (Admin).
          I endorse those criticisms.


    31.    Why then do I take the view that undertakings are not necessary?
          It seems to me that given  the  volatility  of  the  situation  in
         Somalia, it would be wrong to require undertakings which  might  be
         inappropriate in a changed situation.  The downside is that, in the
         absence of undertakings, there is a risk of further  litigation  at
         the point of removal.  However  the  length  of  time  between  the
         decision to remove and a decision  to  effect  removal  in  Somalia
         cases, coupled with the volatility  of  the  situation  in  Somalia
         means that it might be difficult to shut out any chance of  further
         litigation at some uncertain point in what may be a  long  time  in
         the future.


    32.    I  have  reached  the  conclusion  that  it  is  impossible  for
         Immigration judges in cases of this kind (involving the  safety  of
         arrival at an airport and of a journey into Mogadishu) to deal with
         all the eventualities at the time of the hearing.   The  judge  may
         have to make it clear what has to be done by the respondent so that
         an enforced returnee to Somalia  does  not  face  a  real  risk  of
         article 3 ill-treatment at the point of his return.  The  judge  is
         then entitled to assume, for the purposes of the hearing before him
         or her, that what is required will be done."


8.    The country guidance determination  which  is  most  relevant  to  the
    issues raised in the present appeals is NM and  Others  (Lone  Women  -
    Ashraf) Somalia CG [2005] UKIAT 00076, notified on 31 March 2005.   The
    Immigration Appeal Tribunal in NM heard evidence from  Professor  Lewis
    and considered a written report from Dr Luling.  At  paragraphs  96  to
    98, the IAT considered the nature of the risks posed  to  returnees  to
    Somalia and lone women in particular:-
    "96.   Partly because of the different nuances to be found in the major
          sources of objective evidence,  we  regard  it  as  important  to
          consider the two issues of risks to returnees and  risk  to  lone
          women returnees in the context set out by Professor Lewis and  Dr
          Luling in their reports written for this hearing.  Both  experts,
          each of whom  has  a  close  familiarity  with  the  most  recent
          background materials relating to Somalia, seemed to us  to  agree
          that, whilst there are significant dangers for returnees and lone
          women returnees in particular, these can be significantly reduced
          in certain cases: those who, as majority clan members, can  avail
          themselves of  the  protection  of  a  majority  clan,  or  as  a
          minority, the protection of a clan patron,  and  also  those  who
          will be accepted back into Somaliland and  Puntland.  The  former
          two groups  may  be  able  to  arrange  in  advance  for  militia
          protection from the airport onwards, through close  relatives  or
          fellow clan members. The latter group may not need to  do  so  if
          returned directly to Somaliland or Puntland.
    97.    We  do  not  seek  to  suggest  that  all  of  Professor  Lewis'
         formulations  when  giving  evidence  showed  that  majority   clan
         protection of this type was always available or adequate.  He  made
         very plain throughout that he thought Somali society generally  was
         in a parlous state. But he was asked numerous direct  questions  on
         the issue of overall risk to returnees,  lone  women  returnees  in
         particular and was  quite  adamant  in  reply  that  majority  clan
         protection of this type made a significant and material  difference
         to the level of risk. Dr Luling's report  likewise  indicated  that
         the existence of majority clan militia protection made an important
         difference.
    98.    Professor Lewis emphasised that for persons  with  close  family
         members in Somalia the latter would feel under  a  strong  duty  to
         take steps to ensure a safe reception and onward travel. For  those
         here who would have less close  links  with  fellow  clan  members,
         payment may be required, but we do not understand from anything  we
         have read that the amounts involved would be prohibitive. Allied to
         this, we note that although both  Professor  Lewis  and  Dr  Luling
         mention examples of returnees, male and  female,  who  have  fallen
         foul of banditry by clan militias on return, neither they  nor  any
         of the other reports before  us  sufficiently  evidence  that  such
         incidents are  occurring  routinely  where  militia  protection  is
         provided. "
9.    There  are,  and  have  been  for  some  time,  camps  for  internally
    displaced persons in southern Somalia.  On this issue, the  IAT  in  NM
    found as follows:
    "102.  These appeals do not raise specifically the discrete question of
         the safety for persons in IDP camps. However, we would  observe  in
         passing that, on the strength of the background  evidence  and  the
         oral evidence of Professor Lewis, we would consider any  person  at
         real risk on return of being compelled to  live  in  one  of  these
         camps as having little difficulty  in  making  out  a  claim  under
         article 3, if not under the Refugee Convention also."
10.   At paragraph 107, the IAT concluded that internal flight "is  excluded
    where majority clan protection is not available or cannot be accessed".
     In that context, however, it should be  noted  that  the  Tribunal  at
    paragraph 93 had found:-
    "93.   The further paragraphs on IFA  emphasise  that  in  the  Somalia
         context "place of origin" should not necessarily  be  equated  with
         "place of birth" and that "the determining factor in defining where
         a person originates from is where the person has effective clan and
         family ties, and where clan protection is thus available" (emphasis
         added).  They  also  deal  in  discrete  terms  with  the  specific
         situation in Somaliland and Puntland."
11.   The IAT's principal conclusions at paragraphs 116 to  128  also  merit
    being set out in full, albeit that the comments regarding  travel  from
    the point of return to the home or safe area  (both  here  and  in  the
    earlier passages cited above) now need to read in the light of AG:-
    116.   We have given particular weight to  the  evidence  of  Professor
         Lewis and Dr Luling. What they said is consistent with the  picture
         emerging from the 2004 materials both  UNHCR  and  the  JMR  [Joint
         Mission report of 2004], which was strongly  influenced  by  UNHCR.
         Their evidence is significant for its development of  a  particular
         point, practicality of safe movement and the potential availability
         of majority clan militia escort, which is foreshadowed  in  certain
         parts of the background but not brought  out  as  clearly  as  they
         brought it out.
    117.   The starting point is that male and female members  of  minority
         clans from the south will, in general, be at risk  of  breaches  of
         their article 3 rights, and will be refugees,  in  the  absence  of
         evidence that they have a clan or personal patron and the means  to
         access that area of safety without a real risk. Were such  evidence
         to exist, which at present would be  unusual,  their  return  would
         involve no breach of either Convention. We recognise that there may
         be minority clans  who  are,  at  least  locally,  integrated  with
         majority clans, and other groups who may not be a minority clan  at
         all,  being  closer  to  a  caste.  Those  will  require   specific
         consideration. We also recognise that a division  between  minority
         and majority does not represent a bright line on one or other  side
         of which every clan must fall, because there are some  which  could
         be considered to be intermediate. But those  issues  do  not  arise
         here.
    118.   Those issues should be addressed  where  the  evidence  permits.
         There is obviously a greater risk for  lone  females  both  in  the
         place of safety and in access, both in terms of degree of  risk  of
         occurrence and degree of severity of ill-treatment. Their  position
         would call for particular care.
    119.   However, where the  claimant,  male  or  female,  from  southern
         Somalia, is not found to be a minority clan  member  or  equivalent
         equally at risk, different considerations apply.  First,  there  is
         likely to be a location in southern Somalia in which  the  majority
         clan  is  able  to  afford  protection  sufficiently  for   neither
         Convention to  apply.  It  is  important  not  to  over-generalise;
         individual factors and locations will be relevant, as will the past
         history  and  individual  or  family  connections.  Likewise,  lone
         females will be at a greater risk than males but they will  not  be
         able to show that, simply as lone female returnees from the  United
         Kingdom, they have no place of clan majority safety.
    120.   Second, the question of risk in accessing any  such  safe  place
         will arise, the more strongly for females  than  males.  We  accept
         that, where positive findings have been made as to what is the home
         area of a claimant, the prospects of being able  to  travel  safely
         within  Somalia  to  that  area  (or  if  that  is  unsafe,  to  an
         alternative area) is a crucial issue, certainly in cases  involving
         southern Somalia. It will be relevant to the issue of return  to  a
         person's home area or, where  appropriate,  relocation  to  another
         area. That is because of the fact that many of the main road routes
         in this  portion  of  the  country  have  military  checkpoints  or
         roadblocks. In this context, the issue as to how claimants will get
         from the point of arrival to their home area or to  an  area  where
         they have clan connections, is a real one.
    ..................
    122.   A majority clan can be characterised as one which  has  its  own
         militia. The strongly  clan  and  family  based  nature  of  Somali
         society makes it reasonably likely,  though  not  certain,  that  a
         militia escort could sufficiently protect a returnee from Mogadishu
         through the roadblocks and en route  banditry,  to  the  clan  home
         area. This would have to be pre-arranged. Any unwillingness on  the
         part of a claimant to make such  arrangements  is  irrelevant.  The
         telephone connections  to  Mogadishu  are  good.  We  do  not  know
         anything of their availability to other towns. The mere unannounced
         deposit, even of a majority clan member, and especially  a  female,
         at Mogadishu airport would be likely to put them at a real risk, in
         the absence of special factors.
    123.   There are problems with those whose case has been so disbelieved
         that it is not known what their clan or place of origin is.  It  is
         difficult to see that such a person could succeed; he or she  would
         be  a  majority  clan  member  who  was  in  effect  declining   to
         demonstrate, even to the low standard of proof that  they  were  at
         risk on return because unable to arrange for clan  militia  escorts
         from Mogadishu or wherever else they might be returned to.
    ..................
    125.   We do  not  accept  that  the  general  conditions  of  life  or
         circumstances in Somalia engage  the  obligations  of  the  Refugee
         Convention for all returnees or all female returnees, in the  light
         of Adan [1997] IWLR  1107,  [1998]  Imm  AR  338.  A  "differential
         impact"  has  to  be  shown.  We  have  recognised  the  scope  for
         differential impacts in our analysis above. Being  a  single  woman
         returnee is not of itself a sufficient differentiator, although the
         risks they face are greater and  call  for  careful  individualised
         consideration on the material which is accepted. Nor do we consider
         that those general conditions or circumstances  engage  article  3,
         without more, again as we have discussed.
    126.   Returnees or lone women returnees claiming protection under  the
         Refugee Convention or under the Human  Rights  Convention  who  are
         found to be former residents of Somaliland or Puntland  or  persons
         having a connection with a clan or sub  clan  based  in  either  of
         these regions, would not in general face a  real  risk  of  serious
         harm, whether or not they could arrange in advance for clan militia
         protection to meet them at the airport and escort them  thereafter,
         provided that they were returned directly to those  areas  and  not
         via Mogadishu. If they were to be returned via Mogadishu, we do not
         know whether a majority clan militia escort could be  arranged  for
         them.
    127.   The same may well apply in the case of returnees or  lone  women
         returnees returned directly to the Bay and Bakool  region.  We  did
         not hear submissions on this issue, but in the light of  references
         in the reports before us to the dominance in that region of various
         sub clans of the Rahanweyn, it may be that access by air into  that
         region  for  persons  formerly  resident  or  having   local   clan
         connections there, might give rise to a similar outcome,  with  the
         same reservations about return via Mogadishu.
    128.   Internal relocation is  not  in  general  a  viable  option  for
         members of minority clans except where they may be able  to  obtain
         majority clan protection in a secure area. In respect  of  majority
         clan members, this may be a viable option for those whose  majority
         clans have a secure location elsewhere within southern Somalia than
         where the claimant came from, if the home  area  were  not  or  had
         ceased to be one where the majority clan was sufficiently strong to
         provide protection. Here,  however,  there  would  need  to  be  an
         assessment of whether  clan  militia  escort  protection  could  be
         obtained. As  regards  the  question  of  whether  returnees  could
         relocate to Somaliland or Puntland (or the Bay and Bakool regions),
         we have affirmed that  the  findings  made  in  AJH  remain  valid,
         subject to a possible addition in relation to young  men  returning
         to Puntland."
    Evidence of appellant S
12.   Appellant S gave evidence with the assistance  of  an  interpreter  in
    the Somali language.   She  confirmed  as  true  and  adopted  her  SEF
    statement, appeal statement of  15  September  2005  and  supplementary
    statement of 9 November 2007.  The essence of appellant S's  claim,  as
    disclosed in those documents, is essentially as follows.   She  was  of
    the Sheikhal Jasira clan, having  been  born  in  the  Jasira  area  of
    Mogadishu.  Her father formerly worked as a district judge but  stopped
    doing so after the fall of the  Sayad  Barre  regime.   Thereafter  her
    father would "hide somewhere in Mogadishu", although he used  to  visit
    the family in Jasira from time to time.  In 1995, the family heard that
    the father had been shot in the legs by the Hawiye militia and that  he
    was paralysed.  Appellant S and her sister were gang-raped in  1995  by
    Hawiye militia and her sister died as a result of the gang rape.   That
    militia also  killed  appellant  S's  brother  and  beat  other  family
    members.  Appellant S gave birth to a female child as a result  of  her
    rape.

13.   Appellant S's paternal uncle, who worked  in  Saudi  Arabia,  came  to
    Somalia to collect his family.  When he failed to find them he  decided
    to take appellant S along with him, since he considered that she  would
    be at risk as a woman if she continued  to  live  in  Somalia.   Having
    arrived in Saudi Arabia in 1996 with her  uncle,  appellant  S  married
    there in 1997 another member of the Sheikhal Jasira.  She had two  sons
    by him.  Appellant S's husband was working illegally  in  Saudi  Arabia
    and in 2003 the authorities there arrested him and one of appellant S's
    sons,  since  which  time  appellant  S  knew   nothing   about   their
    whereabouts.  Fearing that she would be arrested by the authorities for
    being in Saudi Arabia illegally, and deported to Somalia,  appellant  S
    decided to leave Saudi Arabia and was assisted by  her  neighbour,  who
    arranged for an agent.  Appellant S gave the neighbour her jewellery to
    sell in order to help pay the agent and appellant S left  Saudi  Arabia
    with that agent in January 2004, together with her other son.

14.   Commenting on the respondent's reasons for refusal, appellant  S  said
    at paragraph 9 of her statement of September 2005 that from 1991  until
    1994 the Hawiye  militia  raided  the  home  several  times  and  stole
    valuables but that, although they verbally insulted  the  family,  they
    did not beat them as the militia were looking for appellant S's  father
    "and always asked about his whereabouts.  I believe the militia did not
    harm us physically because they never wanted that my father should  get
    scared of returning back to my home and it  may  become  difficult  for
    them to catch him".  In her statement of  November  2007,  appellant  S
    reiterated this point, stating that,  although  not  physically  abused
    between 1991 and 1995, the family suffered verbal abuse "so it  is  not
    right that we were without problems".  So far as her entry  into  Saudi
    Arabia was concerned, appellant S  said  that  she  had  posed  as  the
    daughter of her uncle and that the daughter had only a six month  visa.
    Although her uncle was also Sheikhal Jasira and thus had taken  a  risk
    in returning to Somalia  to  look  for  his  family,  that  reason  for
    returning to Somalia was important  to  him.   Having  been  unable  to
    locate his family, appellant S's uncle became mentally  disturbed  upon
    returning to Saudi Arabia and appellant S  did  not  know  his  current
    whereabouts.

15.   So far as appellant S's daughter in Somalia was  concerned,  appellant
    S stated that it was "not an easy thing" to leave her  there  but  that
    appellant S "had no alternative as I could  not  take  my  daughter  to
    Saudi Arabia".  She left the daughter with her  mother.   She  did  not
    say, as the respondent had assumed from an earlier statement, that  her
    daughter had been left with both of her parents.  She had not seen  her
    father since 1995.  Her husband in Saudi Arabia had  worked  in  a  car
    wash and had purchased gold  jewellery  for  appellant  S  "because  he
    wanted to show his love for me".  The sale of  the  jewellery  did  not
    cover the entirety of the agent's costs.  The balance  was  covered  by
    appellant S's neighbour.  Appellant S would ask people who travelled to
    the United Kingdom "from African countries if they have heard  anything
    about my family".  She had been put in touch with a lady in an area  of
    Mogadishu and had telephoned that lady, "who  agreed  to  look  for  my
    missing family.  When I tried to contact her again, to find out whether
    she had heard anything, I was unable to  get  through  to  her  on  the
    telephone".   Appellant S did not consider that if returned to Somalia,
    she would be able to track down her mother, daughter or  two  remaining
    brothers.

16.   Cross-examined, appellant S was asked about the interview she had  had
    with Dr Luling in September 2005.  She confirmed that she had told  Dr
    Luling that Jasira was a small village just south of Mogadishu and that
    the inhabitants made salt and were fishermen.  There was also the  tomb
    of a local saint.  Asked whether she had told Dr Luling anything  else,
    appellant S said that she answered the questions that had been  put  to
    her by Dr Luling.  Asked about her earlier statement, in which she said
    that Jasira was part of Mogadishu, appellant S replied that it was near
    Mogadishu, in the south of that city.   She  reiterated  that  she  was
    living in Jasira, rather than Mogadishu.  She had never said  that  she
    had lived in Mogadishu.  Dr Luling had  asked  her  who  the  Sheikhal
    Jasira were and what they  did  by  way  of  occupations.   Asked  what
    answers she gave, appellant S said that she remembered  only  that  she
    had answered the questions she had been asked.  Appellant S  eventually
    confirmed that she had said that her clan fished and  made  salt.   She
    was asked about the origins of the  Sheikhal  Jasira  and  about  their
    rituals.  Appellant S said that they were known as being religious  and
    taught the Koran.   Asked  if  she  had  mentioned  the  names  of  any
    particular religious  rituals  with  which  the  Sheikhal  Jasira  were
    associated, appellant S said again that she answered the questions  she
    had been asked.  Asked if she could not  remember  what  she  had  said
    about such  rituals,  appellant  S  said  that  she  had  answered  the
    questions posed about trades and occupations.

17.   Appellant S was asked how often, before 1995, the militia  would  come
    to the family home. She said that it was routine for  them  to  do  so.
    The militia would steal from the family and anyone else whose home they
    fancied.  Asked whether she was harmed by the militia, she replied that
    the militia gave them "constant harassment" and that  they  "threatened
    and beat us." It was put to  appellant  S  that  in  her  statement  of
    September 2005 at paragraph 9, she had asserted that  the  militia  did
    not harm the family physically.  Appellant S denied that she  had  said
    this.  The militia would ask where the father was and  sometimes,  when
    the family would not answer, they would be beaten.  The family told the
    militia that they did not know the father's whereabouts.  She could not
    say why she had  been  raped  in  1995,  when  previous  incidents  had
    involved only the stealing of belongings.  Her daughter had been a  few
    months old at the time appellant S left without her for  Saudi  Arabia.
    Asked why she had not taken her daughter,  appellant  S  said  she  was
    accompanied by her uncle and he needed someone to show the  immigration
    authorities that he had a daughter.  Although appellant S said that she
    was fearful for her family's safety in 1996, she had left her  daughter
    with her mother.  Asked if she had been keen to stay in touch with  her
    mother in order to get news of her daughter, appellant S said  not  and
    that she had not been in contact.  Asked again if  she  had  wished  to
    stay in touch, appellant S said that there was  no  way  in  which  she
    could contact her mother.

18    Asked about her husband in Saudi Arabia, appellant S said she did  not
    know anything about his family except that they  had  been  in  Somalia
    when he had left that country.  He  said  they  had  lived  in  Jasira.
    Asked if she had known the husband's family in that place, appellant  S
    said that she had not.  It was put to  her  that  Jasira  was  a  small
    village.  She said that she did not know how many people  lived  there.
    She was young and kept indoors and did not count them.  Asked how  many
    brothers and sisters her husband had, appellant S replied that  he  had
    two brothers and three sisters,  naming  them.   She  had  never  asked
    whether her husband had told his family that  he  decided  to  stay  on
    illegally in Saudi Arabia after his  Haj.   As  far  as  she  knew  her
    husband did not make contact with his family in Somalia.  She  did  not
    ask him if he had told his family about his situation.

19.   Asked about the position in 2003 when her husband had  been  arrested,
    appellant S said that as a woman in Saudi Arabia she had been unable to
    go out alone and could not seek information about  him.   She  had  not
    been living with her uncle at that time.  After  her  marriage  to  her
    neighbour in 1997, her uncle had lived on his own in the same  premises
    as appellant S and her husband.  After 1997, her uncle  had  gone  mad.
    This was when it was clear to him that he could not locate his  family.
    The uncle  had  lost  his  residency  permit,  because,  like  that  of
    appellant S, it had expired.  After her uncle became sick, there came a
    time when he just disappeared.  He would very  occasionally  leave  the
    house in the company of her husband, although he  did  not  have  legal
    status in Saudi Arabia.  Although her husband worked in the  car  wash,
    he lived in fear.  There was nothing appellant S could do to  find  her
    uncle.  Her husband had, however, gone to look for him.  It was put  to
    appellant S that she  had  done  little  for  her  uncle,  despite  his
    allegedly  saving  her  from  continuing   difficulties   in   Somalia.
    Appellant S said that there was little she could do.   It  was  put  to
    appellant S that she had not been in Saudi Arabia at all.  She  replied
    that she had gone there with her uncle.  She thought that the arrest of
    her uncle and her son in Saudi Arabia had been  in  February  or  March
    2003.  She had stayed in the country until  January  2004.   She  asked
    people if they had seen her husband.  These were neighbours  of  Somali
    origin.

20.   Appellant S said that her husband's job in the  car  wash  was  not  a
    well-paid occupation and that he did not have any money left over  from
    his wages.  After his disappearance she had  received  assistance  from
    Somali neighbours.  The agent had demanded $5,000 and the sale  of  her
    jewellery amounted to half of this sum.  Asked how much  her  neighbour
    had given, appellant S said she was unsure.  Her neighbour would  bring
    her food but  she  had  no  money  to  give  her  neighbour  for  this.
    Appellant S received food from the neighbour for eleven months.   Asked
    if the same neighbour  had  also  met  half  the  cost  of  the  agent,
    appellant S said she had.  Her husband had not bought the jewellery all
    at one time but, rather, gradually.  There had been two necklaces, four
    bracelets, earrings and two rings, all made of gold.

21.   Asked what she had done since coming to the  United  Kingdom  to  find
    her husband, appellant S said she did not know how to  find  him.   She
    had not contacted any friends in Saudi Arabia.  She had  been  given  a
    number for a lady in Somalia and had asked her if she  knew  about  her
    husband.  Appellant S wondered whether her husband and son were back in
    Somalia.  Asked how her husband could have bought gold  jewellery  when
    there was not enough money to buy food, appellant S replied that he was
    trying his best.  It was put to appellant S that  the  reason  she  had
    contacted a woman in Mogadishu  to  seek  the  whereabouts  of  certain
    family members was in truth because appellant S herself was  from  that
    city.  Appellant S denied this.

22.   It was put to appellant S that she had given incorrect answers  to  Dr
    Luling regarding  her  sub-sub-clans.   One  of  those  mentioned,  "Ba
    Hassan," was not a sub-sub-clan but an alternative name for  the  whole
    sub-clan; the third sub-sub clan was Reer Qasim.   Appellant  S  denied
    that she had said that her sub-sub-clan was Reer Ba Hassan.   What  she
    had actually been asked was whether there was an  equivalent  sub-clan.
    It was in that context that she had referred to Reer Ba Hassan.

23.   Re-examined, appellant S reiterated that she and her  family  were  in
    constant fear of the militias from 1991 to 1994.  Her father had worked
    in Medina in the Mogadishu area.  She said it is disrespectful for  her
    to enquire how much her father had earned.  She reiterated that she had
    been threatened and also beaten.  Asked why she had said  in  September
    2005 that she was not harmed physically, appellant S replied  that  she
    had never claimed that the family were not assaulted physically at that
    time.  She had meant to say  that  the  militia  would  not  leave  any
    visible scars, even though they were beating her and the  family.   She
    had meant to say that the militia would not  assault  the  family  with
    something that would leave a trace or  a  mark,  such  as  a  knife  or
    "breaking one of our organs".  Asked what  form  the  physical  attacks
    took, appellant S said that she would  be  slashed  with  a  stick  and
    sometimes hit with the butts of guns but the  militia  avoided  leaving
    physical scars.  Asked why they were keen  not  to  leave  such  scars,
    appellant S said that the militia  feared  that,  if  the  family  were
    seriously injured, the father of the family would not come  back.   The
    militia had hoped to catch him.

24.   It was put to appellant S that she had said at one point that she  had
    lived in Jasira until 1995 and that  she  had  lived  nowhere  else  in
    Somalia; but elsewhere she had claimed that she went to Saudi Arabia in
    1996.  Asked to explain this, appellant S said that she was  living  in
    Jasira until she had left.  She left for Saudi Arabia in 1996.  She was
    unsure what month but thought it might have been March.  Her  neighbour
    in Saudi Arabia had sympathised with appellant's S's situation and that
    was why she had helped appellant S.  They were both Somali ladies,  and
    Muslims would also help each other.  Although her husband earned little
    money, there was still some left over to buy the  gold.   She  had  not
    been in touch with the neighbour who had helped  her  in  Saudi  Arabia
    because that neighbour did not have a telephone.  Appellant S's lack of
    telephone numbers had also precluded  her  from  contacting  anyone  in
    Jasira.

25.   Appellant S was asked why she had refused the respondent's request  to
    undergo a recorded  language  test.   She  replied  that  she  did  not
    understand what  she  was  being  asked  to  do.   She  had  asked  the
    interpreter who was present at the time but he had  not  given  her  an
    answer.

Evidence of appellant A

26.   Appellant A gave evidence with the assistance  of  an  interpreter  in
    the Somali language.  She confirmed as true  and  adopted  her  written
    statement of 12 November 2007, in which she  said  that  there  was  no
    airport near her home area of Shibiz, Mogadishu and that  it  would  be
    dangerous for her and her children to travel across the city  from  the
    airport to get to her home area.  Even if she did manage to reach  that
    area, appellant A did not consider that she would be safe in Mogadishu,
    as a member of a minority clan.  She had been unable to contact  anyone
    in Somalia since she left that country.  At the time she left only  her
    mother and mother-in-law were known to be  alive  there.   Appellant  A
    knew no one who had a telephone in Somalia and so could not call anyone
    to help search for her family.

27.   Appellant A then addressed the issue of whether her  neighbours  could
    provide protection, bearing in mind her evidence that  they  had  given
    assistance during two attacks on the appellant's family.  The appellant
    referred to a sketch plan she had made of her immediate  neighbourhood,
    showing neighbours from minority clans  such  as  Ashraf,  Reer  Hamar,
    Shanshiya and Bhandabow, with a house on the street to the side of  her
    own home being occupied by Abgal  clan  members.   This  majority  clan
    family was quite large but was not, appellant A recalled, connected  to
    the militia.  After the civil war started, the head  of  the  household
    obtained some small weapons to protect himself and his family  but  was
    still not considered to be well-armed in Somali terms.

28.   In 1996, appellant A said  she  was  attacked  by  Abgal  militia  who
    wanted to rape her.  Having escaped from the militia, appellant  A  was
    shot and fell because the bullet had grazed her.   This  was  near  the
    house of her Abgal neighbours, who came out of the property,  by  which
    time the militia had lost interest in appellant A.  The neighbours took
    appellant A to see a retired doctor.

29.   In 2000 there was a further militia attack  in  the  course  of  which
    appellant A's brother was killed, trying to protect appellant A and his
    other sister.  Upon hearing gunfire, the neighbours gathered around the
    house and the militia  then  "backed  off".   The  neighbours  on  this
    occasion included  the  Abgal  family  and  also  other  minority  clan
    neighbours.  It was the fact that the crowd had  gathered  that  caused
    the militia to leave.

30.   Appellant A had spoken to a woman in the United Kingdom who  had  come
    to seek asylum from Mogadishu.  She was an Ashraf who used to  live  in
    an area close to Shibiz.  When appellant A asked her about the  current
    position of the area, the woman said that it had been destroyed and  no
    one was living there anymore.  Everyone had fled, including  the  Abgal
    neighbours "and the whole place now looks like a graveyard".

31.   Cross-examined, appellant A said that after the looting of the  family
    home in 1991, the family had  lived  with  neighbours.   Her  brothers,
    however, had lived elsewhere.  It was about fifteen minutes' walk  from
    the place where the appellant's brother lived to where appellant A  was
    living.  Her brother Hassan had moved around, not staying in  the  same
    place for very long, because he was afraid.  Her brother  Mohammed  had
    been killed in 2000.  He had lived with appellant  A.   The  other  two
    brothers' whereabouts were unknown.  They had gone  missing  after  the
    civil war had broken out.

32.   Asked how she survived, appellant A said that her neighbours gave  her
    food but she was not able to pay anything for  this.   What  money  had
    been left from the father's savings  was  used  for  the  family's  own
    purposes.  They had enough to buy flour and make  sweets.   They  would
    provide the neighbours  occasionally  with  the  food  the  family  had
    prepared.  The Abgal neighbours had been fond of appellant A's  father.
    Appellant A did not consider  the  actions  of  the  neighbours  to  be
    particularly brave.

33.   Appellant A said that she  had  married  in  2000.   Her  husband  had
    previously lived in the same home as  appellant  A.   His  mother  also
    lived there.  Her husband would see her from time to  time  but  stayed
    elsewhere through fear of the militia.  He would go wherever  he  could
    get shelter.  Appellant A was asked if she had  ever  enquired  of  her
    husband where he stayed.  She said that she did not ask him but he  had
    distant relatives in the area.  He said  that  he  went  to  stay  with
    relatives.  He had  become  more  afraid  after  he  had  got  married,
    compared with before.  This was because an individual had tried to rape
    appellant A in 1996 and, after her  marriage,  that  individual  became
    jealous and so her husband was in more danger.  This individual was the
    person who had killed her brother.

34.   Appellant A was asked about her statement  of  February  2004.   There
    was no reference there to appellant A having seen the  would-be  rapist
    (who was also the person who had shot her) between 1996 and 2000.   She
    replied that he used to come with the militia to attack  them  but  she
    had not seen him face-to-face.  It was put  to  appellant  A  that  her
    claimed reason for her husband being in greater fear could not  be  due
    to her husband's fear of the individual.  She said that if he  had  met
    him at home, her husband would have been in danger.   In  Somalia  life
    was cheap.

35.   Appellant A was asked why she had not  gone  with  her  husband.   She
    said that there was no specific place to go and she could not accompany
    a man to live in the forest by himself.  Asked if she had ever enquired
    where her husband went, she said not in particular but she took it that
    he was living with distant relatives.   Appellant A was asked  why  she
    therefore could not have lived with those relatives.  She said that she
    was living with her mother and sister and so "how could I live  there".
    Her husband might have to change residence from day to day.   Asked  if
    she had been concerned when her husband ceased to  visit  in  September
    2002, she said that she had and his mother had started to  cry.   Asked
    if an attempt had been made to contact the distant relatives, appellant
    A said she did not know where they lived or who they were.  It was  put
    to her that her mother-in-law was living with her.   Appellant  A  said
    that that lady was sick with high blood pressure and  had  needed  help
    going to the toilet. Asked what appellant A had done to try to find her
    husband, she said that she used to ask people from other areas if  they
    had seen him.  She would do this whenever the possibility arose.

36.   Her father-in-law got in contact with the  family  shortly  after  the
    birth of her son Abdullah in 2003.  Her father-in-law sent appellant  A
    an agent bearing a verbal message.  She had never  met  her  father-in-
    law. He had left Somalia before the civil war started.   She  had  only
    spoken to him once she  had  come  to  the  United  Kingdom.   She  had
    obtained his telephone number.  She had not met the  agent  before  and
    was therefore asked how it was she knew that he had been sent on behalf
    of her father-in-law.  Appellant A replied that the agent had asked for
    her and her mother-in-law and had told her to prepare herself, the  two
    children and her sister.  Appellant A was very happy when she heard the
    news.  It was put to her that she  would  be  leaving  her  mother  and
    mother-in-law.  Appellant A said that if  Mr  Swift  had  been  in  her
    situation, she wondered how he would feel.  In  fact,  her  mother  was
    happy that appellant A was going to a safe place.  She and her  mother-
    in-law had said they were two old ladies but they had asked appellant A
    to help them if she could.  Appellant A did  not  know  where  she  was
    supposed to be going.

37.   Asked what arrangements she had made in order to keep  in  touch  with
    her mother and mother-in-law, she said that they had no address and  no
    telephone.  Nor did she know anyone else  who  had  a  telephone  or  a
    mobile telephone.  Asked if  there  were  not  shops  where  one  could
    telephone and leave a message, appellant  A  said  that  Mr Swift  was
    looking at things from a United  Kingdom  perspective.   There  was  no
    telephone.

38.   The Somali lady appellant A had encountered in  Leeds  had  previously
    lived in Shibaz.  The lady had not told appellant A for how long.   She
    had lived about five minutes walk  from  where  appellant  A  had  been
    living.  Although it was a small district, the two had  not  previously
    known each other.  The lady had said to appellant  A  that  Shibiz  was
    deserted and the occupants had left by sea.  Appellant A  had  seen  on
    the internet that there was a lot of destruction in the area.   It  was
    put to her that an internet search revealed  that  there  was  a  Hotel
    Global in Shibaz and she  was  asked  if  it  was  true  that  all  the
    buildings there had been destroyed.  She said as far as  she  had  seen
    and heard they had been.  The Hotel Global, if it still existed,  could
    be occupied by the militia.  It transpired that  appellant  A  had,  in
    fact, been listening to Hiran Radio  over  the  internet.   Asked  what
    other attempts she had made to  contact  Somalia  since  being  in  the
    United Kingdom, she said that there were no Somalis living in the place
    that she lived.  She had, however, gone to a group  which  she  thought
    had been associated with the Red Cross and a person had come  to  visit
    her at home, who had said that efforts would be made  to  relocate  her
    mother and her mother-in-law.  She could not remember when this was but
    thought it was in 2006, some two years after she arrived in the  United
    Kingdom.  She had not tried to speak  to  anyone  in  the  organisation
    recently, notwithstanding the news that Shibiz had been destroyed.  She
    had spoken to her father-in-law by telephone at  the  end  of  Ramadan,
    several months ago.   Asked  what  news  he  had  about  his  wife  and
    appellant A's mother, she said that they would ask each other  if  they
    had obtained information.   Asked  if  the  father-in-law  had  sent  a
    message to his wife in Somalia, appellant A replied  that  he  had  not
    told her that he had received any information.  She was unaware whether
    he had tried to send any messages.  If he had any  news  to  impart  to
    appellant A, he would do so.  Appellant A then said that she had  asked
    her father-in-law and he had said that he did not have any clue.  Asked
    if her father-in-law had tried to  contact  his  son  (appellant's  A's
    husband), appellant A said whatever news he received he would give her.

39.   Re-examined, appellant A said the only assistance neighbours gave  was
    to come out of their homes once they heard the  disturbance,  by  which
    time appellant A's sister was already dead.   She  had  not  maintained
    contact with her neighbours since coming to the  United  Kingdom.   The
    lady she met in Leeds said that the whole area was deserted and no  one
    was living there any longer.  The militia had  come  after  the  family
    because they were a minority clan and could not defend themselves.

40.   In answer to a question from the Tribunal, appellant A said  that  her
    father-in-law was  divorced  from  his  former  wife  before  the  time
    appellant  A  had  left  Somalia.   In  answer  to  further  questions,
    appellant A agreed that she had previously been recorded as saying that
    she had seen her father-in-law before the civil war.  She did know  him
    before she had married her husband.  They came from the same clan.  She
    admitted  that  she  did,  accordingly,  encounter  her   father-in-law
    earlier.  Appellant  A  was  also  asked  about  discrepancies  in  her
    evidence regarding her treatment by a local person  in  Somalia,  after
    she was shot.  In her written statement she said that she  was  treated
    by traditional medicine.  However, she  had  told  her  doctor  in  the
    United Kingdom that she had been given antibiotics. Appellant A  agreed
    she had said this.  Asked about the delay in trying to find  out  about
    her mother and mother-in-law, after  appellant  A  reached  the  United
    Kingdom, she said that there were no Somalis to ask  and  she  suffered
    language difficulties.  She had not had legal help.  It was put to  her
    that she had first seen solicitors in 2004.  Appellant A said  she  did
    not think to ask them for assistance in finding her family.  She  would
    not contact her father-in-law by telephone.  She would wait for him  to
    contact her.  Asked if she had not thought fit  to  do  so  even  after
    hearing the news about Shibaz, she said that  her  father-in-law  could
    not do anything.

Expert evidence


Professor Lewis

41.   Professor I M Lewis is  Emeritus  Professor  of  Anthropology  at  the
    London  School  of  Economics.   He  has  specialised  in  the   social
    institutions of culture of the Somali people since the 1950s.   Amongst
    his publications is The Modern History of the Somalis (2002).  He is  a
    Fellow of the British Academy, an ex-chairman of the Africa Educational
    Trust and a former Director of the International African Institute.  As
    already noted, he gave evidence to the IAT in NM.

42.   Professor Lewis prepared three reports in  relation  to  appellant  S.
    In his report of 29 August 2007, Professor Lewis described interviewing
    appellant S by telephone, when he noted her strong Benadiri accent  and
    corresponding vocabulary.  He considered her to come from  the  Benadir
    coastal  region,  which  included  the  Sheikhal  Jasira,  "a  minority
    religious group  who  also  extracts  salt  from  the  sea  and  fish".
    Appellant S told Professor Lewis that her father had  been  an  Islamic
    judge  (Qadi)  working  in  Madina  at  the  time  of   Sayad   Barre's
    dictatorship.  Professor Lewis  categorised  the  father  as  "a  minor
    official with duties in matters of marriage and inheritance  and  other
    Sharia issues.  As a  religious  sheikh  he  also  taught  the  Quran".
    Professor Lewis considered that pattern of activities to be typical  of
    men belonging  to  religious  lineages  like  the  Sheikhal,  literally
    meaning those who are  sheikhs,  i.e.  professional  men  of  religion.
    Appellant S recited her family genealogy over five generations,  during
    her conversation with Professor Lewis, as well as telling him that  the
    founding ancestor was annually commemorated at  a  shrine  built  on  a
    large stone on a coastal island near  Jasira.   The  ceremony  involved
    slaughtering animals and feasting.

43.   Professor Lewis found the world depicted  here  "entirely  in  keeping
    with [appellant S's] claimed identity  as  a  member  of  the  Sheikhal
    Gesira".  He noted that she was also well versed in  the  wider  tribal
    context of her minority.   Although  Professor  Lewis  considered  that
    appellant S did not know much in detail, she did know the existence  of
    other Sheikhal groups.  At paragraph 6 of the August  report  Professor
    Lewis wrote:-

         "More generally, and without implying any common clan identity, the
         term 'Sheikhal' is used to  designated  any  lineage  of  religious
         specialists and does not mean that  those  so  designated  are  all
         members of the same clan."


44.   Professor Lewis considered that the Sheikhal were  not  an  integrated
    clan of many branches scattered throughout Somalia  but,  rather,  that
    the various Sheikhal were "different in clan terms and only similar  in
    terms of occupation: to put it more simply  they  are  an  occupational
    category and the clan setting of those  who  practise  this  occupation
    varies according to circumstances".  He stated  that  no  inference  of
    shared clan identity could be made from the fact that  some  people  of
    this occupation lived in the "guest" section of the Hawiye Herab  clan.



45.   Turning to  the  current  political  situation  in  southern  Somalia,
    Professor Lewis considered that, since the formation in 2004 of the "so-
    called transitional federal government" (TFG) led by a former guerrilla
    and war lord, Colonel Addillahi Yusuf, the situation has  "deteriorated
    spectacularly".  The  TFG  had,  according  to  Professor  Lewis,  only
    summoned the courage to enter Mogadishu with direct Ethiopian  military
    support.  This followed:-

         "a period of some  six  months  of  peace  and  civil  progress  in
         Mogadishu and southern Somalia  as  a  grass  roots  movement  (the
         "Islamic Courts"), led by Muslim  clerics,  chased  the  pernicious
         'warlords' out of the region and  established  a  brief  period  of
         tranquillity and normal life".


46.   Professor Lewis considered there to be little truth in the  accusation
    that the Islamic courts were in league with Al  Qaeda  but  when  those
    charges attracted  the  attention  of  the  USA,  the  Ethiopians  were
    encouraged to invade Somalia in support of the  unpopular  TFG.   Since
    Abdillahi  Yusuf  belonged  to  the  Darod  clan,  the  largely  Hawiye
    population of Mogadishu regarded the seizure of the  city  as  "another
    Darod invasion" on the model  of  the  previous  Darod  dictator  Sayad
    Barre.

47.   Throughout the first half of 2007,  Professor  Lewis  considered  that
    the civilian population in Mogadishu had  "steadily  melted  away"  and
    that  life  had  become  impossible  even  by  Somali  standards.   The
    insecurity which returned to Mogadishu was on  a  scale  equivalent  to
    that at the start of the civil war in 1990.  The situation  for  asylum
    seekers was, he considered, as bad as at the height of war-lord  terror
    prior to the rise of the Islamic courts.   Professor  Lewis  considered
    that it was "now hard to see how Somalia can ever recover".

48.   In his report of 21 October 2007, Professor Lewis attempted  to  bring
    his analysis of the situation in Somalia up  to  date.   He  considered
    that the latest developments indicated that "security... was even  more
    perilous than I reported  previously"  and  that  Yusuf  had  lost  all
    control of general security in Mogadishu and southern  Somalia.   Quite
    apart from this, Puntland, Yusuf's own tribal territory, had  lost  its
    cohesion as a  federal  unit  and  neighbouring  Somaliland  had  taken
    control of a disputed area on the edge of Puntland.   Such  control  as
    the TFG exercised was provided by the Ethiopian forces, who acted  with
    "extreme brutality", shooting "indiscriminately" so as to cause a  high
    level of civilian casualties.  Tensions had arisen within the TFG, with
    the Hawiye Prime Minister Gedi being accused of corruption  by  figures
    close to Yusuf.  A recent spate of murders of prominent journalists was
    widely attributed to Yusuf's personal  security  police  and,  in  mid-
    October 2007, "these goons were  employed  to  arbitrarily  arrest  the
    Somali manager of the World Food Programme in Somalia and to  hold  him
    without explanation or trial".  Roads  in  southern  Somalia  were  the
    subject of checkpoint militias,  who  would  hold  passing  traffic  to
    ransom.  Only twenty per cent of  children  in  southern  Somalia  were
    receiving food and medicine necessary for their survival.  According to
    Professor Lewis, the judgement of the UN was that there was no state in
    existence in Mogadishu or southern Somalia:  "all  we  have  are  rival
    gangsters pursuing  their  own  private  interests  un-checked  by  any
    functional government structure".

49.   Professor Lewis stated that he was not surprised  by  the  failure  of
    the TFG, a position he contrasted with that of the  British  Government
    and their European partners  who  "had  no  understanding  of  the  de-
    centralised segmented  nature  of  Somali  political  units  and  their
    inherent stability".

50    In a note dated 2 November 2007, Professor Lewis attempted  to  answer
    certain questions put to him by the solicitors for appellant S.   Asked
    how accurate it was to say that some members  of  minority  populations
    had strong positions in Somali society, Professor Lewis replied that he
    could not think of any minority person who had, at that time, a  strong
    position in such society.   The  TFG  "does  have  a  number  of  token
    minority members, but they are just that  and  membership  of  the  TFP
    (Transitional Federal Parliament) which is  a  rhetorical  organisation
    does not in any way indicate social strength".

51.   Asked how  safe  travel  would  be  to  Mogadishu  from  the  airport,
    Professor Lewis said that minority lone women "would certainly  not  be
    safe travelling to Mogadishu" because they would be prime  targets  for
    robbery and rape at roadblocks.  Any Ashraf  or  Sheikhal  Jasira  clan
    member would be "placed at the end of the queue" for shelter/housing in
    Mogadishu.  The same applied to healthcare provision, if  such  existed
    in Mogadishu.  If lucky, an Ashraf or Sheikhal Jasira clan member could
    live in an IDP camp but these were "inadequately resourced  and  unsafe
    especially for women".  A lone woman with a young child "would  be  the
    most likely to perish for lack of food and medicine and  shelter".   As
    for a lone woman found not to be  a  minority  clan  member,  Professor
    Lewis considered that it would be unsafe to return any woman and  child
    to Mogadishu unless they would be received at the  point  of  entry  by
    majority clansmen.

52.   Finally, asked about the likely effect of the  recent  resignation  of
    the Prime Minister of the TFG, Professor Lewis though that  this  would
    further destabilise the situation and he doubted whether Yusuf would be
    able to find a replacement enjoying the full support of the  Hawiye  in
    Mogadishu.

53.   In examination in chief, Professor Lewis said that the TFG was a  "so-
    called" government because it was not accepted by Somalis.  It was  the
    outcome  of  a  conference  in  Kenya.   Professor  Lewis  knew   Yusuf
    personally.  During the rule of the Union of Islamic Courts (UIC),  the
    citizens of Mogadishu had been able to  walk  around  the  city  freely
    without being robbed, assaulted or raped.  The UIC managed to  get  the
    port and airport functioning.  Professor Lewis  acknowledged,  however,
    that there were drawbacks to the UIC, since there were elements  of  it
    that practised extreme forms of religiosity.

54.    Professor  Lewis  considered  that  the   Ethiopians   in   Mogadishu
    demonstrated  extreme  brutality  by  using  heavy  armaments   against
    civilian residences, at short range.  There had also been air  strikes,
    which  might  return.   Ethiopians  were  the  traditional  enemies  of
    Somalis, who viewed the latest events as an act of war by Ethiopia.  If
    an insurgent in Mogadishu  took  action  against  the  Ethiopians,  the
    latter would start shooting at short range  into  neighbouring  houses.
    There were two kinds of insurgents, according to Professor Lewis.   The
    first category comprised local secular people who were unconnected with
    Islamists.  There were local clansmen  in  Mogadishu  who  saw  Yusuf's
    presence as Darod domination.  The  second  group  comprised  religious
    puritanical  organisations,  which   he   categorised   as   Islamists.
    President Yusuf was attempting to present all the insurgents as falling
    into the second category.  However, Professor Lewis considered that the
    majority of them fell into the first category.

55.   Asked about his comments regarding lone  women  from  majority  clans,
    Professor Lewis said that it all depended which clan was involved.   If
    the woman belonged to a locally  dominant  Hawiye  clan,  her  position
    would be much more favourable.  By contrast, the  Ashraf  and  Sheikhal
    did not bear arms and were pacifists.  They could only exist  if  their
    rights were respected.

56.   Professor Lewis believed that since the period considered by  the  IAT
    in NM, matters in Somalia had become much worse.  There  was  a  higher
    level of public insecurity and the survival chances of  minority  clans
    were worse.  Only President Yusuf  and  his  group  were  in  a  better
    position  but  even  that  was  a  precarious  one.   People  who  fled
    inevitably suffered difficult circumstances, with women liable to  rape
    and foodstuffs liable to be seized by any passing  villain.   The  seas
    off Somalia were the haunts of  pirates,  who  committed  extraordinary
    feats of brigandage, making those waters  the  most  dangerous  in  the
    world.  Hospitals in southern Somalia were overflowing and  there  were
    no working social services in Mogadishu.

57.   Asked  whether  he  still  had  the  positive  views  of  Dr  Luling's
    expertise that he has expressed to the IAT in NM, Professor Lewis  said
    he did.  Dr Luling had in his view an excellent  knowledge  of  Somalia
    and as a woman she might possess an empathy that he did not have.

58.   In answer to questions from Mr Young, Professor Lewis  said  that  the
    situation was worse than at the time of NM.  Professor  Lewis  did  not
    give his unqualified approval to the UIC, since he was critical of many
    things that they had done whilst in control of Mogadishu.  Although  he
    would be surprised if it was  now  possible  to  create  a  functioning
    system in southern Somalia, Professor Lewis said  that  he  was  not  a
    soothsayer.  To call appellant S's father a judge was, Professor  Lewis
    considered, to describe him as something much grander than he  in  fact
    was.  The father was best described  as  a  local  Islamic  magistrate.
    Professor Lewis had read Dr Luling's reports and agreed with  them.   A
    good description of a Sheikhal was a  person  of  religion  who  was  a
    pacifist by definition.   These  were  not  groups,  like  clans.   The
    terminology of clans was inappropriate  to  describe  them.   Thus,  an
    Ashraf was a holy person based on clanship with the Prophet and did not
    correspond to the system of majority clans built up on  smaller  units.
    Thus the term Sheikhal was a descriptive category, not  a  group.   The
    Benadiri were not a clan but a group of people who lived in the coastal
    region of Somalia.  Such people were to be contrasted with the  Hawiye,
    Darod and Rahanweyn clans.  The Sheikhal were neither a majority nor  a
    minority clan. They existed outside the clan system. They  used  to  be
    treated with respect and had religious functions but  had  now  totally
    lost their previous aura.

59.   Asked about Dr Luling's view that  appellant  S  displayed  a  scrappy
    knowledge of clanship, Professor Lewis said that he would not  describe
    S's knowledge in those terms.   A  woman  would  not  have  a  detailed
    knowledge of her lineage.  There would be intermarriage  between  these
    religious categories, which, Professor Lewis  re-emphasised,  were  not
    clans.  Having met appellant S at the hearing, Professor Lewis stood by
    what he said about the sound and timbre of her voice and her  range  of
    social knowledge.

60.   In answer to questions from Mr Maka, Professor  Lewis  said  that  not
    all Ashraf were light-skinned.  There were Ashraf  groups  amongst  the
    Rahanweyn and the Ashraf would have relationships with  whichever  clan
    they happened to live amongst but they would be outsiders.  The form of
    deference shown to them because of their knowledge of the Koran was  no
    longer relevant.  Professor Lewis regarded the current position of  the
    Ashraf as no better than it had been in the period  considered  in  NM.
    Mogadishu is on the brink of total anarchy and catastrophe.  The  Prime
    Minister of the TFG was a member of a  less  important  branch  of  the
    Hawiye, whose militias were in loose alliance with Islamists  and  were
    currently fighting the TFG.  The  resignation  of  the  Prime  Minister
    would cause a serious problem in that President Yusuf needed to  get  a
    major Hawiye figure into the  government  if  he  wanted  to  have  any
    "clout".

61.    Cross-examined,  Professor  Lewis  said  that  the  information  that
    appellant S had given him  corresponded  to  what  he  knew  about  the
    Sheikhal.  Asked about appellant  S's  description  of  her  "kindred,"
    Professor Lewis said that Somalis attempted to construct groups in  the
    image of majority clans and then claimed descent from certain  members,
    thereby forming links with other groups.  Professor Lewis was asked how
    Dr Luling could say that different  Sheikhal  groups  may  or  may  not
    belong to the majority population (see paragraph 103  below).   He  was
    asked whether he agreed with her apparent view that  some  such  groups
    had become fully assimilated into the majority group.  Professor  Lewis
    considered that these "guests" had not in fact been  fully  assimilated
    in the social and political senses.

62.   The passage in question in Dr Luling's  report  of  6  September  2005
    reads as follows:-

         "The other Sheikhal groups on the other hand belong to the majority
         (dark skinned) population. The Sheikhal Loboge for instance  formed
         part of the Hawiye, being adopted into  the  Herab  section;  Lewis
         says they are 'a good example of a  religious  group  or  community
         firmly assimilated to the clan of adoption' (Lewis 1998 p17).  They
         are therefore also known as Martiile "the  guests"  (Mohammed  Abdi
         Mohammed vol.II p371).  They were at one point  allied  with  Awdid
         and the Habar Gidir.  This is not the case with the Jasira and  the
         Gandershe Sheikhal.


         Hence the answer  to  the  question  whether  the  Sheikhal  are  a
         minority clan is, I believe, that some groups are and some are not.
         The Sheikhal of the area around Jasira and Gendershe  are  part  of
         the Benadiri minority.  They are recognised as such  by  the  other
         Benadiri and  often  included  in  lists  of  the  Reer  Hamar  (of
         Mogadishu) and the Benadiri of Marka.  They will be  found  in  the
         list prepared by "Somali Benadir Global Unity" (printout from their
         website attached)."


63.   Professor Lewis said that the Martiile were tame priests  and  he  did
    not consider that they could draw on protection from the majority  clan
    in the fullest sense.  Asked if he had changed his mind, compared  with
    what he was quoted as saying in 1998,  Professor  Lewis  said  that  Dr
    Luling's source was based on Italian information, whereas he had  based
    his observations on field work.  He had been using an  Italian  source,
    in the passage that Dr Luling had quoted.   Professor  Lewis  had  not,
    however, researched the Martiile himself.

64.   Professor Lewis was asked about the information in  his  first  report
    and how much  of  this  was  interpolation  of  his  own,  rather  than
    information which appellant S had volunteered to him.  He replied  that
    appellant S had volunteered information regarding the  Aw  Qutub  as  a
    kindred group of the Sheikhal.  Asked  about  the  Hwebjire,  Professor
    Lewis said that appellant S knew that they lived  in  the  North  West.
    Appellant S knew about the Walamogge but the information in paragraph 6
    of Professor Lewis's first report regarding the lineage of  this  group
    was his own interpolation.

65.   Professor Lewis was asked what sources he had used in  describing  the
    current political situation in southern Somalia (paragraphs 9 et  seq).
    He said that it was partly an  analysis  of  information  available  on
    Somali websites and the  Somali  press.   He  described  the  sites  as
    Welcome Benadet and Hurain.  He  also  discussed  matters  with  Somali
    colleagues and friends in London and the USA.  Professor Lewis was also
    asked about the sources for the statements contained in his  report  of
    21 October.  He said they were  websites  and  also  general  knowledge
    amongst Somalis in London.

66.   All the Somalis with whom Professor Lewis had contact  in  the  United
    Kingdom had their own direct contacts in southern Somalia.  The  arrest
    of the manager of the World Food Programme was confirmed by UN sources.
    The sources of the answers given in the note of 21 October and  in  the
    note of  2  November  were,  again,  websites  and  conversations  with
    Somalis.

67.   Asked if he had read the three-monthly UN Secretary General's  reports
    on Somalia and whether they were broadly accurate, Professor Lewis said
    that he had generally a very negative  view  of  the  UN's  actions  in
    Somalia, especially in relation to humanitarian matters.  He considered
    the information emanating form the UN Humanitarian Co-ordinator  to  be
    better than that that in the Secretary General's reports.  Asked how he
    could decide which was better, when he himself had not been in the area
    in recent years, Professor Lewis said that he knew President Yusuf  and
    his representative in the United Kingdom and he  tried  to  come  to  a
    realistic view of what the situation  actually  was.   The  President's
    representative  had  spoken  to  Professor  Lewis  the  previous  week.
    Professor Lewis  also  spoke  to  Somalis  who  were  constantly  going
    backwards and forwards to and from southern Somalia.   Professor  Lewis
    knew how the TFG had been put together and how  those  responsible  for
    its formation had gone out looking  for  warlords  like  Major  General
    Mogan,  whom  Professor  Lewis  described  as  a   "dreadful   person".
    Professor Lewis disagreed with the  United  Nations  and  the  European
    Union's policy to establish the TFG.  He considered that, as a  result,
    the UN's report on Somalia lacked objectivity.  Asked why he should  be
    regarded as any more objective, Professor Lewis said that  the  British
    did not have  anyone  in  Somalia  and  the  UN  were  often  similarly
    uninformed.  Their representative in Somalia spent most of his time  in
    Nairobi and UN reports on the country were,  he  considered,  sometimes
    poorly informed.

68.   Asked about  the  Border  and  Immigration  Agency  (BIA)  reports  on
    Somalia (R3, pages 1119 et seq), where the methodology (page 1121)  was
    described as involving a mission team based in Nairobi holding meetings
    with individuals and  organisations  with  detailed  knowledge  of  the
    position on the ground in Mogadishu and central and  southern  Somalia,
    Professor Lewis said this represented the usual  situation.   Professor
    Lewis had not read the BIA report of May 2007 on Somalia and  had  only
    recently come to know of its existence.  Some  of  those  described  as
    being consulted might, Professor Lewis thought, be quite acceptable but
    he did not know who had done the interviewing.  Professor Lewis had not
    read any of the  Foreign  and  Commonwealth  Office  reports  regarding
    Somalia in preparation for the hearing.  He did not necessarily  regard
    people as lacking knowledge if they  happened  to  disagree  with  him,
    provided that  those  people  possessed  the  necessary  methodological
    knowledge.  Professor Lewis did not, for example, always agree with  Dr
    Luling.

69.   Professor Lewis had known President Yusuf since the early 1970s,  when
    the latter was a Divisional Commander.   Sometimes  Yusuf  would  visit
    Professor Lewis in London.  He could not remember the last  such  visit
    but thought it must have been in 1996.  He had not see Yusuf since.

70.   Professor Lewis was asked about the BIA's COIS report on  Somalia  (12
    November 2007) (R1, pages 1 to 154).  Professor Lewis was not aware  of
    this document.  Having looked at paragraph 3.06,  he  agreed  with  the
    summary recorded there of the  UN  Secretary  General's  report  of  28
    February 2007, concerning the removal from power  between  24  December
    2006 and early January 2007 of the Union of Islamic  Courts.   Remnants
    of the UIC were there said to have been pursued in southern Somalia  by
    the TFG and Ethiopian forces.  Commenting on  a  passage  in  the  same
    paragraph, concerning an  attack  on  Villa  Somalia  (the  President's
    official Mogadishu residence) on 9 January 2007, Professor  Lewis  said
    that this and other incidents described in the paragraph were terrorist-
    style attacks, in response  to  what  he  described  as  the  Ethiopian
    invasion.

71.   Professor Lewis  was  asked  about  the  testimony  given  to  the  UN
    Congress Sub-Committee on African Affairs on 6 February 2007 by Dr  Ken
    Menkhaus, Professor of Political Science at Davidson College (A1,  page
    256).  Professor Lewis said  he  knew  Dr  Menkhaus.   Professor  Lewis
    "roughly agreed" with Dr Menkhaus's analysis that:-

         "Ironically, the end result of the seismic changes of  2006  is  to
         some extent a return to the status quo  ante  bellum.   Somalia  in
         early 2007 looks very much like Somalia of 2005, featuring  a  weak
         and unpopular TFG facing  resistance  from  a  loose  coalition  of
         clans, Islamists, and other interests in Mogadishu, in a context of
         de facto state collapse".

72.   Nor did Professor Lewis dissent from  what  was  recorded  in  the  UN
    Secretary General's report of 25 June 2007 (R1,  page  258)  concerning
    the situation in Mogadishu:-

    "12.    The  Transitional  Federal  Government,  with  the  support  of
         Ethiopian forces,  launched  operations  to  disarm  insurgents  in
         Mogadishu on 21 March.  However, this was met with stiff resistance
         from remnants of the Union of Islamic Courts  and  militiamen  from
         the various sub-clans of Mogadishu's Hawiye clan.   Heavy  fighting
         ensued and lasted until 27 April,  when  government  and  Ethiopian
         troops captured insurgent strongholds in  North  Mogadishu.   Heavy
         weapons were used and large numbers of  casualties  occurred  as  a
         result of the hostilities. The month-long fighting in Mogadishu was
         unusually fierce, also involving heavy  weapons.   The  death  toll
         numbered in the hundreds, including many  civilians.   Hundreds  of
         thousands of residents were displaced and Mogadishu's few hospitals
         were overwhelmed with the injured, as were the hospitals in  nearby
         towns.   In late April the government claimed a  victory  over  the
         insurgents in Mogadishu and invited displaced residents to  return,
         indicating that military operations had then ended.  For the  first
         time since their arrival in March,  troops  of  the  African  Union
         Mission  in  Somalia  (Amisom)  began  patrolling  the  streets  of
         Mogadishu and provided medical assistance to those injured  in  the
         hostilities".


73.   Professor Lewis also accepted what was said at  paragraph  62  of  the
    same report:-

    "62.   Allegations have been made  that  serious  violations  of  human
         rights and international humanitarian law  took  place  during  the
         last few months of serious fighting.  Non-military targets, such as
         hospitals and schools, had been attacked.   It  was  also  reported
         that some of the wounded  were  prevented  from  receiving  medical
         treatment and protection and that urgent  deliveries  of  food  aid
         were hampered or blocked.   Whilst  there  is  no  independent  and
         official  account,  local  human  rights  organisations  based   in
         Mogadishu report that over 1,000  civilians  were  killed  in  this
         period, several thousand people were injured and sixty  percent  of
         the dead and wounded were elderly, women  and  children.   A  joint
         statement made on 28 April  by  twelve  mandate-holders  expressing
         deep concern at the latest round of fierce  fighting  in  Mogadishu
         was welcomed by many local actors and drew  the  attention  of  the
         media  and  the  international  community  to  human   rights   and
         humanitarian issues".


    Professor Lewis also either accepted or did not dissent from  what  was
    said in the BIA's report of the Information Gathering Mission of  27-30
    April 2007 (17 May 2007 (R3, page 1119):-


    "3.02  The source [a UN security officer] said that there had  been  no
         fighting since 26 April.  The  recent  fighting  had  taken  place
         inside Mogadishu, but there had been mortar attacks on the  airport
         and there had also been roadside bombs and suicide attacks  on  the
         road between Mogadishu and Afgoye.


            ........


    4.01   The source [a security advisor to  NGOs  operating  in  Somalia]
         explained that the function of  his  organisation  was  to  provide
         advice to about 200 NGOs on safety and security in  Somalia.   When
         asked about the current situation in Mogadishu, he said it is quiet
         at the moment.  It is "Mogadishu quiet", which means that there are
         still occasional gunshots or roadside  bombs.   He  said  that  the
         recent spell of fighting  has  finished,  and  the  anti-government
         elements have been dispersed.  But although the  opposition  forces
         have been dealt a very serious blow, they have not  been  defeated;
         they would regroup and continue using "terrorist-style" tactics.


            ........


    6.01   The source [a Senior Advisor on Somalia to a Western  Government
         (not UK)] said that with the exception of  Kismayo,  fighting   was
         confined to Mogadishu.  He considered that it was not  possible  at
         the time we spoke to say which parts of Mogadishu were or were  not
         safe.  The territorial battle is now largely over, with the TFG and
         Ethiopians controlling strategic points in the city  although  they
         do not exert day to day control over individual neighbourhoods  and
         there have been widespread reports of  looting  and  violent  crime
         across the city.  The source did  not  think  there  had  been  any
         disarmament since the fighting stopped. Around 1/4 to  1/3  of  the
         city was badly damaged or destroyed by shelling or bombing; much of
         the area long the industrial  road  was  reduced  to  rubble.   The
         government gave broadly accurate warnings  to  civilians  to  leave
         certain areas of the city  to  avoid  the  violence,  although  the
         source was in no doubt that  bombardment  within  these  areas  was
         indiscriminate.


    6.02.  The likelihood is that Mogadishu will remain relatively peaceful
         now for a  short  period  while  everyone  takes  stock,  but  that
         fighting may resume in the near future.  If so, the next  phase  is
         likely to be "asymmetrical warfare", similar to that of January and
         February 2007, characterised by increased  use  of  terrorist-style
         attacks.  Although much of the population  of  Mogadishu  had  been
         prepared to give the TFG 'the benefit of the doubt', recent actions
         by Ethiopian and  TFG forces are likely to leave a legacy of  fear,
         anger and resentment."


74.   Professor Lewis concurred that by the end of  April  2007  the  fierce
    fighting had come to an end and that the situation was relatively quiet
    until the holding of the National Reconciliation Conference.  Professor
    Lewis said that he was the ex-Chairman of the African Educational Trust
    and as such received reports from people on the  ground  in  Mogadishu.
    The last such report had come about a week before the hearing  from  an
    NGO in Mogadishu.  Professor Lewis was referred to  the  25  June  2007
    report of the UN Secretary General, who said:-

    "53.   According to the Office of the United Nations High  Commissioner
         for Refugees (UNHCR), as of mid-May [2007] some 90,000  people  had
         returned to Mogadishu.  However, specific protection concerns  have
         arisen as returnees have reportedly been prevented  from  returning
         to their homes. Tension is also rising over the fate of some public
         buildings that until recently were  occupied  by  urban  internally
         displaced persons and are now being  claimed  by  the  Transitional
         Federal  Government  without  providing  the  necessary   displaced
         persons  with   an   alternative   durable   solution   for   their
         resettlement" (R1, page 268).


75.   Professor Lewis accepted that  some  90,000  people  had  returned  to
    Mogadishu, as  described,  but  said  that  they  had  all  left  again
    subsequently.  The latest (7 November 2007) report of the UN  Secretary
    General (R4, page 1588A) had not been read by Professor Lewis, although
    he had seen what he described as a synopsis.  Professor Lewis  accepted
    that between April and June 2007 there had been a  period  of  relative
    quiet.  There had then been an increase in violence in  early  July  in
    advance of the National Reconciliation Conference.  He  said,  however,
    that there had been even more violence after that conference.

76.   Professor Lewis was asked about the BIA's report of the  Fact  Finding
    Mission of 11-15 June 2007 to Somalia (20 July 2007)  (R2,  page  594).
    He said he had not read this report.  He had,  however,  no  reason  to
    doubt what was said at paragraphs 4.01 to 4.09, regarding the  security
    situation in Mogadishu:

    "4.01   A journalist from an international news agency stressed to  the
         delegation  that  Mogadishu  is  in  effect  'the  centre  of   the
         [security] problem' as it is the city  in  which  the  majority  of
         fighting had taken place and where the TFG continues to  focus  its
         efforts.  He stressed that the current  conflict  (post  the  heavy
         fighting during March-April  2007)  is  the  worst  time  that  the
         country has faced for sixteen years.  This  is  due  to  the  sheer
         volume of hostility and  mistrust  among  officials  and  civilians
         alike.


    4.02    Seven sources stressed the unpredictability and  volatility  of
         the security situation in Mogadishu.  Three sources explained  that
         north of the city is more dangerous than other parts of  Mogadishu.
         A relevant department of the UN stated that although the  north  of
         the city is more volatile and dangerous than  the  south,  in  both
         areas a degree of relative normality has returned, more so  in  the
         south, but even in the areas in the north which are most  unstable.
         An executive of an internationally recognised NGO said further that
         the north was disrupted by TFG cordoning-off  and  house  to  house
         searches; however this has not occurred in the  southern  parts  of
         the city.  One source explained that most of the fighting has taken
         place  around  Thirtieth  Street  (the  main  road  in  Mogadishu),
         particularly north of the street and central  areas  to  it.   When
         asked what the situation was like on this street  the  source  said
         that the road is very hostile, with few people residing  there  and
         with little still functioning. The source  explained  that  he  had
         recently been in Mogadishu and travelled through this area  at  his
         own will.  He did not encounter any hostilities towards him.  OCHA,
         in its situation report dated 6 July  2007,  noted  that  house  to
         house weapon search  operations  have  intensified  since  4  July,
         coinciding with the increased security incidents.


    4.03    Six sources agreed that most of the violence in  Mogadishu  has
         become more sophisticated and more political in  nature,  precisely
         targeting TFG and Ethiopian forces, high profile political targets,
         law enforcement agencies,  Ethiopian  troops  and  occasionally  at
         African Union forces.  On 11  July  2007,  Shabelle  Media  Network
         reported that the Bondhere District  Commissioner  was  wounded  in
         Mogadishu after unknown gunmen shot him on his way home from  work.
         An  embassy  official  added  UN  staff  and  their  personnel  and
         westerners,  specifically  white  people,  to  the  above  list  of
         possible targets.  However, this contrasted  with  the  information
         provided by one source who  claimed  that  the  TFG  and  Ethiopian
         troops were attacking anyone  and  any  visible  target  that  they
         perceived to be a threat to them.   He  told  the  delegation  that
         'anyone who is remotely perceived to be anti-TFG, and anyone who is
         perceived to be Arabic, anyone who is perceived  to  be  a  radical
         Islamist (to give just three examples), are targets'.


    4.04    Three sources stress that there were virtually always  civilian
         casualties either from the insurgent blast itself or  from  gunfire
         and  retaliatory  action  by  the  targeted  forces.   A   relevant
         department of the UN explained that the  rate  of  such  incidents,
         except in roadside and suicide bombs, has remained  broadly  steady
         since the TFG announced victory on 26 April 2007.  ...


    4.05    An advisor to an  EU  institution  explained  that  Shabaad  is
         damaged but has become more targeted in  its  attacks.   There  are
         suicide bombers, and more being trained.  A relevant department  of
         the UN stressed that the insurgents are now making a comeback  with
         almost daily attacks in the city.  Terrorism Focus, in  its  weekly
         journal dated June 19 2007, noted that  'The  recently  established
         Mujahideen Youth Movement has emerged as the most  potent  military
         group [in Somalia].' The group emerged in April  claiming  to  have
         attempted to  assassinate  two  prominent  Somali  officials.   The
         report  also  claims  that  the  Mujahideen  youth  movement   were
         responsible for the attack on Prime Minister Ghedi on June 3  2007.




    4.06.   A relevant department of the UN claimed that clan militias were
         now regrouping around powerful individuals or  factions  and  that:
         'most clans had some network in operation in Mogadishu, though most
         people were now playing on personal rather than clan  connections'.
          There is also evidence  that  the  armed  opposition  groups  both
         inside and outside Somalia are 'coalescing'.   This  could  greatly
         increase the resources available to  the  armed  opposition  groups
         operating in Somalia, although there is also a suggestion that  the
         Shabaab have signalled frictions with exiled opposition groups.


    4.07    However an internationally recognised NGO claimed that violence
         had reduced to 'Mogadishu normal' and the group  thought  that  the
         Ethiopians' more powerful weaponry was responsible for the previous
         higher level of violence.  An adviser to an EU  institution  stated
         that the streets felt 'quite safer' inasmuch as there was  a  large
         military presence.


    4.08    A relevant department of the UN explained that since the  TFG's
         raid on Bakhara Market in  early  June,  which  hitherto  had  been
         traditionally held as a key neutral point,  where  all  clans  were
         able to  trade  and  give  protection  to  trade,  there  has  been
         disagreements (sic) along clan lines.  Since then the  Bakhara  has
         also become a target of  grenade  attacks  by  alleged  insurgents.
         Shabelle Media Network reported an attack on Bakhara  market  which
         took place on 11 July 2007.  The  attack  was  targeted  at  Somali
         Police in the area, however three civilians  were  wounded  in  the
         blast.


    4.09    A journalist from an international news agency  summed  up  the
         current security situation as a vicious circle because  every  time
         the TFG managed to effect some level of peace  and  security,  this
         peace spurred the insurgents to attack as it is their aim to  prove
         to the wider world that Mogadishu is not safe/controlled  and  that
         the TFG is ineffective with no support fro Somali citizens."


77.   Professor Lewis also accepted what was said at paragraph 4.17:-

    "4.17  One source detailed that many Somalis considered  that  the  TFG
         had done 'a good job in cleansing the city' and there  was  a  hope
         that this would have an effect outside the  city.   However,  there
         were conflicting reports as to whether the TFG  has  been  able  to
         effect disarmament.  One source said  that  there  are  no  weapons
         apparent on the street as most  had  been  hidden,  another  source
         detailed that there were 'few visible weapons' on the  streets  and
         another that 'there was no  formal  ban  on  carrying  weapons  and
         disarmament attempts were ineffective'.  One source said  that  the
         government is trying to take away people's weapons but the  problem
         is that  Somalis 'do not know who has the guns any more'.


78.   Professor Lewis was also referred to the following passages  from  the
    same report:-

    "Checkpoints


    4.27   An advisor to an EU institution told the delegation that the six
         main checkpoints in Mogadishu were  not  permanently  operated  but
         rather utilised in periods of high tension.  A journalist  from  an
         international news agency explained that the TFG have  cleared  the
         city of all checkpoints that are not Ethiopian/TFG, with the effect
         of enforcing a 'general' level of security in  a  period  of  great
         insecurity.  He explained that the number  of  checkpoints  in  the
         city can be an indicator as to the level of hostilities at any  one
         time, i.e. when it is feared that there are an increased number  of
         insurgents, there will be an increased number of  checkpoints  with
         the aim of regaining some  form  of  control  over  the  city.   An
         example is in 2004, when there was a high level of  uncertainty  in
         Somalia, and there were a reported 54 checkpoints from Mogadishu to
         Afgoye.


      .....


    Security Situation - Ordinary Somalis and Returnees


    4.28   The  fact-finding  team  received  semi-conflicting  information
         regarding the security situation for ordinary Somalis.  One  source
         told  the  delegation  that  although  the  security  situation  in
         Mogadishu is unpredictable, it is rare for an ordinary Somali to be
         randomly targeted in the shooting.  A Somali researcher said in his
         opinion, except for attacks on TFG and associated forces,  and  the
         often over-zealous retaliatory action on the part of those  forces,
         in which civilians are  often  victims  of  cross-fire,  levels  of
         violence in Mogadishu are currently fairly low.  But there is still
         general insecurity and high levels of crime, so although people can
         and do move around, on the whole they tend to stay  in  their  home
         area.  An NGO working in Somalia claimed that  there  is  also  the
         risk of arrest to ordinary Somalis as after a  suspected  insurgent
         attack, the security forces would arrest anybody  near  the  scene,
         and also arrest ordinary citizens for extortion purposes  as  well,
         with random demands sent by phone.  A native Somali researcher told
         the fact-finding team that 'if you are  not  from  the  Abgal  (the
         Prime Minister's sub-clan) or from the  Magerten  (the  President's
         sub-clan) then you are not immune from TFG attacks, and then if you
         are in any way associated with the TFG, you  are  also  not  immune
         from the insurgent attacks'.


      ......


    5.08   Within Mogadishu itself, the north of the city is more  volatile
         and dangerous than the  south,  but  in  both  cases  a  degree  of
         relative normality has returned, more so in the south, but even  in
         the areas in the north which are most unstable.  There are security
         incidents in Mogadishu every day but these are  precisely  targeted
         at government forces or suspected insurgents.  However,  this  does
         mean there is some risk to civilians either in the original  attack
         or in retaliatory action.  The rate of  such  incidents,  excepting
         roadside and suicide bombs, has remained broadly steady  since  the
         TFG announced victory on 26 April 2007.


    5.09   There has been a  'remarkable  reduction  in  checkpoints,  with
         fewer bandit checkpoints, and less interest  in  clan  affiliation.
         Only occasional TFG/Ethiopian checkpoints exist, typically only one
         on a long road.  When asked about why ordinary Somalis would not be
         targeted, the source explained that it is  a  politically  targeted
         risk now, not aimed at ordinary Somalis.  The distribution of clans
         throughout Mogadishu is more or less the same as  it  was  4  to  5
         years ago'."


79.    Professor  Lewis  accepted  that  the  methodology  set  out  at  the
    beginning of this report had been followed.   He  was  aware  that  the
    material in question was on the internet but said that he had no reason
    why he had not happened to read it.

80.   Professor Lewis said that he had not seen a letter from  Ben  Lyon  of
    the Foreign and Commonwealth Office of 12 November 2007 (R2, page 1096)
    entitled "Past and Current Levels of Armed  Violence  in  Somalia".  He
    accepted, however, what  it  said  regarding  the  latest  violence  of
    October/November 2007:-

         "The latest ongoing violence of October/November 2007  is  held  by
         published  news  sources  as  the  worst  violence  since  December
         2006/January 2007. In  the  period  2-11  October,  reports  allege
         incidences of violence including: the death of  one  individual  in
         the  fire  following  reported  violence  between  government   and
         insurgent forces on 3 October in Bakhara Market, Mogadishu; and the
         murder of a Somali General and two other women by insurgents  on  6
         October in Mogadishu;  attacks  by  insurgents  against  government
         targets on 8 October in Mogadishu resulting in the  death  of  over
         four officials and a car bomb  incident  on  11  October  when  two
         Ethiopian soldiers were  killed  in  Baidoa  by  insurgents.   News
         sources  suggest  that  Regional  Administrators  are  particularly
         targeted for assassination by insurgents, no group of insurgents is
         identifiable.  It is impossible to corroborate these reports."


81.   Professor Lewis thought that he had seen  the  United  Nations  Office
    for the Co-ordination  of  Humanitarian  Affairs  Situation  report  on
    Somalia of 2 November 2007 (R2, page 1104) but in  any  event  accepted
    that:-


          "Nearly 90,000 Mogadishu residents fled during  the  past  weekend
         following the most intense fighting in months. The  United  Nations
         High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and local partners  indicate
         that a huge wave of  more than 70,000 people left  the  capital  in
         the three-day period between 27 to 29 October, whilst  some  17,000
         are estimated to be displaced within the  city.   The  movement  of
         people was also triggered by an announcement advising those  living
         in districts surrounding Bakhara Market to vacate the area  due  to
         security operations.  In addition to causing fear and  panic  among
         the city residents, the busiest market in Somalia  was  essentially
         closed between 26-30 October, cutting off access to livelihoods and
         basic necessities.  Currently, Bakhara  is  open  and  business  is
         gradually picking up."

82.   Returning to the UN Secretary General's  report  of  7  November  2007
    (R4, page 1588a),  Professor Lewis was asked  whether  he  agreed  with
    what was said in paragraph 15, that most  attacks  involved  insurgents
    targeting the TFG forces and Ethiopian military and that (at  paragraph
    18) most checkpoints were now being manned by  militias  loyal  to  the
    TFG.  Limited progress was said (paragraph 17) to have been made by the
    TFG and Ethiopians in securing Mogadishu.  At paragraph  20,  reference
    was made to the TFG forces and Ethiopian groups having "at times opened
    fire indiscriminately, causing many civilian  causalities."   Professor
    Lewis said that all this painted the same  picture  as  he  would  have
    painted although in a much more  detailed  manner.   He  accepted  that
    attacks were targeted and that there were now  fewer  of  them,  albeit
    that they were more serious.  It was put to Professor  Lewis  that  the
    reference to the TFG/Ethiopian response being at  times  indiscriminate
    was different from the evidence he had given.  Professor  Lewis  denied
    that.  He had not meant to suggest that the TFG/Ethiopian forces always
    responded indiscriminately.

83.   The attention of Professor Lewis was drawn  to  the  passages  in  the
    report regarding the resignation of the Prime Minister:-

    "13.   On 29 October, Prime Minister  Gedi  tendered  his  resignation,
         which was accepted by President Yusuf.  Deputy Prime Minister Salim
         Aliyo  Ibrow  was   appointed   acting   Prime   Minister   pending
         parliament's election of a permanent replacement.  President  Yusuf
         has since initiated consultations with clans and political  leaders
         to appoint a new Prime Minister".




84.  And, later:

      "I [the Secretary General]  welcome  the  amiable  resolution  of  the
       divisions between President Yusuf and Prime Minister  Gedi  and  the
       consolatory spirit of the statements issued by both on the  latter's
       resignation.  I call upon the  Transitional  Federal  Government  to
       continue to seek peaceful solutions to its internal  differences  so
       as to focus its efforts on national reconciliation".


85.   Professor Lewis did not consider that the matter had in  reality  been
    handled in such a manner.  The Prime  Minister's  position  had  become
    intolerable.  Website  reports  from  people  in  Mogadishu  painted  a
    different  picture,  involving  animosity   between   the   individuals
    concerned and their respective clans.  Professor Lewis reiterated  that
    in his opinion the establishment of  the  TFG  had  been  fundamentally
    flawed.

86.   Re-examined by Mr Collins, Professor Lewis said  that  he  examined  a
    range of websites but two in particular were used by him.  He also  saw
    monthly reports from a small grouping of NGO's  in  Mogadishu,  through
    the Africa Educational Trust.  He in addition  examined  material  from
    Somali social scientists.   He could not be sure that any of  this  was
    accurate but he examined it with the benefit of his career as a  social
    anthropologist.  He had read some of the materials produced by the Home
    Office but not systematically.  He had, however, examined  comments  on
    those materials that had appeared on Somali websites and to working  on
    cases involving Somali asylum seekers. His contacts  with  people  from
    Mogadishu involved the telephone and speaking to people who had been to
    that city and returned.

87.   Professor Lewis considered that the security  situation  in  Mogadishu
    was deteriorating, highlighting a severe problem  with  something  that
    called itself a government but could not carry  out  the  functions  of
    government.  Professor Lewis said the range of his contacts had widened
    since he gave evidence to the Tribunal in NM.

88.   Re-examined by Mr Maka, Professor Lewis  said  that  the  websites  he
    examined were in English and Somali.  He spoke standard Somali.   Asked
    about paragraph 18 of the latest UN  Secretary  General's  report  (R4,
    page 1588D), Professor Lewis said that he did not, in fact, accept as a
    comprehensive statement the claim that most checkpoints were now manned
    by militias loyal to the TFG.  Referred to  page  43  of  the  material
    submitted on behalf of appellant A, where  is  set  out  the  BBC  News
    reports in which Somalis describe their lives in and  around  Mogadishu
    and the comment of one such person that there were a  large  number  of
    checkpoints, at which people would be compelled to part with money  and
    other possessions, Professor Lewis said that he was  not  surprised  by
    any of this.

89.   In answer to questions by the Tribunal, Professor Lewis said that  the
    Somalis to whom he spoke in the United Kingdom, and  who  travelled  to
    and from Mogadishu,  included  persons  involved  with  NGOs  and  also
    journalists.  He knew their clan affiliations in most cases,  but  only
    to the level of generality of them being Darod or Hawiye.  He was  also
    in touch with people who travel to and from Somaliland.   The  websites
    that he consulted were run by Somali diaspora  having  close  links  to
    their respective clans.  Every major Somali clan had its  own  website.
    The two which Professor Lewis most commonly consulted were run  by  the
    Hawiye and the Benadiri/Reer Hamar respectively.  Members of the Somali
    diaspora would remit money to fellow clan members  in  Somalia.   There
    was no great understanding or sympathy between different clans  amongst
    the diaspora.  The NGOs with which Professor Lewis was  in  touch  were
    not entirely run along clan lines.   They  had  been  able  to  operate
    during 2007, albeit with varying levels of success.  All were, however,
    still "in business".

90.   Professor Lewis said that the rise of the UIC had been unexpected,  so
    far as he was concerned.  The UIC comprised a  mixture  of  radicalised
    Islamists and humble sheikhs.  The majority of the UIC comprised sheikh
    groups, whilst a minority had much more extreme views.  The latter  had
    unnecessarily antagonised Ethiopia.  Professor  Lewis  considered  that
    the intelligence information available to the USA about the UIC had  to
    a degree been misinformed.  US  intelligence  relied  excessively  upon
    technology.

91.   Professor Lewis considered that  it  was  possible  the  UIC  had  not
    discriminated against people along clan lines  whilst  they  controlled
    Mogadishu and that they continued not to do so now that  they  were  in
    the position of being insurgents.  The Ashraf would, he considered,  be
    afforded a measure or protection if they were involved with a  majority
    clan but that  majority  would,  at  present,  he  considered  be  more
    interested in their own future and less likely to provide "charity" for
    minority groups.

92.   Asked if it was safe to return a lone woman to Somalia who was  not  a
    minority clan member, Professor Lewis said that it was unsafe to return
    any woman and child unless they would be received at the point of entry
    by majority clansmen.  Given, however, that many  people  had  recently
    fled Mogadishu, there would not necessarily be time  to  organise  such
    protection. The position might be otherwise where the  person  able  to
    afford protection was a close relative  of  the  returnee.   A  distant
    fellow clansman would, however, be disinclined to offer  protection  to
    the returnee.  The current level of violence was at a comparable  level
    to that in the early 1990s, during the civil war.

93.   Professor  Lewis  said  that  he  had  not  been  to  Mogadishu  since
    1990/1991 although he had been to Somaliland.  Under the Barre  regime,
    Mogadishu had been a peaceful  city,  possibly  the  most  tranquil  in
    Africa.

94.   In further examination by  Counsel,  in  response  to  the  Tribunal's
    questions, Professor Lewis was asked about his  comment  regarding  the
    NGOs having varying degrees of success.  Some were  trying  to  provide
    schools in Mogadishu and some medical help and famine relief.  None  of
    this was on a very grandiose scale.  The NGOs had been present  all  of
    the time, albeit that the degree of security in Mogadishu had waxed and
    waned.  The  UIC  were  all  Sunni  Muslims.   The  minority  who  were
    interested in jihad were connected with "outfits"  that  originated  in
    Saudi Arabia, which was the main source of the most subversive elements
    in Islam.

Evidence of Dr Luling


95.    Dr Luling holds a PhD in Social Anthropology from London  University,
    her principal field of study being southern Somalia; in particular, the
    Afgooye near Mogadishu, where she did  her  initial  fieldwork  in  the
    1960s.  Further visits to Somalia took place in 1980, 1986, 1989,  1996
    and 2001.  Dr Luling remains in touch with people in Somalia as well as
    having "many Somali friends in the UK".

96.   Dr Luling produced four reports in respect  of  appellant  S.  In  her
    first report of 6 September 2005, Dr Luling described her  face-to-face
    interview with appellant S on 30 August 2005 when, although  Dr  Luling
    spoke Somali "fairly well," the interview  was  undertaken  through  an
    interpreter.  The two questions  which  Dr  Luling  addressed  in  that
    report were whether appellant S came  from  Jasira  near  Mogadishu  or
    possibly from outside Somalia, in one of the diaspora communities;  and
    whether appellant S belonged to the Sheikhal Jasira clan.

97.   As to nationality, Dr Luling was sure that appellant S  was  a  Somali
    national because of her "accurate account of the village or small  town
    of Jasira" and her dialect.  She said that Jasira was a  small  village
    by the sea just south of Mogadishu; that the  people  there  made  salt
    from sea water; that they were fishermen; that there was little  or  no
    cultivation; and that the tomb of the local saint was cut off  at  high
    tide.  All of this Dr Luling confirmed as  accurate.   Dr  Luling  then
    said:-

      "I do not think [it] likely that she is a  Somali  from  the  diaspora
         who has learnt this;
         I believe she is from Jasira as she says."


98.   As to clan, the first reason given  by  Dr  Luling  for  stating  that
    appellant S was in  her  view  a  Sheikhal  Jasira  was  appellant  S's
    knowledge of the village:

         "The Sheikhal are the main inhabitants of this small place, so that
         is prima facie evidence that she is Sheikhal."


99.   Dr Luling also referred to appellant S's knowledge  of  the  Sheikhal,
    which was "scrappy but accurate".  The  scrappiness  could,  Dr  Luling
    considered, be excused by the fact that appellant S was a  young  woman
    rather than a tribal elder and that she  grew  up  in  troubled  times.
    Appellant S also told Dr Luling that "she came from the lighter-skinned
    Sheikhal.  The other similar group was the Sheikhal of  Gandershe,  who
    live near Marka.  This is correct".   Appellant  S  had  heard  of  the
    Sheikhal Loboge but did not know where they lived.  She  did  not  know
    the origin of the Sheikhal Jasira and said that  their  sub-clans  were
    Reer Ba Hassan, Reer Hassan, Reer Maad and Reer Haji.  Dr  Luling  said
    that this was "nearly right, according to my other informants: in  fact
    the  first  sub-sub  clan  is  Reer  Qasim  while  'Ba  Hassan'  is  an
    alternative name for the whole sub-clan".

100.  Appellant S was able to tell Dr Luling that about  the  Badgal  -  the
    ritual of entering the sea  -  and  the  annual  commemoration  of  the
    ancestor known as Aw Hassan.  As to dialect:-

         "As far as I could tell, she was speaking in the Af Hamar  dialect.
         I have not been able to verify this with a native  speaker  of  the
         dialect, because of pressure of time."


101.  In Dr Luling's second report of 6 September  2005,  Dr  Luling  placed
    the Sheikhal Jasira within the group of minorities  that  fall  outside
    the Somali system of clans and  sub-clans,  all  of  whom  trace  their
    descent from a single, fabled ancestor, Hiil.   Relations  between  the
    clans and the minority groups had in the past ranged from  alliance  to
    distrust or contempt by the majority for the minorities:

         "The most relevant minority in this context are the group of people
         who have become known as "Benadiri", as they live (or used to live)
         along the "Benadir" coast from Mogadishu to Brava and in the inland
         towns from Afgoye along the Shabelle river.  They are  partly  Arab
         and Persian descent, going back to the 11th century; this  accounts
         for their complexion, which is typically much lighter than that  of
         the majority Somalia. (However it is not safe to rely on  this  for
         identification, as there are exceptions both  ways  and  plenty  of
         people who from their appearance could be either).  Unlike the most
         of the  Somali  (sic)  they  were  never  nomadic  pastoralists  or
         warriors, but were a peaceful trading community".


102.  As a result of harassment since the civil war,  Dr  Luling  considered
    that "most of" the Benadiri  "have  fled  the  country,  to  Kenya  and
    elsewhere.  Some however still remain in the  cities,  often  living  a
    semi-clandestine existence under the protection of Hawiye families".

103.  So far as the Sheikhal were concerned, Dr Luling found that they  were
    "very badly documented" and that most of her information about them had
    come from a member of the Sheikhal Gandershe, who was now an accountant
    living in London:

         "The Sheikhal of Jasira and Gandershe are ethnically distinct  from
         the other groups of the Sheikhal Loboge. Jasira and  Gandershe  are
         both small towns on the  coast  between  Mogadishu  and  Merca;  in
         recent times many of the Sheikhal originating from these two places
         came to live in Mogadishu, but went  on  calling  themselves  after
         their home towns.  The Sheikhal  Jasira  also  call  themselves  Ba
         Hassan (often  pronounced  Ba  Wassan)  because  they  trace  their
         descent from Hassan, son  of  Faqi  Omar,  while  the  Sheikhal  of
         Gandershe trace descent from son of Faqi Omar, known as Aw Garweyne
         (Big Beard).  Both groups belong to a  'light  skinned'  'Benadiri'
         population, and are very similar and close to each other.  They are
         an urban population who are generally shopkeepers and  businessmen.
         They are especially noted for salt  making  from  sea  water.   The
         Gendershe and the Jasira Sheikhal are noted as  entrepreneurs,  and
         have made an impact out  of  proportion  to  their  numbers  (about
         1,500).  They used to live in a relation of alliance and  symbiosis
         with the Somali groups of that area, providing them with  religious
         services.  Since 1991 however they have  largely  been  'ethnically
         cleansed'.  They are among the groups who have been robbed and been
         made the victims of atrocities, as they  are  a  minority  with  no
         means of self-defence".


    The remainder of this passage is set out at paragraph 62 above.


104.  In her report  of  14  February  2007,  Dr  Luling  commented  on  the
    determination of the Immigration Judge who had dismissed appellant  S's
    appeal. Dr Luling  considered  that  appellant  S  had  been  right  in
    describing in her statement  that  the  Sheikhal  Jasira  was  a  mixed
    community rather than a clan.  The Sheikhal were not  one  but  several
    groups with different cultures and dialect:-

         "The word [Sheikhal] is simply the plural of 'Sheikh' and signifies
         a lineage who have an inherited religious status.  They  all  trace
         descent in legendary terms from the same ancestor ... I  have  here
         added italics to my  original  statement  to  emphasise  that  this
         common descent is not to be  taken  literally,  and  indeed  is  an
         invention intended to fit a number of  groups  of  diverse  origins
         into a genealogical framework... However, the joint British, Danish
         and Dutch Fact-Finding  Missions  'report  on  Minority  Groups  in
         Somalia'  2000,  followed  by  the  Home   Office,   swallows   the
         genealogical fiction and refers to the Sheikhal as 'a clan'."


105.  In the same report, Dr Luling opined that during the rule of  the  UIC
    it seemed to many that conditions in Mogadishu and elsewhere had become
    sufficiently secure for asylum applicants to be returned there  without
    serious risk.  However, following  the  fall  of  the  UIC,  Dr  Luling
    considered that the position had completely changed.

106.  In her report of 3 November 2007, Dr Luling  attempted  to  deal  with
    the current position in Somalia.   Contrary  to  her  expectations,  as
    expressed in February  2007,  neither  the  Ethiopian  troops  nor  the
    Ugandan troops had withdrawn.  No  further  African  Union  troops  had
    arrived:

         "At the same time, Mogadishu and the  country  generally  have  not
         returned to the pre-2006 situation of separate clan-based enclaves,
         each under its own  'warlord';  instead  the  Transitional  Federal
         Government (TFG) is in nominal control, and there have been efforts
         to set up an administration and clean up the city of Mogadishu, but
         at the same  time  violence  by  anti-government  forces  has  only
         intensified,  as  have  reprisals  by  the  TFG  forces  and  their
         backers."


107.  The anti-TFG forces consisted, according to Dr Luling, of the  Shabaab
    - the militant wing of the UIC - and other less organised clan-based or
    anti-Ethiopian forces.  As for  the  TFG,  there  were  four  competing
    factions within it: (i) the police of  the  Mayor  and  former  warlord
    Dheere; (ii) the Ethiopians and  their  forces;  (iii)  the  TFG's  own
    followers; and (iv) other TFG collaborative forces.  Apart from  these,
    the African Union troops comprised a force of their own.

108.  In late  March  2007,  in  the  face  of  a  growing  insurgency,  the
    TFG/Ethiopians began a large scale operation to clear  insurgents  form
    their strongholds.  From late March to May 2007,  military  engagements
    in Mogadishu were the worst the city had seen for  a  decade  or  more.
    Both sides could be accused of acting  indiscriminately  against  their
    perceived  opponents.  The  National   Reconciliation   Conference   in
    Mogadishu on 15 July 2007 brought  greater  levels  of  violence  and,
    quoting a report by Dr Barnes of the Refugee Documentation  Centre,  Dr
    Luling  stated  that  the  current  level  of  conflict   "would   seem
    unsustainable even  by  the  very  low  standards  of  the  Mogadishu".
    Quoting the same report, Dr Luling recorded that "abuse of human rights
    is at its worst for quite some years" and that suspicion on both  sides
    "makes almost any person at risk of  human  rights  abuse,  up  to  and
    including  harassment,  persecution,  imprisonment,  kidnap,   physical
    violence or assassination".  Freelance militias and illegal checkpoints
    had returned, with regular instances of extortion and robbery.   Whilst
    in April 2007 many of those who had fled Mogadishu to  take  refuge  in
    the "bush" were returning to the city, there had  since  been  another,
    quite larger exodus, with UNHCR estimating that  about  90,000  escaped
    during the week preceding 2 November 2007.  reports as to  whether  it
    was safe to go from any of the Mogadishu airports into  the  city  were
    confused  and  contradictory.   In  any  event,  however,   Dr   Luling
    considered that appellant S would not need to go  into  the  centre  of
    Mogadishu from the airport but would rather travel straight to  Jasira.
    Once there, however, she would not be safe if her fellow clansmen  were
    not in a position to give her protection.

109.  Whilst Dr Luling had "no reports  of  specific  assaults  on  specific
    minority groups" she considered that members of  minority  groups  were
    particularly at risk because of their unarmed state and that this would
    be particularly true for a woman.  This would apply  "whether  all  the
    details of [appellant S's] personal statement were true or not".

110.  Answering specific questions  put  by  appellant  S's  solicitors,  Dr
    Luling considered that "So far as I know, minority clans are  still  as
    much subject to discrimination as ever.  However, this must be seen  in
    the context of the general increasing violence not now only random  but
    a virtual war between the PFG (with  its  backers)  and  'insurgents'".
    Also the Hawiye clans, who were previously  in  control  and  therefore
    responsible for the discrimination, are now out of power; many of their
    members constitute the wave of refugees fleeing the city and others are
    joining the anti-government insurgency".  Dr Luling considered  that  a
    woman, particularly with a young child, would be especially vulnerable.

111.  In examination in chief, Dr Luling  said  that  by  "scrappy"  in  her
    first report, she meant that appellant S could have  known  more  about
    the Sheikhal. When Dr Luling had asked appellant S where they had  come
    from, appellant S did not know that they had originated in Arabia.  Her
    information about sub-clans was also  not  quite  right.   However,  Dr
    Luling did not consider that this was unusual in a young woman such  as
    appellant S.  She stood by her conclusion that appellant S was probably
    Sheikhal Jasira.  She could not at this point remember  the  interview;
    she had undertaken so many.  If returned  with  a  child,  appellant  S
    would not be able to run away at the sign of danger and would also have
    to find food enough for two people.  She  had  read  Professor  Lewis's
    August 2007 report and agreed with it.

112.  Mr Collins asked Dr Luling what  the  situation  would  be  on  return
    today for a female majority clan member with a child.  Dr  Luling  said
    that such a person would be in danger, albeit not to the same degree as
    a minority person.  Members of the woman's majority clan might  not  be
    in a  position  to  offer  much  help  in  the  current  circumstances.
    Furthermore, the position was not the same as it had been a  year  ago,
    when certain Hawiye clans could find safety in their enclaves.   Hawiye
    were now amongst those pouring out of Mogadishu.

113.  Dr Luling was asked about the respondent's  apparent  stance,  in  the
    light of material submitted to the Tribunal, that  Dr  Luling  was  not
    objective or  independent.    She  said  her  reports  on  the  general
    situation in Somalia were based on objective evidence which was in  the
    public domain.  She had no "hot line" to the TFG or  to  the  warlords.
    She did her best to be objective.

114.  Dr Luling said that she had read the material set out  at  pages  1371
    to 1401 of R3.  These concerned  a  person  ("the  claimant")  who  had
    sought asylum in 2002 on the basis that he was a  Reer  Hamar  who  had
    suffered persecution in the past and would do so again in  the  future,
    if returned.  At the request of the claimant's  solicitors,  Dr  Luling
    produced a report.  This report was prepared  in  connection  with  the
    claimant's appeal.  In it, Dr Luling stated that "I understand that  my
    duty to the court is to provide an  impartial  expert  opinion  and  to
    assist the court in reaching a decision".  The report details questions
    Dr Luling put to the claimant at interview regarding Somalia in general
    and Mogadishu in particular.  In doing so, she made  express  reference
    to the respondent's reasons for refusing the claimant's application for
    asylum.  Her conclusion was that the claimant "in fact has quite a good
    knowledge both of Mogadishu  and  its  recent  history"  and  that  the
    claimant was a Somali national.

115.   It  appears  that  the  solicitors  for  the  claimant  supplied  the
    Adjudicator who was to hear the appeal not only with Dr Luling's report
    but also with the letter of 13 March 2003  which  she  had  written  to
    them, in which she said as follows:-

         "Here is my report on this client.


         I have said in it that I am sure that he is a Somali national  from
         Mogadishu.  However, I have said nothing about his clan,  as  I  do
         not believe that he is Reer Hamar - Morshe.  This is mainly because
         he knows very little about them, and his names ... are not the sort
         of names used by the Reer Hamar, as they are Somali words, not  the
         Arabic Muslim words that the Reer Hamar used.


         May I point out that the date of his refusal  was  September  2002,
         before the regulations changed  in  October.   Hence  as  a  Somali
         national he arguably should get ELR.


         If you need any modifications to the report please let me know."


116.  The Adjudicator who heard the  claimant's  appeal  dismissed  it.   At
    paragraphs 34 and 35 he wrote as follows:-

    "34.   However, rather disconcertingly,  in  her  covering  letter  [Dr
         Luling] volunteers, 'I do not believe he is Reer  Hamar  -  Morshe.
         This is mainly because he knows very  little  about  them  and  his
         names ... are not the sort of names used by the Reer Hamar  because
         they are Somali words, not the Arabic Muslim names the  Reer  Hamar
         use'.


    35.    It is not entirely clear from this covering letter the extent to
         which Dr Luling was instructed  to  consider  whether  or  not  the
         appellant was a member of the Morshe sub-clan  and  what  questions
         she had asked for the purpose of establishing her conclusions.   In
         that letter she invited modifications to her report if needed."


117.  The Adjudicator came to the conclusion that the appellant  was  not  a
    Reer Hamar.  He did so without making express reference to Dr  Luling's
    letter.  The  matter  then  appears  to  have  been  taken  up  by  the
    respondent's Presenting Officers' Unit in Cardiff,  who  wrote  to  the
    Deputy Chief Adjudicator and received from her a reply in  April  2003,
    in which she said that it seemed appropriate that  adjudicators  should
    be made aware of Dr Luling's "reluctance to express an  opinion  which
    might be adverse to the appellant's claim",  and  that  it  would  seem
    sensible for that  information  to  be  brought  to  the  attention  of
    Presenting Officers so that adjudicators could be  made  aware  of  the
    need to approach Dr Luling's reports with some caution.

118.  Asked what she would say if  the  respondent's  stance  was  that  she
    tailored  her  reports  in  order  to  omit  material  that  might   be
    detrimental to appellant S's interests, Dr Luling said that  she  would
    probably have followed the instructions of her solicitors in  the  case
    in question.  Somali nationals at the  time  were  obtaining  temporary
    leave to remain and it was therefore permissible to leave  clanship  to
    one side.  She had thought, however, that  the  solicitor  should  know
    that her client was not from a minority clan.  If the  issue  had  been
    relevant, she would have included it in her report.

119.  So far as the present position in Mogadishu was concerned,  Dr  Luling
    described it as disastrous and dire.  The  chances  were  not  good  of
    someone finding a protector from a majority clan and the Hawiye were in
    any event out of power and their protection was not worth very much.

120.  Cross-examined, Dr Luling said  that  the  Hawiye  had  been  dominant
    until two years ago but the TFG relied largely on the  Darod  clan  and
    Hawiye militias were no longer controlling Mogadishu.  It  was  put  to
    her that the Prime Minister of the TFG had been Hawiye and that the TFG
    were currently looking for a replacement from the same clan. Dr  Luling
    agreed but said that this did not  mean  that  armed  militias  of  the
    Hawiye were in control of Mogadishu as they used to be.

121.  Dr Luling was referred to paragraph 46 of Dr Mullen's initial  report,
    entitled "Statement to the Court," where Dr  Mullen  recorded  that  he
    understood "that my duty in writing this report is to  help  the  court
    within my area of expertise.  I understand that this duty overrides any
    obligation to the parties from whom I have received instructions or  by
    whom I am paid and I have complied with that duty in  formulating  this
    report".  Dr Luling agreed that that was a correct  description  of  an
    expert's duties.  She confirmed that  those  were  her  obligations  in
    2003, in particular, when she wrote the letter of 30  March  2003  (R3,
    page 1375 and paragraph 115 above).  Dr Luling said that it  was  usual
    for her to obtain details of what the appeal in question was about  and
    she would have known that this particular claim  was  one  for  asylum.
    She agreed that she would have known the relevance of  clan  membership
    to the asylum claim.  She supposed she knew what the  claimant's  claim
    had  been.   Asked  whether  she  appreciated  her  duty  included   an
    obligation to tell the Adjudicator whether or  not  the  appellant  was
    from a minority clan, Dr Luling said that she did not  appreciate  that
    that was her duty.  She understood, however, that her duty was to  help
    the court.  It was put to her that she had gone out of her way  not  to
    help.  She replied that she thought her duty was to say  what  she  had
    done.  It was put to her that she had told  a  version  of  the  truth.
    Dr Luling said that what she had written was true as far as  it  went.
    Asked if it was acceptable not to tell the whole truth, she  said  that
    she answered the questions put to her by her solicitor. She could  not,
    however, remember what questions these  were  in  the  context  of  the
    particular claimant's case.

122.  Turning to appellant S, Dr Luling recalled that the  interview  lasted
    about 30 minutes.  Dr Luling had never been to Jasira.  Her  source  of
    information about it was from other people; in particular,  the  person
    mentioned in her report.  She herself knew it to be a  village  by  the
    sea most of whose inhabitants  were  Sheikhal  Jasira,  known  for  the
    manufacture of salt.  There was also an ancestral tomb in the sea.   Dr
    Luling said she did not think she needed to know more about Jasira.  It
    was put to her that the three matters which she  had  recorded  in  her
    report as persuading her that the appellant came from  Jasira  were  no
    more than the sort of thing one could find in a Lonely Planet guide and
    that knowledge about people from Jasira being fishermen and making salt
    would be bound to be known in Mogadishu.  Dr Luling concurred as to the
    last point but  said  that  such  knowledge  would  not  exist  outside
    Somalia.  Asked whether she would agree  that  her  conclusions  as  to
    appellant S coming from Jasira and having lived there  all  of  her  19
    years were based on rudimentary knowledge,  Dr Luling  said  that  she
    could not have asked appellant S  anything  more  because  she  herself
    would not have known what the answers were.

123.  Dr Luling said that the information in her report  about  people  from
    Jasira being entrepreneurs was not something that appellant S had  told
    her.  Asked if that did not suggest that appellant  S's  knowledge  was
    less than complete as regards basic matters, Dr Luling disagreed.   She
    had not asked appellant S about entrepreneurship and  it  was  not  the
    sort of thing that she would have expected appellant S to know about.

124.  Dr Luling said that as to clan knowledge appellant S had  demonstrated
    a "scrappy" appreciation because appellant S had been unable to provide
    certain answers to her questions.  Dr  Luling  was  reminded  that  her
    report made it clear that she  had  received  an  incorrect  name  from
    appellant S.  Dr Luling said that appellant S  had  got  things  nearly
    right and it was not surprising that she had not done better. This  was
    so notwithstanding appellant S's claim  that  her  father  had  been  a
    religious judge.  The head  of  the  household  would  not  necessarily
    communicate oral traditions to a female child.  Dr Luling was, however,
    expecting that appellant S could say that her ancestors had  come  from
    Arabia.

125.  Dr Luling could not remember whether the appellant was  light-skinned.
     Mr Swift put to Dr Luling the fact that, as  his  own  assertions  had
    indicated, there had been a massacre in 1989 near Jasira  of  opponents
    of Barre and that the appellant could have been expected to know  about
    that.  Dr Luling said she had forgotten that the  incident  took  place
    near Jasira and she had not asked appellant S about it.

126.  The documentary reference relating to this exchange is at  pages  1149
    to 1151 of R3.  This COIS reply to an information request states:-

         "The town is about 20km (now) south-west of Mogadishu City  limits,
         along the coast.  It has been close to areas of the outward  growth
         of Mogadishu, such as Afgoye and Madina, as  the  centre  has  been
         abandoned with the population fleeing to the outskirts of the city.




         ...


         Before the collapse of Somalia as a state, the  town  was  a  beach
         resort and described by many sources as 'the former resort of Gzira
         Beach'.


         The beach at Gzira  was  the  scene  of  a  massacre  of  political
         opponents to President Barre by government troops  variously  dated
         14 July or 16 July 1989".


127.  Dr Luling was asked about the passages in her report  of  14  February
    2007 regarding events since June 2006.  It was put to  her  that  these
    passages were unsourced.  Dr Luling said she had drawn on many sources
    such as UN reports and news reports.  She had not,  however,  seen  the
    November 2007 COIS report.  She had seen the report of the Fact Finding
    Mission of 11-15 June 2007 (R2, page 594) and had also seen the  report
    of the Information Gathering Mission of  27-30  April  2007  (R3,  page
    1119).  She thought she had seen the UN Secretary General's  report  of
    February 2006 (R1, page 224).  Her own November 2007 report  drew  upon
    the COIS report of June 2007.

128.  Paragraphs 4 and 5 of Dr Luling's report of 3 November 2007 drew  upon
    material from the Refugee Documentation Centre, Ireland and  UNHCR  (Dr
    Barnes).  The  reference  to   the   inauguration   of   the   National
    Reconciliation Conference bringing greater levels of violence came,  Dr
    Luling agreed, from the following paragraph of the RDC report (A2, page
    61):-

         "The current political  situation  (as  of  late  August  2007)  in
         Mogadishu and its immediate environs is a  matter  of  perspective.
         There are evidently significant sections of the population who  did
         not support  the  TFG  Government;  there  are  regular  and  often
         successful assassination attempts  against  TFG  officials  of  all
         ranks.  Buildings, businesses and installations associated with TFG
         are targeted by mortars on daily  basis.   The  TFG  and  Ethiopian
         forces conduct wide-ranging 'security' operations against groups or
         individuals perceived to  be  actively  resisting  the  government.
         Both sides can be accused of acting indiscriminately against  their
         perceived opponents.  The inauguration of the much delayed National
         Reconciliation Conference in Mogadishu on 15 July has brought still
         greater levels of violence".


129.  So far as checkpoints were concerned, Dr Luling was asked whether  she
    agreed with the assessment at paragraphs 5.06 et seq of the BIA  report
    of the Fact Finding Mission of June 2007, that as at  June  2007  there
    had been a remarkable reduction in  checkpoints  (R2,  page  614).   Dr
    Luling said she had no reasons to disagree  with  those  findings.   Dr
    Luling was asked why she had not made reference in her report to  these
    materials.  She replied that she thought  that  the  BIA  Fact  Finding
    Mission report had been talking about checkpoints between  the  airport
    and Mogadishu City.  It was put to her that paragraph 4.27  (R2,  pages
    610/611) made it plain that all Mogadishu checkpoints  were  in  issue.
    Dr Luling disagreed and said  that  she  preferred  the  report  of  Dr
    Barnes.  Dr Luling agreed, however, that the BIA  report  was  sourced,
    unlike that of Dr Barnes. Asked whether she agreed that the BIA  report
    was wholly credible, Dr Luling said that she could not comment.   Asked
    on what basis she selected material to put in her  reports,  Dr  Luling
    said that she selected what seemed to give a broad and general  account
    of the situation.

130.  Dr Luling was asked about her description of people leaving  Mogadishu
    as having "escaped".   She was referred to the "latest news" section of
    the  November  2007  COIS  report  (R1,  page  8),  where  the  website
    Garoweonline was quoted as stating that a  Hawiye  elder  claimed  that
    Mayor Dheere had ordered evacuations from parts of Mogadishu during the
    security operations and about the  UN  (OCHA)  Situation  report  of  2
    November 2007 (R2, page 1104), which stated that the large movements of
    people in late October 2007 was partly due to "an announcement advising
    those living in districts surrounding the Bakhara Market to vacate  the
    area due to security operations".  Dr Luling was not sure  if  she  had
    seen the latter document when she wrote her report of 3 November.   She
    would nevertheless not accept the categorisation of  the  exodus  as  a
    well-ordered arrangement.  She did not think it was relevant that  part
    of the movement of people out of Mogadishu  had  been  in  response  to
    warnings.  She maintained that the people  in  question  were  escaping
    Mogadishu.

131.  Dr Luling said that the Somali contact referred to in paragraph  9  of
    her report of 3 November was a woman living in London who communicated
    by telephone with Mogadishu, and another Reer Hamar informant, also  in
    London, who also obtained information by telephone  from  Somalia.   Dr
    Luling's answers to the  questions  put  by  appellant  S's  solicitors
    (paragraph 14 of her 3  November  report)  were,  she  said,  based  on
    general information that she had collected and also on common sense.

132.  Dr Luling was referred to paragraphs 20.14 and 20.15 of  the  November
    2007 COIS report (R1, page 79):-

    "20.14 The Danish Refugee Council and the Danish  Immigration  Service,
             in their Joint Fact Finding Mission report on Human Rights and
             Security in Central and  southern  Somalia,  published  August
             2007 noted:


             'Hibo  Yassin,  Regional  Co-ordinator  Cooperatione  per   lo
             Sviluppo dei Paesi Emergenti (COSPE) explained  that  minority
             populations in Somalia, i.e. members of ethnic minority groups
             and members of clans being  in  a  minority  position  are  no
             longer victims of targeted looting and  other  targeted  human
             rights violations.  However, it was added that any  person  in
             Somalia who does not enjoy strong clan protection  because  he
             or she is from a weak clan or minority group has to keep a low
             profile.  Such a person should never be outspoken  or  express
             political opinion openly or he or she will  have  to  go  into
             hiding or conceal his/her identity.  During the period of  UIC
             control members of minority populations were in a much  better
             position and some were even able to reclaim property,  however
             today this is no longer so.  Everyone is now under threat  and
             many are afraid, not least  members  of  minority  groups  ...
             Regarding  blood-compensation  (diya)  Yassin  explained  that
             minority groups cannot  expect  to  obtain  compensation  from
             major clans such as the Hawiye or  the  Darod  and  to  obtain
             compensation from the Abgal clan is also very difficult  since
             this clan is dispersed over a large area.  However, if  blood-
             compensation is being negotiated on a lower sub-sub clan level
             it is very likely that compensation may take place.  Even  the
             Reer Hamar, Sheikhal and  other  minority  groups  today  have
             profiled elders who can negotiate blood compensation'.


    20.15  The report notes the OCHA  and  the  NOVIB  continue  to  regard
             minorities in Somalia as vulnerable and targeted.  The  report
             continues:


                  'Jabirel Ibrahim Abdulle, Director,  Centre  for  Research
                  and Dialogue - Somalia  (CRD  -  Somalia)  explained  that
                  'social  capital'  in  Somalia  is  not  for  members   of
                  minorities.  The minority groups are  vulnerable,  but  on
                  the other hand as they do not  have  access  to  the  same
                  resources as the rest of the population they are often not
                  involved   in   direct   conflicts.    However,    Abdulle
                  acknowledged that members of minority groups and clans are
                  often victims of human rights violations'.


133.  Earlier in the same report we find:-

    "2.06  The Danish Refugee Council and the Danish  Immigration  Service,
             in their Joint Fact Finding Mission report on Human Rights and
             Security in Central and southern Somalia published August 2007
             noted a difference in opinion regarding clan protection:


                  'An  international   organisation   (A)   explained   that
                  individual persecution per  se  does  not  take  place  in
                  Somalia.   Any  Somali  has  the  opportunity  to   obtain
                  security within  his  or  her  own  clan.   This  is  even
                  applicable if a person does not have any  close  relatives
                  in the country.  As long as a person is living inside  the
                  traditional  area  of  the  clan  he  or  she  enjoys  the
                  protection of that clan.'


134.  However, the report also notes:

                  '2.07 An international organisation (C) stated that it  is
                  too broad to say that everyone upon return to Somalia from
                  abroad will have access to protection from his or her clan
                  in Somalia.  The clan may try to assist  and  protect  the
                  person at the initial stage but not in the long term.'

135.  The report goes on to note:

                  '2.08 Lazzarini explained that in general clan  protection
                  is better in northern  Somalia  than  in  the  south.   In
                  central and southern Somalia the situation is very complex
                  when it comes to clan protection.  In these areas there is
                  no guarantee that a person will enjoy protection form  his
                  or her own clan.  Many clans are rather dispersed and  the
                  mixture  of  clans  is  much  more  blurred.    Lazzarini,
                  however, acknowledged that in principle one  could  expect
                  to be protected by one's own clan if he or she  is  living
                  among clan members. Lazzarini emphasised that  it  is  not
                  possible to say  something  reasonable  as  to  whether  a
                  person will be certain to enjoy clan protection in central
                  and southern Somalia.  It  was  added  that  many  Somalis
                  living abroad or as IDPs  would  not  be  able  to  return
                  safely  to  central  and  southern  Somalia.    The   IDPs
                  experience no clan protection and accordingly there is  no
                  negotiation or compensation if an IDP is the victim  of  a
                  crime.'


                  'Yassin considered that 'clanism' is generally  no  longer
                  an issue in Somalia.  This has been the  situation  during
                  the last three to four years.  No one is being  persecuted
                  or targeted solely because of their clan  affiliation  and
                  in principle anyone can expect to enjoy protection by  his
                  or her own clan'."


136.  Dr Luling accepted these findings.  She was asked, therefore,  whether
    it was the case that the findings  by  the  Tribunal  in  NM  regarding
    majority clan protection had changed little.  Dr Luling  said  that  it
    depended.  In Mogadishu, clan protection would be of little  relevance.
     It was put to her, however, that in March-April 2007  there  had  been
    intense fighting in Mogadishu, and yet the Danish authorities had found
    that clan protection existed.  Dr Luling replied  that  there  were  no
    reports of minorities  being  specifically  targeted.   Dr  Luling  was
    referred to the report of the Fact Finding Mission of 11-15  June  (R2,
    pages 639-640):

    "10.   In the recent waves  of  IDPs,  the  minorities  have  not  been
         particularly discriminated against. The source said that the Bantus
         were not  noticeably  discriminated  against  either.   The  source
         explained that IDPs go back to wherever they feel secure,  in  most
         cases back to clan areas, with 'the first safety net  is  the  sub-
         clan'. In this sense, the clan maps are still valid, as  people  go
         back to clan areas.  He  added  that  it  was  very  difficult  for
         outcasts.  The source said that  the  clan  assisted  female-headed
         households,  unlike  the  treatment  of  widows  in  other  African
         scenarios."


137.  Dr Luling said that she would question  that  finding.   She  did  not
    know what the  source  there  quoted  was  talking  about.   Dr  Luling
    accepted that a person's personal circumstances would be important,  as
    well as clan affiliations.  In the end,  Dr  Luling  thought  that  she
    probably could accept the statements in the Danish  reports.   She  had
    thought it likely that appellant S was Sheikhal Jasira and had done her
    best to be balanced.

138.  Re-examined, Dr Luling said that she relied upon her human source  for
    information on Jasira.  She had not checked things like  Lonely  Planet
    and similar materials.  She considered that there was "not a  lot  else
    to know about Jasira". Appellant S would not have been likely  to  have
    known about the reputation of Jasira for entrepreneurial activities  or
    as a place that produced entrepreneurs.

139.  Dr Luling said that she trusted her London contacts both of  whom  she
    believed to be honest and reliable.

140.  In answer to questions from the Tribunal,  Dr  Luling  confirmed  that
    she had seen the refusal letter in  the  case  of  the  2003  claimant.
    Members of minority clans and groups were likely to be  less  well  off
    than others but sometimes relatives in other countries collected  money
    and sent it to Somalia, so that the persons  concerned  could  come  to
    Europe.

141.  Dr Luling said that she had around 1,000 entries on her  database  for
    cases in which she had been involved and that in most cases  the  claim
    was that that a person was from a minority clan.  In around 170  cases,
    she had said that she could  not  support  a  person's  claim  and  she
    refused to act in about one in four or one in five cases.

142.  The Tribunal asked Dr Luling to look at appellant S,  who  was  seated
    in the hearing room.  Dr Luling said that appellant S  was  "obviously"
    not light-skinned but that was not definitive and one could get a range
    of appearance in persons who  were  Benadiri.    Dr  Luling  could  not
    remember  if  she  had  ascertained  what  occupation  was  pursued  by
    appellant S's father.

143.  On  further  re-examination  by  Mr  Swift  following  the  Tribunal's
    questions, Dr Luling was asked why she had not stated  in  her  written
    reports that appellant S was not light skinned.  Dr Luling  was  unable
    to say at this point.

Evidence of Dr Mullen

144.    Dr Mullen holds a PhD in African politics  from  the  University  of
    Edinburgh and until  recently  was  Senior  Lecturer  in  International
    Property Conflict at the University of Manchester,  where  he  is  also
    Programme  Director  of  the  Poverty,   Conflict   and   Post-Conflict
    Reconstruction Programme.  He is  an  Honorary  Senior  Fellow  of  the
    University of Manchester, Visiting Lecturer at the University  of  York
    and an external PhD examiner for the Universities of York and  Salford.
    He has advised  the  Commonwealth  Secretariat,  the  Foreign  Office's
    Department for International  Development,  the  British  Council,  the
    European Commission and the Governments  of  the  Netherlands  and  the
    Irish Republic.  From October 2005 to March 2006  Dr Mullen  was  Team
    Leader  and  Governance/Human  Rights  Specialist   in   the   European
    Commission's evaluation of  their  development  programme  in  Somalia,
    which involved travel to Somalia, Somaliland and Puntland.

145.  Dr Mullen produced an expert report in connection  with  appellant  A.
    The report is dated 29 April 2007.  The first addendum to  that  report
    is dated 6 November 2007, the second addendum is dated 16 November 2007
    and the third is undated. In his main report, Dr Mullen  recorded  how,
    since the break-up of Somalia in 1991, Mogadishu had been characterised
    by intra-clan fighting among the two  Hawiye  sub-clans  of  the  Habar
    Gedir  and  the  Abgal  for  control  of  the  capital   and   of   its
    infrastructure, over which time the indigenous Benadiri population were
    dispossessed and subjected to severe  physical  harm  by  the  opposing
    warlord armies.  With the help of the international community, the  TFG
    was established in 2004, with government posts distributed  across  the
    four major clan groupings plus a  fifth  category  which  included  the
    minority groupings.   Finance  for  the  TFG  came  from  the  European
    Community, Ethiopia and Kenya.

146.  After the UIC came to power in Mogadishu in  2006,  militia-controlled
    checkpoints were dismantled, the international airport  re-opened,  the
    previous sea landing area of El Maan abandoned in favour of  re-opening
    the port of Mogadishu, piracy activities curtailed, the export of  rare
    wildlife species prohibited and  "even  illegal  fishing  in  Somalia's
    national waters received attention" (paragraph 18).  In the  course  of
    two months "an unbelievable  change  took  place  in  Mogadishu,  which
    provided a degree of security  and  protection  for  average  citizens,
    particularly women".  Certain freedoms were restricted, in  particular,
    the use of tobacco and khat.

147.  However, in late 2006 the TFG moved against  the  UIC,  displacing  it
    from  Mogadishu,  since  which  time  the  situation   in   that   city
    "deteriorated substantially and the level of conflict escalated into  a
    near  Baghdad-style  urban  warfare"  (paragraph  20).   The  TFG   was
    perceived as being Darod,  with  the  united  resistance  in  Mogadishu
    claiming  to  be  defending  the  Hawiye  people.   Mogadishu   slipped
    gradually back to the violence and anarchy of recent years,  with  very
    large numbers of people fleeing the city  between  1  February  and  25
    April 2007.  By 29 April a tentative calm was established  when  former
    warlords were appointed to the post of National Police Chief and  Mayor
    of Mogadishu.

148.  Writing in April 2007, Dr Mullen considered possible outcomes  of  the
    National Reconciliation Conference.  If the  UIC/Hawiye  were  given  a
    prominent role in national governance in conjunction with the TFG, then
    the treatment of a lone female would depend upon her clanship.  If  she
    were Hawiye, "assuming that the sub-clans of Habar Gedir, Abgal and Ayr
    are not at war with each other", Dr Mullen assessed the level  of  risk
    as moderate.  If the woman came from a minority clan, however, or a non-
    Hawiye clan, the risk would be high.  He considered that risk would  be
    "even greater for  minority  clan  males  in  the  majority  of  cases"
    (paragraph 23).   Were the TFG to  assume  primary  responsibility  for
    national governance, a scenario which Dr Mullen categorised as utopian,
    then "one could assume that a level of protection could be extended  to
    females from both  majority  and  minority  clans,  with  a  consequent
    moderate to low level of risk" (paragraph 24).  The  third,  "doomsday"
    scenario was that the armed conflict continued, in which case the level
    of risk would be very high in  the  case  of  both  minority  clan  and
    majority non-Hawiye clan women and children.   Again,  it  was  "likely
    that the risk would be even greater for men of  all  clans"  (paragraph
    25).

149.  Both the UIC and the TFG had a  strong  clan  character,  although  Dr
    Mullen recognised that the TFG had made provision for the  presence  of
    minorities within their ranks.  Dr Mullen considered that there  was  a
    lack of "hard evidence at the moment on how the  UIC  in  practice  has
    dealt with minority clans". Since both clan and caste are proscribed in
    Islamic law, one would anticipate an outcome of  tolerance.   Anecdotal
    evidence  suggested  that  the  UIC  "are  not  discriminating  against
    minorities" (paragraph 31).   He considered that one could  "imagine  a
    certain empathy between the UIC  and  minorities  such  as  the  Ashraf
    (traditionally a devout and religious Benadiri sub-clan) for  instance"
    (paragraph 32).  On the other hand it was known that there had  been  a
    good deal of infiltration of the UIC and the  Al  Ittihad  by  "Wahabi-
    type/Salihiyya/Salafi sects which would advocate strict observance  and
    could lead to jihadism".  However, since the  military  defeat  of  the
    mainstream UIC forces, the extremist protagonists had had  to  moderate
    their views in order to maintain an alliance  with  the  clan  militias
    (paragraph 32).

150.  At paragraph 39 of the report,  Dr  Mullen  considered  the  issue  of
    roadblocks.  "If the female in question belonged to the local clan  and
    she could indicate so by the name of her father, it  is  unlikely  that
    she would be harmed.  The presence of accompanying children would also,
    as a general rule, "contribute to risk  reduction".   Nevertheless,  it
    was often necessary to transit  through  another  clan's  territory  to
    reach one's home.  At paragraph 41, Dr Mullen concluded  that,  at  the
    time of writing, humanitarian grounds "would dictate  that  returns  to
    Mogadishu, under the current circumstances,  whether  male  or  female,
    majority  or  minority  clan  would  not  accord  with   human   rights
    legislation and  the  ECHR.   Other  areas  of  the  country  may  have
    acceptable levels of security and lower levels  of  risk,  particularly
    for majority clan members."

151.  In his first addendum, Dr Mullen  considered  the  position  as  at  6
    November 2007.  He observed that  since  the  end  of  April  2007  key
    changes had taken place in Mogadishu, with attacks intensifying on  the
    ground between the TFG and Ethiopian  troops,  on  the  one  hand,  and
    remnants of the UIC, in alliance with Hawiye militias,  on  the  other.
    There had been two peace and reconciliation conferences, one  sponsored
    by the TFG in mid-July and the other held in Eritrea by a broad Islamic
    alliance in September.  After the Eritrean conference,  the  impression
    was given that the Jihadists in the UIC held the upper hand  in  policy
    making.  Within the TFG there  had  been  a  power  shift,  with  Prime
    Minister Gedi resigning.  The Bakhara  Market  in  Mogadishu  had  been
    bombed, as it was suspected of harbouring  terrorists.   This  had  the
    effect  of  breaking  the  food  supplies/marketing  chain.    Security
    problems in Mogadishu had forced people to abandon the capital and  had
    broken the social support system upon which vulnerable people depended.
     Since 27 October 2007 approximately 46,000 people  had  settled  along
    the  Mogadishu-Afgoye  road,  including  large  numbers  of  women  and
    children.  UNHCR's Population Movement Tracking reported  that  between
    February and May 2007 roughly 400,000 IDPs had  moved  from  Mogadishu,
    some 125,000 had returned and a further 85,000 moved out since June.

152.  Dr Mullen considered that even the  ability  of  a  person's  clan  to
    provide protection had to be called into doubt in south/central Somalia
    in November 2007.  The clan composition of the IDPs covered all  groups
    "so we are dealing with a scale of the degree of vulnerability as, even
    if all shared the same condition of destitution, those  of  a  minority
    clan would not enjoy the social support  mechanisms  or  protection  in
    numbers available to a majority clan".

153.  In his second addendum dated 16 November 2007, Dr Mullen attempted  to
    address the issue of whether  appellant  A's  male  family  members  in
    Somalia could provide her with support and whether such  support  could
    alternatively be provided from fellow Ashraf and members of a  majority
    clan who had afforded appellant A protection.  Dr Mullen wrote:-

         "The social support system available  to  Somali  clan  members  is
         legendary  for  its  breadth  and  generosity.   However,  it  does
         presuppose a degree of  stability  in  which  there  is  a  certain
         equilibrium of demands and capacity to respond.  The disintegration
         of societal stability, even in the case of  majority  clans,  since
         the beginning of this year, with the occupation  of  the  Ethiopian
         Army and its Transitional Federal Government (TFG) allies, droughts
         and floods has given rise to  a  situation  where  human  existence
         itself is even in question and the support system  has  effectively
         collapsed.  An excerpt from a report delivered by  an  NGO  on  the
         ground, to the international community describes the  situation  in
         graphic terms:


             'The  TFG  in  Mogadishu  appears  increasingly  as  an  Abgal
             venture; and the opposition increasingly  dominated  by  Habir
             Gedir.  The danger of a new  clan  civil  war  increases,  but
             remains not inevitable.  That said,  leaders  from  both  clan
             groupings don't want a new civil war, but they are largely not
             on the ground, and nor  are  their  families.   The  level  of
             desperation  on  the  ground  is   increasing.    Individuals,
             families, sub-clans and clans are having to mobilise  and  arm
             themselves for survival.  The existential survival  imperative
             is increasingly dominating  and  the  political  decisions  or
             desires by transitional or political leaders are  increasingly
             meaningless.  Civil war is not inevitable, but more precursors
             for  a  new  war  for  basic  survival  continue  to  manifest
             themselves.'


         The population in Mogadishu is more mobile with people fleeing from
         one district to another to avoid the ubiquitous  bombing.   My  NGO
         informant in Mogadishu writing on 5/11/07 stated  that  'there  are
         Reer Hamari  people  residing  outside  Shangani  and  Hamar  Weyne
         districts.  They are currently residing in Shidis, Bondhere,  Hamir
         Jajjab and Abdulaziz Districts".


154.  In his third addendum, Dr Mullen provided further  information  as  to
    the status of the airports in the  vicinity  of  Mogadishu.   Mogadishu
    International, K50 Jowhar and Balidogle were all  open  for  commercial
    and civilian traffic.  The International Airport was controlled by  the
    Hawiye - Habar Gedir, as were K50 and Balidogle.  September  2007  had,
    according to Dr Mullen, shown "a  bumper  sale  of  light  weapons"  in
    Mogadishu.

155.  Giving oral evidence, Dr Mullen said that Mogadishu was now a zone  of
    intense conflict.  There was a note  of  desperation  coming  from  the
    city.  There had been a breakdown in the discipline  of  the  Ethiopian
    forces.  The population of North and Central Mogadishu was moving south
    into areas which had already been devastated by fighting.  The  network
    of  social  support  was  breaking  down  and  clan  leaders  were  not
    interested in the fate of Mogadishu because the Abgal and  Habar  Gedir
    sub-clans of the Hawiye  had  managed  to  get  their  families  asylum
    overseas and so no longer had any interest in the fate of the Mogadishu
    population.  That population  was  now  almost  entirely  dependent  on
    humanitarian food aid.  The TFG had greatly increased the money supply,
    causing inflation.

156.  The warfare taking place  in  Mogadishu  was,  Dr  Mullen  considered,
    essentially Baghdad-style, with attacks taking place by means of remote-
    controlled  bombs  and  civilians  being  used  as   cover.    Military
    facilities and police stations were targeted by the  UIC.   Journalists
    who criticised the TFG were targeted  by  the  latter.   The  Ethiopian
    troops were concerned with their own survival and  would,  accordingly,
    not intervene if a woman was being raped  at  a  roadblock.   A  Hawiye
    would be seen by the Ethiopian troops as a potential insurgent.   There
    had been a breakdown in the traditional governance by clan or religious
    authorities.  Basic survival was now a priority.  Even though the  clan
    network had broken down in terms of social  support,  minorities  would
    still be at the bottom of the  scale.  The  Bantu  were,  according  to
    Dr Mullen, in some respects now more vulnerable than the  Reer  Hamar.
    The Reer Hamar and the Ashraf were the only minorities who had received
    assistance from majority clans in  the  past.   The  Reer  Hamar/Ashraf
    could be described as broadly  being  the  Benadiri.   Such  minorities
    could not as such obtain much protection at the present time,  although
    there were individual instances of  protection.   An  example  was  the
    former speaker of the Parliament, who was an Ashraf, but married  to  a
    Rahanweyn.  Dr Mullen considered that the word "protection" was perhaps
    too strong in any event and preferred to refer to  support.   Patronage
    had not, however, entirely evaporated.  Dr Mullen considered that  the
    situation was now close to that described as the doomsday  scenario  in
    his main report.

157.  Cross-examined, Dr Mullen said that he was aware of the  UN  Secretary
    General's reports and the November 2007 COIS  report.   He  was  unsure
    about the BIA Mission reports following the visits in  April  and  June
    2007.  He had not seen the one relating to April.

158.  Dr Mullen agreed that the security situation in southern  Somalia  was
    specific in terms of time and place.  Within Mogadishu,  a  feature  of
    the recent past had been the introduction of security sweeps into areas
    of the city that had previously been protected from insurgency.   There
    was still a difference in the situation of North  and  South  Mogadishu
    respectively.  In the previous week the Ethiopian forces had swept  the
    north of Mogadishu, which had the effect of displacing  people  to  the
    south, which presupposed that the south was more secure than the  north
    of the city.  The situation in Mogadishu could, Dr Mullen acknowledged,
    change very quickly but unless the Ethiopians withdrew or there  was  a
    reconciliation between the clans, it was  unlikely  that  any  positive
    developments would emerge.

159.  Dr Mullen agreed that the rise of the  UIC  was  a  great  change  and
    entirely unexpected so far as everyone, including Somali watchers, were
    concerned.

160   Dr Mullen was asked about what he had said  in  paragraph  11  of  his
    main report:-

         "Risks are proportionate to the historical situation of security or
         conflict on the grounds  at  a  given  period  in  time.   Risk  is
         associated with the  degree  of  danger  associated  with  a  given
         operation or course of action.  In terms of forecasting the  impact
         of a particular line of action, risk may be  subdivided  into  high
         risk; high moderate risk; moderate risk; low moderate risk and  low
         risk.  The risk calculus would then be premised upon the  situation
         that the degree of danger or harm associated with the  repatriation
         of different groups of persons to Somalia  at  a  given  moment  in
         time.  Minority rights group international have classified  Somalia
         as having the most hostile environment for minorities in the world,
         ahead of Afghanistan, Iraq and Burma.  Overall Somalia is  a  risk-
         prone society and among development practitioner organisations,  it
         is viewed as perhaps the most dangerous country in the  world.   In
         the context of Somalia, security is  both  fluid  and  is  location
         specific and this affects the level of risk permeating the politico-
         economic environment.  Levels of risk perception  are  also,  to  a
         degree, subjective".


161.  Dr Mullen said that by subjectivity he meant that he was  viewing  the
    matter from the prospective  of  the  Western  European  relief-worker;
    whereas for a Somali, the situation had been part of everyday life  for
    a number of years.  The opening of the international airport for relief
    purposes had come about as a result of international  pressure  on  the
    TFG.  Dr Mullen accepted to an extent that  his  information  regarding
    the airports in Somalia in his report suggested a worse position as  at
    mid-2007, compared with other observers whose reports were contained in
    the written evidence.  The airport  known  as  K50  was  50  kilometres
    outside Mogadishu, in a much more secure area  than  the  International
    Airport, and handled the bulk of air traffic.  Checkpoint  numbers  had
    varied considerably during 2007, although the nature of the checkpoints
    was, according to Dr Mullen, more worrying.   Checkpoints  were  to  an
    extent clan-neutral: some were run by bandits who  would  extort  money
    from anybody, irrespective of clan.  It was put to Dr Mullen  that  his
    report was at variance with the statements of sources recorded  in  the
    BIA's report of the Fact Finding Mission in June 2007 (R2,  page  611),
    that the TFG had cleared away militia checkpoints.  The information  in
    Dr Mullen's report,  coming  from  aid  workers,  Mr Swift  suggested,
    necessarily reflected concerns  that  aid  convoys  would  suffer  more
    frequent interference.  Dr Mullen demurred.  Checkpoints were, he said,
    used as tolls to fund  the  war  effort.   Tariffs  would  be  adjusted
    according to capacity to pay.

162.  In the report on the June 2007 Mission (R2, page 643), an  adviser  to
    an EU institution provided the following information:-

    "6.    Regarding movement in  the  city,  there  are  minibuses  moving
         freely.  There has been a 'remarkable'  reduction  in  checkpoints,
         with  fewer  bandit  checkpoints,  and  less   interest   in   clan
         affiliation.  Only occasional TFG/Ethiopian checkpoints,  typically
         only one on a long road.  Returning Somalis can  move  around,  and
         not be targeted as insurgents.  But it is better if they can hire a
         car.  When asked about why ordinary Somalis would not be  targeted,
         the source explained that it is a politically targeted risk now and
         not aimed at ordinary Somalis."


163.  Asked about this source, Dr Mullen said that he could have  reason  to
    doubt the completeness of her knowledge, given  the  frequency  of  her
    travel to the area.  Dr Mullen's source was an NGO operative contracted
    to an EU institution, who worked  on  the  ground  in  Mogadishu.   The
    source was unpublished.

164.  Regarding the UIC and  the  Hawiye,  Dr  Mullen  said  that  they  had
    previously been in conflict and their alliance now was not a close  one
    but, rather, one of convenience.

165.  Regarding the movement of people in Mogadishu, it  was  accepted  that
    in May/June 2007 some 190,000 people returned  to  Mogadishu  during  a
    lull in the violence.  It was put to Dr Mullen that "Mogadishu  normal"
    life involved a degree of such mobility.  Dr Mullen said that it indeed
    represented the reality  and  that  there  had  been  a  good  deal  of
    movement.  He agreed with what was said in the report of the June  2007
    Mission (R2, page 629):-

    "12.   For IDPs, there are areas in which they cannot go,  particularly
         after the public building evictions.  However the group [executives
         of  an  internationally  recognised  NGO]  impressed  the  need  to
         understand 'normal life' in a Mogadishu sense, where  there  is  an
         acceptance of a mobile type of life created  by  displacement.   In
         this current conflict, there had been many displacements within the
         city of Mogadishu, with  68  per  cent  of  the  city's  population
         affected."


166.  Dr Mullen said, however, that the  current  displacements  were  of  a
    scale of magnitude  greater  than  that  seen  previously.   Dr  Mullen
    accepted that the evacuations had in part been a response  to  security
    operations.  Dr Mullen appeared to accept what was said in  the  report
    of the June 2007 Mission regarding violence becoming more sophisticated
    and targeted and it being of a relatively low level at the time of  the
    mission.

167.  Dr Mullen was asked about the  UN  Secretary  General's  report  of  7
    November 2007 (R4, page 1588a) where he stated:-

    "17.   The Transitional Federal Government  and  the  Ethiopian  forces
         continued to concentrate  on  securing  Mogadishu  and  seeking  to
         apprehend and disarm insurgent elements.  Limited progress has been
         made to date, with targeted attacks by insurgents continuing  on  a
         regular basis.  Such attacks include the  use  of  roadside  bombs,
         rocket-propelled grenades, mortar and hand grenade attacks  against
         Transitional Federal Government personnel and Ethiopian forces.  In
         addition,  there  had  been  frequent  gun  battles   between   the
         Transitional Federal Government's  security  forces  and  insurgent
         elements lasting several hours.  On 27  October,  local  insurgents
         and Ethiopian troops engaged in some of the  heaviest  fighting  in
         Mogadishu in months.


    18.    Most checkpoints are now being manned by militias loyal  to  the
         Transitional Federal Government, many of which  appear  to  lack  a
         proper command structure and training ...


    20.    Civilians have been caught in the line  of  fire  as  insurgents
         continue to stage targeted  assassinations  and  suicide  bombings.
         Furthermore, Transitional Federal Government forces  and  Ethiopian
         troops have, at times, opened fire indiscriminately,  causing  many
         civilian casualties...."


168.  Dr  Mullen  first  accepted  these  descriptions  as  relevant  as  at
    September 2007.  It was pointed out to him that the report was  written
    in November and related to a later time  period.   Dr  Mullen  accepted
    that.  He also accepted that Bakhara Market had  now  reopened,  having
    been closed between 26 and 30 October 2007.  There had been  a  bombing
    in the market, followed by a security operation, which had now ended.

169.  Dr Mullen was asked about the second addendum to his report, where  he
    quoted a report delivered by an NGO regarding the TFG in  Mogadishu  as
    appearing to be increasingly an Abgal venture.  Dr Mullen said that the
    NGO in question was called Saacid and the information could be found on
    its website.  Dr Mullen was asked about the  reference  to  the  Abgal,
    given that Professor Lewis said that the  TFG  was  regarded  as  being
    controlled by the Darod.  Dr  Mullen  said  that  the  Saacid  comments
    related to Mogadishu.  There was an alliance between the Abgal and  the
    Darod and the Mayor of Mogadishu  was  an  Abgal,  who  controlled  the
    region to the north of Mogadishu.  Dr Mullen said that  the  desire  to
    survive was eroding clan solidarity in Somalia.  There  were  movements
    of  people  from  the  north  of  Mogadishu  and  from  the  south  and
    hospitality was no longer possible  because  of  the  collapse  of  the
    social support networks.  He took this information from a Human  Rights
    report.  So far as the cost of weapons was concerned, as  to  which  Dr
    Mullen had produced a bar chart, he agreed that this varied.

170.  Re-examined by Mr Maka, Dr Mullen said that Shibiz was in  the  centre
    of Mogadishu and had not been mentioned as a place to which people were
    moving.  Jasira was near the international airport.  Mogadishu had been
    pock-marked with bombs and few buildings had roofs.  The situation  now
    was  not  normal,  even  by  Mogadishu  standards.   The  UN  Secretary
    General's report of June  2007  (A2,  page  93)  referred  to  targeted
    assassinations and attacks but did not have anything to say  about  the
    destruction of property.  The Mayor of Mogadishu had been  Governor  or
    Middle Shebelle, where he had gained the reputation for  extortion  and
    rape.  He had been brought in by President Yusuf to clean-up Mogadishu.
     So great was Dr Mullen's distaste for  Mayor  Mohammed,  that  he  had
    refused to meet the latter.  As for checkpoints, Dr  Mullen  considered
    that his own source was more reliable because it was more recent.

171.  In answers to questions from the Tribunal, Dr  Mullen  could  not  say
    how the ICRC had come to the conclusion (as referred to in paragraph 20
    of his report) that the fighting in Mogadishu had been  the  worst  for
    fifteen years.  As to the allegation of alleged war crimes,  Dr  Mullen
    thought that a reference had been made to  the  International  Criminal
    Court but was unsure if the  jurisdiction  of  that  body  extended  to
    Somalia.  At page 227 of appellant A's ring binder of materials,  there
    was a Voice of America News report of 14 November 2007, in which it was
    recorded that the head of a Mogadishu-based group that  promotes  human
    rights and democracy said that Somalis in the capital  are  fleeing  to
    escape being used as human shields  and  becoming  victims  of  revenge
    attacks and that all sides had committed war crimes.

172.  As for armed groups in Somalia,  excluding  Somaliland  and  Puntland,
    the Abgal sub-clan of the Hawiye were aligned with  the  TFG,  but  the
    predominant clan in the TFG was the Darod, the clan of President Yusuf,
    and the TFG could actually be described as the Army  of  Puntland.   In
    Kismayo, two sub-clans of the Darod were fighting for  control  of  the
    city.  In Lower Shabili the Indhe Addeh was also engaged  in  conflict.
    Estimating the size of the armed groups  was  difficult.   The  dispute
    over territory between Somaliland and Puntland was  becoming  a  second
    front for the  TFG.   The  disputed  territory  was  geographically  in
    Somaliland but the clan of the population was that of Puntland.

173.  As for the number of armed groups that were ranged  against  the  TFG,
    Dr Mullen said the original UIC was based on clan militias. Where there
    were Shari'a courts, messengers from those courts would  go  and  bring
    people in to be dealt with.  Where the Shari'a courts were  strong  the
    number of such messengers or staff would be fifty to sixty.  The system
    had been expanded to form the UIC.   The  business  community  saw  the
    courts as a way of creating a secure environment.   The  various  court
    districts were unified.  Dr Mullen thought that  there  might  be  some
    2,000  to  3,000  UIC  combatants  at  the  present  time.   There  was
    considerable enmity between Al-Ittihad, an  element  of  the  UIC,  and
    President Yusuf.  Al Ittihad would be around  700  to  800  strong  the
    overall size of the anti-TFG resistance was less than 10,000.

174.  As for command structures, Al Ittihad adopted a cellular  system.   In
    the Hawiye militia, there was some command structure.

175.  The issue  of  the  level  of  violence  at  present  was,  Dr  Mullen
    considered, a complex one.  Civilian displacements from  Mogadishu  had
    been caused by large build-ups of Ethiopian troops, which caused  panic
    in the civilian population, who feared a "Herculean battle" between the
    Darod and Hawiye.  The population was asking itself whether  there  was
    to be a winner-take-all.

176.  On a scale of one to ten, starting in 1991, Dr  Mullen  estimated  the
    current violence in Mogadishu as about nine.  It had hit ten in January
    2007, when Ethiopian troops had entered Mogadishu.  Dr Mullen was  sure
    that there was an armed conflict ongoing in Mogadishu  at  the  present
    time.  He was unclear as to whether that conflict had  been  continuous
    since January 2007.  Whilst the UIC had been in control  of  Mogadishu,
    the city was peaceful.  This was between 24 June 2006 and late December
    2006.  Before the UIC took control, the armed conflict had  been  of  a
    different order, being warlord and resource-based.   The  struggle  had
    been for the import export and khat business.

177.  Telephone communications in southern  Somalia  had,  Dr  Mullen  said,
    interestingly enough been maintained in the times of  conflict.   Three
    mobile telephone companies  were  operating  in  Mogadishu.   Telephone
    masts were off-limits so far as the combatants were concerned.   Mobile
    telephone cards could easily be purchased from huts on the roadside.

178.  Dr  Mullen  was  asked  about  those  passages  of  his  report  which
    suggested there was a greater  risk  to  men  than  women  in  southern
    Somalia.  He said that the received wisdom was  that  women  were  more
    vulnerable because they were  liable  to  abuse.   However,  they  were
    regarded as an asset in terms of childbearing and domestic  labour  and
    thus, although they might be raped, they were unlikely  to  be  killed.
    Males,  however,  would  either  be  conscripted   into   the   militia
    controlling  the  checkpoint  at  which  they  were  stopped,  or  shot
    outright.  Children were increasingly being conscripted.

179.  Asked whether the UIC was  still  operating  in  a  non-discriminatory
    way, so far as minorities were concerned, Dr Mullen said that there was
    some evidence that the UIC did  not  discriminate  against  minorities,
    especially the Bantu, and that the  Ashraf  were  not  perceived  as  a
    despised minority.  In Islam it was  anathema  to  consider  people  in
    terms of clans.  However, other Somalis might have regarded the UIC  as
    being centred around various different district courts,  and  therefore
    reflecting the clan or clans of those districts.  Dr Mullen agreed that
    links between the Ashraf and UIC had not yet  been  picked  up  in  the
    relevant literature.

180.  Dr Mullen accepted that, although majority clan leaders  in  Mogadishu
    may have sent their families abroad and  regarded  clan  warfare  as  a
    commercial activity, the rise of the  UIC  had  shown  that  there  was
    powerful public support for order and stability.  Although  middle  and
    lower Shebelle were more stable than Mogadishu, refugees in Afgoye  had
    risen from 10,000 to 40,000, which had an effect on stability.  In  the
    Bay and Bakool regions there was some instability,  in  that  two  sub-
    clans of the Rahanweyn were in conflict but there was stability in  the
    town of Baidoa, which was used by the Ethiopians as a supply  base  for
    Mogadishu.  The other area with a degree of stability was Hiran,  which
    enjoyed a very good and enlightened local government.

181.  Defections from the  TFG  were  significant  and  increasing.   Before
    deserting, TFG militiamen would sell their weapons.  The Ugandan troops
    of the African Union had  made  a  considerable  impact  on  the  local
    population, in that they provided free medical facilities and water for
    the people, but the force was of no significance militarily.

182.  Asked about the town of Jasira, the claimed home of  appellant  S,  Dr
    Mullen said that that  would  be  "basically  Hawiye  territory".   The
    Hawiye would form the majority of the population of Jasira, in a  ratio
    of, he considered, 5:1.  Dr Mullen had been in  Jasira  in  the  1980s.
    Medina was, he considered, quiet, although there had been a  number  of
    TFG forays into it.

183.  In answer to further questions  from  Counsel  in  the  light  of  the
    Tribunal's questions, Dr Mullen said that the UIC was a "broad  church"
    but after the Eritrea Conference in 2007 the radical  elements  in  the
    UIC appeared to be dominating the agenda.  Certain elements of the  UIC
    would be not unlike the Taliban but the Somali population  as  a  whole
    was not by nature radical in the religious sense and if  the  UIC  were
    going to take power, Dr Mullen considered that moderation would return,
    since this was a part of the Somali  character.   Dr  Mullen's  comment
    about a certain empathy between the Ashraf and the UIC applied  to  the
    religious leaders of the Ashraf, rather than mainstream Ashraf  people,
    who would not associate with the UIC.

184.  Asked to estimate total combatants on all  sides,  Dr  Mullen  thought
    that there might be around 25,000, excluding what he described  as  the
    Puntland Army.

185.  Asked about Jasira, Dr Mullen said that he was in the  area  in  1988.
    In the case of minority groups, it was unusual to have such a  minority
    dominating any  particular  area,  as  minority  groups  did  not  have
    homogeneous minority villages.  Minorities such as the Sheikhal  Jasira
    were named after the areas in which they lived.

186.  Asked by Mr Swift about combatant numbers,  Dr  Mullen  said  that  he
    consulted IRIN and benadir.com.  There were no overall figures but  one
    could sometimes make estimates.  It was put to him that the  respondent
    had been unable to find any reports regarding command structures of the
    combatants.  Dr  Mullen  said  that  he  had  not  looked  at  any  one
    particular source.


Submissions on general issues and credibility

Mr Collins for appellant H

187.  On behalf of appellant  H,  Mr  Collins  submitted  that  NM  was  the
    starting point for the Tribunal's analysis of  the  current  situation.
    The conclusion in paragraph 117 that members of minority clans would in
    general be at risk of article 3 ill-treatment were still valid.  So was
    the finding in paragraph 102, that any person at real risk of having to
    live in an IDP camp would "have little difficulty in making out a claim
    under article 3, if not under the Refugee Convention also".   What  had
    changed,  however,  since  NM  was  that  any  lone  female   returnee,
    regardless of clan, would be  at  risk.  Mr  Collins  referred  to  the
    determination of the Tribunal in AA (Involuntary returns  to  Zimbabwe)
    Zimbabwe [2005] UKAIT 00144 where, in considering the case law  on  the
    criteria for establishing a general risk of  article  3  ill-treatment,
    independent  of  individual  circumstances,  the  Tribunal   found   at
    paragraph  50  that  "the  question  is  simply  whether  the  evidence
    establishes that there is a real risk". and "any expression of the rule
    would be clearly wrong if it had the effect that, in order to establish
    the risk of harm to him, a claimant  was  required  to  show  that  the
    actual harm was universal or nearly so - that  is,  certain  or  nearly
    so".  In paragraph 53, the Tribunal held that, in order to  succeed  in
    such a claim, an appellant "does not need to show that all,  or  nearly
    all, returned asylum seekers are harmed.  It needs only  to  show  that
    all returned asylum seekers are at real risk of harm".   In the  report
    of Mr Ghaanim Alnajjar to the Office of the UN  High  Commissioner  for
    Human Rights on the situation of human rights in Somalia (13  September
    2006) the actions of the TFG had been praised  and  it  was  considered
    that Somalia had appeared to take another tentative step forward on the
    "perilous road to peace and security"  (A2,  page  216).   By  February
    2007, however, the situation had deteriorated, as was evident from  the
    report on 28 February of the UN  Secretary  General  (R4,  page  1572).
    Asked by the Tribunal to comment on  Vilvarajah  and  Others  v  United
    Kingdom [1991] 14 EHRR 248, which established that it was necessary  to
    show more than that a person would be returning to a  country  torn  by
    war and that (as indicated at paragraph  112  of  the  judgment)  there
    needed to be distinguishing features in a claimant's case,  Mr  Collins
    stated that appellant H was so distinguished by reason of being a  lone
    woman.  Unlike the position in Vilvarajah or HLR  v  France  [1997]  26
    EHRR 29, the real risk  of  serious  harm  for  appellant  H  could  be
    foreseen.  The humanitarian situation  in  South  Central  Somalia  had
    deteriorated, according to the UN Secretary  General  in  his  February
    2007 report, over the preceding three months  "due  to  the  compounded
    effects of the flood emergency and  the  intensification  of  conflict.
    Heavy rains in Somalia and the Ethiopian Highlands during 2006  brought
    large-scale flooding  to  parts  of  southern  Somalia,  displacing  an
    estimated 454,000 people in the Gerba and  Shabelle  riverine  regions"
    (R4, page 1578).  According to an HJT Research Paper of 27  April  2007
    (A2, page 133), the UN indicated that the violence in  Somalia  in  the
    preceding two months had displaced more people than  anywhere  else  in
    the world.  Since that time, Mr Collins submitted,  the  situation  had
    become even more volatile.  The report of Dr Barnes of August 2007 (A2,
    page 47) found the UIC victory in 2006 "was due partly to a small group
    of well trained and disciplined militia, but also to a  groundswell  of
    'public opinion' against 'warlordism' in Mogadishu, made  effective  by
    clan elders transferring tacit support from the warlords to the Islamic
    courts".  So far as the TFG victory over the UIC was concerned:-

         "For all the apparent ease of  the  winning  the  war  against  the
         Islamic courts, winning the peace in Mogadishu proved difficult for
         combined Ethiopian-TFG forces.  Within the first few months of  the
         TFG's arrival in Mogadishu a visitor characterised the TFG  as  "in
         residence,  but  not  in  power".   Large  parts  of  the  powerful
         political and business elite of  Mogadishu  (mostly  Hawiye  based)
         regarded the TFG with deep suspicion.  Many  saw  it  as  an  alien
         occupying force since it was a predominantly  Darod  backed  entity
         closely associated with Ethiopia and  indirectly  with  the  United
         States.


         The first three months  of  2007  saw  a  steady  deterioration  in
         security in Mogadishu.  The tardy and partial deployment of African
         Union Peacekeeping Force 'AMISON' of only 1,700 Ugandan troops of a
         promised 8,000 strong force  had  little  success  in  keeping  the
         peace. ... From late March to May 2007  military  engagements  were
         the worst Mogadishu had seen for a decade or more ... at the height
         of the fighting in Mogadishu it was estimated by  various  agencies
         that up to 40,000 people may have been displaced.


         ... both sides can be accused of  acting  indiscriminately  against
         their perceived opponents.  The inauguration of  the  much  delayed
         National Reconciliation Conference in  Mogadishu  on  15  July  has
         brought still greater levels of violence.


         The TFG  Government  has  struggled  to  maintain  its  unity;  the
         government is in  a  constant  state  of  flux,  full  of  personal
         rivalries and unreliable alliances. The insurgency also involves  a
         number of disparate and often uncoordinated factions  fighting  for
         different ends and with different means.  Glib comparisons  in  the
         media with the  insurgency  in  Iraq  have  become  common.   Prime
         Minister Gedi recently announced that the TFG will try and create a
         Baghdad style 'Green Zone' for the safety of  government  officials
         and foreign visitors.  Overall, the current level of conflict would
         seem unsustainable even by the very low standards of Mogadishu.
         ...


         Despite the polarised political climate in Mogadishu, there  is  no
         doubt that abuse of human rights it at its  worst  for  quite  some
         years.  Neither side  of  the  current  conflict  in  Mogadishu  is
         blameless.  In current conditions  suspicion  of  association  with
         'terrorists' or 'insurgents',  or  suspicion  of  collaboration  or
         identification with the TFG, makes almost any  person  at  risk  of
         human rights abuse, up to and  including  harassment,  persecution,
         imprisonment, kidnap, physical violence or assassination.


         For the last six months there  has  been  an  increase  in  general
         criminality in Mogadishu and surrounding areas.  The disruption  to
         Mogadishu's economy has led to an increase in  freelance  militias,
         the re-appearance of illegal checkpoints, and regular instances  of
         extortion  and  robbery.   Kidnapping  and   ransom   demands   are
         increasing.  Sexual violence is also endemic.  Most  reporting  has
         come from  Mogadishu,  but  it  is  clear  there  are  considerable
         instances of human rights abuse in other areas of southern Somalia,
         such as the second city of Kismayo.


         ...

         A recent report based on extensive field work across the Somaliland
         during 2006 stated:


             'Generally, the fundamental human rights in Somalia for women,
             children, minorities, other vulnerable groups and IDPs are not
             guaranteed'.


         It should be noted that though the situation for  some  individuals
         and groups is certainly better than others, and  some  regions  are
         more secure than others -  notably  Somaliland  -  nevertheless  it
         remains true that universal respect for fundamental human rights is
         not certain in any part of Somalia.


         ... In terms of the population as a whole, women and  children  are
         especially vulnerable to abuse of their  basic  human  rights.   In
         present day Somalia  women  feel  that  they  "carry  the  greatest
         burdens of insecurity and survival".  In general, sexual and gender
         based violence is endemic in all the Somali  lands,  although  more
         widespread in some areas than others.


         ...


         Rights of children are equally weak in all regions  of  the  Somali
         lands.  A recent report by the United Nations Security General, Ban
         Ki-Moon, estimated that a third of fatalities due  to  conflict  in
         Somalia during 2006 were children, and that the ongoing violence in
         southern and South-Central  Somalia  was  characterised  by  'grave
         child rights violations'. "


188.  Later in the same report we find:-


         "The civil war and the continuing collapse of the central State  in
         Somalia  made  large  civilian  populations  subject   to   serious
         violations of internationally accepted humanitarian norms and human
         rights  laws.   A  common  and  continuing  response  of   civilian
         populations to insecurity - whether due  to  man-made  conflict  or
         natural disasters such as famine or flooding - was to  move  either
         within or outside Somalia.  Within Somalia there has  been  massive
         displacement of civilian populations,  often  several  times  over,
         particularly in the South-Central regions.


         The security of Mogadishu, and specifically the  risk  of  ordinary
         individuals returning  to  Mogadishu  and  travelling  between  the
         airport and their final destinations, is subject  to  almost  daily
         changes.  Nevertheless, return to Mogadishu is  evidently  possible
         since flights are arriving and departing from at least two airports
         serving the city.


         It is the case that the physical act of return to Somalia will  not
         in itself be a risk of breach of human rights unless the individual
         is suspected  of  involvement  with  the  opposition  to  the  TFG.
         However,  anecdotal  information  suggests  that  many   with   the
         wherewithal to leave - i.e.  businessmen  and  professionals,  have
         chosen to leave Somalia in the last month because of the  declining
         security situation,  especially  the  risk  of  kidnap  for  ransom
         purposes.


         The possibility of  returning  failed  asylum  seekers  to  Somalia
         should be judged against the prevailing  security  conditions  that
         all ordinary Somalis face in Somalia.  At the  present  moment  and
         for the last two  months  security  conditions  have  deteriorated.
         Recent communications from Mogadishu have noted that  there  is  an
         increase  in   freelance   militias,   illegal   checkpoints,   and
         generalised harassment and persecution of civilians  especially  on
         roads leading out of the capital.  Violence against women and girls
         is also rising.  More worryingly in a recent interview,  the  Mayor
         of  Mogadishu,  an  ex-warlord  Mohamed   'Dheere,'   stated   that
         'terrorists' were hiding in the camps  for  displaced  peoples  and
         said 'we will go after them wherever  they  are  for  the  sake  of
         security of the region'.   As in the past, any large scale  further
         security operations will entail civilian casualties."


189.  In the Human Rights Watch report "Shell-shocked Civilians under siege
    in Mogadishu" (13 August 2007) (A2, page 251) there was,  according  to
    Mr Collins, the most comprehensive recent account of the  situation  in
    Somalia.  Based  on  "dozens  of  eye  witness  accounts",  the  report
    detailed routine deployment by "the  insurgency"  of  their  forces  in
    densely populated civilian areas,  carrying  out  hit  and  run  mortar
    attacks, which  placed  civilians  at  unnecessary  risk.   They  fired
    weapons, particularly mortars, in a manner that  did  not  discriminate
    between civilians  and  military  objectives,  and  they  targeted  TFG
    civilian officials for attack."  The TFG forces, meanwhile, "failed  to
    provide  effective  warnings  when  alerting  civilians  of   impending
    military operations, committed  widespread  pillaging  and  looting  of
    civilian property, and interfered with  the  delivery  of  humanitarian
    assistance.  TFG  security  forces  committed  mass  arrests  and  have
    mistreated persons in custody".  The report expressed indignation  that
    "these serious international crimes" elicited a muted response from the
    international community:


         "Between January and March  2007  insurgent  attacks  took  several
         forms: assassinations of government officials; attacks on  military
         convoys; and rocket-propelled grenade (RPG) or  mortar  attacks  on
         police  stations,  TFG  and  Ethiopian  military  bases,  or  other
         locations or individuals deemed by the insurgency to  be  political
         or  military  targets.   For  instance,  several  hotels  known  to
         accommodate TFG officials,  such  as  the  Ambassador  Global,  and
         Lafweyne hotels, were repeatedly hit with RPGs  and  mortar  rounds
         and were the site of the attempted assassinations of TFG officials.




         The insurgency was mobile, often using hit-and-run tactics  in  its
         attacks or setting up and launching mortar rounds in minutes,  then
         melting back into the  civilian  population.   After  an  insurgent
         attack on a convoy or other mobile target, Ethiopian and TFG forces
         typically sealed off the area and conducted house to house searches
         of the area.  The Ethiopian and  TFG  response  to  mortar  attacks
         increasingly included the return firing of mortars and  rockets  in
         the direction of origin of insurgency fire."


190.  So far as international humanitarian law and  the  armed  conflict  in
    Somalia were concerned, the report had this to say:-

         "International humanitarian law (the  laws  of  war)  imposes  upon
         parties  to  an  armed  conflict  legal   obligations   to   reduce
         unnecessary suffering and  to  protect  civilians  and  other  non-
         combatants.  It is applicable to all situations of armed  conflict,
         without regard to whether the conflict itself is legal  or  illegal
         under international or domestic law, and whether those fighting are
         regular  armies  or  non-state  armed  groups.   All  armed  groups
         involved in a conflict must  abide  by  international  humanitarian
         law, and any individuals who violate humanitarian law with criminal
         intent can be prosecuted in domestic or  international  courts  for
         war crimes.


         International humanitarian law does not regulate whether states and
         armed groups can engage in hostilities, but rather how  states  and
         armed groups engage in hostilities.  Insurgency  itself  is  not  a
         violation of international humanitarian law.  The laws  of  war  do
         not prohibit the existence of insurgent groups or their attacks  on
         legitimate military targets.  Rather, they restrict the  means  and
         method of warfare and impose  upon  insurgent  forces  and  regular
         armies alike a duty to protect civilians and  other  non-combatants
         and minimize harm to civilians during military operations."


191.  The reports quotes sources in the form of Hawiye clan elders who said
    that the first round of fighting in March 2007 killed between  400  and
    1,000 civilians, whilst the second round resulted in the deaths of  300
    civilians.  Members of the ceasefire  committee  interviewed  by  Human
    Rights Watch described  seeing  the  corpses  of  civilians.   It  was,
    however, almost impossible to calculate the number of dead and missing.




192.  According to eye witness and  other  evidence,  the  insurgents  were
    armed with a variety of mortars, rocket propelled  grenades,  bazookas,
    recoilless rifles, anti-aircraft guns  and  other  small  arms.   Anti-
    aircraft artillery mounted on the back  of  pick-up  trucks  (known  as
    "technicals") had also been a typical feature of the  Somali  conflict.
    When the insurgency launch rocket  of  mortar  attacks,  the  Ethiopian
    forces  responded  with  barrages  of  rockets,  artillery  and  mortar
    shelling of areas of Mogadishu perceived to be areas of origin  of  the
    attack or strongholds of the insurgency.   There was said to be "strong
    evidence   that   the   indiscriminate   bombardment    of    populated
    neighbourhoods by Ethiopian forces was intentional" and it was asserted
    that commanders who  knowingly  or  recklessly  ordered  indiscriminate
    attacks were responsible for war crimes.  The deployment  of  insurgent
    forces in densely  populated  neighbours  and  the  Ethiopian  military
    offensive resulted in the unnecessary deaths of hundreds  of  civilians
    and injured thousands more.  Those fleeing Mogadishu were on  occasions
    attacked by bandits and other criminal  elements  "occasionally  raping
    women and girls" (page 284).


193.  At  page  285,  we  find  that,  according  to  Human  Rights  Watch,
    international humanitarian law is set out in The Hague  Regulations  of
    1907 and the first Additional Protocol of 1977, which provided the most
    detailed and current codification of the conduct of hostilities  during
    international armed conflicts, not directly applicable to the  conflict
    in Mogadishu.   Nor was the second Additional Protocol of 1977  because
    Somalia was not a party to the Protocol.   Nevertheless,  it  was  said
    that many if not most of the Protocols I and II had been recognised  by
    states to be reflective  of  customary  international  law.  The  legal
    analysis in the  report  was  said  to  reference  norms  enshrined  in
    Protocols I and II "as an  important  clarification  of  customary  law
    rather than as a treaty obligation.  Customary humanitarian law  as  it
    relates to the fundamental principles concerning conduct of hostilities
    is now recognised as largely the same  whether  it  is  applied  to  an
    international  or  non-international  armed  conflict".   International
    humanitarian law  prohibited  indiscriminate  attacks  such  as  aerial
    bombardment,   a   practice   used   by   the   TFG/Ethiopian   forces.
    International humanitarian law required the parties to  a  conflict  to
    take  constant  care  during  military  operations  for  the   civilian
    population and to take all feasible precautions to  avoid  or  minimise
    the incidental loss of civilian life.  According to the Red Cross, this
    required the person  launching  an  attack  to  take  steps  needed  to
    identify the target as a legitimate military objective in good time and
    to spare the population as far as possible  (page  286).    Mr  Collins
    submitted that such care was  not  being  taken  in  Mogadishu.   Human
    Rights Watch moreover submitted to  the  US  House  of  Representatives
    Committee on Foreign Affairs in October 2007 (A2,  page  23)  that  the
    situation in Mogadishu for civilians had grown "intolerable"; that  the
    insurgency had acted  in  violation  of  the  laws  of  war;  and  that
    Ethiopian troops had indiscriminately bombarded  insurgent  strongholds
    with no apparent effort to distinguish between civilians and  insurgent
    targets.  Human  Rights  Watch  asserted  that  the  current  US-backed
    Ethiopian approach would lead to "a mountain of civilian deaths  and  a
    litany of abuses".   Mr  Collins  submitted  that  this  bore  out  the
    concerns that Professor Lewis had voiced regarding the attitude of  the
    US to the conflict.  There was a  real  risk  for  a  lone  female  or,
    indeed, in the light of Dr Mullen's comments, any returnee to  Somalia.




194.  Mr Collins also relied upon the United  Nations  Office  for  the  Co-
    ordination of Humanitarian Affairs Situation report of 5  October  2007
    (A2, page20):-

         "During the week, a serious fire broke out at the  Bakhara  Market,
         the main trading centre for the South Central  Region  of  Somalia,
         which will have a decidedly negative impact on economic  activities
         of the country.  The market was forced to close earlier  this  year
         due to the  widespread  conflict  in  the  capital,  with  negative
         consequences on trade and  prices.   Somali  citizens  are  already
         reeling from basic food cost increases due to  increased  transport
         expenses linked to checkpoints and ad hoc  'taxis'  and  spiralling
         inflation.  Many casual labourers at the  market  have  lost  their
         only source of income and reduced food supplies to the rest of  the
         country will increase demand hence weakening the  purchasing  power
         of the already stretched communities.


         Meanwhile, persistent insecurity in Mogadishu continues to restrict
         movement for residents.  For  example,  the  area  surrounding  the
         market was sealed by the TFG following the fire to prevent looting.
          Neighbourhoods are frequently sealed  by  the  authorities  during
         searches for weapons, preventing people from  leaving  their  homes
         and earning a living.  Many Mogadishu residents who have  not  fled
         the city have moved from the northern part  of  the  city  to  join
         family members in the relative calm of South  Mogadishu,  burdening
         already impoverished families.


         According to media reports, the TFG this  week  announced  that  it
         would deploy more soldiers in the city, intensifying arms search in
         an effort to restore peace and order.   Targeting  and  killing  of
         government officials and police continued in the capital  unabated,
         with a District Commissioner assassinated, three roadside bombs and
         four hand grenade attacks on police during the week, with civilians
         caught in the crossfire.  In Mogadishu's Madina  hospital,  records
         indicate that in August and September,  305  people  were  admitted
         with wounds caused by gunshots or shelling.  One journalist held in
         prison for one week in Deletweyne was released and  Radio  Shabelle
         finally went back on air on 2 October after fifteen days of closure
         following being sprayed by gunfire from government troops."


195.  A report from the same source of 19 October 2007 (A2, page 13)  stated
that:-

         "This week,  Mogadishu  saw  one  of  its  worst  fighting  between
         government troops and anti-government elements.   Reportedly,  over
         30 people were injured and an unknown  number  killed  due  to  the
         crossfire.  This follows the intensification of  firearms  searches
         by the TFG to rid the city of insurgents.    As  the  targeting  of
         government officials by unknown groups  continues,  for  the  third
         time this year, a Yaqshid District Commissioner  was  assassinated.
         The continuing clashes in Mogadishu further  aggravated  the  daily
         lives of the neediest people, as they have not been  able  to  meet
         their basic social needs on a regular basis since February".


    As far as the UNHCR was concerned, its February 2007  note  on  Somalia
    described the situation in Mogadishu as  'very  unstable  and  insecure
    with deadly incidents being reported on a daily basis'.  The UNHCR  had
    requested the TFG 'to appoint focal points regarding  voluntary  return
    to Mogadishu and, generally, South/Central Somalia'.  As at the date of
    the report, however, there was no contact person with  whom  UNHCR  had
    been able to discuss the issue.  The TFG had  initiated  a  very  basic
    immigration service at Mogadishu Airport but it is now unclear  whether
    this would continue to operate.  The TFG had indicated to the  UN  that
    the former did not have the capacity and resources  to  receive  people
    and requested UNHCR support to inform European  countries  accordingly.
    With the constant insecurity, IDPs and marginalised  groups  were  said
    neither to be able to protect themselves from violence  nor  to  expect
    any remedy for human rights violations committed against them (A2, page
    17).  The most  recent  (2  November  2007)  OCHA  report  (A2,  page1)
    referred to the flight of 90,000 Mogadishu residents  during  the  past
    weekend following the most intense fighting in months.  Those living in
    districts  surround  Bakhara  Market  were  warned  to  leave,  pending
    security operations but although the market was closed between  26  and
    30 October, it was  subsequently  opened  'and  business  is  gradually
    picking up'.   UNHCR  and  the  Population  Monitoring  Tracking  (PMT)
    Network reported that:

             " the 90,000 people  displaced  from  and  in  Mogadishu  came
             largely  from  the  four  districts  of  Hodan,  Hawl  Wadaaq,
             Wardhigley and Haliwaa.  Some 17,000 had moved  to  relatively
             safer areas  within  the  city  while  56,000  went  to  Lower
             Shebelle, including the 46,000 to Afgoye.  An additional 8,000
             people went to  Middle  Shebelle  and  some  5,600  to  Baidoa
             (Bay)".


196.  Referring to the UN Secretary General's  report  of  7  November  2007
    (R4, page 1588a), Mr Collins  drew  attention  to  the  fact  that  the
    situation in Mogadishu remained volatile, with daily attacks mostly  by
    insurgents targeting TFG forces and Ethiopian military.  Mogadishu  was
    in a "phase five" situation, in which all United  Nations'  staff  were
    evacuated, and Somalia was said to present one of the most  challenging
    security environments,  particularly  in  the  capital.   According  to
    paragraph 22 (page 1588e),  piracy  was  on  the  increase,  which  was
    particularly significant,  given  that  nearly  80%  of  assistance  to
    Somalia was shipped by sea.  In a report of 7 November 2007 by Medicine
    sans Frontieres entitled "Somalia: no safe place  in  Mogadishu",  MSF,
    one of the few international organisations providing health services in
    Mogadishu, was witnessing increasing violence in the area near  one  of
    its clinics.  Those who were able to do so had  left  the  city  whilst
    others had fled into other areas of it "but are increasingly left  with
    no safe place  to  seek  refuge"  (additional  appellant  documentation
    bundle of 22/11/07).  Some MSF staff were said not to be able to travel
    to work due to roads being closed due to the violence.  According to  a
    report in the Independent (additional bundle, page 36) on  22  November
    2007, the refugee crisis in Somalia was said to surpass that of  Darfur
    "in its horror".  The article concerned IDPs living alongside the  road
    outside Mogadishu to Afgoye.  On 15 November 2007 (additional  bundle,
    page 40) the European  Parliament  had  passed  a  resolution  strongly
    condemning the serious violations of humanitarian law and  humanitarian
    rights law committed by all parties to  the  conflict  in  Somalia  and
    calling for an immediate end to hostilities.

197.  Mr Collins said that the view expressed at  paragraph  3.2.11  of  the
    respondent's Operational Guidance Note of 12 November  2007  (R1,  page
    1187), that there was  no  longer  any  general  serious  risk  that  a
    returnee to Mogadishu would be caught in  the  crossfire  or  seriously
    injured by indiscriminate bombing or other military action, was out  of
    date, being based on the situation as at  June  2007.   There  was  now
    evidence of such fatalities and there was now a serious or  real  risk.
    To this extent, the guidance in NM needed to be modified.

198.  Turning to the criticism mounted by the respondent of  Dr  Luling,  Mr
    Collins said it was unclear what her instructions had been in the  case
    in question.  The matter was one of concern but, on the other hand,  Dr
    Luling could not be said to have become a "bad expert  overnight".   On
    the contrary, she had since the events in  question  been  specifically
    praised by the Tribunal in a number of determinations.

199.  Mr Collins urged us  to  accept  the  evidence  of  Dr  Luling,  which
    carried a real flavour of the situation in Mogadishu and the  sense  of
    "desperation" felt by everyone concerned.

200.  As for the issue of internal  armed  conflict,  Mr  Collins  submitted
    that there was such a conflict in southern Somalia at the present  time
    and  appellant  H  met  the  requirements  of  paragraph  339C  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  Asked by the Tribunal about the reference  in  that
    provision to a "serious and individual threat", and recital (26) to the
    Council Directive 2004/83/EC of 29  April  2004,  which  provided  that
    risks to which the  population  of  a  country  or  a  section  of  the
    population is generally exposed do not normally create in themselves an
    individual  threat  which  will  qualify  serious  harm,   Mr   Collins
    acknowledged that there was a difficulty. He submitted,  however,  that
    the situation  in  Somalia  was  not  one  where  the  risks  could  be
    categorised as "normal".

Mr Young for appellant S

201.  Mr Young said it was  important  to  appreciate  that  the  letter  of
    refusal in respect of appellant S had made no great  challenge  to  her
    claimed clan  and  that  the  basis  of  the  respondent's  refusal  of
    appellant S's claim had been that the  Sheikhal  Jasira  could  not  be
    regarded as a  minority  clan,  despite  the  country  guidance  in  FK
    (Sheikhal Gandhershe) Somalia CG [2004] UKIAT 00127.  The  Tribunal  in
    that case had effectively endorsed the finding in Mohamed [2002]  UKIAT
    08403, based on the evidence of Dr Luling, that the Sheikhal Gandhershe
    and the Sheikhal Jasira "were minority groups which were not  protected
    by the Hawiye".

202.  Mr Young submitted that appellant S had been consistent throughout  in
    her account.  Whether or not she had  refused  to  participate  in  the
    respondent's  language  test  was  immaterial,  given  that   she   was
    identified by Professor Lewis and Dr Luling as speaking with a Benadiri
    accent.  The respondent's practice  of  sending  recordings  of  asylum
    applicants to Scandinavia, to be assessed by Somali speakers, was short
    lived and its methodology had been questionable.  Appellant S's failure
    to attend an asylum interview was due  to  the  legal  advice  she  had
    received.

203.  Mr Young accepted that paragraph 7 of  his  skeleton  argument  needed
    some amendment, in that appellant S had now  said  she  was  physically
    harmed during earlier visits by the militias.  However, her description
    fitted the objective evidence  regarding  the  violence  escalating  in
    1995.  Whether Jasira was a separate village or part of  Mogadishu  was
    open to debate.  What appellant S said about the matter  added  to  her
    credibility.  As for knowledge of her clan, whilst this was  deficient,
    appellant S had some knowledge about its  origins.   In  any  event,  a
    young woman would not have had a keen interest in  such  matters.   The
    evidence contained in the Minority Group's report (A4, page 95) had  to
    be treated with some caution given that the compilers of the report had
    not met the representatives of the Sheikhal.  At page 118, it was noted
    that not all Benadiri knew their sub-groups and Benadiri did not put as
    much emphasis on their background as did  members  of  majority  clans.
    Appellant S had been correct as to her description of the  occupations
    of the inhabitants of  Jasira  as  fishermen  and  producers  of  salt.
    Whether or not her father had been a  man  of  education,  appellant  S
    herself was uneducated and her father may  merely  have  been  a  minor
    official.  The fact that he was a judge was in keeping  with  appellant
    S's claimed background during the time of the Barre regime.  The report
    on minorities (A4, page 106) recorded that people associated  with  the
    Barre regime subsequently faced difficulties.  It  was  plausible  that
    appellant S would have left  Somalia  in  2006.   As  for  the  account
    regarding events in Saudi Arabia, it was plausible that  appellant  S's
    husband, working long hours in the car wash, could have  earned  enough
    in order to buy the jewellery described.  As for the  assistance  which
    appellant S said she received  from  her  neighbour  in  Saudi  Arabia,
    appellant S had made it clear that her neighbour did so  for  religious
    reasons.  Furthermore, by helping appellant S to  leave  Saudi  Arabia,
    the neighbour avoided further obligations to  appellant  S  by  way  of
    support.

204.  As for the error regarding her sub-clan,  appellant  S  asserted  that
    she thought she  was  being  asked  by  the  respondent's  interviewing
    officer to name other sub-clans, rather than her  own.   The  interview
    had  not  been  read  back  to  appellant  S.   Appellant   S's   later
    clarification of the fact that she had been  harmed  between  1991  and
    1995 did not detract  from  her  credibility,  since  she  had  clearly
    referred at interview to suffering harassment.

205.  As for Dr Mullen's evidence  regarding  the  fact  that  the  Sheikhal
    Jasira were a minority even in Jasira, Mr Young said that Dr Mullen had
    not been there.  Mr Young asked the Tribunal to accept the evidence  on
    this issue from Dr Luling rather than Dr Mullen.  Professor Lewis  was
    clear that appellant S spoke with a Benadiri dialect.

206.  Mr Young reminded the Tribunal that the respondent's stance  was  that
    if appellant S was credible in terms of being of the  Sheikhal  Jasira,
    then she was entitled to refugee status.  The objective evidence showed
    that a member of a minority clan would be at real  risk.   She  had  no
    known family and could not access protection  from  anyone.   Mr  Young
    endorsed the comments of others that there was likely to have  been  an
    under-reporting of the difficulties faced by minorities at the  present
    time in Somalia.  In any event, as a lone woman with a child, Mr  Young
    endorsed what Mr Collins had said on the issue of risk, irrespective of
    clanship, and asked the Tribunal to  find  that  appellant  S's  appeal
    should be allowed, even if we found her not to be Sheikhal Jasira.

207.  Both Mr Collins and Mr Young relied on various passages from the  CIOS
    report of November 2007  (R1,  page1).    At  paragraph  4.03,  the  UN
    Secretary General in June  2007  had  observed  that  the  movement  of
    civilians from Mogadishu was the largest  new  population  displacement
    anywhere in the world that year.  The  PIA  Fact  Finding  Mission  was
    referred to in  paragraph  4.05  as  demonstrating  the  difficulty  in
    estimating numbers of people who returned to  Mogadishu  as  many  IDPs
    seemed to be moving back and forth.  At paragraph 7.02 the UN Secretary
    General, in his report of June 2007, considered that over the past  six
    months the human rights situation in Somalia appeared to have worsened.
     Allegations had been made of human rights violations and violations of
    international humanitarian law, with civilian targets  being  attacked.
    At paragraph 8.08 the Fact Finding Mission counted  seven  sources  who
    stressed the unpredictability and volatility of the security  situation
    in Mogadishu, with the north of the  city  being  more  dangerous  than
    other parts.  As already noted, however, the passage goes on  to  state
    that a UN source said that even in the north there is a relative degree
    of normality.

208.  So far as clan protection  was  concerned,  section  20  of  the  COIS
    report stated that the Danish Fact Finding Mission of August  2007  had
    encountered a difference of opinion regarding clan protection, with one
    international organisation asserting that individual persecution per se
    did not take place in Somalia and that any Somali had  the  opportunity
    to attain security within his or her own clan, even if that person  did
    not have close relatives in the country.   As  long  as  a  person  was
    living within the traditional area of the clan he or  she  enjoyed  the
    protection of that clan.  However, another  international  organisation
    said that it was too broad to say that everyone upon return to  Somalia
    from abroad would have access to protection from his or her clan.  That
    clan might try to assist and protect a person at the initial stage  but
    not in the long term.  In central and southern  Somalia  the  situation
    was "very complex when it comes to clan protection" (20.08).  In  those
    areas there is "no guarantee that a person will enjoy  protection  from
    his or her own clan.  Many clans are rather dispersed and  the  mixture
    of clans is much more blurred". However,  the  informant  "acknowledged
    that in principle one could expect to be protected by one's own clan if
    he or she is living among clan members" although  it  was  not  certain
    that a person would enjoy  clan  protection  and  many  Somalis  living
    abroad or as IDPs will not be able to  return  safely  to  Central  and
    southern Somalia.

209.  At paragraph 20.13 the UN  Commissioner  on  Human  Rights  (September
    2006) was recorded as estimating that minority groups in Somalia  might
    constitute up  to  one  third  of  the  population  (approximately  two
    million).  These  labourers,  metal  workers,  herbalists  and  hunter-
    gatherers continued to live in conditions of great poverty  and  suffer
    numerous forms of discrimination and exclusion.   Members  of  minority
    groups also found it harder to flee and move around to escape fighting.
     This was because they were not as easily accepted in new surroundings,
    as was the case for many other IDPs from major clans.  Such  IDPs  also
    often had a better chance of being tolerated in the area to which  they
    had fled.  There had been "enormous relief among  the  minorities  when
    the UIC took over in June 2006" and many minority members were accorded
    high or prominent positions in its administration (20.15).

210.  With the defeat of the UIC, the International Crisis Group  considered
    that there had been a return of clan-based politics to southern Somalia
    and that whereas the  UIC  drew  its  support  predominantly  from  the
    Hawiye, the TFG  was  widely  perceived  as  dominated  by  the  Darod.
    Although control  of  Mogadishu  had  been  wrested  from  the  UIC,  a
    grassroots network of mosques, schools  and  private  enterprises  that
    underpinned the spread of  Salafist  teaching  remained  in  place  and
    continued to expand  thanks  to  generous  contributions  from  Islamic
    charities and the private sector (20.18).

211.  So far as women  were  concerned,  the  Danish  Fact  Finding  Mission
    recorded one international organisation as explaining that  there  were
    powerful women in Somalia but socially  such  women  might  be  treated
    badly  and  their  own  community  might  marginalise  them.    Another
    organisation "added that women are not vulnerable just because they are
    women.  A woman's vulnerability depended  on  particular  circumstances
    and it was not right to say that all women in Somalia  are  vulnerable"
    (23.05).  Domestic violence against women was a serious concern in many
    parts of Somalia and some civil  society  groups  focusing  on  women's
    rights were working to sensitise the public however government and clan
    elders were yet to engage on the issue.   Children  remained  as  chief
    victims of societal violence, with many boys as young  as  fourteen  or
    fifteen  participating  in  militia  attacks  or  becoming  members  of
    marauding gangs known as "parasites" or "maggots" (24.01).

212.  At paragraph 26.03, dealing with health issues, MSF stated in  January
    2007 that the conflict in Somalia  might  generate  fleeting  worldwide
    attention but the abysmal day-to-day living conditions faced by Somalis
    remained largely forgotten.  Somalia had  some  of  the  world's  worst
    health indicators.  However, at paragraph 26.13 it was noted  that  the
    ICRC continued to support Keyseney Hospital in Mogadishu North, run  by
    the Somali Red Crescent, and  the  community  run  Medina  Hospital  in
    Mogadishu South.  These were the man referral hospitals for war wounded
    patients throughout Central and southern Somalia.   The  ICRC  provided
    hospitals with staff salaries, supplies, equipment,  training  and  job
    supervision (paragraph 26.13).

213.  At paragraph 28.07, the BIA's Fact finding Mission of June 2007  found
    that IDPs who had been settled since 1991 had been  particularly  badly
    affected by the latest  conflicts,  with  their  livelihoods  gone  and
    assets now running out due to the increased number of IDPs using  their
    resources.   According to one source:-

         "Waves of IDPs will go back to wherever they feel secure,  in  most
         cases back to clan areas, where 'the first safety net is  the  sub-
         clan'.  On the question of whether clans  were  disrupted  by  such
         movement, one source said this was not the case, adding that people
         moved as clans, and were received as families with  the  sub,  sub-
         clans structure.  However, two security advisors  on  Somalia  said
         that clan maps cannot be used  any  longer  even  as  a  guideline,
         because groups had been displaced and were not disputing who is the
         original occupant of various lands".

 Mr Maka for appellant A

214.  Mr Maka submitted that  appellant  A  had  given  a  good  account  of
    herself in cross-examination.  She clearly engaged with the questioning
    and corroborated what she had said in her witness statement.  She had a
    four inch scar, from when she had been shot.  Being  an  Ashraf  had  a
    number of consequences.  Professor Lewis  had  stood  by  his  evidence
    given to the Tribunal in NM and Mr Maka urged the Tribunal to take  the
    same approach to his client as the IAT had done with the first claimant
    in NM:-

      "131. We considered that the  determination  of  the  Adjudicator  who
         dealt with the first claimant was legally flawed.   We  have  taken
         account of the recent materials placed before us and in  particular
         the oral evidence we heard.  Professor Lewis's evidence made  clear
         that  the  Ashraf  were  a  minority  clan  which  was   especially
         vulnerable to targeting by majority  clan  militias  and  that  for
         members of the  clan  there  would  be  three  particular  problems
         afflicting any travel within Somalia.  Firstly, most  Ashraf  could
         be picked out by their appearance, being relatively  light-skinned.
         Secondly,  the  Ashraf  had  no  clan  militia  and  so  would   be
         particularly at risk from militias manning checkpoints both at  any
         airport in southern Somalia they might land at and along any  route
         they might take by land to the Hamar Wayne area of Mogadishu or  to
         any other  part  of  southern  Somalia  such  as  Gedo  or  Afgoye.
         Thirdly, lack of clan militia meant  that  there  was  no  area  of
         southern Somalia which would be  a  safe  destination  for  Ashraf,
         including Gedo.  The latter region had been unsafe for Ashraf for a
         number of years.  This is  in  line  with  what  the  Tribunal  has
         routinely held.

    133.   For those reasons, this claimant's appeal is  allowed  outright.
         There is no evidence that she has any majority clan patronage."


215.  Mr Maka  referred  to  the  UNCU/UN-OCHA  report  of  August  2002  on
    minorities in Somalia (appellant A's bundle, page 125).  At  page  133,
    in the table dealing with the main  minority  groups  in  Somalia,  the
    Ashraf were described  as  Arab  immigrants  from  Saudi  Arabia,  some
    500,000 strong, whose main location districts were  Merka,  Brava,  Bay
    and Bakool regions, with a  clan  affiliation  to  the  Rahanweyn.   Dr
    Mullen, however, had spoken of the wife of the Speaker  of  the  Somali
    Parliament (an Ashraf) as being Rahanweyn.  In the case of appellant A,
    the Abgal (Hawiye) family who had turned out to help the appellant  and
    her family were merely one majority family in the midst of a number  of
    minority groups and appear to  have  assisted  because  the  father  of
    appellant A had been helpful to the Abgal family in the past.   In  any
    event, the family had not proved particularly effective  in  preventing
    attacks on appellant A and her family.  Such assistance as she received
    arose after the attack in question, including the attempted rape of her
    sister and the shooting of her brother.

216.  It was not incredible that appellant A did not know where her  husband
    was staying, after he left the family home.  There was no inconsistency
    in her evidence; her husband was moving around.  Accordingly, he  would
    not have been permanently living with distant relatives.  Appellant A's
    mother and mother-in-law had each given her their blessing to leave the
    country.  Her father-in-law had been divorced  from  her  mother-in-law
    and would not therefore wish to bring the latter out of  Somalia.   Any
    suggestion that, following her arrival in the United Kingdom, appellant
    A had made only feeble attempts to maintain contact with her family  in
    Somalia was, Mr Maka submitted, to approach the matter form  a  western
    point of view.  She did not have a telephone in Mogadishu.   There  was
    nothing unreasonable or incredible about what  appellant  A  had  said.
    Although Professor Lewis and Dr Luling were in  frequent  contact  with
    Somalis in Somalia, this did not mean that appellant A, as  a  minority
    clan member, could be so.  Appellant A had explained in her most recent
    statement why she had not immediately fled the persecution she had been
    suffering.  She could not be expected to remain indoors for the rest of
    her life.

217.  Drawing on the Court of Appeal judgment in Kinuthia  [2001]  EWCA  Civ
    2100, that "subsequent judicial action may be  insufficient  protection
    again maltreatment pending trial" (paragraph  21),  Mr  Maka  submitted
    that any assistance which appellant A received or might  receive  after
    the event would be too late.

218.  Although Professor Lewis had dismissed the suggestion that the  Ashraf
    had any connection with the Rahanweyn, Mr  Maka  acknowledged  that  Dr
    Mullen had spoken of the Speaker of the  Somali  Parliament  as  having
    such a connection.  Whilst that might be so  it  all  depended  on  the
    circumstances of a particular case.  In present-day Somalia,  Professor
    Lewis had explained that the priority for  majority  clan  members  was
    self-preservation; whereas Dr Luling said that minority  members  could
    not expect protection unless  they  had  maintained  contact  with  the
    protecting group, which appellant A  had  not.   Given  the  fact  that
    (appellant A's bundle, page 104)  entire  districts  in  Mogadishu  had
    emptied in May 2004,  according  to  an  IRIN  news  report,  and  that
    appellant A had arrived in the United Kingdom  in  February  2004,  her
    inability to contact relatives in Somalia was credible.

219.  Paragraph 3.5.6 of the respondent's OGN of 12 November 2007 (R3,  page
    1192) clearly stated  that  although  some  individuals  from  minority
    groups like the Reer Hamar and the Bravanese were in some circumstances
    able to secure protection from major or sub-related clans,  in  general
    those  based  in  southern  or  central  Somalia  were  culturally  and
    ethnically distinct from Somali clan families and unlikely to  be  able
    to secure protection from any major clan family or  related  sub  clan.
    Paragraph 3.5.7 stated that Benadiri and Bravanese groups could not  in
    general avail themselves of internal relocation within southern central
    Somalia.  According to the latest background evidence, minority  groups
    in Somalia were particularly  vulnerable.   In  this  regard,  Mr  Maka
    referred to the Danish Fact Finding report of March 2007 (R2, page 569)
    where IDPs were said to be extremely vulnerable to various  abuses  and
    were a targeted  population  in  Mogadishu.  Being  a  minority  was  a
    sufficient differential impact to  satisfy  the  requirement  of  Adan.
    That being an Ashraf was a sufficient  distinguishing  feature  to  put
    appellant A at real risk was borne out by the decision of the ECtHR  in
    Salah Sheekh v Netherlands [2007] ECHR 36:-

    "148.The court would further take issue with the  national  authority's
         assessment that the treatment to which the  applicant  fell  victim
         was meted out arbitrarily.  It appears from the appellant's account
         that he and his family were targeted because  they  belonged  to  a
         minority and for that reason it was known  that  they  had  had  no
         means of protection; they were easy prey, as were the  other  three
         Ashraf families living in the same village...  The court would  add
         that, in its opinion, it cannot be required of the  applicant  that
         he  establishes  that  further  special  distinguishing   features,
         concerning him personally exist in order to show that he  was,  and
         continues to be, personally at risk.  In this context, it  is  true
         that a mere possibility of ill-treatment is insufficient to give  a
         rise to a breach of article 3.  Such a situation arose in the  case
         of Vilvarajah and Others v the United Kingdom where the court found
         that the possibility of detention  and  ill  treatment  existed  in
         respect of young male Tamils returning to  Sri  Lanka.   The  court
         then insisted  the  applicants  show  that  special  distinguishing
         features exist in their case that could or ought  to  have  enabled
         the United Kingdom  authorities  to  foresee  that  they  would  be
         treated in a manner incompatible with article 3... However, in  the
         present case, the court considers, on the basis of the  applicant's
         account and the information about the situation in "the  relatively
         unsafe" areas of Somalia insofar as members of the Ashraf  minority
         are concerned, that it  is  foreseeable  that  on  his  return  the
         applicant will be exposed to treatment in breach of article 3.   It
         might render the protection offered by that provision illusory  if,
         in addition to the fact that he belongs to the Ashraf -  which  the
         government have not disputed - the applicant be  required  to  show
         the existence of further distinguishing features".


220.  The OCHA situation report of 9 November  2007  on  Somalia  (appellant
    A's bundle, page 118) described the recent fighting  in  Mogadishu  and
    its impact on the population as "alarming".  Some 40  NGOs  released  a
    statement in October 2007 on what they  described  as  a  "humanitarian
    catastrophe" in South/Central Somalia and called for the protection  of
    civilians and the delivery of aid.  The nature of the language used  in
    the OCHA report had, Mr Maka submitted, implications for  international
    humanitarian law.  On anyone's view, however, there was a real risk  of
    a breach of the relevant Conventions.  The BBC News report (appellant's
    bundle A, page 39) regarding a 22 year old woman who for the past seven
    years lived in a camp for displaced persons in Central Mogadishu, since
    fleeing Baidoa, returned to Baidoa in April 2007 when there  was  heavy
    fighting in Mogadishu.  However, she  returned  to  Mogadishu  recently
    because her husband was hit by a stray bullet and she had to look after
    him.  The family did not feel safe and when the children became ill the
    family had no access to  medical  facilities  and  resorted  to  herbal
    medicine or  "a  traditional  burning  method".   Although  there  were
    hospitals near their camp, they did not accept the family  because  the
    family did not have money.  The hospital would, however, take the  most
    serious cases "like the wounded  or  gunshots".   The  informant's  own
    child had died of diarrhoea.  Six months ago there had been an increase
    in the number of rapes in the IDP  camp  but  "since  the  transitional
    federal government said no one could walk around at night the number of
    cases has decreased".  This was because "it is not so easy any more  to
    enter our camp after dark".  Having said  that,  the  informant  stated
    that the camp "doesn't have gates so anyone can just come in and  out".
    If a woman in the camp was raped, one  could  hear  her  screaming  but
    there was little one could do.  According to another  BBC  News  report
    (page 42)  pro-government  militias  were  frustrating  UN  efforts  to
    deliver aid by demanding up to $300 at checkpoints.  IDPs  were  having
    to wait in line for up  to  six  hours  for  twenty  litres  of  water.
    Another informant quoted by BBC  News  (page  43),  who  had  lived  in
    Mogadishu all his life, described the fighting of the past  few  months
    as unlike anything he had previously witnessed.  Although he  was  used
    the checkpoints, the ones now in operation were "unlike anything else I
    have seen" (page 44), Ethiopian forces were  shelling  civilian  areas.
    All of this information was more recent than that referred  to  in  the
    COIS report.

221.  According to Ken Menkhaus in "There and Back  Again  in  Somalia"  (11
    February 2007) (R3, page 1402):-

       "Under  the  Courts'   administration,   public   security   improved
         dramatically throughout the capital.  The Islamists  disarmed  clan
         militias, rid the city of warlords and  criminal  gangs,  re-opened
         the  seaport  and  airport,  and  made  the  streets   safe.    Not
         surprisingly, they earned  widespread  respect  and  support  among
         locals and in the diaspora.  That respect began to  fray,  however,
         once   hard-line   elements   in   the   Courts   promoted   strict
         interpretations of Shari'a, restricted the  rights  of  women,  the
         media and civil society, and began mobilising for irredentist Jihad
         against Ethiopia.   Somalis  were  torn  between  their  desire  to
         support a movement that brought calm to the capital for  the  first
         time in 15 years, and feared that the same movement  was  beginning
         to replicate many of the authoritarian tendencies at home and  ill-
         considered clashes with Ethiopia  that  had  proved  so  disastrous
         under the Said Barre regime".

222.  Menkhaus considered the sudden dissolution of the  Courts  to  be  the
    result of a deep,  unresolved  set  of  divisions  within  the  Islamic
    alliance in Mogadishu.  Although  the  Union  of  Islamic  Courts  were
    "defunct as an organisation, political Islam  will  remain  a  powerful
    factor in any  future  political  dispensation  in  Somalia.   Islamist
    groups  retain  a  strong  infrastructure  of  schools,  charities  and
    mosques".  Armed resistance to the TFG  and  Ethiopians  had,  however,
    already arisen because of clan-based resistance to the TFG in Ethiopia,
    attacks and "mischief" by recently returned warlords seeking to disrupt
    any effort to impose law and order in the city, regrouping Jihadi cells
    and criminal gangs.  Menkhaus considered that these  disparate  sources
    of armed violence  "could  coalesce  into  more  organised  resistance,
    although  Ethiopia's  pledged  withdrawal  reduces  the  odds  of  true
    insurgency".  The crumbling of the UIC, combined with  the  failure  of
    the TFG to provide even a token administrative presence,  had  produced
    ideal conditions for the revival of armed  criminality.   The  rise  in
    assassinations in Mogadishu in recent weeks suggested a possible return
    of the "dirty war" tactics of 2004-2006.  Somali families were  fleeing
    "a combination of war,  criminal  violence,  political  insecurity  and
    natural disasters" such as floods (page 1406).  Menkhaus described  the
    extent of US involvement in the offensive against the UIC as "unclear",
    although some in the Pentagon saw the offensive against the  UIC  as  a
    preferred template  for  the  war  on  terror  (page  1408).   Mr  Maka
    submitted that the TFG had excluded key organisations and he said  that
    the objective evidence showed clearly that  there  were  indiscriminate
    killings going on in Mogadishu.

223.   Jonathan Evans,  Director  General  of  MI5,  in  a  speech  entitled
    "Terrorism is 'product of a much wider extremist ideology' "(5 November
    2007) (appellant A's bundle, page 222) considered  that  Al  Qaeda  was
    undertaking terrorist activities in Somalia.  The Foreign Secretary  on
    27 November 2006 said in the House of  Commons  that  a  UN  Monitoring
    Group on Somalia  had  alleged  "that  foreign  fighters  have  entered
    Somalia in answer to calls for Jihad that have been uttered by  members
    of the Union of Islamic Courts".  Mr Maka said that the  forces  ranged
    against the TFG were, accordingly, not unorganised bandits but an armed
    opposition organisation.  This was relevant to  the  issue  of  whether
    there existed an internal armed conflict.  The only conclusion to reach
    was that the situation in Somalia had deteriorated to  the  point  that
    all three appellants should succeed and that any failed  asylum  seeker
    from Somalia should do likewise.

 Mr Swift for the respondent

224.  Mr Swift's oral  submissions  on  22  November  were  supplemented  by
    written submissions received the following day, which  were  copied  to
    the appellants' counsel and Mr Young.  The respondent accepted that the
    country situation in Somalia was "fluid" but, whilst that might  affect
    the general level of security enjoyed by all civilians, it  was  not  a
    factor that altered the relevance or significance of  the  analysis  of
    asylum claims.  To the extent that the  current  situation  might  have
    altered the motivation of the participants, the evidence suggested that
    the current state of targeted  violence  was  not  concerned  with  the
    persecution of minority groups or attacks on individuals on  the  basis
    of clan membership as such.  The respondent submitted that the  general
    approach in NM regarding the distinction between majority and  minority
    groups remained valid at the  present  time.   There  was,  indeed,  no
    reason to depart from the general guidance given in NM in  relation  to
    minority/majority clan membership and that case's approach to women.

225.  Mr Swift submitted that appellant H fell to be treated as a member  of
    an unidentified majority clan and that she accordingly had no  arguable
    claim  for  asylum.   Although  Somali  women  were  recognised  as   a
    particular social group, appellant H had not shown that she had a  well
    founded fear of persecution by reason of membership of that group.   AG
    and paragraph 123 of NM were relied upon.  There was in  any  event  no
    reason to suggest that the status of Somali women was materially  worse
    now than at the time of NM.  As for article 3, appellant H could not be
    taken to have shown that she was a lone woman, that is to say, with  no
    access to male family support; or that she did not  have  a  safe  clan
    area that she could live  in.   Any  evidence  appellant  H  had  given
    regarding the  existence  and  whereabouts  of  her  family  should  be
    assessed in the light  of  the  adverse  credibility  findings  of  the
    Tribunal.  As well as being guilty of a criminal offence of  attempting
    to obtain leave to enter  or  remain  by  deception,  appellant  H  had
    initially claimed to be a member of the Reer Hamar and, later, to be  a
    member of the Ashraf.  The  original  Tribunal  had  reached  justified
    findings regarding her credibility.  It did not accept  that  what  she
    had said about her relatives was true.  She should be treated as having
    an area in which she could enjoy the protection of her majority clan.

226.  Appellant S's claim to be a member of  the  Sheikhal  Jasira  was,  Mr
    Swift  submitted,  wholly  lacking  in  credibility.    Appellant   S's
    knowledge of her clan structure was both  inaccurate  and  differed  as
    between the account given to the screening officer and  to  Dr  Luling.
    Given her family background, it was not credible that, even as a  young
    woman, she would not have a rudimentary knowledge of her clan identity.
     Her knowledge of the village of Jasira was very  basic  and  comprised
    the sort of information that most people in Mogadishu could be expected
    to know.  No weight should be given to the evidence  of  Dr  Luling  in
    respect of appellant S's clan identity because Dr Luling  accepted  she
    had no knowledge of Jasira apart from what  she  had  set  out  in  her
    report and therefore was not in a position  to  test  the  veracity  of
    appellant S's claim to come from there.   Dr  Luling's  report  was  in
    places ambiguous and/or "economical".  It  was  unclear  from  it  what
    information came from appellant S and what  had  been  supplied  by  Dr
    Luling by way of elaboration.  Having included the observation (without
    more) that appellant S said she came from the "light skinned" Sheikhal,
    Dr Luling, when asked to comment on appellant  S's  appearance  at  the
    hearing, indicated that she was in fact dark-skinned.  Dr Luling  could
    give no explanation for this omission.  Dr Luling was unable to  verify
    appellant S's dialect.   Professor  Lewis's  evidence,  that  he  spoke
    northern Somali and could identify whether someone was  speaking  in  a
    southern Somali dialect, did not  suggest  any  basis  for  being  able
    precisely to identify the dialect of appellant  S  who,  moreover,  had
    refused to undertake a language test.

227.   Appellant  S's  evidence  about   attacks   from   the   Hawiye   was
    contradictory of her statement, that she had not been beaten physically
    in the period 1991 to 1995.  She was unable to elaborate on the  nature
    of the beatings except to say that she was beaten in such a way that no
    scars would be left.   That  she  had  left  her  daughter  in  Somalia
    contradicted her evidence  that  it  was  dangerous  to  stay  in  that
    country.  Her evidence as to losing contact with her husband and  elder
    son in Saudi Arabia was wholly  lacking  in  credibility,  as  was  her
    account of how  she  came  to  raise  thousands  of  dollars  with  the
    assistance of a Somali lady from another clan.

228.  In the light of those credibility factors,  Mr  Swift  submitted  that
    the appeal of appellant S should fail for the same reasons as appellant
    H.

229.  The respondent accepted that appellant  A  was  Ashraf  but  Mr  Swift
    submitted that her evidence showed that she and her family were able to
    live reasonably safely in Mogadishu; her account  of  her  husband  and
    brothers  being  unable  to  live  with  her  was  wholly  lacking   in
    credibility; her explanation for not going with her husband, instead of
    staying with her mother and mother-in-law, was  inconsistent  with  the
    fact that she had left those women to come to the United  Kingdom;  and
    she had made only feeble attempts whilst in this country to contact her
    family in Mogadishu, particularly given that the Tribunal  observed  in
    NM that telephone connections in Mogadishu remained good.

230.  Mr Swift submitted  that  there  was  evidence  that  the  Ashraf  had
    relationships with other majority groups and may accordingly be able to
    access protection form  them.   Appellant  A's  circumstances  were  an
    example of this protection.  The  particular  community  in  which  she
    lived had  acted  collectively  for  some  thirteen  years  to  provide
    protection for itself and that protection had encompassed  appellant  A
    and her family.  Whatever the reason, appellant A had been accepted  by
    her neighbours, who had compelled the militia to depart and had  helped
    her when she was wounded.  Thus, Mr Swift said that, even if one were a
    member of a minority clan  or  group,  the  identity  of  the  minority
    concerned might be significant, as would the  individual  circumstances
    of the  person  concerned.   In  this  regard,  Mr  Swift  relied  upon
    paragraphs 117 and 119 of NM.  The Ashraf  fell  to  be  looked  at  by
    reference to their particular circumstances.  In  the  situation  which
    Somalia now found itself,  it  appeared  that  there  was  in  fact  no
    particular persecution going on of minority groups and that the lack of
    respect for the Ashraf, which had developed during the civil war, might
    be disappearing.

231.  As for the argument that the protection afforded  by  the  neighbours,
    including the member of the Abgal, was insufficient because it arose ex
    post facto, Mr Swift said that neighbours could not be expected  to  be
    on hand on a twenty four hour basis; the important thing were that they
    were willing not only to react but to react bravely, when the  occasion
    demanded.  The lack of a well-founded fear at the time appellant A  was
    in Mogadishu was shown by the fact that she did not leave  in  response
    to any particular event but, rather, when  an  agent  was  fortuitously
    provided by her father-in-law.

232.  Mr Swift referred to paragraphs 23.18 and 23.21 of the  November  2007
    COIS report (R1, page 571), quoting Danish sources, for the proposition
    that there was no evidence that women  were  specifically  targeted  in
    Somalia at the present time.  Overall, he said that the COIS report was
    the most valuable source of  materials  on  the  country,  producing  a
    comprehensive  picture  which,  despite   claims   to   the   contrary,
    demonstrated that the position in Somalia was nowhere near the same  as
    that  of  Darfur.   Humanitarian  relief  agencies  were  operating  in
    Somalia.  They were stretched on occasion but their activities were not
    being frustrated  by  any  of  the  players.   There  were  significant
    population  movements  in  both  directions  and  it  was   accordingly
    difficult to see any net effect.  According  to  Dr  Mullen,  the  most
    recent movements arose because people were fearful  of  a  Darod/Hawiye
    conflict and not because of the actuality  of  such  a  conflict.   The
    situation was not such as to give rise to a general  well-founded  fear
    of article 3 abuse.  In any event, circumstances  varied  significantly
    across Somalia.  As an example, Mr Swift said there was an  absence  of
    evidence to show that conflict was taking place  in  Jasira,  appellant
    S's alleged home village.

233.  In the respondent's written  submissions  it  was  asserted  that  the
    current political and security situation in Mogadishu, whilst adding  a
    "further dimension", had not served to "shift the  central  place  that
    clan structures hold in  Somali  society".   Nor  had  there  been  any
    significant change in the status of Somali women, although  there  were
    "increased security risks which unaccompanied women  may  face  in  the
    current climate".  The Tribunal was urged to endorse  the  position  of
    the IAT in paragraph 117 of NM and confirm that a person of either  sex
    who was not found to be a minority clan member or a equivalent would be
    likely to have a location in southern Somalia where the  majority  clan
    concerned  could  offer  sufficient  protection,  although   individual
    factors and locations would be relevant,  as  would  past  history  and
    individual or family connections.

234.  A review of the material showed, the respondent said, that  there  was
    some evidence that majority clan  members  would  not  be  attacked  by
    members of other clans, unless in the context of an inter-clan dispute;
    that a majority clan member would generally  be  safe  within  an  area
    controlled by his or her clan; that the violence currently taking place
    did not at face value appear to be  based  on  clan  lines;  that  such
    violence was motivated primarily by  political  considerations  (albeit
    that those might in fact directly correlate to clan  membership);  that
    an ordinary Somali with no particular political affiliations, perceived
    or actual, who was not involved in any dispute, faced  a  limited  risk
    within his or her own clan area; and that particular clan  areas  might
    be safe for other clans traversing them.

235.  At R1, page 192, the US State Department, reporting in March  2007  on
    the year 2006, noted that the vast  majority  of  killings  in  Somalia
    during 2006 resulted from clashes between  militias  or  from  unlawful
    militia activities.  The fall of  the  UIC  had  resulted  in  violence
    between the TFG and factions opposed to it and there had, according  to
    the UN Secretary General (R1, page 258 and R4, page 1588a), been a  re-
    emergence of  inter-clan  fighting  which  had  abated  under  the  UIC
    control.  But objective evidence indicated that majority  clan  members
    were not targeted by other clan members for  purely  clan  reasons  and
    majority clans were generally perceived to be safe within their  areas.
    In this regard, Mr Swift relied upon the BIA report of the  April  2007
    Mission (R1, page 1119).  In this, a UN security officer  was  recorded
    (page 1129) as stating that, apart from Mogadishu, other areas could be
    safe for return if an  individual's  clan  was  dominant  in  the  area
    concerned and the individual had not done anything to  antagonise  them
    in the past.  The position as of April  2007,  compared  with  eighteen
    months previously was  different  (leaving  aside  Mogadishu)  only  in
    Middle and Lower Shebelle, where there  was  a  vacuum  in  leadership.
    Apart from Mogadishu, the source said that there would  be  no  problem
    for Somalis travelling through an area dominated by  a  different  clan
    and that "peaceful interaction between members of different  clans  did
    take place when they were not in dispute".  There would, however, be  a
    risk if a person was caught up in  sporadic  inter-clan  fighting,  for
    example, by being subjected to a  revenge  attack  in  response  to  an
    incident that the person  concerned  might  have  been  unaware  about.
    Another source (page 1131) said that safety on return depended  on  the
    circumstances.  In general it would be "irresponsible" to return people
    to Mogadishu without very careful checking but  there  might  be  cases
    where this could be possible.  In terms  of  the  rural  village  areas
    which had been unaffected  by  the  Mogadishu  fighting,  it  could  be
    possible to return individuals of the predominant clan  in  that  area.
    Clanship was important - if a person had not offended against his  clan
    they would take  him  back  and  defend  him.   Feasibility  of  return
    depended on a case-by-case assessment: theoretically, returning is  not
    impossible or 'a complete no', particularly if the person left  Somalia
    for economic reasons.  But you would have to  look  very  carefully  at
    factors such as whether the person's clan wanted him back or whether he
    might be at risk from the TFG/Ethiopian forces for being  a  member  of
    the UIC.  Travel through another clan area could be  achieved  provided
    this was done "in  a  respectful  and  appropriate  manner".    Outside
    Mogadishu, clan relations were  generally  maintained  in  a  state  of
    balance or "cold war" which enabled them to interact peacefully.

236.  Another source was quoted (R3, page 1138) as stating that although  it
    was unsafe until 1993 for an individual to travel  from  his  own  clan
    area to one of a rival clan,  genuine  clan  warfare  had  subsequently
    ceased and clan enmity had largely dissipated.  Clashes  tended  to  be
    between clan-based militias, but about matters unrelated  to  any  clan
    issues that might impact upon "innocent" individuals.  So, in the main,
    a private individual could safely travel outside their own  clan  areas
    throughout the country.  However,  recent  hostilities  had  seen  "the
    beginning of a return to the pre-1993  situation,  with  clan  enmities
    being revived as a direct result of  the  TFG's  actions".   The  TFG's
    military command and control structures were almost  exclusively  Darod
    and the TFG was increasingly being described as a "clan clique".

237.  At R3, page 1141, a Swedish researcher  of  Somali  dissent  explained
    that, although his clan was Hawiye (Habr Gedir) he did not  "live"  the
    clan system and did not generally disclose  his  clan  background.   He
    would consider travelling through an area dominated by a different clan
    to be "very dangerous".  The same source then continued:-

    "8.05.He said that the current war marked  a  new  development  because
         clans which were normally hostile to each other had  joined  forces
         against a common enemy - the Ethiopians and  Darods.   Another  new
         development was the intensity of the conflict.  Clan disputes  were
         normally characterised  by  posturing,  brief  flare-ups  and  then
         withdrawal but the intensity of this war had been sustained.


    8.06.  Mr Khaire commented that people saw the period when the  Islamic
         courts were in control as one of relative  peace  and  tranquillity
         when things functioned reasonably well.  This had promoted  greater
         contact between different clans and more social interactions.


    8.07.  We asked about general safety in  areas  in  Central  and  South
         Somalia outside Mogadishu and its  immediate  environs.   Mr  Carey
         said that the provinces had been relatively unaffected by the  main
         fighting, and that life there remained much  the  same  as  it  had
         always been, with little impact from IDPs most of whom remained  on
         the outskirts of Mogadishu.  He thought that other areas  would  be
         increasingly affected if the war carried on.


    8.08.  He said that in  the  provinces  there  continued  to  be  local
         disputes between local clans and militias, often about water rights
         (he thought that the provision of reliable water supplies would see
         the end of inter-clan conflict in Somalia).  But this  was  'normal
         life' Somalia  style.   Although  not  comparable  to  the  western
         standards, the local administration  and  justice  administered  by
         local clans was reasonably fair.  However, even without the current
         war, Somalia remained a dangerous place.  Mr Carey  did  not  think
         that it would be appropriate for anyone to be returned to any  part
         of Somalia and said this was likely to be the case for another ten-
         fifteen years".


238.  At R3, page 1143, an airline executive source  was  quoted  as  saying
    that his researchers indicated that, although a  person  would  not  be
    welcome on a permanent basis in the area of another clan,  particularly
    given the pressure that that would put upon resources,  in  particular,
    water, in ordinary circumstances a member of one clan  would  not  harm
    one of another clan solely because of their clan membership - it  would
    be because of what they did.  The exception would be if there  were  an
    inter-clan dispute, such as a killing.

239.  The BIA Fact Finding Mission of June 2007 (R2, page  609)  heard  from
    many sources "that the internal conflict with the TFG was for the  most
    part not due to clan differences.  For example, the Ali Ghedi  and  the
    Mohamed Dheer, both members of the Abgal sub-clan of  the  Hawiye,  did
    not work together because of the underlying struggle of  power  between
    them.  It was deceptive to see the current crisis in Somalia as a Darod-
    Hawiye clan conflict.  That conflict was now over and the main one  was
    now political in nature.  This warlord  conflict  involving  government
    officials "had little popular support as many civilians believe  it  to
    be nothing more than a struggle for power, land,  money  and  dominance
    between warlords.  Mohamed Dheere's  targeted  arrest  of  hundreds  of
    Somalis (all Hawiye, many of them  businessmen)  in  mid-2007  included
    those from his own sub-clan, the Abgal.

240.  The respondent's submissions  reiterated  what  was  said  to  be  the
    importance of  paragraph  5.08  of  the  same  report,  concerning  the
    "remarkable" reduction  in  checkpoints  and  "less  interest  in  clan
    affiliation".  The risk at checkpoints was now political,  rather  than
    aimed at ordinary Somalis.  At paragraph 5.2, the  Mission  found  that
    outside Mogadishu "protection used to be arranged  within  clan  lines,
    but now  there  is  a  fragmented  pattern  of  fiefdoms  and  emerging
    factions".  One source said that, although clan was most  important  in
    times like these "when you need each other the most", the  same  source
    also said that "if you have your close friends in Somalia then you  may
    be more likely to contact them than your own clan if you need somewhere
    to stay etc."  Although the clan traditionally supported both  men  and
    women, men were more likely to be welcomed back, regardless of how long
    they had been away from Somalia, because of the shortage of  males  and
    the importance of their role in the clan.

241.  As for travel in  Mogadishu,  the  Mission  found  that  there  was  a
    rudimentary private transport network in the city and returning Somalis
    could move around the city "and not  be  targeted  as  insurgents,  but
    despite this, it would be "better" (i.e. safer) if they  could  hire  a
    car.  All sources asked agreed there was no problem travelling to rival
    clan areas except at times of inter-clan clashes".

242.  Referring to the respondent's OGN (R1, page 1189) where, at 3.3.7,  it
    was considered that any Somali  from  a  major  clan  family  would  be
    unlikely to be able to demonstrate a well-founded fear  of  persecution
    on the basis of clan affiliation alone; that  all  clan  family  groups
    were represented in Mogadishu; that people displaced  from  their  home
    area may move to other areas populated by their clan; and that  Somalis
    were increasingly able to both visit and live in cities  outside  their
    clan's traditional domain, the respondent asserted that  there  was  an
    increasing body of evidence to show that clan protection was not always
    necessary  for  majority  clan  members,  although  the   deteriorating
    security situation gave rise to increasing uncertainties, and  that  by
    and large the disturbances recorded in  the  background  evidence  were
    primarily politically motivated.   It was submitted that  the  approach
    of the Tribunal at paragraph 117 of NM  remained  appropriate.   There,
    the IAT had recognised that there were  minority  clans  who  were,  at
    least locally, integrated with majority clans  and  other  groups  that
    might be more accurately described as a caste.  Those cases  were  said
    to require specific consideration and it was recognised that a division
    between minority and majority did not represent a "bright line  on  one
    or other  side  of  which  every  clan  must  fall".    The  respondent
    submitted that  this  was  correct  so  far  as  minority  groups  were
    concerned.  Reference was made to R1, page 84, where at  20.30  of  the
    COIS report, it was said that Reer Hamar families in Mogadishu had been
    able to secure majority  protection  by  marrying  their  daughters  to
    members of the majority clan such as the Habr Gedir.  The Danish report
    of January 2007 (R2, page 563) found that one source explained that the
    minority populations in Somalia were "no  longer  victims  of  targeted
    looting and other targeted human rights violations.   However,  it  was
    added that any  person  in  Somalia  who  did  not  enjoy  strong  clan
    protection because he or she is from a weak clan or minority group  has
    to keep a low profile".  The BIA mission  of  June  2007  recorded  one
    source (R2, page 639) as stating that in the recent waves of  IDPs  the
    minorities  have  not  been  particularly  targeted  or   discriminated
    against.

243.  A "practical  example"  of  the  way  in  which  minorities  could  be
    effectively protected was, the respondent submitted, to be found in the
    case of appellant A, who received assistance from non-Ashraf neighbours
    continuously from 1991 and over a period  of  thirteen  years  had  the
    benefit of shelter and protection afforded by a community  which  acted
    collectively for its own protection.  The reasons  for  that  state  of
    affairs might well have been  mixed,  including  elements  of  personal
    loyalty (in appellant  A's  case,  to  her  father).    The  respondent
    contended that the position of the Ashraf is not precisely the same  as
    that of other Benadiri sub-groups.  The Ashraf  have  continually  been
    held in respect (by reason of the religious functions which  they  have
    traditionally carried out).  There was also  the  issue  of  historical
    links between the Ashraf and the Rahanweyn in Baidoa and the  Abgal  in
    Mogadishu.  Thus, an individual  Ashraf  was  more  likely  than  other
    persons from another Benadiri group to have a clan or  personal  patron
    to which to turn for protection.  Although the "special status" of  the
    Ashraf was eroded following 1991 and they, like other minorities,  were
    vulnerable to attack by militias, their previous position was  said  to
    have placed them in a better position to be able to  obtain  protection
    from majority clan members.  In any event,  the  evidence  showed  that
    minority groups were no  longer  subject  to  active  persecution.   By
    contrast, building on the point made by Dr Mullen, there was nothing to
    suggest that the Ashraf were generally associated with the UIC and they
    were therefore not vulnerable on that basis.

244.  Turning to the position of women, the respondent  urged  the  Tribunal
    to confirm the guidance of the IAT at paragraph 125 of NM; that in  the
    light of Adan, a "differential impact" had not been  shown  as  regards
    female Somali returnees, nor were general conditions such as to  engage
    article 3.  An individualised consideration  of  the  position  of  the
    female appellant in question had to  be  undertaken.   So  far  as  the
    status of women in Somali society was concerned, the objective evidence
    did not indicate any significant worsening (or indeed  improvement)  in
    the situation.

Mr Collins's reply to the respondent's submissions

245.  Mr Collins criticised the respondent for choosing  not  to  submit  an
    expert of her own and seeking "merely to unduly and unfairly  criticise
    and nitpick and on that basis attempt to undermine the expert  evidence
    called on behalf of the appellants".  It was not  right  to  categorise
    Professor Lewis and Dr Luling as one-sided or extreme and  politicised.
    It could not in any event be  said  that  Dr  Mullen  had  adopted  any
    extreme positions.   Any criticism of the respondent that  the  experts
    had not provided adequate  sourced  material  ignored  the  reality  of
    obtaining information  from  sources  on  the  ground  in  Somalia,  in
    particular Mogadishu.  In any event, Mr Collins pointed  out  that  the
    BIA's Fact Finding Mission did not actually visit Mogadishu  but,  like
    the three experts who had given oral  evidence,  was  informed  through
    contacts on the ground, and contacts with those contacts.  The evidence
    of Lewis, Luling and Mullen was compatible, Mr Collins submitted,  with
    the Human Rights Watch report "Shell Shocked: Civilians  under  Siege",
    which relied on first hand evidence from Mogadishu.

246.  The  respondent  had  accepted  that  the  current  position  involves
    serious perturbing armed violence and the  objective  evidence  clearly
    showed  that  the  situation  in   Mogadishu   was   one   of   ongoing
    deterioration.

Mr Maka's reply to the respondent's submissions

247.  In his written comments  on  the  respondent's  submissions,  Mr  Maka
    submitted that the respondent's attempt to distinguish  the  Ashraf  as
    some  special  group,  owing  to  their   religious   background,   was
    fundamentally flawed.  It was only adopted by the  respondent  when  it
    became plain that that was  the  only  position  that  she  could  take
    against appellant A, in the light of the evidence, including  appellant
    A's performance in cross-examination.  The aura of respect accorded  to
    the Ashraf as a "religious" group had, according to Dr  Mullen,  ceased
    to  exist  after  the  civil  war.   Numerous  Tribunal  decisions  had
    consistently approached the matter on the basis that the Ashraf were  a
    minority clan, especially vulnerable  to  targeting  by  majority  clan
    militias (paragraph 131 of NM).  The respondent's position was  in  any
    event inconsistent, as between appellant A and  appellant  S,  who,  if
    accepted as a Sheikhal, would, the respondent acknowledged, have a well
    founded fear of persecution. However, "Sheikhal" was only the plural of
    "Sheikh", a term of reverence utilised for professional men of religion
    (as stated in the evidence of  Professor  Lewis).    According  to  the
    Danish report (R1, page  326),  whilst  the  Ashraf  were  a  religious
    people, the Sheikhal were religious Sheikhs and judges, a  position  Mr
    Maka submitted was  "superior in  the  religious  pecking  order"  than
    merely being religious people.  Furthermore, so far as the  association
    with the Rahanweyn was concerned, the  Danish  report  (R1,  page  368)
    noted Ashraf elders as explaining that the Ashraf  have  no  particular
    affiliation with any of the major Somali clans.  They stated that  they
    used to have good relations with all other clans in Somalia.  They were
    considered a highly  respected  clan  with  devout  religious  members.
    However, to some degree now, the Ashraf "are  considered  strangers  in
    Somalia by the other major Somalia clans.  ... They are  considered  to
    be a weak, unarmed  religious  group  with  no  social  legal  rights".
    Those left behind had no protection from any other  clan  and  were  at
    risk of being looted, raped and even killed (page 370).  That, Mr Maka
    said, was what the Danish had found in 2000.  There was  also  evidence
    that there was no so-called Abgal connection with the Ashraf  and  that
    R3, page 1161 was inaccurate as referring to the fact that  some  Abgal
    militia did not respect the Ashraf.  The actual source, a Canadian  IRB
    paper of 1996, actually recorded that after  Barre  fled,  "some  Abgal
    militias were brought into Mogadishu... These militias did not  respect
    the Ashraf".   Dr Mullen had also said in evidence that  the  Islamists
    of the UIC would  only  have  respect  for  those  who  were  religious
    teachers, rather than ordinary Ashraf.

248.  So far  as  the  protection  by  neighbours  was  concerned,  Mr  Maka
    referred to the map produced by appellant A at page 16 of  her  bundle,
    which  clearly  showed  that,  besides  one  Abgal  family,  which  was
    favourably disposed to appellant A's family  because  of  her  father's
    past, all the other neighbours were actually minority clans themselves.
    These comprised other Ashraf, Reer Hamar and Shanshiya, Reer  Faqi  and
    Bandhawaw, all minority  Benadiri  groups.   The  family  accommodating
    appellant A was, itself, a minority clan.  There was,  accordingly,  no
    evidence to show  that  appellant  A  was  locally  integrated  with  a
    majority clan or that she was living in some closed community or secure
    village.  It could not possibly be said,  living  in  urban  Mogadishu,
    that she was safe, when her father had been shot, her sister  had  been
    shot and appellant A had been attacked with a view  to  rape  and  also
    shot.   Her brother had been shot, her sister beaten up and the  family
    property regularly looted.  It was not denied by  the  respondent  that
    what A had suffered amounted to persecution.

249.  Appellant A had nowhere to go until arrangements were made for her  to
    leave Somalia,  thanks  to  her  father-in-law.   The  actions  of  the
    neighbours had been sporadic and, in any event, after the event.  Given
    what had been happening in Mogadishu, it  could  not  realistically  be
    said, in any event, that this network of neighbours would be  available
    to appellant A  if  returned  today.   Her  home  area  of  Shibiz  was
    described by Dr Mullen as being in Central Mogadishu,  whereas  looking
    at the map of Mogadishu overall, Mr Maka submitted that it was in North
    Mogadishu.  There had been civilian killings and heavy shelling in  the
    north of  Mogadishu.   Furthermore,  the  OCHA  report  of  March  2007
    referred to Shibiz as being in the north of Mogadishu and a place  from
    which people were fleeing.

250.  Mr Maka submitted that even majority clan members were  at  real  risk
    today.  Dr Mullen had said that there was evidence of  inter-clan  and
    intra-clan fighting, that males were at risk of forced  recruitment  or
    being shot and the females were at risk of rape or being used as assets
    for domestic labour and child-bearing.  Given that the dynamics of  the
    area were constantly changing, a majority clan  member  would  have  to
    negotiate his way past enemy clan lines in  order  to  get  home.   The
    finding in NM for majorities could not  stand,  in  the  light  of  the
    current evidence.  There were many checkpoints and,  insofar  as  these
    were manned by the TFG, the respondent's own Fact Finding Missions  had
    recorded that the TFG were ill-disciplined.

251.  So far as Dr Luling was concerned, Mr Maka submitted that  she  should
    not be cast in a light in which she was no longer able to give evidence
    before the Tribunal.  Her reports and views had been found  helpful  in
    the past.  He accepted, however, that there were  concerns  about  "the
    1993 material" and that the Tribunal  should  make  clear  that  expert
    reports  should  include  a  statement  setting  out  the  duties   and
    obligations of an expert.  The fact that Dr Luling did not include such
    a statement did not make her reports less reliable.  Mr Maka echoed  Mr
    Collins's observation that the respondent  had  not  seen  fit  to  put
    forward an expert  to  give  oral  evidence.   So  far  as  women  were
    concerned, there was objective evidence to show they were  particularly
    at risk in the present situation, as were children.  It  was  submitted
    that "in a war situation, the vulnerable and weak in society suffer the
    most".

Submissions on article 15(c) of Council Directive 2004/83/EC  and  paragraph
339C of the Immigration Rules - serious and individual threat to  civilian's
life or person  by  reason  of  indiscriminate  violence  in  situations  of
international or internal armed conflict

252.  The Tribunal received considerable oral  and  written  submissions  on
    one particular issue of subsidiary protection, as provided in Chapter V
    of Council Directive 2004/83/EC ("the  Qualification  Directive"):  the
    risk of suffering the form of serious harm identified in article  15(c)
    of the Qualification Directive, namely, a serious and individual threat
    to a civilian's life or person by reason of indiscriminate violence  in
    situations of international or internal armed conflict. We have already
    noted the initial submissions of Mr Collins on this  issue  (paragraphs
    190, 193 and  200  above).  In  order  to  put  the  parties'  detailed
    submissions in context, it is necessary to set out at some  length  the
    legal background, as disclosed in the materials that  were  before  us.
    All the representatives were agreed that, although the actual decisions
    in the cases of the three appellants fell to be  made  under  paragraph
    339C(iv)(second) of the Immigration Rules, the fact that the wording of
    that provision mirrored  that  of  article  15(c)  meant  that  it  was
    convenient to refer to that article directly.

The legal background

253.  The following recitals to the Qualification Directive play a  part  in
    helping to understand the purpose and scope of article 15(c):-

    "(1)   A common policy on asylum, including a  common  European  asylum
         system, is a constituent part of the European Union's objective  of
         progressively establishing an area of freedom, security and justice
         open to those  who,  forced  by  circumstances,  legitimately  seek
         protection in the Community.


     (2)   The European Council at its special meeting in Tampere on 15 and
         16 October 1999  agreed  to  work  towards  establishing  a  Common
         European Asylum System, based on the full and inclusive application
         of the Geneva Convention relating to the Status of Refugees  of  28
         July 1951 (Geneva Convention), as  supplemented  by  the  New  York
         Protocol  of  31  January  1967  (Protocol),  thus  affirming   the
         principle of non-refoulement and ensuring that nobody is sent  back
         to persecution.


    (3)    The Geneva Convention and Protocol provide  the  cornerstone  of
         the international legal regime for the protection of refugees.


    (4)    The Tampere conclusions provide that a  Common  European  Asylum
         should include, in the short term, the approximation  of  rules  on
         the recognition of refugees in the content of refugee status.


    (5)    The  Tampere  conclusions  also  provide  that  rules  providing
         refugee status should be complemented  by  measures  on  subsidiary
         forms of protection, offering an appropriate status to a person  in
         need of protection.


    (6)    The main objective of this Directive is, on  the  one  hand,  to
         ensure  that  Member  States  apply  a  common  criteria  for   the
         identification  of  persons  genuinely  in  need  of  international
         protection, and, on the other hand, to ensure that a minimum  level
         of benefits is available for these persons in all Member States.


      ...


    (8)    It is in the very nature of minimum standards that Member States
         should have the power to  introduce  or  maintain  more  favourable
         provisions for third country nationals  or  stateless  persons  who
         request international protection from a Member State, where such  a
         request is  understood  to  be  on  the  grounds  that  the  person
         concerned is either a refugee within the meaning of article 1(A) of
         the  Geneva  Convention,  or   a   person   who   otherwise   needs
         international protection.


    (9)    Those third country nationals  or  stateless  persons,  who  are
         allowed to remain in the  territories  of  the  Member  States  for
         reasons not due to a need for international  protection  but  on  a
         discretionary basis on compassionate or humanitarian grounds,  full
         outside the scope of this Directive.


      ...


    (11)   With respect to the treatment  of  persons  falling  within  the
         scope of this Directive, Member States  are  bound  by  obligations
         under instruments of international law to which they  are  a  party
         and which prohibit discrimination.


              ...


    (24)   Minimum standards for the definition of  content  of  subsidiary
         protection status should also be laid down.   Subsidiary protection
         should be complimentary and additional to  the  refugee  protection
         enshrined in the Geneva Convention.


      ...


    (25)   It is necessary to introduce criteria  on  the  basis  of  which
         applicants for international protection are  to  be  recognised  as
         eligible for subsidiary protection.  Those criteria should be drawn
         from international obligations under human rights  instruments  and
         practices existing in Member States.


    (26)   Risks to which a population of a country or  a  section  of  the
         population is generally exposed do normally create in themselves an
         individual threat which would qualify a serious harm."


254.  As part of the process of implementing the Qualification Directive  in
    the United Kingdom, the respondent added the following provision to the
    Immigration Rules, with effect from 9 October 2006:-

    "339C. A person will be granted humanitarian protection in  the  United
             Kingdom if the Secretary of State is satisfied that:


             (i) he is in the United Kingdom or has arrived at  a  port  of
                  entry in the United Kingdom;


             (ii)      he does not qualify  as  a  refugee  as  defined  in
                  regulation  2  of  the  Refugee  or  Person  in  Need  of
                  International  Protection   (Qualification)   Regulations
                  2006;


             (iii)     substantial grounds have been  shown  for  believing
                  that the person concerned, if he returned to a country of
                  return, would face a real risk of suffering serious  harm
                  and is unable, or owing to such risk, unwilling to  avail
                  himself of the protection of that country; and


             (iv)      he is not excluded  from  a  grant  of  humanitarian
                  protection.


    Serious harm consists of:


             (i) the death penalty or execution;


             (ii)      unlawful killing;


             (iii)      torture  or  inhuman  or  degrading  treatment   or
                  punishment of a person in the country of return; or


             (iv)      serious and individual threat to a  civilian's  life
                  or  person  by  reason  of  indiscriminate  violence   in
                  situations of international or internal armed conflict."


255.  The reference in article 15(c) and paragraph 339C(iv) (second)  to  an
     international  or  internal  armed  conflict  appears  to  touch  upon
     concepts relevant to international humanitarian  law  or  the  law  of
     armed conflict.   This body of international law has  as  its  purpose
     the regulation of  the  activities  of  those  taking  part  in  armed
     conflicts, in particular, so as to avoid so far as  possible  harm  to
     non-combatants,  particularly   civilians.    Having   witnessed   the
     aftermath of the battle of Solferino, Henry Dunant published in 1862 a
     book called A Memory of Solferino, which  directly  led  to  the  1864
     Geneva Convention. The current international instruments are the  four
     Geneva Conventions of 1949 and their Protocols.   Common article 3  of
     the Conventions provides:-

         "ARTICLE 3


         In the case of armed conflict not  of  an  international  character
         occurring in the territory of one of the High Contracting  Parties,
         each Party to the conflict shall be bound to apply, as  a  minimum,
         the following provisions:


         1. Persons taking no active part in hostilities, including  members
             of armed forces who have laid down their arms and those  placed
             "hors de combat" by sickness, wounds, detention, or  any  other
             cause, shall in all circumstances be treated humanely,  without
             any adverse distinction founded on race,  colour,  religion  or
             faith, sex, birth or wealth, or any similar criteria.


             To this end, the following acts are and shall remain prohibited
             at any time and in any place whatsoever  with  respect  to  the
             above-mentioned persons:


             (a) violence to life and person, in particular murder  of  all
                   kinds, mutilation, cruel treatment and torture;


             (b) taking of hostages;


             (c) outrages upon personal dignity, in particular  humiliating
                   and degrading treatment;


             (d)  the  passing  of  sentences  and  the  carrying  out   of
                   executions without previous  judgement  pronounced  by  a
                   regularly constituted court, affording all  the  judicial
                   guarantees  which  are  recognised  as  indispensable  by
                   civilised people.


             (2) The wounded and sick shall be collected and cared for.


             An impartial  humanitarian  body,  such  as  the  International
             Committee of the Red Cross,  may  offer  its  services  to  the
             parties to the conflict.


             The parties to the conflict should further endeavour  to  bring
             into force, by means of special agreements, all or part of  the
             other provisions of the present Convention.


             The application of the preceding provision shall not affect the
             legal status of the parties to the conflict".


256.  Common article 3 applies to all cases of armed conflict which are  not
    of an international character occurring in the territory of one of  the
    parties to the Convention.  The  law  of  armed  conflict  contains  no
    authoritative definition of armed conflict.    Pictet's  Commentary  on
    the Fourth 1949 Geneva Convention (respondent's authorities  bundle/49)
    states:-

         "A.      'Cases of Armed  Conflict'  -  what  is  meant  by  'armed
             conflict not of an international character'?


            That was burning question which arose again  and  again  at  the
             Diplomatic Conference.  The  expression  was  so  general,  so
             vague, that many of the delegations feared that  it  might  be
             taken to cover any act committed by force of arms -  any  form
             of anarchy, rebellion, or even plain banditry.   For  example,
             if a handful of individuals were to rise in rebellion  against
             the state and attack a police station, would that  suffice  to
             bring into being an armed conflict within the meaning  of  the
             article?  In order to reply to questions of this sort, it  was
             suggested that the term "conflict" should be defined or -  and
             this would come to the same thing -  that  a  list  should  be
             given  of  a  certain  number  of  conditions  on  which   the
             application of the Convention  would  depend.   The  idea  was
             finally abandoned - wisely,  we  think.   Nevertheless,  these
             different  conditions,  although   in   no   way   obligatory,
             constitute convenient criteria, and we therefore think it well
             to give a list drawn from the  various  amendments  discussed;
             they are as follows:


             1.   That the Party in revolt against the  de  jure  Government
                 possesses  an  organized  military  force,   an   authority
                 responsible for  its  acts,  acting  within  a  determinate
                 territory and having the means of respecting  and  ensuring
                 respect for the Convention.


             2.   That the legal Government is obliged to have  recourse  to
                 the regular military forces against insurgents organised as
                 military and in  possession  of  a  part  of  the  national
                 territory.


             3.   (a)  That  the  de  jure  Government  has  recognized  the
                      insurgents as belligerents; or


                 (b)   That it has  claimed  for  itself  the  rights  of  a
                      belligerent; or


                  (c)  That it has accorded the  insurgents  recognition  as
                      belligerents for the purposes  only  of  the  present
                      Convention; or


                 (d)   That the dispute has been admitted to the agenda  of
                       the Security Council or the General Assembly  of  the
                       United Nations as being  a  threat  to  international
                       peace,  a  breach  of  the  peace,  or  an   act   of
                       aggression.


            4.   (a)   That the insurgents have an  organisation  purporting
                    to have the characteristics of a State.

                 (b)   That  the  insurgent  civil  authority  exercises  de
                    facto  authority  over  persons  within  a  determinate
                    portion of the national territory.

                 (c)   That the armed forces act under the direction  of  an
                    organised authority and are  prepared  to  observe  the
                    ordinary laws of war.

                  (d)  That the insurgent civil authority agrees to be bound
                     by the provisions of the Convention.


             The above criteria are useful as a means  of  distinguishing  a
             genuine armed conflict from  a  mere  act  of  banditry  or  an
             unorganised and short-lived insurrection.


             Does this mean that article 3 is not applicable in cases  where
             armed strife breaks out in a country, but does not  fulfil  any
             of the above conditions (which are not obligatory and are  only
             mentioned as an indication)?  We do not subscribe to this view.
              We think, on the contrary, that the scope  of  application  of
             the article must be as wide as possible."


257.  According to The Manual of the Law of Armed Conflict - UK Ministry  of
    Defence ("the Manual") (respondent's authorities/41):-

         "Neither the Geneva Conventions nor Additional Protocol I  contain
         any definition of the expression 'armed conflict' but the following
         guidance has been given:


              (a) 'any difference arising between States and leading to  the
                 intervention of members of the armed forces  is  an  armed
                 conflict';


              (b) an armed conflict exists whenever there  is  a  resort  to
                 armed force between States or  protracted  armed  violence
                 between  governmental  authorities  and  organised   armed
                 groups within a State'.


      These definitions do  not  deal  with  the  threshold  for  an  armed
        conflict.   Whether  any  particular   intervention   crosses   the
        threshold so as to become an armed conflict will depend on all  the
        surround circumstances."


    The authority for paragraph (a) is Pictet; that for  paragraph  (b)  is
    Prosecutor  v  Tadic  (Jurisdiction)  (1995)  105  ILR  419.   In  that
    judgment,  the  International  Criminal   Tribunal   for   the   Former
    Yugoslavia, a body established by the United Nations, held:-


             "An armed conflict exists whenever there is a resort  to  armed
             force between  States  or  protracted  armed  violence  between
             governmental authorities and organised armed groups or  between
             such groups within a  State.   International  humanitarian  law
             applies from the initiation of such armed conflicts and extends
             beyond the cessation of hostilities until a general  conclusion
             of  peace  is  reached  or,  in  the  case  of  internal  armed
             conflicts, a peaceful settlement is achieved.  Until that time,
             international humanitarian law continues to apply in the  whole
             territory of the warring States or, in the  cases  of  internal
             conflicts, the whole territory under the control  of  a  party,
             whether or not actual combat takes place there" (paragraph 70).


    The Tribunal accordingly found that there had therefore been  an  armed
    conflict in the Prijedor region of Bosnia-Herzegovina at the  time  the
    offences were alleged to have been committed, even though  the  accused
    had argued that there had been no fighting in that region and that  the
    Bosnian  Serbs  had  'assumed   power'   there   without   encountering
    opposition.  The head note to the judgment (summarising  paragraphs  96
    to 127 thereof) states that:


         (5)     Internal armed conflicts were subject to an extensive body
             of customary international law which extended beyond the rules
             codified in common article 3 of the Geneva  Conventions.  This
             customary law  included  rules  relating  to  the  conduct  of
             combat, such as rules  on  weaponry  and  what  constituted  a
             legitimate target.  They included, but were  not  limited  to,
             many of the rules set down in Additional Protocol  II  to  the
             Geneva Convention.  Although many of these rules were  similar
             to those applicable in international armed conflicts,  only  a
             number  of  the  rules  of  the  law  of  international  armed
             conflicts had  been  extended  to  conflicts  of  an  internal
             character.  Moreover, it was  the  general  essence  of  those
             rules, rather than their detailed regulation, which had become
             applicable to internal armed conflicts."


258.  Additional Protocol II to the Geneva Conventions (8 June 1977)  has  a
    more extensive ambit than common article 3,  with  provisions  relating
    to, amongst other things,  the  protection  of  medical  and  religious
    personnel, the protection of medical units and transports, the right of
    the civilian population and  individual  civilians  to  "enjoy  general
    protection against dangers  arising  from  military  operations",  with
    civilians not to be the object of attack or subjected  to  threats  for
    the purpose of spreading terror, and works  or  installations  such  as
    dams and nuclear electrical generating stations not to be the object of
    attack, even where they are military objectives, if  that  would  cause
    the release of "dangerous forces and consequent civilian  losses  among
    the civilian population".  According to the Manual (paragraph 3.7):-

         "For Additional Protocol II  to  apply,  there  must  be  an  armed
         conflict of an internal nature between  the  forces  of  the  state
         party to the Protocol and dissident armed forces or other organised
         armed groups under responsible command.  The dissident  forces  are
         required to have a territorial base and to  exercise  such  control
         over a part of the State's territory as to enable them to carry out
         sustained and concerted military operations and  to  implement  the
         Protocol."


259.  Protocol I to the Geneva Convention (8 June  1977)  contains  specific
    provisions in article 51 for the protection of the civilian population,
    including a prohibition on "indiscriminate attacks",  which  are  those
    not directed at a specific military objective; which employ a method or
    means of combat  which  cannot  be  directed  at  a  specific  military
    objective; or which employ a method or means of combat the  effects  of
    which cannot be limited as required by the  Protocol.    Article  51(5)
    specifically states that  an  attack  is  indiscriminate  if  it  is  a
    bombardment that treats as a single  military  objective  a  number  of
    clearly separated and distinct military objectives located in the city,
    town, village or other  area  containing  a  similar  concentration  of
    civilians or civilian objects.  Also indiscriminate is an attack  which
    "may be expected to cause incidental loss of civilian life, injuries to
    civilians, damage to civilian objects, or a combination thereof,  which
    will be excessive in relation  to  the  concrete  and  direct  military
    advantage anticipated".  Protocol  I  applies  to  international  armed
    conflicts (see article 2 of the 1949 Conventions)  and,  by  reason  of
    article 1(4) of Additional Protocol I to internal  armed  conflicts  in
    which "peoples are  fighting  against  colonial  domination  and  alien
    occupation and against racist regimes in the exercise of their right of
    self-determination".  It is insufficient for the authority representing
    the people simply to claim that this is happening; the condition has to
    be  assessed  objectively.   A  substantial  degree  of   international
    recognition of the legitimacy of the liberation movement is  necessary.
    On  ratifying Protocol I, the United Kingdom stated  it  would  not  be
    bound  by  an  authorities'  declaration  unless  the  United   Kingdom
    expressly recognised that it was made by a body which was genuinely  an
    authority representing a people engaged in this type of armed  conflict
    (Manual, paragraph 3.4).


260.  The Manual sums up the matter as follows:-

         "Spectrum of Conflict


         The  application  of  the  Law  of  Armed  Conflict   to   internal
         hostilities thus depends on a number  of  factors.   In  the  first
         place, it does not apply at all unless an  armed  conflict  exists.
         If an armed conflict exists, the provisions  of  common  article  3
         apply.  Should the dissidents  achieve  a  degree  of  success  and
         exercise the necessary control over a part of  the  territory,  the
         provisions of Additional Protocol II come into force.  Finally,  if
         a conflict is recognised as a conflict within  Additional  Protocol
         I, article 1(4) it becomes subject to the  Geneva  Conventions  and
         Protocol I".


261.  At page 66 of appellant A's bundle,  there  is  a  useful  article  by
    James G. Stewart, a New  Zealand  lawyer,  entitled  Towards  a  Single
    Definition of Armed  Conflict  in  International  Humanitarian  Law:  a
    Critique  of  Internalized  Armed  Conflict.   The  article  begins  as
    follows:-

         "International humanitarian law applies different  rules  depending
         on whether an  armed  conflict  is  international  or  internal  in
         nature.  Commentators agree that the  distinction  is  'arbitrary',
         'undesirable', 'difficult to justify', and that it 'frustrates  the
         humanitarian purpose of the law of war in most of the instances  in
         which war now occurs'.   The  views  are  not  new.   In  1948  the
         International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) presented a  report
         recommending that the Geneva Conventions apply the full  extent  of
         international humanitarian law "in  all  cases  of  armed  conflict
         which are not of an international character,  especially  cases  of
         civil war, colonial conflicts, or wars of religion, which may occur
         in the territory of one or more of the High  Contracting  Parties".
         In 1971, it submitted a  draft  to  the  Conference  of  Government
         Experts recommending a further proposition  that  was  intended  to
         make the whole body of international humanitarian law applicable to
         a civilian war if foreign troops intervened.  The ICRC put  forward
         a more subtle proposal along the same  lines  the  following  year.
         Finally in 1978 a Norwegian  delegation  of  experts  to  the  same
         conference proposed that the two categories of  armed  conflict  be
         dropped in favour of a single law for all kinds of armed  conflict,
         again without success.  Somewhat surprisingly, calls for a  unified
         body of international humanitarian law have since  died  out,  even
         though  'the  manifold  expressions  of  dissatisfaction   with   a
         dichotomy  between  international  and  internal  armed  conflicts'
         persist."


262.  At pages 69 and 70, Stewart has this to say:-

    "70.   Traditionally, international  humanitarian  law  has  sought  to
         regulate the conduct of  and  damage  caused  by  conflict  between
         rather than within  States.   The  distinction  was  based  on  the
         premise that internal armed violence raises questions of  sovereign
         governance and not international regulations.  On that  basis,  the
         1899 and 1907 Hague Conventions respecting the laws and customs  of
         war on land apply solely to international warfare.


         The Geneva Conventions of 1949  continue  to  very  heavily  favour
         regulation of inter-state rather then domestic  warfare,  the  vast
         majority of the substantive  provisions  contained  in  the  Geneva
         Convention 1949 applying solely to:


             '... all cases of declared war of  any  other  armed  conflict
             which may arise between two or more of  the  High  Contracting
             Parties, even if the state of war is not recognised by one  of
             them.   The Convention  shall  also  apply  to  all  cases  of
             partial or  total  occupation  of  the  territory  of  a  High
             Contracting Party, even if the said occupation meets  with  no
             armed resistance'. [article 2]


         Although the scope of the article was more  restrictive  than  some
         would have hoped, the wording marked an  important  departure  from
         earlier   Conventions   that   have   required   more   formalistic
         declarations of war.  From  the  perspective  of  internationalized
         armed conflicts, which are often  characterised  by  covert  rather
         than direct military action, the change was critical.


         In addition,  the  international  communities'  experience  of  the
         Spanish Civil War, which was in fact heavily internationalised, and
         the mass of atrocities committed  against  minority  groups  within
         individual nations during the Second World War,  contributed  to  a
         political willingness  to  at  least  superficially  regulate  some
         aspects of civil war.  After considerable  disagreement  in  giving
         that  willingness  form,  article  3  common  to  the  four  Geneva
         Conventions of 1949 extended the  most  rudimentary  principles  of
         humanitarian protection to those persons taking no active  part  in
         hostilities and placed hors de combat.   The problematic  issue  of
         defining internal armed conflict was  circumvented  by  a  negative
         definition that rendered common  article  3  applicable  in  'armed
         conflicts not of international character' even if 'one of the  most
         assured things that might be  said  about  the  words  'not  of  an
         international character' is that no  one  can  say  with  assurance
         precisely  what  they  were  intended  to  convey'.   Although  the
         substance of common article 3 defines principles of the Conventions
         and stipulates certain  imperative  rules,  the  article  does  not
         contain specific provisions.  In  addition,  the  scant  principles
         enumerated in it apply only  where  the  intensity  of  hostilities
         reaches  the  level   of   'protracted   armed   violence   between
         governmental authorities and organised armed groups or between such
         armed groups'.


         The Additional Protocols to the  Geneva  Conventions  continue  the
         distinction  between  international  and  non-international   armed
         conflicts 'leaving unresolved the troublesome question of  the  law
         to  be  applied  to  armed  conflicts  in  which  there  are   both
         international non-international elements'.  Additional  Protocol  I
         sought to reaffirm and  develop  the  rules  affecting  victims  of
         international armed conflicts, specifically indicating in article 1
         that 'this Protocol, which supplements the Geneva Conventions of 12
         August 1949 for the protection of war victims, shall apply  in  the
         situations referred to in article 2 common to  those  Conventions'.
         Tellingly in relation to internationalised armed conflicts, article
         1(4) of Additional Protocol I also explicitly  provides  that  '...
         armed conflicts in  which  people  are  fighting  against  colonial
         domination and alien occupation and against racist regimes  in  the
         exercise  of  their  right  of  self-determination'   automatically
         qualifies international armed conflict  for  the  purposes  of  the
         Protocol.  Although the subject of some considerable criticism, the
         inclusion of such  conflicts  within  the  scope  of  article  1(4)
         confirms  that  the  dichotomy  between  international   and   non-
         international  conflict  is  far   from   strict   or   principled:
         international armed conflict  is  not  a  synonym  for  inter-state
         warfare, nor does the full extent of international humanitarian law
         presuppose that the collective belligerents must be States.


         The  more  limited  development  of  the  law  applicable  in  non-
         international armed conflicts was continued by Additional  Protocol
         II, which sought to develop and supplement  article  3,  until  the
         Geneva Conventions of 12 August  1949.    While  providing  greater
         clarity to the broad principles identified  in  common  article  3,
         Additional Protocol II set a significantly higher threshold for its
         own application, limiting its scope:


             'to all armed conflicts which are not covered by article 1  of
             the Protocol Additional to the Geneva Conventions of 12 August
             1949 ... (Protocol I) and which take place in the territory of
             a  High  Contracting  Party  between  its  armed  forces   and
             dissident armed forces or other organised armed groups  which,
             under responsible command, exercise such control over  a  part
             of its territory as to enable them to carry out sustained  and
             concerted military operations and to implement this protocol'.


         Therefore, unlike common  article  3  of  the  Geneva  Conventions,
         Additional Protocol II will not  apply  to  conflicts  between  two
         warring dissident groups.  It will also  only  apply  in  conflicts
         that in fact approximate to traditional conceptions of  inter-state
         warfare, namely where an organised dissident armed force  exercises
         military control over a part of a territory of State Party.


         In the context  of  internationalised  armed  conflicts,  which  by
         definition  contain  both  international  and  internal   elements,
         determining which set of rules applies and to what aspects  of  the
         conflict is critically important".


263.  Under the heading "The Substantive Legal Differences", Stewart finds:

         "Superficially, the difference between  substantive  regulation  of
         international armed conflicts  and  the  laws  applicable  in  non-
         international armed conflicts is striking.  As a reflection of  the
         historical bias  in  international  humanitarian  law  towards  the
         regulation of inter-state warfare, the 1949 Geneva Conventions  and
         the 1977 Protocols contain close to 600  articles,  of  which  only
         article 3 common to the 1949 Geneva Conventions and the 28 articles
         of additional Protocol II apply to internal conflict.  In  addition
         and as previously  mentioned,  the  law  of  the  Hague  addressing
         methods and means of combat and conduct of armies in the  field  is
         not applicable in internal armed conflicts.


264.  Consequently, Stewart finds that a strict reading of  the  Conventions
    and their Protocols would suggest that  a  range  of  very  significant
    disparities between the two regimes exist.  For example, common article
    3 covers only non-participants and persons who  have  laid  down  their
    arms, and does little to regulate combat or protect  civilians  against
    the effect of hostilities.  Common  article  3  also  fails  to  define
    elaborate rules of distinction between military  and  civilian  targets
    and makes no mention of the principle  of  proportionality  and  target
    selection.  Although Additional Protocol II does address the protection
    of civilian populations more explicitly, its coverage does not  compare
    to the prohibitions on indiscriminate attack, on methods and  means  of
    warfare causing unnecessary suffering and  on  damage  to  the  natural
    environment, that are applicable under Additional Protocol I.

265.  Most significant from a political perspective is the fact  that  there
    is no requirement in either common article 3 or Additional Protocol  II
    that affords combatants  prisoner-of-war  status  in  non-international
    armed  conflicts,  nor  is  there  anything  preventing  parties   from
    prosecuting enemy combatants in those circumstances for having taken up
    arms.

266.  According to Stewart, the "uncomfortable overlap"  between  the  legal
    regimes  applicable  to  international  and   non-international   armed
    conflicts respectively was  reinforced  by  the  Rome  Statute  of  the
    International  Criminal  Court,  which  "perpetuates   the   cumbersome
    international/non-international legal dichotomy.   The  statute  limits
    the grave breaches  regime  to  international  conflicts  and,  despite
    similarities, the serious violations provisions  of  common  article  3
    that are  applicable  in  "armed  conflicts  not  of  an  international
    character"  are  both  different  and  less  comprehensive  than  their
    international counterparts. However, Stewart goes on to say:-

         "Yet somewhat ironically given the staunch opposition to explicitly
         assimilating  the  laws  of  war   applicable   in   internal   and
         international armed conflict, there  is  now  extensive  literature
         that suggests that customary international law has developed  to  a
         point where the gap  between  the  two  regimes  is  less  marked."
         [footnote 48 refers to a number of academic articles in support  of
         that  proposition]   The  Appeals  Chamber  of  the   International
         Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia  (ICTY)  in  the  Tadic
         Jurisdiction Appeal held that customary  rules  governing  internal
         conflicts include:


             "Protection of civilians from hostilities, in particular  from
             indiscriminate attacks, protection  of  civilian  objects,  in
             particular cultural property, protection of all those  who  do
             not (or no longer) take active part in hostilities, as well as
             prohibition of means of warfare  proscribed  in  international
             armed conflicts and  ban  of  certain  methods  of  conducting
             hostilities" (paragraph 127 of the judgment).


267.  Whilst acknowledging that the Appeals Chamber of the  ICTY  have  made
    it plain that principles of customary international law can be used  to
    lessen  somewhat  the  disparity  between  the   laws   applicable   in
    international and non-international armed conflicts, Stewart  considers
    that this process has its limitations.    As  the  Appeals  Chamber  in
    Tadic said in its jurisdictional judgment:-

    "126.  The emergence of the aforementioned general  rules  on  internal
         armed conflicts does not imply that internal strife is regulated by
         general international law  in  all  its  aspects.   Two  particular
         limitations may be noted: (i) only a number of rules and principles
         governing  international  armed  conflicts  have   gradually   been
         extended to apply to internal conflict; and (ii) this extension has
         not taken place in the form of a full and mechanical transplant  of
         those rules to internal conflict; rather, the  general  essence  of
         those rules, and not the detailed regulation they may contain,  has
         become applicable to internal conflicts".


268.  Stewart has made partial reference to paragraph 127, but it  is  worth
    setting this out in full:-


     "127.Notwithstanding these limitations, it cannot be denied  that  the
         customary rules developed to govern internal strife.  These  rules,
         as specifically identified in the preceding discussion, cover  such
         areas as protection of civilians from  hostilities,  in  particular
         from indiscriminate attacks, protection  of  civilian  objects,  in
         particular cultural property, protection of all those  who  do  not
         (or no  longer)  take  active  part  in  hostilities,  as  well  as
         prohibition of means of warfare proscribed in  international  armed
         conflicts and ban of certain methods of conducting hostilities".


 269. That it is important  for  international  law  purposes  to  establish
      whether an armed conflict is internal or international is  plain  from
      the Tadic appeal judgment of 15 July  1999,  referred  to  by  Stewart
      (page 76 of appellant A's bundle).  Although the Criminal Tribunal for
      the Former Yugoslavia decided in that  appeal  judgment  that  it  had
      jurisdiction in respect of offences committed  in  both  internal  and
      international  armed  conflicts,  it  found  that  article  2  of  its
      governing Statute, which gave it  jurisdiction  in  respect  of  grave
      breaches of the Geneva Conventions, was applicable  only  to  offences
      committed in the context of international armed conflicts:-


         "83. The requirement that the conflict  be  international  for  the
        grave breaches ..... to  operate  pursuant  to  article  2  of  the
        statute has not been contested by the parties.


         84.     It is indisputable that an armed conflict is international
         if it takes place between two or more States.  In addition, in  the
         case of an internal armed conflict breaking out on the territory of
         the State, it may become  international  (or,  depending  upon  the
         circumstances, be international in character alongside an  internal
         armed conflict) if (i) another state intervenes  in  that  conflict
         through  its  troops  or  alternatively  if  (ii)   some   of   the
         participants in the internal armed conflict act on behalf  of  that
         other state.


    85.    In the instant case, the Prosecution claims that at all relevant
         times, the conflict was an international armed conflict between two
         States, namely Bosnia and Herzegovina ("BH") on the  one  hand  and
         the FRY on the other.  Judge McDonald, in her dissent,  also  found
         the conflict to be international at all relevant times.


    86.    The Trial Chamber found the  conflict  to  be  an  international
         armed conflict between BH and FRY until 19 May 1992, when  the  JNA
         formally withdrew from Bosnia and Herzegovina.  However, the  Trial
         Chamber did not explicitly state what the nature  of  the  conflict
         was after 19 May 1992.  As the prosecution points  out  "the  Trial
         Chamber made no express finding on the classification of the  armed
         conflict between the Bosnian Serb Army (VRS) and the BH  after  the
         VRS was established in May 1992".  Nevertheless it may be held that
         the Trial Chamber at least simplicity considered that after 19  May
         1992 the conflict became internal in nature.


    87.    In the instant case, there is sufficient evidence to justify the
         Trial Chamber's finding of fact that the conflict prior to  19  May
         1992 was international in character.  The question whether after 19
         May 1992  it  continued  to  be  international  or  became  instead
         exclusively internal turns on the issue  of  whether  Bosnian  Serb
         forces - in his hands  the  Bosnian  victims  in  this  case  found
         themselves - could be considered as de jure or de facto organs of a
         foreign power, namely the FRY." ([1999] ICTY 2)


270.  As Stewart indicates, the most frequently applied limb  of  the  Tadic
    appeal judgment's test for determining whether internal armed  conflict
    has become international is whether "some of the  participants  in  the
    internal armed conflict acted on behalf of another State".  The test of
    "dependence on the one side and control  on  the  other",  set  out  in
    Nicaragua v United States  of  America  (ICJ  reports  1986  p14),  was
    rejected by the Appeals Chamber in favour of a looser  test  described,
    according to Stewart, by some as "dubious".

The submissions

271.  We have set out the legal background to the law of armed  conflict  in
    some detail because it is against that  background  that  the  Tribunal
    must consider the parties' submissions as to the proper  interpretation
    and application of article 15(c) of the  Qualification  Directive.   In
    her opening skeleton argument, the respondent deals with these  issues,
    again in some detail.

272.  Relying on Recital (25) to  that  Directive,  which  states  that  the
    criteria on which applicants are  to  be  recognised  as  eligible  for
    subsidiary protection is to be drawn  from  "international  obligations
    under  human  rights  instruments  and  practices  existing  in  Member
    States," the respondent contends that  subsidiary  protection  "is  not
    intended to identify or impose  any  new  or  more  extensive  form  of
    obligation  on  Member  States".    Instead,  the  provisions  of   the
    Qualification Directive regarding subsidiary  protection  "do  no  more
    than re-state certain (but not all) existing bases on which refoulement
    is prohibited".  The bases identified in article 15  of  the  Directive
    are Protocol 6 to the ECHR (death  penalty),  article  3  of  the  ECHR
    (torture/inhuman  or  degrading  treatment/punishment)  and  "in  part"
    article 2 (right to life).  article 15(a) relates to the death penalty;
    article 15(b) corresponds to  article  3  of  ECHR  and,  against  that
    background, article 15(c)  is  said  by  the  respondent  to  show,  by
    reference to the words "life or person," a connection with so  much  of
    article 2 of the ECHR as implies "a duty to  abstain  from  acts  which
    needlessly endanger life".

273.  According to the respondent's submission,  the  Commission's  Proposal
    for what became the Qualification Directive showed that  article  15(c)
    was drawn from article  2(c)  of  the  Temporary  Protection  Directive
    (Directive 2001/55/EC of 20 July 2001).  This Directive, which followed
    the mass influx into the  EU  of  displaced  persons  from  the  former
    Yugoslavia, provides a mechanism whereby temporary protection is to  be
    granted to "displaced persons", defined in article 2(c) as:

         "third-country nationals or stateless  persons  who  have  had  to
        leave their country or region of origin, or have been evacuated, in
        particular in response to an appeal by international organisations,
        and are unable to return in safe and durable conditions because  of
        the situation prevailing in that country, and who may  fall  within
        the  scope  of  Article  1A  of  the  Geneva  Convention  or  other
        international  or   national   instruments   giving   international
        protection, in particular:


        (i)  persons who have fled  areas  of  armed  conflict  or  endemic
        violence:


        (ii) persons at serious risk of, or who have been the  victims  of,
        systematic or generalised violations of their human rights;"


      The existence of a  "mass  influx  of  displaced  persons"  is  to  be
    established by a Council Decision adopted by a qualified majority on  a
    proposal from the Commission (article  5(1)).    This,  the  respondent
    contends, demonstrates that the level of armed  conflict  envisaged  in
    article 15(c) "is armed conflict of a scale that induces people to flee
    the relevant area".

274. So far as attempts  to  define  the  concepts  of  international  armed
    conflict  and  non-international  armed  conflict  are  concerned,  the
    respondent  contends  that  "the  extent  to  which  these  may   offer
    assistance to the Tribunal may be approached with caution" and that  it
    is not appropriate "simply to adopt such international law  definitions
    as there are".  Amongst the reasons given for that  is  the  fact  that
    international humanitarian law  applies  in  a  different  context  and
    serves  difference  purposes  and  that   even   within   international
    humanitarian law there are  differing  definitions.    Drawing  on  the
    Pictet Commentary, the respondent submits that the  threshold  for  the
    application of the Geneva Conventions in the case of  an  international
    armed conflict is "very low".   Pictet considered that  any  difference
    arising between two States and leading to the invention of  members  of
    the armed forces would be an  armed  conflict  within  the  meaning  of
    article 2 of the 1949 Conventions, regardless of how long the  conflict
    lasted  or  how  much  "slaughter  takes  place".  According   to   the
    respondent, the rationale for that view is that an affected  individual
    might require specific protection under international humanitarian law,
    once an international armed conflict has arisen.   By contrast, such  a
    low threshold does not apply with respect to article 15(c) since  there
    the question is whether there are  substantial  grounds  for  believing
    that a real risk of serious harm exists vis--vis a specific "civilian"
    who is in a Member State.  What is regarded by the  respondent  as  the
    "higher threshold for establishing an internal armed conflict" is  said
    by her to be "entirely  explicable  in  the  context  of  international
    humanitarian law, which has developed alongside  a  reluctance  on  the
    part of States to allow infringements of their sovereignty in terms  of
    the application of the laws of war to domestic  conflicts".   Since  it
    would be anomalous if article 15(c) had separate definitions  for  what
    constituted  an  armed  conflict,   depending   on   whether   it   was
    international  or  internal,  and  there  was  no  basis  for  such   a
    distinction in the purpose of article 15(c), that provision required an
    interpretation "that is autonomous of international humanitarian  law".
    There were varying definitions of armed conflict in the relevant  legal
    materials and, as is pointed out in the Manual  of  the  Law  of  Armed
    Conflict at  paragraph  15.3.1,  "the  point  at  which  situations  of
    internal disturbances and tensions develop into an  armed  conflict  is
    open to interpretation".  We should add here that, in the course of his
    oral submissions, Mr Swift appeared to accept  that,  in  international
    humanitarian law, whilst the threshold  for  establishing  an  internal
    armed  conflict  was  higher  than  that  for  an  international  armed
    conflict, the test for the former was not a particularly  high  one  in
    absolute terms.

275.  The respondent considered it significant that  the  reference  to  the
    Fourth Geneva Convention that appeared "in one of  the  drafts  to  the
    Directive (document 13354/02) was not retained" and that  according  to
    Catherine  Costello  (respondent's  authorities/40)  in   her   article
    Subsidiary Protection and the EC Qualification Directive,  "the  nature
    of the armed conflict is restricted to 'international or internal armed
    conflict' and so may exclude internal  disturbances.   However,  unlike
    the previous draft,  there  is  no  longer  an  explicit  reference  to
    international humanitarian law, so that the definition may take  on  an
    autonomous interpretation".  Again, the respondent relied upon  recital
    (25)  to  the  Qualification  Directive,   which   referred   only   to
    international obligations and human rights  instruments  and  practices
    existing in Member  States,  without  any  reference  to  international
    humanitarian law.

276.  In the light of the above, the respondent submitted that, as with  the
    term "civil war", in the charter party which was the subject of Mustill
    J's judgment in Spinney's v Royal Insurance [1980] 1  Lloyd's  Rep  406
    the Tribunal should apply the "ordinary" as opposed to the  "technical,
    international law" meaning of armed conflict.

277.  Paragraph 40 of the skeleton argument reads as follows:-

    "40.   Finally, it is a matter of great legal and practical  importance
         that any decision on whether there is, or is not, armed conflict in
         any part of Somalia is by reference to that term as defined for the
         purposes of article 15(c)  alone.   The  Tribunal  is  respectfully
         requested to make clear in its judgment that its  decision  has  no
         wider  ramifications  in  terms  of  whether,  as   a   matter   of
         international law (including international humanitarian law), there
         is any such armed conflict.  For the reasons set out above,  it  is
         submitted that it is entirely appropriate to recognise that article
         15(c) contains the  use  of  the  term  'armed  conflict'  that  is
         autonomous from these other areas of international  law.   Such  an
         approach  best  serves  the  purpose  underlying   article   15(c).
         Nevertheless, any characterisation by the English courts of broader
         application would be to stray into highly sensitive areas that  are
         matters for foreign policy and military determination".


278.  In the respondent's further note of 23 November 2007, her concern  was
    further elaborated:-

    "2.    The Tribunal raised the possibility of  inconsistent  decisions,
         i.e. a prior decision of an  International  Tribunal  such  as  the
         ICTFY, or of the Security Council, and a subsequent decision of the
         AIT taken in applying different criteria.  In these  circumstances,
         however, the AIT (and all parties) would have the previous decision
         firmly in mind in coming to any determination.


    3.     Of very real concern to the SSHD is a situation  where  the  AIT
         would have made a  determination  strictly  applying  international
         humanitarian law, e.g. that there is no armed conflict in State  A,
         but then (i) the FCO or MoD come to a different conclusion  on  the
         materials  and  intelligence  before  them  or  (ii)  there  is   a
         subsequent Security Council resolution mandating the use  of  force
         that is predicated on the existence of  an  international  or  non-
         international armed conflict. One point is that  the  determination
         of whether or not armed violence is [such an armed conflict is]  of
         huge importance including  in  terms  of  targeting  decisions  (of
         particular importance where UK troops are involved in  some  form).
         See  eg.  The  Manual  of  the  Law  of  Armed  Conflict  at   15.6
         [respondent's authorities bundle, tab 41, page 387]: a  distinction
         is to be drawn between those  who  are  taking  a  direct  part  in
         hostilities and may be attacked ...".


      .....


    5.     The SSHD is certainly alive to the  concerns  expressed  by  the
         Tribunal as to a consistent approach to the Directive across Member
         States.  But that concern is met if the Tribunal  decides  that  it
         wants  to  look  at  or  even  largely  borrow  from  international
         humanitarian law definitions  (insofar  as  these  exist).   It  is
         indeed correct that the SSHD does not  object  to  'mining  of  the
         quarry', although it has separately made the point that there is an
         absence of rich seams to be found.  As demonstrated in the  passage
         from the Manual  of  the  Law  of  Armed  Conflict  at  3.3.1,  the
         definitions derived from Tadic 'do not deal with the threshold  for
         an armed conflict' and it later states in terms (at  15.3.1)  that:
         attempts  to  define  the  term  "armed   conflict"   have   proved
         unsuccessful...".


    6.     It is also to be noted that the SSHD's concerns are  not  rooted
         in comity. (The starting point of  the  submissions  advanced,  but
         rejected  in  Krotov).   Even   the   concern   that   a   judicial
         characterisation of a situation as an armed conflict as a matter of
         international humanitarian law may lead to escalation is rooted  in
         foreign policy, not an unwillingness to see matters determined that
         should be left to other States.  The concern is that foreign policy
         decisions of the FCO (including the application of Security Council
         resolutions), and military and  strategic  decisions  of  the  MoD,
         should be made unhindered by the existence of AIT adjudications  on
         whether as a matter of international humanitarian law there  is  an
         armed conflict in a given State".


279.  Mr Collins's response to that note was to  contend  that  it  was  the
    respondent "who seeks to hinder the Tribunal in its task  of  assessing
    whether there exists for the present time in  Somalia  a  situation  of
    internal armed conflict".  He considered it difficult to  see  how  the
    Directive should not be interpreted by reference to general  principles
    of Community law including international humanitarian law.  Dr Gil-Bazo
    in her article, Refugee Status and Subsidiary Protection under  EC  Law
    had stated  that  EC  secondary  legislation  should  be  "assessed  by
    reference to international human rights law".   Mr Collins concluded:-

    "18.   There have been various uses made in the  instant  case  of  the
         metaphor of "mining the quarry of international humanitarian  law".
         The Secretary  of  State's  initial  position  (and  still  clearly
         preferred one) is that the  Tribunal  should  not  even  enter  the
         quarry.  Under examination from the Tribunal that position has  now
         shifted ... to the extent that the Tribunal can  now  mine  at  the
         quarry, i.e. 'look at or even  largely  borrow  from  international
         humanitarian law definitions'.   It is difficult to  reconcile  the
         Tribunal being able to 'look at' or 'borrow' from humanitarian  law
         definitions  but  not  strictly  apply  international  humanitarian
         law ..."


280.  Mr Maka's submissions were in a similar vein.  He referred  to  A  and
    Others v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2005]  UKHL  71,
    where the House of Lords accepted as uncontentious a submission that  a
    treaty, even if ratified by the United Kingdom, had no binding force in
    the domestic law of this country "unless it is given effect by  statute
    or expresses principles  of  customary  international  law".   Mr Maka
    submitted  that  the  AIT  "is  obliged  by  law  to   apply   whatever
    international or human rights law it feels necessary to  determine  the
    appeal before it, provided the UK is a party to that law.  If  the  FCO
    or the MoD come to a different conclusion on the material before it  as
    after a particular date in time then it is not bound  by  any  Tribunal
    decision provided in the unlikely event of a challenge it  can  justify
    the legal change in a Court of law".

The Tribunal's assessment of the expert evidence

281.    It is, to some extent, understandable that the appellants  expressed
    concern that, although they put forward expert witnesses to  give  oral
    evidence, the respondent, as usual, chose not to do so, and then sought
    to undermine the evidence of the experts.  Nevertheless, we  must  look
    objectively at the evidence of the experts.

Evidence of Professor Lewis

282.  The Tribunal and its predecessors have, in the past,  been  materially
    assisted by the evidence of Professor Lewis and that was also the  case
    in the present appeals. There was, however, a degree of resentment  and
    even anger in Professor Lewis's attitude to the TFG and what he saw  as
    the American and European interference that had brought about the  fall
    of the UIC in southern Somalia.  Professor Lewis is fully  entitled  to
    his opinions.  Indeed, over a long and  distinguished  academic  career
    that has focused on the people of Somalia, it would frankly be  strange
    if Professor Lewis had not developed a marked degree of concern for the
    welfare of Somalis  and  had  come  to  see  the  activities  of  other
    countries by reference to his own views about what is best for Somalia.
     Nevertheless,  we  could  not  but  conclude  that  Professor  Lewis's
    strongly-held opinions to some extent compromised  his  ability  to  be
    objective as regards  some  aspects  of  the  evidence  he  gave.   One
    particular example of this was in relation to Professor  Lewis's  views
    on the activities of the Ethiopian forces.  At paragraph 48  above,  he
    described  them  as  acting  with  "extreme  brutality"  and   shooting
    "indiscriminately" so as to cause a high level of civilian  casualties.
    Overall, his evidence suggested that the Ethiopians and the TFG take no
    regard at all to the position of civilians, when responding to  attacks
    from anti-TFG/Ethiopian forces operating in Mogadishu.   However,  when
    taken to the UN Secretary General's report, which Professor  Lewis  had
    not read, he accepted that there was evidence  that  the  TFG  and  the
    Ethiopians were,  according  to  certain  reports,  behaving  far  more
    responsibly in their relationship with civilians although they had  "at
    times" opened fire indiscriminately (paragraph  82  above).   Professor
    Lewis's assertion, when the point was put to him, that he had not meant
    to   suggest   that   the   TFG/Ethiopia   forces   "always   responded
    indiscriminately" (paragraph 82 above) did not sit comfortably with his
    written reports and evidence in chief.

283.   It  was,  in  general,  impossible  to  escape  the  conclusion  that
    Professor Lewis's distaste for  the  TFG  had  caused  him  to  take  a
    jaundiced view of the UN, which he  considered  had  given  unwarranted
    support for the TFG.  In cross-examination,  however,  Professor  Lewis
    accepted considerable amounts of what the Secretary General had to  say
    in his reports  on  Somalia  regarding  the  position  on  the  ground.
    Professor Lewis's knowledge of the BIA  reports  of  the  Fact  finding
    Missions in 2007 appeared to have been derived from his reading of  two
    Somali diaspora websites, which were connected to particular  clans  or
    groups.  It was apparent that, despite their  being  on  the  internet,
    Professor Lewis was not conversant  with  the  actual  reports.    When
    faced with these reports, Professor Lewis fairly acknowledged  that  he
    had no reason to doubt what was said at paragraphs 4.01 to 4.09 of  the
    July 2007 report (paragraph 76 above) and that he  also  accepted  what
    was said at paragraph 4.17 (paragraph 77 above).   This matter  was  of
    some significance, given that many  of  the  issues  in  these  appeals
    turned on very recent events and their interpretation.

284.  At paragraph 79 above, Professor Lewis is recorded  as  accepting  the
    methodology set out at the beginning of the BIA reports.   Although  he
    at times sought  to  stress  the  second-hand  nature  of  the  sourced
    evidence recorded by the Fact Finding Missions, his own "human" sources
    were not, upon analysis, in any markedly better position to provide  an
    overall picture of the position on  the  ground  in  southern  Somalia.
    Professor Lewis was in contact with at least  one  NGO  that  had  been
    operating  in  the  educational  sphere  in  Mogadishu  throughout  the
    relevant period, as well as Somalis in  the  United  Kingdom  "who  are
    constantly going backwards and  forwards"  between  here  and  Somalia"
    (paragraph 67 above).

285.   The  Tribunal  places  significant  weight  upon  Professor   Lewis's
    anthropological evidence; especially what he had to say about  minority
    groups (paragraphs 42 to 44, 58 and 60 above).  In particular, we  note
    Professor Lewis's insistence  that  the  Benadiri  people  of  southern
    Somalia are not a clan but a group consisting of people who live in the
    coastal region of Somalia.  Thus, although the  Sheikhal  people  might
    have sought in effect to manufacture a history of common lineage,  they
    are in reality neither a majority nor a minority  clan  but  an  entity
    existing outside the clan system.  The same can be said of the  Ashraf.
    This does not,  of  course,  mean  that  such  groups  have  not  faced
    persecution.

286.  At paragraphs 60 to 63 above, Professor  Lewis  was  asked  about  the
    degree to which some at least of the Benadiri groups could be  said  to
    have been assimilated into the majority clan with whom they  live.   Dr
    Luling's report of 6 September 2005 appeared to rely on Professor Lewis
    at least in part in finding that certain of the Sheikhal  groups  could
    be said to have been "firmly  assimilated"  to  the  majority  clan  in
    question.   The  Tribunal  did  not  find  Professor  Lewis's  response
    (paragraph 63 above) to be particularly clear.  Overall, it appeared to
    the Tribunal that Professor Lewis was to some extent attempting  unduly
    to down play the degree to which some minority groups  had  assimilated
    with  (and,  accordingly,  might  in  certain  circumstances  look   to
    protection from) the majority clans with whom they lived.

Evidence of Dr Luling

287.  Dr Luling has given evidence, largely in the form of written  reports,
    in a considerable number of cases before the AIT and its  predecessors.
    On  a  number  of  occasions,   the   resultant   determinations   have
    acknowledged the weight given to her  evidence.   She  is  a  respected
    anthropologist who has devoted much of her academic career to  Somalia.
    We have, nevertheless, concluded that her evidence falls to be  treated
    with caution.  Our reasons for so finding are as follows.

288.  The matters set out at paragraphs 113 to 121 above are troubling.   In
    the case in question, it would have been apparent to Dr Luling that the
    appellant has put his claim for asylum and with  it  his  claim  to  be
    entitled to indefinite - as opposed to exceptional - leave to remain on
    the basis that he was a Reer Hamar.  Dr Luling prepared her report at a
    time when it was plain to her (from the letter  of  refusal)  that  the
    appellant's claim had been refused and that  that  decision  was  being
    appealed.   In those circumstances, to fail to deal with the  important
    issue of clan or group ethnicity in the report  was  a  failure  on  Dr
    Luling's part to discharge the duties of an expert.   Whilst  accepting
    that the events in question occurred some while ago, we do not consider
    that Dr Luling provided any satisfactory explanation for the  omission.



289.  Dr Luling's reports in the present appeal are problematic.  Whilst  we
    accept that she has never been to  appellant  S's  claimed  village  of
    Jasira, and that she will consequently have been reliant on third party
    information as to those matters that might be known by  someone  living
    there, her report of 6 September 2005 was structured in such a  way  as
    to make it unclear what information appellant S was giving to Dr Luling
    about life in Jasira.  Furthermore, having noted appellant S's claim to
    come "from the lighter skinned Sheikhal" (paragraph 99 above) and  that
    the Benadiri people  "is  typically  much  lighter  than  that  of  the
    majority" (paragraph 101 above), Dr Luling failed to point out what was
    obvious to all who saw appellant S in the hearing  room;  namely,  that
    she was in no sense a person who could be described  as  light-skinned.
    Although  it  is  common  ground  that  skin  colour  is   not   itself
    determinative and the Tribunal accepts Dr Luling's evidence that "there
    are exceptions both ways", to include references to this matter in  her
    report, without informing the reader that appellant S  was  not  light-
    skinned, can only be described as unhelpful.

290.  Finally, as recorded at paragraph 98  above,  Dr  Luling  asserted  in
    terms that the Sheikhal are the main inhabitants of "Jasira" (page 2 of
    her first report).  That assertion is unsourced  and,  in  view  of  Dr
    Luling's not having been to Jasira and knowing  little  about  it,  the
    lapidary nature of the statement is puzzling.  In fact, it turns out to
    be entirely wrong; but the Tribunal only  discovered  as  much  in  the
    course of its own questions to Dr Mullen, who had been in Jasira in the
    1980s and who immediately and categorically stated that the place would
    be "basically Hawiye territory", with a ratio of Hawiye  to  others  of
    5:1 (paragraph 182 above).  A central plank of appellant S's case  thus
    fell away, since Dr Luling's evidence was plainly to the  effect  that,
    if appellant S came from Jasira,  she  was  likely  to  be  a  Sheikhal
    Jasira.  Whilst it is  true  that  Professor  Lewis  also  opined  that
    appellant S was Sheikhal Jasira because she knew  something  about  her
    group's  background,  that  knowledge  was,  according  to  Dr   Luling
    "scrappy" and its asserted accuracy by no means plain.

291.  So far as Dr Luling's evidence  regarding  the  general  situation  in
    southern Somalia is concerned, by her own admission,  this  is  largely
    reliant  on  reports  in  the  public   domain,   reinforced   by   her
    conversations with Somalis in the United Kingdom who, in turn,  are  in
    contact by telephone with those in Somalia.  Overall, the Tribunal  has
    concluded that in these appeals we have been unable to give  weight  to
    much of Dr Luling's evidence.

Evidence of Dr Mullen

292.  Of the three experts who gave oral evidence, Dr Mullen  was  probably
    best placed to assist the Tribunal.  He  had  visited  Somalia  in  the
    relatively recent past and had plainly read a much greater quantity and
    range of the relevant sourced material, than had Professor Lewis and Dr
    Luling.  In  general,  we  accord  Dr  Mullen's  evidence  considerable
    weight.  However, some of the assertions made  by  Dr  Mullen  in  oral
    evidence did not appear to be supported in  the  background  materials,
    including those cited in his reports.  For example,  at  paragraph  153
    above, Dr Mullen is recorded as saying that the support system  amongst
    clans "has effectively collapsed" although he went on to  refer  to  an
    NGO's report that suggested that people in Mogadishu were  reacting  to
    the difficult situation there in part by mobilising on a clan and  sub-
    clan basis.  Furthermore, in the vicinity of Mogadishu,  it  was  plain
    from Dr Mullen's own evidence that majority clans continued to have  an
    identifiable presence: see paragraph 154 above, where the International
    Airport  and  two  other  airports  were  described  by  Dr  Mullen  as
    controlled by the Habar Gedir sub-clan  of  the  Hawiye.   Dr  Mullen's
    assertion, recorded at paragraph 155 above, that clan leaders  were  no
    longer interested in the fate of Mogadishu because the Abgal and  Habar
    Gedir sub-clans of the Hawiye had managed to get their families  asylum
    overseas, sat uneasily with the NGO report,  referred  to  above,  that
    spoke of leaders from both the  Abgal  and  Habar  Gedir  groupings  as
    indicating that they did not want a new civil war, albeit that they and
    their families were "largely not on the  ground".   Dr Mullen's  claim
    recorded at paragraph 156 above that a Hawiye  would  be  seen  by  the
    Ethiopian troops as a potential insurgent  is  to  be  contrasted  with
    paragraph 169 above, where he is  recorded  as  regarding  the  TFG  in
    Mogadishu "as appearing to be increasingly an Abgal venture"  and  that
    there was "an alliance between the Abgal and the Darod".   Dr  Mullen's
    view that a man would be at greater risk at a checkpoint than  would  a
    woman  does  not  find  support  in  any  of  the  other  evidence  and
    understandably  was  not   pressed   upon   us   by   the   appellants'
    representatives. We have, nevertheless, had regard to it in the context
    of considering the risk to a person who, not belonging  to  a  majority
    clan or being otherwise under their protection, may find himself having
    to negotiate an "unofficial" checkpoint alone.

293.   The expertise of Professor Lewis and Dr  Luling  is,  in  each  case,
    primarily that of an anthropologist; a point that needs to be borne  in
    mind because, as we shall later indicate, whatever  else  the  evidence
    may show,  the  security  situation  in  Mogadishu  and  its  immediate
    environs is currently incapable  of  being  categorised  as  one  where
    majority clans are actively targeting  minority  clans  or  groups  for
    persecution. That the situation in Mogadishu is more complex  than  has
    perhaps been thought is also borne out by the fact that both  Professor
    Lewis  and  Dr  Mullen  said  that,  notwithstanding  their   undoubted
    expertise, they had not foreseen  the  fundamental  change  which  came
    about  in  Mogadishu  and  southern  Somalia  in  2006,  when  the  UIC
    effectively  took  control,  originally  at  least  at  the  behest  of
    influential people in Mogadishu who had had their  fill  of  clan-based
    warlords.  Finally, all three experts, when asked to consider  specific
    passages in the UN Secretary General's reports and those of the two BIA
    Fact Finding Missions, tended to accept what was there said  about  the
    very recent situation in southern Somalia. This underscores the need to
    give those reports significant weight.

The Tribunal's analysis of the current situation

The position of clans and groups in Mogadishu: attitudes  and  behaviour  of
    the combatants

Majority clans

294.  Although the Hawiye clan were dominant in Mogadishu and  its  environs
    until 2006, the emergence of the UIC in that year  effectively  negated
    the power of the Hawiye warlords and their militias. Despite what might
    superficially seem to be the import of the evidence noted in paragraphs
    239 and 240 above, the fall of the UIC has not led to a return  of  the
    previous state of affairs, since the entry into the city of the TFG and
    the Ethiopian forces has significantly  changed  the  dynamics  of  the
    situation.  We agree with Dr Luling's view that the Hawiye militias  no
    longer control Mogadishu (paragraph 120 above).   That is not  to  say,
    however, that both the UIC, in its present, insurgent form, and the TFG
    do not have a "strong clan character" (paragraph 149 above);  but  that
    character is, we find, more complex than that  suggested  in  parts  of
    Professor  Lewis's  evidence,   in  that,  whilst  the  TFG  is  Darod-
    dominated, there are plainly Hawiye elements supporting it.

295.  Although the evidence shows that elements of the Habir Gedir  sub-clan
    of the Hawiye are  aligning  themselves  with  the  UIC  insurgents  in
    Mogadishu, the evidence read as a whole does  not,  in  the  Tribunal's
    view, show that the TFG/Ethiopians in Mogadishu are targeting the Habar
    Gedir or other  Hawiye  sub-clans  as  such.  Although  an  adviser  is
    mentioned at  paragraph  4.30  of  the  BIA  report  of  July  2007  as
    considering that the TFG were "repressing on a clan basis with  certain
    sub-clans of the Hawiye being the main targets of a revenge" (R2, pages
    611-612), such an assertion  is  not  supported  in  the  rest  of  the
    evidence and, indeed, another source of the same report said there  was
    no routine targeting of members of particular clans.    The  background
    evidence, which includes the BIA  reports  of  the  2007  Fact  Finding
    Missions (which we consider to be generally  fair  and  well-balanced),
    does not support Professor Lewis's contention (at paragraph  48  above)
    that the TFG are, in reality, no more than warlords or gangsters.  That
    is not to say that the TFG/Ethiopians cannot be properly criticised for
    the way in which they have, from time to time,  gone  about  things  in
    Mogadishu; but were the TFG  and  Ethiopians  as  thoroughly  venal  as
    Professor Lewis at times appeared to contend, we  would  have  expected
    that to have been demonstrated  far  more  clearly  in  the  background
    materials, including those sourced from the observations of  NGO's  and
    others operating in the area.  The same is true  of  the  UN  Secretary
    General's reports.  The background evidence  shows  that  those  ranged
    against the TFG/Ethiopians primarily conduct their  operations  against
    specific targets, although, particularly where these  attacks  involved
    bombs or mortars, nearby civilians are put at risk (paragraphs  76  and
    189 above).   By  the  same  token,  whilst  there  have  plainly  been
    instances of overreaction and insufficiently focused retaliation by the
    TFG/Ethiopians, the evidence read as a whole indicates that the objects
    of retaliation are those attacking  the  TFG/Ethiopian  forces.   Thus,
    despite the one source referred  to  in  paragraph  4.03  of  the  Fact
    Finding Mission report of July 2007 (paragraph 76 above), a  journalist
    from an international news agency  was  quoted  at  paragraph  4.09  as
    considering that the TFG had "managed to effect some level of peace and
    security", whilst paragraph 4.17 recorded the efforts  of  the  TFG  to
    effect disarmament in the city.   At paragraph 4.28, it was said to  be
    "rare for an ordinary Somali to be randomly targeted in  the  shooting"
    and that despite the "often over-zealous retaliatory action on the part
    of [the TFG] forces", the level of violence in Mogadishu as at mid-2007
    was "fairly low" and that, notwithstanding high levels of crime, people
    could and did move around, although on the whole they intended to  stay
    in their home areas (paragraph 78 above).  It is also significant  that
    the mass movement of people over the weekend of 27/28 October 2007 from
    Mogadishu was in response to "an announcement advising those living  in
    districts surrounding Bakhara Market to vacate the area due to security
    operations" (paragraph 81  above).    As  previously  noted,  Professor
    Lewis accepted the comment in the UN Secretary General's  report  of  7
    November 2007 that the response of the  TFG/Ethiopian  forces  was  "at
    times  indiscriminate"  (paragraph  82).    Other  references  in   the
    materials, to the TFG/ Ethiopians cordoning off  areas  and  conducting
    house-to-house searches, do not demonstrate that the Hawiye  population
    of Mogadishu or any sub-clan thereof, can as such be said to be at real
    risk of persecution or serious harm at the hands of the TFG/Ethiopians.

296.  For their part, the UIC  and  their  allies  or  associates  are,  the
    evidence  shows,  targeting  TFG/Ethiopian   military   and   political
    personnel.  The evidence does not indicate that members  of  the  Darod
    clan or the Abgal sub-clan of the Hawiye are, in either case,  as  such
    at real risk of persecution or serious harm at the hands of the UIC and
    others fighting against the TFG/Ethiopians.  In this regard, it is also
    worth observing that, during the time of their dominance in  Mogadishu,
    the UIC were widely perceived as establishing a system of law and order
    in the city that benefited all of the clans and other  groups  residing
    there (and more widely throughout southern Somalia).   The more extreme
    religious elements of the UIC took action against those engaged in what
    were perceived as un-Islamic activities  such  as  the  consumption  of
    alcohol and khat but this was not pursued by reference  to  a  person's
    clan or group.


Minority clans and groups

297.  The evidence does not disclose that the TFG/Ethiopians  are  targeting
    the Ashraf or other minority groups.  That is so  notwithstanding  that
    the Ashraf and the Sheikhal groups,  to  take  two  examples,  have  an
    association with Islamic religious teaching.  Even  the  single  source
    quoted at paragraph 4.03 of the Fact Finding Mission report  (paragraph
    76 above) does not appear to have made such a claim.   That is  not  to
    say, however, that the Darod and Abgal  elements  within  the  TFG  are
    likely to go out of their way to be  helpful  to  those  from  minority
    groups but, although there might be a failure of discipline  from  time
    to time at TFG-controlled checkpoints, we  do  not  consider  that  the
    evidence shows that minority clans  and  groups  in  Mogadishu  at  the
    present time are the victims of targeting by the TFG/Ethiopians.

298.  So far as the  UIC  are  concerned,  we  do  not  find  that,  despite
    Professor  Lewis's  attempt  to  distinguish  between  "religious"  and
    "ordinary" Ashraf, that the evidence is such as to show that the UIC is
    reasonably likely to target a member of  a  minority  group.   In  this
    regard, we prefer the evidence of Dr Mullen (paragraph 149 above).

The general security position in Mogadishu and the relevance of  clan  areas
and support networks

299.  Whatever misgivings one might have about the rule of the  UIC,  it  is
    manifestly the case that life in Mogadishu for the vast majority of its
    citizens  was  considerably  better  under  the  UIC  than  that  which
    pertained before or, it must be said, has pertained since.   So far  as
    2007 is concerned, the mass  migrations  evidenced  in  the  background
    materials disclose a very serious state of affairs.  A person  who  has
    been displaced from his or her home in Mogadishu, without being able to
    find a place elsewhere (including in another part of  that  city)  with
    clan members or friends, and who as a result,  is  likely  to  have  to
    spend any significant period of time in a makeshift  shelter  alongside
    the road to Afgoye, for example, or in an IDP camp, may well experience
    treatment that would be proscribed by article 3 of ECHR.

300.  That said, the position in 2007 has been characterised by  significant
    movements of civilians, not only out of Mogadishu, but also back again,
    as soon as the security position in  the  city  has  allowed  (see  eg.
    paragraph 165 above).  Thus, one security source was  able  to  say  in
    April 2007, that the  position  in  Mogadishu  was  "Mogadishu  quiet",
    whilst the government "gave broadly accurate warnings to  civilians  to
    leave certain areas of the city to avoid  the  violence,  although  the
    source was  in  no  doubt  that  bombardment  within  these  areas  was
    indiscriminate" (paragraph 73 above).   A  significant  factor  in  the
    movement of people is Bakhara Market, which plays an important role  in
    the provision of food  for  the  inhabitants  of  Mogadishu.   The  UIC
    insurgents have on occasion targeted the market, eliciting  a  military
    response from the TFG/Ethiopians.   Following a warning that a security
    operation was to take place in the  market,  there  was  a  significant
    exodus in late October  2007,  as  we  have  already  noted.   However,
    closure of the market appears to have lasted only  five  days,  and  Dr
    Mullen accepted (paragraph 168 above) that it had re-opened,  according
    to the information produced in early November 2007.  The resilience  of
    the market is, we consider, of some significance.   We also  note  that
    several sources questioned by the Fact finding  Mission  of  June  2007
    stressed "a need to understand 'normal life' in  the  Mogadishu  sense,
    where there is an acceptance of  a  mobile  type  of  life  created  by
    displacement" (R2, page 600).

301.  Notwithstanding the Tribunal's generally positive  impression  of  the
    evidence of Dr Mullen, we have seen how, under  cross-examination,  he
    was unable to  sustain  the  stance  that  clan  support  networks  had
    completely broken down during 2007.   Despite the  fierce  fighting  in
    early 2007, the Danish Refugee Council and Danish Immigration  Service,
    in their report published in 2007,  noted  the  continuing  ability  of
    clans to protect their own, albeit that someone returning  from  abroad
    might receive assistance "in the  long  term"  (paragraph  134  above).
    The same report, at  paragraph  20.08  (paragraph  135  above),  whilst
    noting the source's inability to be "certain" that someone would  enjoy
    clan protection in Central and southern Somalia, nevertheless  recorded
    his acknowledgement that in principle one could expect to be  protected
    by one's own clan. The source quoted at paragraph 4.31 of the July Fact
    Finding Mission report as saying that there is little  protection  from
    one's own clan (R2, page 612) appears to have  based  his  view  on  an
    anecdote involving a friend who was for some reason shot at by a fellow
    clan member. Similarly, the source referred to at paragraph  4.32,  who
    said returning Somalis who had  left  for  economic  reasons  would  be
    considered as traitors, based that view in part on  the  experience  of
    someone she knew. The source's view is, in any event, out of step  with
    the preponderance of the evidence.  It appears  to  be  the  case  that
    certain areas of Mogadishu (namely, the south) have remained better off
    than other areas, such as the north, during the  disturbances  of  2007
    and that the educational NGO with whom Professor Lewis  is  in  contact
    appears to have continued to function throughout the relevant time.  As
    noted at paragraph 4.06 of the Fact Finding Mission report of July 2007
    (paragraph 76 above) a relevant department  of  the  UN  is  quoted  as
    saying that "most clans had some network  in  operation  in  Mogadishu,
    though most people were  now  playing  on  personal  rather  than  clan
    connections".  We also observe that Professor Lewis's  United  Kingdom-
    based contacts were able to travel to and  from  Somalia  and  that  Dr
    Mullen told us the airports outside Mogadishu were functioning  at  the
    date of the hearing. Indeed, the evidence given  to  the  Fact  Finding
    Missions of April and June 2007 by an airline executive is particularly
    noteworthy. In the May report we find:

        "9.03 The source said that his airline had not cancelled  a  flight
        to Mogadishu since 1991... He explained that the airline works with
        whoever is in control on the ground in Mogadishu to ensure the safe
        operation of the flights, be that the UIC as  before,  or  the  TFG
        now.


        ...


        9.05 He explained that the airline has 'special status' in  Somalia
        and that it would be in no-one's interests to harm the flights.  He
        said that any fighting around the airports stops during  the  times
        the flights arrive. When questioned on this, he explained  that  it
        is quite likely that all sides will have their own  people  on  the
        flight. Also, because the current conflict is political rather than
        clan based, the clans do not want to kill members of  another  clan
        which would lead to retributive attacks.


        9.06 Asked about travel from  Mogadishu  International  Airport  to
        Mogadishu, the source said that  there  were  no  difficulties.  He
        contrasted this with the previous situation,  under  the  warlords,
        when flights had been to Bale  Dogle  airport,  around  90kms  from
        Mogadishu. From there, he said, it had been necessary for people to
        arrange militia escorts because there were so many  roadblocks  but
        that did not apply from Mogadishu International. He said  that  his
        airline had never had a passenger ambushed.


        9.07 The source said that he did not know what the current position
        was following the  US  airstrikes  on  26  April,  but  before  the
        airstrikes there were always lines  of  taxis  queuing  up  outside
        Mogadishu International. There was no problem for anyone to take  a
        taxi into Mogadishu and there were no roadblocks or checkpoints  to
        impede their 12km journey. When asked about the situation for those
        who wished to travel elsewhere in Somalia he thought that, distance
        aside, this was no more difficult than travelling into  Mogadishu."
        (R3, pages 1143 and 1144)


   In the July 2007 report, the airline executive told the delegation:


        "1. The source  said  that  flights  continue  to  operate  between
        Nairobi and Mogadishu International Airport via  Aden  and  Berera.
        Traffic is now building up again after the conflict.  Numbers  have
        been thin on the flight into Mogadishu,  but  the  source  did  not
        consider that this was because of the  security  situation.  Normal
        turnaround for the flights in Mogadishu is 45 minutes  to  1  hour,
        and they remain in Mogadishu for a maximum of four hours. No flight
        has ever been cancelled for security reasons.


        2. The airline operates its own minibus to transport its staff from
        Mogadishu International Airport into  and  around  Mogadishu  city,
        including the airline's three offices in North, South  and  Central
        Mogadishu. Although not technically for airline passengers' use, on
        the infrequent occasions when regular  public  transport  has  been
        interrupted, the  airline's  minibus  has  been  used  to  transfer
        passengers into the city.  The  airline  had  not  encountered  any
        difficulties in operating this service and at no time had its staff
        or passengers come to any harm. In addition to  the  airline's  own
        transport, the source  informed  the  delegation  that  there  were
        regular minibus services from the airport into the city  and  taxis
        were freely available.


        3. To illustrate the ease with which travel from the airport to and
        within Mogadishu could be undertaken, the source invited  a  member
        of the delegation to speak on the telephone with a  member  of  his
        staff who was based in and lived in Mogadishu.  The  source  called
        the member of staff on his  mobile  telephone,  explained  why  the
        delegation wished to speak to him , and told him to answer honestly
        any questions he was asked. The staff member in Mogadishu told  the
        delegate that  the  had  driven  in  his  private  motor  car  from
        Mogadishu  International  Airport  to  his  home  in  the   Halanie
        district, on the opposite side of Mogadishu, two hours  previously.
        He makes this journey every working day  and,  apart  from  routine
        checks at TFG  operated  checkpoints,  has  never  encountered  any
        difficulty. Nor had he ever heard of any  airline  passenger  being
        mistreated en route from the airport  into  the  city,  and  seemed
        surprised at the question." (R2, page 624)


    Although this evidence is in some respects qualified or contradicted by
    other sources to whom the Mission spoke,  its  provenance  is,  in  our
    view, such that it cannot lightly be discounted. It  also  chimes  with
    the evidence  regarding  Somalis  travelling  back  and  forth  between
    Somalia and the United Kingdom and with the UN source (R2,  page  617),
    who said that passengers  "arriving  at  MIA  or  K50  airports  should
    generally not have any difficulty travelling into Mogadishu or anywhere
    else" and that a passenger  bound  for  Mogadishu  "would  not  need  a
    protective escort".

302.  Looking at the evidence as a whole, the Tribunal does  not  find  that
    the current situation in Mogadishu is such that any person living there
    is at real risk of serious harm.  (We shall deal later with  the  issue
    of armed conflict).  In making  this  finding,  the  Tribunal  has  had
    regard to the issue of checkpoints.  Within Mogadishu itself, we accept
    the information contained in the report of the Fact Finding Mission  of
    June 2007, that there had been a "remarkable reduction in checkpoints",
    a finding with which Dr Luling said  she  had  no  reason  to  disagree
    (paragraph 129 above) and that as at mid-2007, the TFG had cleared away
    most militia checkpoints (paragraph 161  above).   Although  Dr  Mullen
    demurred on this issue, his evidence was to  the  effect  that  non-TFG
    checkpoints were run by  those  whose  purpose  was  to  extort  money,
    irrespective of clan, and that tariffs "would be adjusted according  to
    capacity to pay". The  Tribunal  concludes  that  those  moving  around
    Mogadishu and its environs, including those taking refuge  with  fellow
    clan members, will in general  not  be  at  risk  of  serious  harm  at
    checkpoints.  The position may, however, be otherwise where there is  a
    real risk that a person will  encounter  a  non-TFG  checkpoint  alone,
    without friends, family or other clan members.

Women

303.  The Tribunal in NM did not consider that being a woman  constituted  a
    "differential impact", of the kind required by Adan.  There is  nothing
    in the evidence before us to indicate that the position in this  regard
    has changed.  We accept what is said at paragraphs 23.18 and  23.21  of
    the November 2007 COIS report (paragraph  232  above)  regarding  there
    being no current evidence  that  women  are  specifically  targeted  in
    Somalia at the present time.  This finding, however, needs to  be  read
    in the light of what we have just  said  about  checkpoints.   Post-AG,
    checkpoints will not in general be a substantive issue as regards  risk
    on return to the "home" area from the point of  return.   However,  the
    possibility, once in that area, of  having  to  leave  it  in  the  way
    discussed above, in response to a fresh deterioration in  the  security
    situation in Mogadishu, is relevant in assessing a person's claim to be
    in need of international protection.  It is  on  that  basis  that  the
    respondent's acknowledgment at paragraph  233  above,  that  there  are
    "increased security risks which unaccompanied women  may  face  in  the
    current climate," needs to be considered.  In  general,  it  would,  we
    consider, be difficult to see how a woman who,  ex-hypothesi  could  be
    returned to live in her "home" area with fellow clan or  group  members
    would be able to show that, in the event of having to move for security
    purposes, she would be at real risk of having to do  so  alone,  rather
    than in the company of others, who would  provide  her  with  requisite
    protection at any "unofficial" checkpoint. According to a Senior Policy
    Adviser to the EU, interviewed by the BIA Mission in April  2007,  "the
    highways could be dangerous but people always  travelled  with  escorts
    arranged by their own clan, so checkpoints just meant paying a  'toll'"
    (R3, page 1127).

The Ashraf and other minority groups

304.  As we have already said, the events of 2006 and 2007,  concerning  the
    rise to dominance of the UIC, the intervention of the  Ethiopians,  the
    expulsion of the UIC from Mogadishu, and its aftermath,  represent,  in
    our view, a departure from the previously accepted paradigm of majority
    clan warlords preying upon those from minority clans and groups, whilst
    contending amongst themselves over such things as land and the trade in
    khat.  Although the genesis of the  UIC,  in  the  system  of  district
    religious courts described by Dr Mullen,  is  complex,  the  fact  that
    Hawiye businessmen in Mogadishu were both able and willing to call upon
    assistance from such a source suggests that persons perceived as being,
    or having a connection with, Islamic teachers, jurists,  officials  and
    the like were not as despised and marginalised by other Somalis as  may
    have been thought (paragraph 173 above).  The evidence before  us  also
    indicates that the issue  of  patronage  from  or  integration  with  a
    majority clan may very often need specific and detailed  consideration.
    This was identified by the Tribunal at paragraph 117 of NM but, in  our
    view, it now requires greater emphasis.

305.  So far as the Sheikhal are concerned, we have  set  out  at  paragraph
    286 above our reasons for finding that Professor  Lewis  underestimated
    the extent to which a member of such a group  could  become  integrated
    with his or her host-clan community.  The respondent's initial position
    was that appellant S, if found  to  be  a  Sheikhal  Jasira,  would  be
    entitled by reason of that finding to international protection. In  the
    light of the evidence, we have doubts about that; nevertheless, for the
    purposes of appellant S's  appeal,  the  concession  must,  of  course,
    stand.  Apart from what we say in the previous paragraph,  our  concern
    arises because by her own account appellant S's father was, on the face
    of it, an official of just the type of religious court upon  which  the
    UIC was founded and,  even  if  appellant  S  was  truthful  about  his
    disappearance, there plainly must have been many others who remained in
    post during the era of the warlords or who were at least  available  to
    be called upon in 2006.  In addition, given that, in  general,  members
    of such minority groups in southern  Somalia  would  not  have  (as  Dr
    Mullen made clear) their own majority areas but, in general, be  living
    amongst other, major clans, the possibility of a significant degree  of
    local acceptance or even integration becomes apparent.  In the light of
    the evidence before us and the concerns regarding Dr Luling's evidence,
    it seems to us that FK (Shekhal Gandhershe)  Somalia  CG  [2004]  UKIAT
    00127 should not be relied on for the  proposition  that  all  Sheikhal
    Gandhershe (and, by implication, all Sheikhal Jasira) are, as such,  at
    real risk, as being unprotected minorities. FK relied on a report of Dr
    Luling which appears to have been similar in various  respects  to  the
    ones before us.

306.  A similar issue arises in relation to the Ashraf.  A  person  of  that
    group who has continued to live in southern Somalia until recent  times
    may well have been able to do  so,  not  by  living  in  hiding  and/or
    suffering periodic harassment (or worse) but because  she  has  enjoyed
    the significant protection of her geographic community.  In  short,  we
    emphasise what Ouseley J said in paragraph 117 of NM "that  a  division
    between minority and majority does not represent a bright line  on  one
    or other side of which every clan must fall". In this regard,  we  also
    remind ourselves of what the IAT had to say in  KS  (Minority  Clans  -
    Bajuni - ability to speak Kibajuni)  Somalia  CG  [2004]  UKIAT  00271,
    where, at paragraph 38, it found that a minority clan member  may  have
    protection from a majority clan where, for example,  she  marries  into
    such a majority  clan.   Being  an  Ashraf  will  still  usually  be  a
    significant step on the path to establishing a claim  to  international
    protection.  But  the  evidence  we  have  before  us,  including  that
    concerning the rise of the UIC and its aftermath, seems to us to  point
    towards a less mechanistic approach to the  consequences  of  being  an
    Ashraf or other minority  group  member  than  may  have  been  thought
    necessary hitherto: in particular, where the only credible part  of  an
    appellant's claim is that she is an Ashraf or a member  of  some  other
    minority  group.  What  we  have  just  said  is,  we  consider,  fully
    compatible with the ECtHR's judgment in Salah Sheekh v The  Netherlands
    , where, on the facts as found, the claimant had  plainly  not  enjoyed
    any degree of assimilation and protection: indeed, quite  the  opposite
    (paragraph 148 of the judgment).

307.  What, then, of a person who is found to be an Ashraf  (or  other  such
    minority) from an area that has not accepted her or  would  not  accept
    her in such a way as to offer any requisite  protection?   As  we  have
    seen, such a person would not as such be at real risk of persecution or
    other targeted harm at the hands  of  the  TFG/Ethiopians  or  the  UIC
    insurgents.   However,  if  the  appellant  came  from  Mogadishu,  her
    position on return to her former  home  area  would,  on  the  evidence
    before us, be extremely problematic.  The  TFG/Ethiopians  are  plainly
    not in the position of being able to offer  such  a  person  protection
    from the activities of criminal elements in the  city  which  would  be
    likely to seek to exploit those without any form of support  mechanism.
    Notwithstanding the fact that the minority populations of Mogadishu are
    no longer the victims  of  targeted  looting  and  other  human  rights
    violations at the hands of majority militias, we do not see how it  can
    properly be said that the return of a lone  Ashraf  or  other  minority
    group member to Mogadishu would not result in that individual facing  a
    real risk of serious harm, contrary to article 3 of  the  ECHR,  absent
    the type of protection just described.   In this regard, we observe, in
    addition to the evidence to which we have earlier set out, the  finding
    in the UN Commissioner on Human Rights report  (paragraph  209  above),
    that members of minority groups found it harder to flee and move around
    to escape fighting, because they were not as  easily  accepted  in  new
    surroundings.  This fell to be contrasted with displaced  persons  from
    majority clans, who often had a better chance of being tolerated in the
    area to which they have fled.

308.  We  must  then  ask  whether  this  risk   contains   any   sufficient
    differential impact as to engage  the  Refugee  Convention.   In  other
    words, assuming that the feared serious harm is persecutory,  could  it
    be said to be "by reason of" the person's membership of the Ashraf?  It
    is because the person has  no  identifiable  home  area  and,  thus,  a
    community in which she could find protection, that she is  particularly
    vulnerable to criminality, both within the area itself but also, in the
    event of displacement for security reasons, by reason of having nowhere
    to go other than an IDP camp or some roadside  refuge.  This  state  of
    affairs is directly related  to  her  minority  status.   Applying  the
    principle enunciated in Adan, we are satisfied  that  the  differential
    requirement is met and that such a person (male or female) would  be  a
    refugee, as well as succeeding under article 3 of the ECHR.  It  should
    be noted that, despite the changes in the factual  position  since  NM,
    our conclusions in this regard are in line with those of  the  Tribunal
    in that case.


309. The significance of belonging to, or otherwise  being  able  to  secure
    the protection of, a majority clan was identified in NM as lying in the
    fact that majority clans had their own militias (paragraph 122  of  the
    determination; paragraph 11 above).Whilst we  find  that  the  evidence
    shows that in Mogadishu majority clan militias are no longer in control
    (and have not been since the rise of the  UIC),  and  that  members  of
    majority clans have on occasion been  compelled  to  leave  their  home
    areas  during  2007  as  a  result  of  fighting  and  other   security
    operations, the evidence does not indicate that the majority clans have
    lost their militias or that they have otherwise become unprotected.  As
    Dr Mullen's testimony shows, large numbers of guns  of  all  kinds  are
    being sold in Mogadishu and the written materials confirm both this and
    the very limited success of the TFG/Ethiopians in attempting to  disarm
    the population.  Accordingly,  the  distinction  drawn  in  NM  between
    majority clans and minority clans and groups continues  to  hold  good,
    both in Mogadishu and the rest of southern Somalia.

The position outside Mogadishu

310.  The security situation in Mogadishu is,  we  find,  peculiar  to  that
    city and its immediate environs.   The  areas  beyond  remain  much  as
    before.   According to Dr Mullen  (paragraph  180  above),  Middle  and
    Lower Shebelle are more stable than Mogadishu.  Although he  considered
    that (internal) refugees in Afgoye  had  had  an  effect  on  stability
    there, we note at paragraph 8.07 of the  report  of  the  Fact  Finding
    Mission of April 2007, one source said that  "the  provinces  had  been
    relatively unaffected  by  the  main  fighting,  and  that  life  there
    remained much the same as it had always been, with little  impact  from
    IDPs most of whom remained on the outskirts of Mogadishu," although  he
    "thought that other areas would be increasingly  affected  if  the  war
    carried on".   "Normal life" in  those  areas  was,  the  source  said,
    characterised by local disputes, usually about water rights, and  that,
    although not comparable to western standards, the local  administration
    and  justice  administered  by  local  clans  were  "reasonably   fair"
    (paragraph 237 above).   In the South, Kismayo appears to be  unstable.
    According to a UN security officer (R3, page 1130):  "it  was  an  area
    that was always likely to see instability: there were many clans  there
    but none was dominant so it was inherently unstable and volatile."

311.  Dr  Mullen  considered  the  Bay  and  Bakool  regions  to  have  some
    stability, albeit that two sub-clans of the Rahanweyn were in conflict.
      There was, in particular, stability in the town of Baidoa, which  was
    being used by the Ethiopians as a supply base for Mogadishu.   Finally,
    according to Dr Mullen the "other area with a degree of  stability  was
    Hiran, which enjoyed a very  good  and  enlightened  local  government"
    (paragraph 180 above).

The Tribunal's findings on the legal issues regarding article 15(c)  of  the
    Qualification Directive

(a) Meaning of international or internal armed conflict

312.  The Asylum and Immigration Tribunal is  a  creature  of  statute.   It
    may, accordingly, exercise only that jurisdiction which Parliament  has
    seen fit to confer upon it.  For the present purpose, that jurisdiction
    is limited to deciding whether the appellants  (or  any  of  them)  are
    entitled to subsidiary protection for the purposes of  the  Immigration
    Rules, which implement article 15(c) of  the  Qualification  Directive.
    Any finding which we make on the issue of whether there is or is not an
    international or internal armed conflict in Somalia for the purposes of
    paragraph 339C(iv) (second) of the  Immigration  Rules  is  limited  to
    these purposes.  That is  so,  irrespective  of  whether  and  to  what
    extent, in reaching a decision on that issue, we  have  regard  to  and
    apply anything that can be said to  constitute  a  rule,  principle  or
    terminology found in international humanitarian law, the law  of  armed
    conflict or any other form of international law, whether  customary  or
    otherwise.   International  humanitarian  law  and  the  law  of  armed
    conflict exist in order to regulate the activities of combatants.  This
    Tribunal has no such function.  Unlike international tribunals such  as
    the International Tribunal for the Prosecution of  Persons  Responsible
    for Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law  Committed  in
    the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991 (to  give  that  body
    its full title), we have no jurisdiction whatsoever to pass judgment on
    those who may have violated international humanitarian law.  Nor is  it
    any part of our function to identify for the purposes of  international
    humanitarian law the existence of armed  conflict  in  countries  other
    than the United Kingdom in a way that would affect  the  Government  of
    the United Kingdom, otherwise than in relation to its  responsibilities
    under the Qualification Directive and related legislation.

313.  To that extent, the Tribunal is readily able to  give  the  respondent
    the assurances she seeks.   Otherwise,  we  consider  the  respondent's
    submissions  on  the  issue  of  armed  conflict  to  be   ones   which
    exclusively involve the question of the statutory interpretation of the
    expression "international or internal armed conflict" in article  15(c)
    and paragraph 339C(iv)(second).   We now turn to that issue. It is  one
    that currently is without United Kingdom judicial  authority.  We  have
    endeavoured to deal with the substantive issues, on the  basis  of  the
    submissions made to us. That last  point  needs  to  be  stressed  (see
    paragraphs 331 to 333 below).

314.  Whilst there is some force in the  argument  that  article  15(c)  is,
    upon analysis, no more than a limited part  of  the  obligations  which
    Member States have by reason of article 2 of the ECHR, elevated to  the
    point of conferring the "status" of subsidiary protection,  as  opposed
    to the right of non-refoulement, we do not accept that the position  is
    as straightforward as the respondent contends or, even if it  is,  that
    this necessarily compels a definition  of  "international  or  internal
    armed conflict"  that  pays  no  substantial  regard  to  international
    humanitarian law  etc.   There  are  two  reasons  why  we  reach  that
    conclusion.

315.  First, if  that  had  been  the  intention  of  the  drafters  of  the
    Qualification Directive, they could easily have made it plain that  the
    serious harm covered by article 15(c) was limited to certain  forms  of
    harm that were  already  "covered"  by  article  2  of  the  ECHR.  The
    respondent's argument is further weakened by the  fact  that  paragraph
    339C(iii)(second) of the Immigration Rules provides that  serious  harm
    includes "unlawful killing", which, on the face of it, leaves  no  room
    for sub-paragraph (iv) to be concerned solely with some other aspect of
    article 2. Secondly, the respondent herself makes the  point  that  the
    drafting history of article 15 shows that paragraph (c) derives to some
    extent from the Temporary Protection Directive.  As the  definition  of
    "displaced  persons"  in  article  2  of  that  Directive  makes  plain
    (paragraph 273 above), those who have, for example, fled areas of armed
    conflict or endemic violence may include those who do not  satisfy  the
    requirements of recognition as refugees under  the  Geneva  Convention.
    By the same token, it may be inferred  that  such  persons  would  also
    include those who, if their  claims  were  analysed  on  an  individual
    basis, might not be entitled to  resist  refoulement  by  relying  upon
    article 2 of the ECHR.

316.  The somewhat tortuous drafting history of article 15(c)  described  in
    the materials to which we have made reference has undoubtedly played  a
    part in making the meaning and scope of that provision less than plain.
    However, we consider that two points can be made. First, the fact  that
    the Temporary Protection Directive was one of the midwives  of  article
    15(c)  does  not  necessarily  mean  that  the  primary   international
    obligation  for  the  purposes  of  Recital  (25),  and  thus  for  the
    Qualification Directive itself, is anything other than the  ECHR,  with
    the consequence that the concept of subsidiary protection is to be seen
    as predominantly if not entirely as a way of  according  a  status,  as
    opposed to a bare right of non-refoulement, to certain of those who are
    able to resist return by reference to article 2 or 3 of the  ECHR.  (We
    shall have more to say about this  below).  But,  secondly,  that  this
    should be so cannot require us to shut our eyes to the terminology used
    in article 15(c), which plainly makes use of terminology that is  drawn
    from international humanitarian law, notwithstanding the absence of any
    specific reference to that law in the Directive, as finally made. There
    is, in short,  nothing  contradictory  in  the  concept  of  subsidiary
    protection being about the protection of  an  individual  from  serious
    harm  and  the  identification  of  that  harm  involving  (in  certain
    circumstances)  the  identification  of   "dangerous"   situations   by
    reference to interpretative tools  that  are  "borrowed"  from  another
    system of law. But, what are those tools?

317.  As is manifest from the 1949 Geneva Conventions and  their  Protocols,
    and the Tadic judgments (which  have  been  widely  followed  by  other
    similar international tribunals), there is no authoritative  definition
    in international humanitarian law of "armed  conflict",  "international
    armed conflict" or "internal armed conflict".    Furthermore,  although
    the Fourth of the 1949  Conventions  relates  to  civilians,  there  is
    nothing in common article 3 that deals expressly with their  protection
    from indiscriminate violence.  Indeed, the only specific  reference  to
    indiscriminate violence  is  in  Protocol  I,  which  applies  only  to
    international armed conflicts and those "in which people were  fighting
    against colonial domination and alien  occupation  and  against  racist
    regimes in the  exercise  of  their  right  of  self-determination",  a
    concept  which,  as  we  have  seen,  has  caused  the  United  Kingdom
    Government considerable concern.  Protocol II, whilst not referring  in
    terms to indiscriminate attacks involving civilians, does  specifically
    provide that civilians "shall  enjoy  general  protection  against  the
    dangers arising from military operations".   In order for that Protocol
    to apply, however, there has to be an armed conflict taking  place  "in
    the territory of a High Contracting Party against its armed forces  and
    dissident armed forces or other organised  armed  groups  which,  under
    responsible command, exercise such control over a part of its territory
    as to enable them to carry out sustained concerted military  operations
    and to implement the Protocol".  That test may not, accordingly, be  of
    much use in seeking to identify actual situations where  an  individual
    merits subsidiary protection under  the  Qualification  Directive.   To
    take the present  case,  neither  the  appellants  nor  the  respondent
    appeared to contend that the military opposition to  the  TFG  and  its
    Ethiopian allies in Mogadishu exercised control  over  a  part  of  the
    territory of Somalia.

318.  As we have seen above, international tribunals such as the ICTY  have,
    in  recent  years,  turned   increasingly   to   customary   norms   of
    international  law,  drawn  inter  alia  from  the  Conventions,  other
    international instruments, UN resolutions and case  law,  in  order  to
    punish certain acts perpetrated during conflicts such as those  in  the
    former Yugoslavia.  In the course of  such  an  exercise,  the  Appeals
    Chamber in Tadic attempted to provide a definition of  armed  conflict.
    As already noted, it found that:-

         "an armed conflict exists wherever there is a resort to armed force
         between states or protracted armed  violence  between  governmental
         authorities and organised  armed  groups  or  between  such  groups
         within a state" (paragraph 70 of the jurisdiction judgment).


      The Appeals Chamber specifically recognised (at  paragraph  67)  that
    "the definition of armed conflict"  varies  depending  on  whether  the
    hostilities are international or internal.   That,  no  doubt,  is  the
    reason for its use in paragraph 70 of the criterion of "protracted"  in
    connection with internal armed conflict.


319.  In seeking to identify the tests to be applied in  the  interpretation
    of article 15(c), this Tribunal  is  not  bound  to  follow  the  Tadic
    judgments, as if they were binding  authority.   We  nevertheless  have
    concluded that we should pay particular  regard  to  the  authoritative
    pronouncements of those international tribunals which operate  directly
    within the sphere of international humanitarian law.  We say this,  not
    so much because in so doing we may achieve consistency as  between  the
    Member States of the EU in relation to the  interpretation  of  article
    15(c).  If such consistency is achieved, all well  and  good;  although
    given the somewhat blunt nature of the  interpretative  tools  we  have
    identified from those systems, complete consistency is unlikely  to  be
    obtained.  Rather, we adopt this course because we consider  it  to  be
    the correct way of undertaking our task of legislative  interpretation.
    Just because article 15(c),  read  as  a  whole,  has  a  significantly
    different purpose from that of international humanitarian law, and that
    express references to that law appear to have been deliberately omitted
    from the final draft of the Qualification Directive, does not mean that
    we  should  shut  our  eyes  to  the  fact  that  the  terminology   of
    "international or internal armed conflict" clearly  derives  from  that
    law.

(b) The Tribunal's conclusions on the meaning of international  or  internal
    armed conflict

320.  The Manual (op cit) draws  on  both  Pictet's  commentary  (which  was
    relied upon by  the  respondent  and  the  appellants)  and  the  Tadic
    jurisdictional judgment in order to provide guidance on the  definition
    of armed conflict (paragraph 3.3).  Expanded to reflect more accurately
    the wording in Tadic and other judgments of international tribunals, we
    consider that it may properly be said that an "armed  conflict"  exists
    where:-

         (a)      any difference between States leads to the intervention of
             members of the armed forces  (Pictet,  Commentary,  volume  3,
             23); or


         (b)      whenever there is a resort to armed force  between  States
             (Tadic jurisdictional judgment, paragraph 70); or


         (c)       whenever  there  is  protracted  armed  violence  between
             governmental authorities and organised armed groups or between
             such groups within a State (ibid).


321.  Whether the threshold for an armed conflict is  crossed  in  any  case
    will depend on all the  surrounding  circumstances.   An  international
    armed conflict will, however, be usually easier to  establish  than  an
    internal conflict.  Nevertheless, as the Manual states, "an  accidental
    border incursion by members of the armed forces would not,  in  itself,
    amount to an armed  conflict,  nor  would  the  accidental  bombing  of
    another country".

322.  So far as internal armed conflicts are concerned, the list in  Pictet,
    drawn from various proposed amendments to common article 3,  is,  taken
    as a whole, probably no  longer  representative  of  current  juridical
    thought. Nevertheless, the basic thrust of the factors set out in  that
    list reflects a distinction of some importance in the context of  armed
    conflicts, which finds an echo in other international instruments (such
    as the Rome Statute, article 8(2)(d) and Protocol II), that an internal
    armed conflict does not cover situations of internal  disturbances  and
    tensions such as riots, isolated and  sporadic  acts  of  violence,  or
    other acts of a similar nature.

323.  As has been seen, for the purposes of international  humanitarian  law
    it is important to determine whether, at any particular time, an  armed
    conflict is international or internal  in  nature.   This  is  in  part
    because  international  criminal  law  imposes  different  regimes   of
    liability and punishment, depending on whether the armed conflict is of
    one or the other kind: eg. liability for "grave breaches" under article
    2 of the Statute establishing the ICTFY depends  upon  there  being  an
    international armed conflict (paragraph 269 above).  For  the  purposes
    of article 15(c), however, once  a  conflict  has  been  identified  as
    international or internal, it is unlikely that any change in its nature
    (as  opposed  to  its  existence)  will  matter.   Nevertheless,   were
    circumstances to arise in which the continuation of an  armed  conflict
    depended upon whether it had started as  an  internal  one  and  become
    international, what the Appeals Chamber said at  paragraph  84  of  the
    Tadic appeals judgment should be borne in mind:-

         "[In the] case of an internal armed conflict breaking  out  on  the
         territory of a State, it may become  international  (or,  depending
         upon the circumstances, be international in character alongside  an
         internal armed conflict) if (i) another State  intervenes  in  that
         conflict through its troops, or alternatively if (ii) some  of  the
         participants in the internal armed conflict act on behalf  of  that
         other State."


324.  It is extremely important  to  emphasise  that  the  determination  of
    whether there exists an armed conflict of either kind is  predominantly
    one of fact and that the tests articulated in the case  law,  including
    Tadic, are not sharp instruments. That this is  so  should  be  neither
    surprising nor alarming. A large part of the work  of  the  Asylum  and
    Immigration Tribunal involves  applying  similarly  broad  concepts  to
    factual situations (see eg. Krotov v SSHD [2004] EWCA Civ 69  or  Huang
    and Kashmiri [2007] UKHL 11 (in the context of article 8 and  the  test
    of proportionality)).

325.  The respondent's  opening  skeleton  identified  a  further  potential
    indicator, albeit that on the facts of the present cases it is one that
    might be said to work against her.  This is that, bearing in  mind  the
    partial genesis of article 15(c) in the Temporary Protection Directive,
    an armed conflict for the purposes of that provision may  be  one  that
    "induces people to flee the relevant area".  This indicator is  useful,
    insofar as it helps in the application of the Tadic test, by  providing
    one means of differentiating between a relatively minor revolt or other
    disturbance and an internal armed conflict. Taken any further, however,
    it runs the risk of leading to  the  assembly  of  an  ad  hoc  set  of
    indicators, not firmly rooted in international law.

326.  Although the question of whether, for the purposes of  article  15(c),
    there is a situation of international or internal armed conflict  in  a
    particular country at a particular time is predominantly one  of  fact,
    it is one which is plainly capable of constituting country guidance, as
    envisaged by the Tribunal's Practice Direction 18.2.

(c) The temporal and geographic extent of an armed conflict

327.   As already noted, paragraph 70 of the Tadic  jurisdictional  judgment
      states that, once an international  or  internal  armed  conflict  has
      begun, "international humanitarian law extends beyond the cessation of
      hostilities until a general conclusion of peace is reached; or in  the
      case of an internal armed conflict, a peaceful settlement is achieved.
      Until that moment, international humanitarian law continues  to  apply
      in the whole territory of the  warring  States  or,  in  the  case  of
      internal armed conflicts, the whole territory of a party,  whether  or
      not actual combat takes place there".

328.  To what extent should we have regard to  this  particular  finding  in
      the context of applying the rules which  implement  the  Qualification
      Directive? If the guns of the contending parties fall silent,  perhaps
      as a result of what is at first merely seen as a  truce  or  temporary
      ceasefire, it may  be  asked  what  purpose  is  served  by  requiring
      judicial fact-finders to consider article 15(c). On one view,  it  may
      not matter if they do, because, unless the peace is plainly fragile or
      ephemeral, the appellant will be unable to  show  a  real  risk  of  a
      serious and individual threat to his life or person in a situation  of
      armed conflict. There may, however, be cases where  the  actual  armed
      conflict (as opposed to the legal  regime  triggered  by  it)  has  so
      clearly and durably ceased to exist,  as  to  make  it  pointless  for
      article 15(c) even to be considered. In the present appeals, we  heard
      insufficient argument to come to any firm general conclusions. We  do,
      however, consider that the existence  of  an  armed  conflict  at  any
      particular time is to be examined not only by reference to whether the
      conflict at that time falls to be  regarded  as  an  international  or
      internal  armed  conflict,  having  regard  to  the  Tadic  definition
      regarding the initial identification of an armed conflict; it has also
      to be decided by reference to the history  of  conflict  in  the  area
      concerned. This is the approach we have adopted below on the issue  of
      whether there is a relevant armed conflict  in  Mogadishu,  where  the
      current security situation needs to be examined in the light  of  what
      has been occurring in Somalia since the early 1990's: a history  which
      is sufficiently generally known.

329.   According to Tadic, in the case of an internal  armed  conflict,  the
      geographic extent of  international  humanitarian  law  is  the  whole
      territory under the control of  a  party  to  that  conflict.  In  the
      context of that system of law, the principle  clearly  makes  a  great
      deal of sense. Were it otherwise, a party  could  evade  international
      criminal responsibility by removing enemy combatants from  the  combat
      zone, and ill-treating them somewhere else.  In the appeals before us,
      it appeared to be common ground  between  all  the  parties  that  the
      existence or otherwise  of  an  armed  conflict  turned  on  what  was
      happening in Mogadishu and its immediate environs. That being  so,  on
      the application of the relevant case law, the  fighting  in  Mogadishu
      between the TFG/Ethiopians and the UIC  and  related  elements  cannot
      lead to a finding that an internal armed conflict exists  outside  the
      area or areas controlled by the contending parties. As we  have  seen,
      the evidence shows that the control of  the  TFG/Ethiopians  does  not
      extend much if at all beyond Mogadishu, its immediate environs and the
      supply base of Baidoa. Even within Mogadishu,  the  TFG's  control  is
      tenuous. The insurgents, for their part, have no material areas  under
      their control (see paragraph 337 below).

330.  Accordingly, if, as submitted, the conflict in  Mogadishu  constitutes
      the relevant internal armed  conflict  for  the  purposes  of  article
      15(c), the geographical extent of international humanitarian  law,  as
      it applies to the contending parties, is effectively co-extensive with
      the area (Mogadishu and its immediate environs) on which it was common
      ground we should focus in assessing risk on return. But  even  if  the
      geographical extent of that law were much wider (say, the country as a
      whole), the practical value of any country  guidance  finding  by  the
      Tribunal on the issue of armed  conflict  in  any  particular  country
      will, we think, often lie in the analysis of where  that  conflict  is
      actually taking place: ie. in the identification of the conflict zone.
      That is because, whether or not a person is at real risk of a  serious
      and individual threat to life or person by  reason  of  indiscriminate
      violence in a situation of armed  conflict  will  normally  depend  on
      whether,  if  returned  to  the  country  in  question,  she  will  be
      reasonably likely to find herself within or near  that  zone.  We  say
      "normally" because there may be cases where the  requisite  risk  will
      exist anywhere within the  territorial  area  to  which  international
      humanitarian law applies. The  judgment  of  the  Appeals  Chamber  in
      Prosecutor v Kunarac (12 June 2002; Case No. IT-96-23 &  IT-96-23/1-A)
      is relevant in this regard, as is Tadic itself (paragraph 257  above).
      In short, our provisional view is  that  (always  assuming  that  some
      examination of paragraph 339C(iv)(second) is  needed  separately  from
      that given in the course of assessing refugee eligibility or paragraph
      339C(iii) eligibility), the Tribunal should endeavour to identify both
      the territorial area in respect of  which  international  humanitarian
      law  applies  (following  the  identification  of  an  internal  armed
      conflict) and, where feasible, the parameters of the  actual  zone  of
      conflict. In any event, that is what  we  have  done  in  the  present
      cases.

(d) "...serious and individual..."

331.  We have already touched on the issue of serious and individual  threat
    but something more needs to be said. As we have seen, the fact that  we
    have not accepted the respondent's contention that  article  15(c)  was
    intended as no more than an identification of a specific kind  of  EHCR
    article 2 harm does not in any  way  mean  that  we  should  refuse  to
    approach the opening words of that  provision  without  regard  to  the
    principles of human rights law.  On the contrary, it seems to  us  that
    those words point clearly to the intention to create a  high  threshold
    for succeeding under article 15(c), directly  analogous  to  the  well-
    established high threshold required to demonstrate a breach of  article
    2 or article 3 of the ECHR.  Furthermore, at least on the basis of  the
    submissions made to us, we consider that the concept of "an  individual
    threat" requires there to be some form of "differential impact", of the
    kind recognised by the House of Lords for  the  purposes  of  the  1951
    Geneva Convention in Adan [1997] 1 WLR 1107 and by the  ECtHR  for  the
    purpose of article 3 in Vilvarajah v United Kingdom [1991] 14 EHRR 248.
     Whether an individual can  show  such  a  "differential  impact"  will
    depend on the facts.  We shall later  return  to  this  matter  in  the
    context of the three appellants.   It is, however, important to bear in
    mind in this regard Recital (26), which states in terms that the  risks
    to which a population of a country or a section of  the  population  is
    generally exposed do not normally create in  themselves  an  individual
    threat which would qualify as serious harm.

(e) "... threat to a civilian's life or person ..."

332. We did not have much by way of submissions on this  particular  aspect,
    and so what we say here must inevitably be somewhat tentative.  Article
    15(c) defines serious harm by  reference  to  a  "threat"  to  life  or
    person, as opposed to article  15(b),  which  speaks  of  treatment  or
    punishment. It is well-established that, in  certain  circumstances,  a
    threat to a person can constitute inhuman  or  degrading  treatment  or
    punishment, contrary to article 3 of  the  ECHR,  and  thus  constitute
    serious harm within article 15(b) of the  Qualification  Directive.  On
    the assumption that the word "threat" must have been intended  to  have
    some significance, it is possible that a "threat" for  the  purpose  of
    article 15(c) may comprise something less than the kind  or  degree  of
    threat required to constitute ill-treatment within article  15(b).  But
    even if that is so, the significance of the words that precede the word
    "threat" in article 15(c), and of the words  "life  or  person",  which
    follow, together with the requirement arising  from  article  2(e)  for
    there to be "substantial grounds for believing" the person concerned to
    be at "real risk" if returned, mean in practice that there is likely to
    be  very  little  scope  for  a  person  to  succeed  in  a  claim  for
    humanitarian   protection   by   reference    solely    to    paragraph
    339C(iv)(second) or article 15(c); in other words,  without  showing  a
    real risk of ECHR article 2 or article 3 harm (and, thus, serious  harm
    within the meaning of paragraph 339C or the Qualification Directive).

(f) "indiscriminate violence"

333.  Once again, the lack of full submissions on this part of the  relevant
    provisions is a reason for caution  on  our  part.  But,  nevertheless,
    three  points  about  the  phrase  "indiscriminate   violence"   appear
    noteworthy. Contrary to what appears to have been the submission of the
    respondent, we do not consider that this phrase can be elided with that
    of armed conflict, so as  to  require  indiscriminate  violence  to  be
    present before an armed conflict can be said to exist for the  purposes
    of article 15(c). The basic aim of international humanitarian law is to
    achieve a situation where armed conflicts, if  they  must  happen,  are
    conducted in accordance with the principles enshrined in that law  (and
    its customary norms), including respect for civilians  and  other  non-
    combatants. An armed conflict of the relevant kind must, therefore,  be
    capable  of  arising  and  of  subsisting  independently   of   whether
    indiscriminate  violence  occurs.  Secondly,  it  is  clear  that   the
    indiscriminate  violence   can   comprise   violence   perpetrated   by
    combatants, which fails to distinguish between  civilian  and  military
    targets. But, thirdly, the indiscriminate violence does not have to  be
    violence that emanates directly from the combatants themselves. If that
    had been intended, we think the drafters could and would have said  so.
    The indiscriminate violence may, for example, be perpetrated by looters
    and other criminal elements, taking advantage of a breakdown in law and
    order to go on the rampage.

334.  In the light of the above, it is plain that, to  reiterate,  a  person
    will in general be very unlikely to satisfy article  15(c)  if  she  is
    unable to show that there are substantial grounds for  believing  that,
    if returned, she faces a real risk of ECHR article 2 or article 3 harm.
       This point is important. The fact that an international or  internal
    armed conflict has been found to exist in no way means that a  claimant
    is entitled to expect to succeed under article 15(c)  or  its  domestic
    counterpart.

Armed conflict in Mogadishu

335.  Applying the approach set out above, we  must  now  consider  whether,
    there exists a situation of international or  internal  armed  conflict
    for the purposes of paragraph 339C of the Immigration Rules and article
    15(c) of the Qualification Directive. Bearing in mind what we have said
    at paragraphs 329 and 330 above and that each of the appellants'  cases
    falls to be assessed on the assumption that they  come  from  Mogadishu
    (treating Jasira for these purposes  as  part  of  Greater  Mogadishu),
    whether or not a situation of international or internal armed  conflict
    exists in any other part of Somalia is for present purposes immaterial.

336.  The TFG is  the  internationally  recognised  Government  in  Somalia.
    Accordingly, for the purpose  of  the  Tadic  test,  we  must  consider
    whether there can be said to be protracted armed violence  between  the
    TFG and "organised armed groups".  Notwithstanding that  the  TFG  came
    into existence relatively recently, we consider that, as  part  of  the
    exercise of considering whether there  exists  an  armed  conflict,  we
    should have regard to the issue of protraction in the  context  of  the
    situation that has largely pertained since the fall of the  Said  Barre
    regime.   To do otherwise would risk  distorting  the  reality  of  the
    position.  The reason why the TFG and the Ethiopians are in  Mogadishu,
    fighting insurgents from the former controllers of the city - the UIC -
    and other hostile elements, is a direct result of the  state  of  civil
    war that arose in Somalia  in  the  early  1990s  and  which  (although
    abating in the north of the  country)  continued  to  affect  parts  of
    southern Somalia, including Mogadishu, until comparatively recently.

337.  It cannot be said that the UIC and its "allies" at  the  present  time
    have any identifiable territory  or  are  in  possession  of  what  can
    realistically be described as any significant part of  Somalia.    That
    the UIC etc. possesses a degree of organisation is,  however,  manifest
    from the way in which it has been able to target  numerous  attacks  on
    the TFG/Ethiopians during 2007.  In particular, there  are  within  the
    ranks of the UIC certain Salafist  or  Al  Qaeda  elements,  which  are
    likely to  be  using  a  cell-type  structure,  whereby  each  cell  is
    controlled from above but remains largely or entirely  unaware  of  its
    peers. We also consider that some inference relevant to the  degree  of
    organisation can be drawn from the figures concerning the  numbers  and
    types of weaponry, some of it clearly heavy, being used in Mogadishu by
    the anti TFG forces. Such munitions cannot  be  effectively  used  over
    time without a certain level  of  organisation.  Dr Mullen  was  asked
    various questions by the Tribunal about the numbers  of  the  UIC  etc.
    forces.  It was apparent that, without any criticism of him, Dr  Mullen
    was in some difficulties in giving any meaningful figures.  That  there
    are  sufficient  numbers  of  combatants  to  cause  the  TFG  and  the
    Ethiopians serious problems is, however, obvious.

338.  One of the Pictet factors we consider, on the facts before us,  to  be
    of particular significance. This concerns the issue whether the dispute
    has been admitted to the agenda of the Security Council or the  General
    Assembly of the United Nations  as  being  a  threat  to  international
    peace, a breach of the peace, or an act of  aggression  (see  paragraph
    256 above).  In this regard the Court  in  AG  made  reference  to  the
    Somalia (United Nations Sanctions) Order 2002. Looking  at  that  Order
    (SI2002/2628), which is made under the United Nations Act 1946,  it  is
    clear that its purpose is to prohibit the direct or indirect supply  to
    Somalia of  technical  advice,  financial  and  other  assistance,  and
    training related to military activities, and that the  Order  was  made
    pursuant to UN Resolution No.1425 of 22 July 1992 and the decisions  of
    the Security Council of the United Nations in Resolution No. 733 of  23
    January 1992 and 19 June 2001, concerning arms embargos in  respect  of
    Liberia, Somalia and the former Yugoslavia. At R4, pages 1589 to  1609,
    the respondent has produced further  Security  Council  resolutions  on
    Somalia of 2006 and 2007, which, amongst other things,  reinforced  the
    calls for compliance with the provisions regarding  the  arms  embargo,
    condemned the influx of weapons as a  "serious  threat  to  the  Somali
    peace process", welcomed the African Union's  mission  to  Somalia  and
    expressed concern at the continued violence in Somalia.

339.   At  paragraph  325  above,  we  indicated   that   the   respondent's
    identification of part at least of the genesis of article 15(c) in  the
    Temporary  Protection  Directive  could  cause  her   difficulties   in
    contending that an armed  conflict  does  not  exist  in  Mogadishu  or
    southern Somalia at the present time.   This  is  because  if,  as  the
    respondent asserts at paragraph 28(b)  of  her  opening  skeleton,  the
    effect of looking at article 15(c) through the prism of  the  Temporary
    Protection Directive is that the armed conflict "must  be  of  a  scale
    that induces people to flee the relevant area", then this is  precisely
    what has happened on a major scale in  Mogadishu  during  2007,  albeit
    that the pattern is one of movement followed by return.

340.  As we have already said, we do not accept the respondent's  submission
    that article 15(c) falls to be read in a way which requires a  conflict
    to be one that gives rise to indiscriminate violence,  in  turn  giving
    rise to a serious and individual threat to a civilian's life or person,
    before the conflict can be categorised as an  armed  conflict  for  the
    purposes  of  that  provision.   Notwithstanding  the  kin-relationship
    between article 15(c)  and  the  Temporary  Protection  Directive  and,
    indeed, the ECHR, the  expression  "international  armed  conflict"  is
    plainly drawn from international  humanitarian  law,  as  is  "internal
    armed  conflict".   As  we  have  already   noted,   the   purpose   of
    international humanitarian law is, amongst other  things,  to  seek  to
    proscribe  and,  thus,  eliminate  indiscriminate  violence   involving
    civilians,  in  situations  of  armed  conflict.    The   presence   of
    indiscriminate violence  cannot,  therefore,  be  said  to  be  a  pre-
    requisite for the existence of an armed conflict (paragraph 333 above).

341.  The Tribunal finds  as  a  fact  that,  on  the  evidence  before  it,
    Mogadishu is in a state of internal armed conflict.  Having  regard  to
    paragraph 84 of the Tadic appeals judgment (see paragraph  323  above),
    the intervention of the Ethiopian forces may have  led  to  that  armed
    conflict becoming also an international one,  or  having  international
    elements.  Whether or not that is the case is, however, irrelevant  for
    our purposes.

342.  Before we embark upon a specific consideration of  the  situations  of
    the three appellants, we  should  consider  whether  we  can  make  any
    findings  of  a  general  nature  regarding  the  impact  of  paragraph
    339C/article 15(c) on appeals involving those from the Mogadishu area.

343.  The first point to  make  is  that,   as  we  have  already  found  in
    relation to article 3 of the ECHR, the  particular  security  situation
    giving rise to the current situation of armed conflict relates only  to
    Mogadishu itself and some of its immediate environs, where the TFG  has
    a presence and where it is being attacked by the UIC.

344.  Turning to the issue of the serious individual  threat  to  civilian's
    life or person, in the light of our findings about the attitude of  the
    TFG/Ethiopians on the one  hand  and  the  UIC  on  the  other  towards
    majority clans and minority clans and groups, we do not  consider  that
    even a member of a minority group, such as the Ashraf, can successfully
    demonstrate a differential impact arising out of the armed conflict  in
    Vilvarajah/Adan  terms.    An  Ashraf's  chance  of  being  injured  by
    shrapnel from a bomb intended for Ethiopian soldiers or of being struck
    by a bullet from such a soldier,  intended  for  an  insurgent,  is  in
    general no greater than the chances of a majority clan member being  so
    harmed.

345.   So  far  as  indiscriminate  violence  is  concerned,   neither   the
    TFG/Ethiopians nor the UIC are, we have found, engaging in  what  might
    be described as indiscriminate violence to such an extent as  to  place
    the citizens of Mogadishu (regardless of their circumstances)  at  real
    risk of such violence.

346.  However, as we have  already  indicated  (paragraph  333  above),  the
    words "indiscriminate violence" are  not  to  be  read  as  limited  to
    violence directly attributable to the combatants in the armed conflict.
     Accordingly, article 15(c)/paragraph 339C can  apply  where  there  is
    such a conflict and indiscriminate violence, such as arson, robbery and
    rape arising from a breakdown in law and order, is perpetrated by  non-
    combatants.

347.  As a result of these findings, a minority group member, with  no  home
    area in which she can call on adequate protection  from  majority  clan
    neighbours etc  or  who,  having  been  forced  to  move  for  security
    purposes, is reasonably likely to have to run the gauntlet  of  a  non-
    TFG/Ethiopian checkpoint outside the city and/or find refuge only in an
    IDP  camp  or  ad  hoc  roadside  shelter,  would,  we  find,  face   a
    "differential threat" such as to satisfy the "serious  and  individual"
    requirement. In practice, however, her recognition as  a  refugee  will
    disentitle her to humanitarian protection (paragraph  339C(ii)(first)).
    Such a person would also, of course, be able to  show  a  violation  of
    article 3 of the ECHR (see paragraph 308 above).

348.  As can be seen, even leaving aside the point just  made,  our  general
    conclusions on paragraph 339C/article 15(c) in the context of Mogadishu
    do not in practice  provide  any  separate  entitlement  to  subsidiary
    protection, in that the minority person whom we  have  just  identified
    would   in   any   event   fall   within   the   scope   of   paragraph
    339C(iii)(second)/article  15(b).    That   conclusion   is,   however,
    unsurprising in view of what we say at paragraph 334 above.

The Tribunal's assessment of the appellants' cases

Appellant H

349. On the basis of our general findings, appellant  H  cannot  succeed  in
    her claim to be in need of international  protection.   The  inevitable
    result of the rejection of her claim to  be  a  member  of  a  minority
    group, namely, the Ashraf, is that she falls to be treated as a  member
    of a majority clan.  Given that it is common ground  that  appellant  H
    originates from Mogadishu, the reality of the matter is, we find,  that
    she is a member of the Hawiye.  Which sub-clan matters not,  given  our
    findings that the Mogadishu sub-clans of the Hawiye  are  not  at  real
    risk of persecution or targeted  ill-treatment  at  the  hands  of  the
    TFG/Ethiopians or the UIC and their associates. Nor does  the  evidence
    show that the Hawiye sub-clans are targeting each other.

350.  The fact that  members  of  majority  clans  may  claim  international
    protection outside Somalia on the false basis that  they  come  from  a
    minority is, we find, highlighted by Dr Mullen's evidence, that  Hawiye
    warlords  have  "managed  to  get  their  families   asylum   overseas"
    (paragraph 155 above).  Whilst we do not accept Dr  Mullen's  inference
    from this, that clan leaders can no longer be said to be interested  in
    the fate of Mogadishu, his evidence  on  this  matter  is  nevertheless
    significant and judicial fact-finders should bear it in mind in appeals
    involving Somalia.

351.  Appellant H has failed to show a reasonable  likelihood  that  she  is
    without a home area to go to in Somalia, where she would have not  only
    family but also fellow majority clan members to protect her.   Even  if
    she lacked a family, the evidence we  have  considered  fails  to  show
    that, even in the circumstances in which Mogadishu has found itself  in
    recent times, fellow clan-members would refuse  to  accept  her,  as  a
    person returning from outside Somalia.  Furthermore, as we have  found,
    the clan support system, although undoubtedly strained by the movements
    of people on the scale seen last year, has not collapsed.  Appellant  H
    has failed to show a  reasonable  likelihood  that,  in  the  event  of
    displacement in response to a security operation, she would  be  forced
    to deal with any unauthorised checkpoints in a way that would give rise
    to a real risk to her of serious harm or be compelled to take refuge in
    a place of danger, without the protection of majority clan members.

352.  As a result of our findings, appellant H is not  entitled  to  refugee
    status.  Her removal in pursuance of the decision to deport  her  would
    not give rise to a real risk of her suffering article  3  ill-treatment
    or  serious  harm  within  the  meaning  of  the  domestic  legislation
    implementing the Qualification  Directive.   Notwithstanding  the  fact
    that she would return to a city  which  is  in  a  situation  of  armed
    conflict, she has failed to show that there are substantial grounds for
    believing that she would face a serious and individual  threat  to  her
    life or person by reason of indiscriminate violence in the situation of
    that armed conflict.   On the evidence, being a woman, without more, is
    not a sufficient differentiator to place her at such risk.

353.  If and when directions  are  specifically  made  for  the  removal  of
    appellant H, it might be open to her, depending on the  situation  then
    pertaining, to seek to persuade the  Administrative  Court  that  those
    directions cannot be put into effect without violating her rights under
    the ECHR.  We are mindful of the observation in AG  that  the  Tribunal
    might nevertheless be able to make  what  would  in  effect  be  obiter
    findings by reference to a hypothetical point of  return;  but,  as  we
    agreed  with  counsel  at  the  outset  of  the  hearing,  it  was  not
    appropriate to attempt any detailed exercise in this regard.  We  would
    thus merely observe that, given the extent of appellant H's failure  to
    make out her case, it is reasonable to assume that,  in  the  event  of
    removal directions being set, she would be able  to  contact  relatives
    and/or friends in Mogadishu, who could make arrangements to meet her at
    the airport and travel with her to her home in Mogadishu. In the  light
    of the evidence recorded at paragraph 301 above,  we  doubt  whether  a
    substantial militia escort would in practice be necessary.

354.  As noted at paragraph 1 above, it is only appellant H's  claim  to  be
    in need of  international  protection  that  affects  the  question  of
    whether the respondent was entitled in law to decide to deport her.  No
    article 8 case having been advanced, we find that appellant H's  appeal
    must  be  dismissed  since,  absent  human  rights,  there  is  nothing
    "exceptional"  about  her  case  in  terms  of  paragraph  364  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  Indeed, no submission to the contrary was advanced.

Appellant S

355.  As we  have  already  noted,  the  respondent's  position  as  regards
    appellant S is that, if we find that she is reasonably likely to  be  a
    member of the Sheikhal Jasira,  appellant  S  is  entitled  to  refugee
    status.  We have already expressed the view that that  concession  does
    not easily fit with the totality of the evidence placed before us.   Be
    that as it may, however, we have concluded that appellant S's claim  to
    belong to that group is not reasonably likely to be true.

356.  Although to some extent supported by Professor Lewis,  the  conclusion
    that appellant S was probably a Sheikhal Jasira comes from the  reports
    of Dr Luling which, for the reasons we have given, cannot  be  accorded
    significant weight.  Although both Professor Lewis and Dr Luling sought
    to support their conclusion on ethnicity by reference to appellant  S's
    accent and general manner of speech, neither of them professes to be an
    expert  on  that  particular  issue.   Appellant  S  rejected,  for  no
    satisfactory reason, the respondent's proposal that she subject herself
    to linguistic analysis.  In any event, in the light  of  our  findings,
    based on the evidence of Dr Mullen, about the demographics of  Jasira,
    the linguistic evidence of Professor Lewis and Dr Luling cannot be said
    to demonstrate that appellant S is reasonably likely to be  a  Sheikhal
    Jasira  inhabitant  of  Jasira,  as  opposed  to  one  of  its   Hawiye
    inhabitants.

357.  The Tribunal agrees with the respondent's  submission  that  appellant
    S's knowledge of  her  clan  structure  was  not  only  inaccurate  but
    differed as between the accounts given respectively to the respondent's
    screening officer and Dr Luling.  Having heard appellant S, we  do  not
    accept the explanation proffered on her behalf  by  Mr  Young  for  her
    error as to the sub-sub-clans (paragraph 204 above).  Furthermore,  our
    attention was not drawn to any evidence to  show  that  female  Somalis
    are, in general, less likely to know about their clans or  groups  than
    are males.  In any event, appellant  S  was  by  her  own  account  the
    daughter of an official in a religious court.  Against this background,
    we do not believe that, during her formative years, she would have been
    unable to glean more than the  "scrappy"  knowledge  identified  by  Dr
    Luling or, in  our  view,  the  inaccurate  knowledge  exposed  by  the
    respondent.

358.  There  is  also  the  fact  of  the  inconsistent  evidence  given  by
    appellant S as to  when  she  was  first  subjected  to  physical  harm
    (paragraphs 17, 203 and 227 above).    Appellant  S's  assertion  that,
    although the militia attacked her, they did so in ways that  would  not
    leave marks because that might persuade her father to reappear at  home
    is, in the circumstances, wholly unbelievable.

359.  So too is appellant S's account of her alleged  experiences  in  Saudi
    Arabia.  How her husband, working long hours in a car  wash,  where  he
    earned barely enough  to  support  the  family,  could  have  purchased
    (whether  gradually  or  otherwise)  a  significant  amount   of   gold
    jewellery, worth a substantial sum, which appellant S used to  fund  in
    part her trip to the United Kingdom, is inexplicable.   The  motivation
    of appellant S's neighbour, who is not said to be from the  same  clan,
    in providing appellant S with an equal sum to that realised by the sale
    of the jewellery, is incredible,  particularly  in  the  light  of  the
    absence of evidence to show either that the woman  in  question  was  a
    member of the same clan as appellant S or that, if not, Somalis outside
    Somalia would be likely to act in so benevolent a manner towards  those
    from other clans (paragraphs 19 to 22 above).  That appellant S should,
    in circumstances described by her, see fit for the reasons she gave  to
    leave one of her children in Somalia also defies belief,  as  does  her
    lack of interest in the fate of  her  uncle,  who  had  allegedly  been
    responsible for her escape.

360.  Then there is, of course, the issue of the demographic composition  of
    Jasira.  Dr Luling asserted, without reference to any source  material,
    that the majority are Sheikhal Jasira.  Dr Mullen, who, contrary to  Mr
    Young's submission, did indeed say that he  had  been  to  Jasira,  was
    clear that it was "basically Hawiye territory", with that clan being in
    the majority to the ratio of around 5:1.  Not only does  that  evidence
    undermine a significant part of the evidence  of  Dr  Luling;  it  also
    explains what is the reality of appellant S's  position,  namely,  that
    she is a Hawiye clan member from Jasira,  who  has  been  sent  by  her
    family (whether or not via Saudi Arabia) to seek asylum in  the  United
    Kingdom on a false basis. Appellant S is not to blame for  Dr  Luling's
    failure to point out that appellant S was not  light-skinned;  but  her
    actual skin-colour is plainly not a factor that can advance her case.

361.  We conclude that appellant S has not  shown  that  she  is  reasonably
    likely to suffer persecution or  other  serious  harm  if  returned  to
    Somalia. She is not entitled to the grant of any status. No  article  8
    case was advanced before us. Her appeal is dismissed.  The  conclusions
    we have reached above regarding appellant H also apply to  appellant  S
    but, as regards the latter, we additionally find as follows.

362.  Whether Jasira is, in geographical terms,  to  be  described  as  just
    outside Mogadishu or part of its southern  extension  is,  for  present
    purposes, immaterial.  In either case, there is an absence of  evidence
    to show that the security position there has, during 2007, been bad; in
    particular, that there have been movements of civilians in response  to
    attacks by the  UIC  or  security  operations  of  the  TFG/Ethiopians.
    Through her father, appellant S has asserted a connection with  Medina,
    a place which, according to  Dr  Mullen,  was  "quiet"  (paragraph  182
    above).

363.  If and when the respondent sets removal directions  for  appellant  S,
    it may be of relevance that, on the basis that she  is  a  Hawiye  from
    Jasira, the evidence of Dr Mullen shows that, as at November  2007,  at
    least  some  of  the  airports  serving  Mogadishu  were  in  territory
    controlled by the Hawiye (paragraph 154 above) and Jasira is  near  the
    international airport (paragraph  170  above).  The  airline  executive
    interviewed by the BIA Mission described a situation in  which  one  of
    the airports used for  international  traffic  was  as  at  April  2007
    controlled by the TFG. It appears that appellant S  would  be  able  to
    travel from an airport  to  Jasira,  without  having  to  venture  into
    central Mogadishu but, even if she had to  do  so,  we  make  the  same
    observations as regards her as we did in the case  of  appellant  H  at
    paragraph 353 above.   Appellant S has  not  shown  that  she  will  be
    without family and clan member support in undertaking such a journey.

Appellant A

364.  The respondent accepts that appellant A  is  an  Ashraf.   Apart  from
    that, however, the respondent  takes  issue  with  the  credibility  of
    appellant A's claim.  The Tribunal can understand  why  the  respondent
    adopts this stance.  Certain aspects of appellant A's evidence are,  it
    has to be said, troubling.  Although Mr Maka asked us to  have  regard,
    as a point in her favour, appellant A's means of  delivering  her  oral
    evidence, we found  her  at  times  to  be  deliberately  obtuse.   Her
    apparent lack of interest in where her husband  spent  his  time,  once
    leaving the matrimonial home,  is  unbelievable.   There  was  also  no
    adequate explanation as to why her husband and her brothers were unable
    to live with appellant A and the other female members of the household.
     Her explanation for  not  going  with  her  husband  was  unpersuasive
    (paragraphs 31 to 40 above).

365.  That said, we have nevertheless concluded that the core  of  appellant
    A's account is reasonably likely to be true.   Her  evidence  has  been
    basically consistent.  More particularly, the respondent has not  taken
    issue with appellant A's ethnicity or that  she  and  her  family  were
    subjected  to  harassment  and,  in  appellant  A's  case,  far  worse.
    Appellant A bears the scar of a gunshot wound, which we accept occurred
    in the circumstances described by her (paragraph  28  above).   Despite
    our reservations regarding certain aspects of appellant  A's  evidence,
    her production of a sketch map showing the immediate  environs  of  her
    home, and  her  oral  evidence  in  relation  to  it,  were,  we  find,
    unfeigned.  The map was detailed and appellant  A  spoke  to  it  in  a
    detailed but straightforward way.

366.  So far as her time in the United Kingdom is concerned, we accept  that
    appellant A's initial failure to seek to get in touch with  her  family
    in Somalia  was  caused  by  her  inability  to  access  the  necessary
    assistance.  In the circumstances, we accept that appellant A was  told
    by  a  Somali  woman  originally  from  Shibiz,  that  this  place  had
    subsequently been at least seriously damaged and  that  the  population
    had fled (paragraph 30 above).

367.  On the basis of these specific findings of fact  and  of  the  general
    findings we have made, the Tribunal has concluded  that  appellant  A's
    appeal falls to be allowed on  asylum  and  human  rights  (article  3)
    grounds.   Notwithstanding  our  general  conclusions   regarding   the
    possibility of the Ashraf and other  minority  groups  being  able,  in
    certain circumstances, to call on the protection of the  majority  clan
    with whom  they  are  living,  each  such  case  remains  highly  fact-
    sensitive.  In the present  case,  it  cannot  properly  be  said  that
    appellant A and her family were so much  a  part  of  a  dominant  clan
    community as not to  be  at  real  risk,  during  the  years  preceding
    appellant A's departure from Somalia.  The place in  which  the  family
    home was situated appears to have been somewhat mixed, as far as  clans
    are concerned.  Although one particular Abgal family sought  from  time
    to time to drive off  the  militias  who  were,  we  find,  persecuting
    appellant A  and  her  family,  their  efforts  were  not  particularly
    successful.  Indeed, the life described by appellant A, which we accept
    is reasonably likely to be true, was a highly precarious one.  Her past
    persecution and serious harm are, by reason of paragraph  339K  of  the
    Immigration Rules, a serious indication of appellant  A's  well-founded
    fear of persecution or real risk  of  suffering  serious  harm,  unless
    there are good reasons to consider that such a persecution  or  serious
    harm will not be repeated.

368.  On  the  basis  of  our  general  findings,  no  such  reasons  exist.
    Appellant A would be required to return to a home area which, some time
    ago, appears to have suffered mass population dispersal.  At this point
    in time, it appears unlikely that appellant A's family in  Somalia  are
    discoverable by her.  Given  the  nature  of  the  community  in  which
    appellant  A  lived  and  the  absence  of  evidence  demonstrating   a
    substantial connection with  a  majority  clan  community,  it  is  not
    reasonably likely that, if returned  to  Mogadishu,  appellant  A  will
    enjoy any degree of clan or other protection.

369.  On our findings, appellant A has shown  that,  following  return,  she
    will be a lone Ashraf woman, with children, unable  to  call  upon  the
    support of any third party.   In  the  absence  of  a  protecting  clan
    community,  whether  in  Shibiz  or  elsewhere,  appellant  A  will  be
    particularly vulnerable to criminality.  That vulnerability is a direct
    consequence of her  minority  status.   That  status  is  a  sufficient
    differential factor for the purposes  of  the  Refugee  Convention  and
    article 3 of the ECHR.  Accordingly,  as  we  have  already  indicated,
    appellant A's appeal is allowed on asylum and human rights grounds.  In
    the light of our finding on refugee status, appellant A is not entitled
    to the grant of humanitarian protection (paragraph  339C(ii)(first)  of
    the Immigration Rules).

General findings and conclusions

370.  On the  basis  of  the  submissions  we  had  in  these  appeals,  the
    Tribunal's general  findings  and  conclusions  may  be  summarised  as
    follows:

         (1)   In  deciding  whether  an  international  or  internal  armed
    conflict exists for the purposes of paragraph 339C of  the  Immigration
    Rules and the Qualification Directive (but not for any wider purpose  -
    see paragraph 312 above), the Tribunal will pay  particular  regard  to
    the definitions to be found in the judgments of international tribunals
    concerned with  international  humanitarian  law  (such  as  the  Tadic
    jurisdictional judgment). Those definitions are  necessarily  imprecise
    and the identification of a relevant armed conflict is predominantly  a
    question of fact.

         (2)  It will in general be very difficult for a person  to  succeed
    in a claim to humanitarian protection solely by reference to  paragraph
    339C(iv) of the Immigration Rules and article 15(c) of  the  Directive,
    ie. without showing a real risk of ECHR article 2 or article 3 harm.

    (3) Applying  the  definitions  drawn  from  the  Tadic  jurisdictional
    judgment, for the purposes of paragraph 339C of the  Immigration  Rules
    and the Qualification Directive, on the evidence before us, an internal
    armed conflict exists in Mogadishu. The zone of conflict is confined to
    the city  and  international  humanitarian  law  applies  to  the  area
    controlled by the combatants, which comprises the city,  its  immediate
    environs and the TFG/Ethiopian supply base of Baidoa.


    (4) A person is not  at  real  risk  of  serious  harm  as  defined  in
    paragraph 339C by reason only of his or her presence in  that  zone  or
    area.


    (5) Neither the TFG/Ethiopians nor  the  UIC  and  its  associates  are
    targeting clans or groups for serious harm. Whilst both  sides  in  the
    conflict have acted from time to time in such a way as to cause harm to
    civilians, they are not in general engaging in indiscriminate violence.


    (6) Clan support networks  in  Mogadishu,  though  strained,  have  not
    collapsed. A person from a majority clan or whose background  discloses
    a significant degree of assimilation with or acceptance by  a  majority
    clan will in general be able to rely  on  that  clan  for  support  and
    assistance, including at times of displacement as a result of  security
    operations, etc. Majority clans continue to have access to arms, albeit
    that their militias no longer control the city.


    (7) A member of a minority clan or group who has no  identifiable  home
    area where such support as is mentioned in sub-paragraph (6) above  can
    be found will in general be at real  risk  of  serious  harm  of  being
    targeted by criminal elements, both in any area of former residence and
    in the event  (which  is  reasonably  likely)  of  being  displaced  as
    described  in  sub-paragraph  (6)  above.   That   risk   is   directly
    attributable to the person's ethnicity and is a sufficient differential
    feature to engage the Refugee Convention, as well as article 3  of  the
    ECHR and paragraph 339C/article 15(c) of  the  Qualification  Directive
    (but for the first sub-paragraph (ii) of paragraph 339C).


    (8) The evidence discloses no other  relevant  differentiating  feature
    for the purposes of those Conventions and the Directive.


    (9)  The issue of whether a person from a minority clan or group  falls
    within sub-paragraph (7) above will often need  specific  and  detailed
    consideration.


    (10)  Subject to sub-paragraph (9) above,  outside  Mogadishu  and  its
    immediate  environs,  the  position  in   southern   Somalia   is   not
    significantly different from that analysed in NM.


    (11)  Air travel to and  from  Mogadishu  has  not  been  significantly
    interrupted; nor has the mobile telephone network in southern Somalia.

371.  The Tribunal wishes to put on record that the cases  of  each  of  the
    parties to these appeals were conspicuously well argued  and  that  the
    documentary  evidence  assembled  by  the   representatives   for   the
    appellants and the respondent was well-presented and generally  useful.






Signed                                             Date:  22 January 2008

Senior Immigration Judge P R Lane


















                                  APPENDIX

               LIST OF BACKGROUND MATERIALS BEFORE THE TRIBUNAL


|Various dates   |  |UN Security Council resolutions on      |
|                |  |Somalia                                 |
|Various dates   |  |Miscellaneous Hansard Extracts          |
|October 1999    |  |Tampere European Council Conclusions    |
|1 March 2000   |   |US State Department: Somalia: profile of|
|               |   |asylum claims and country conditions    |
|July 2000       |  |Journal of Humanitarian Assistance:     |
|                |  |International Law and internal armed    |
|                |  |conflict - clarifying the interplay     |
|                |  |between human rights and humanitarian   |
|                |  |protection, Mark Freeman                |
|1 December 2000 |  |Joint British, Danish and Dutch Fact    |
|                |  |Finding Mission to Nairobi, Kenya:      |
|                |  |Report on minority groups in Somalia    |
|June 2002       |  |International Committee of the Red      |
|                |  |Cross: The Law of Armed Conflict, Basic |
|                |  |Knowledge.                              |
|25 July 2002    |  |Joint British, Danish and Dutch fact    |
|                |  |finding mission to Nairobi, Kenya and   |
|                |  |Baidoa and Belet Weyne Somalia: Report  |
|                |  |on political, security and human rights |
|                |  |development in Southern and Central     |
|                |  |Somalia, including South West of        |
|                |  |Somalia, and Puntland State of Somalia  |
|1 August 2002   |  |Full OCHA report of 1 Aug 2002          |
|30 June 2003    |  |International Review of the Red Cross:  |
|                |  |Towards a single definition of armed    |
|                |  |conflict in International Humanitarian  |
|                |  |law. A critique of Internationalised    |
|                |  |armed conflict No. 850, p313-350, James |
|                |  |G. Stewart                              |
|20 January 2004 |  |UNHCR: position on the Return of        |
|                |  |Rejected Asylum Seekers to Somalia      |
|25 February 2004|  |US State Department: Country Reports on |
|                |  |Human Rights Practices 2003: Somalia    |
|17 March 2004   |  |Joint  Danish, Finnish, Norwegian and   |
|                |  |British fact-finding mission to Nairobi,|
|                |  |Kenya: Human rights and Security in     |
|                |  |Central and Southern Somalia            |
|May 2004        |  |Home Office Immigration and Nationality |
|                |  |Directorate: Operational Guidance Note: |
|                |  |Somalia                                 |
|13 May 2004     |  |IRIN News: Death toll mounts as fighting|
|                |  |in Mogadishu continues                  |
|16-22 May 2004  |  |United Kingdom Ministry OCHA: Somalia - |
|                |  |Humanitarian Update                     |
|                |  |                                        |
|1 July 2004     |  |United Kingdom Ministry of Defence: The |
|                |  |Manual of Armed Conflict                |
|8 July 2004     |  |Medicins Sans Frontiers UK: Not safe to |
|                |  |return - MSF attacks Home Office's      |
|                |  |forcible return of failed asylum seekers|
|                |  |to Mogadishu                            |
|9 August 2004   |  |Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada:|
|                |  |Somalia: The Situation of minority      |
|                |  |groups and their members                |
|October 2004    |  |Home Office Immigration and Nationality |
|                |  |Directorate: Somali Country Report,     |
|                |  |October 2004, UK                        |
|24 November 2004|  |IDP Project, Norwegian Refugee Council: |
|                |  |Internally displaced Somalis face       |
|                |  |uncertain future after years of state   |
|                |  |collapse                                |
|May 2005        |  |Refugee Studies Centre: Revised version |
|                |  |of paper presented at the Conference    |
|                |  |"How much freedom, security and justice?|
|                |  |Developments in Eu Ayslum and           |
|                |  |Immigration Law "Dr Maria-Teresa        |
|                |  |Gil-Bazo                                |
|30 June 2005    |  |IBID: Operational Guidance Note: Somalia|
|November 2005   |  |UNHCR: UNHCR Advisory on the Return of  |
|                |  |Somali Nationals to Somalia             |
|21 November 2005|  |IBID: Operational Guidance Note: Somalia|
|5 May 2006      |  |Border and Immigration Agency:          |
|                |  |Operational Guidance Note: Somalia      |
|29 June 2006    |  |US House of Representatives Committee on|
|                |  |International Relations: Joint Hearing: |
|                |  |Somalia: Expanding Crisis in the Horn of|
|                |  |Africa                                  |
|13 September    |  |Office of the United Nations High       |
|2006            |  |Commissioner for Human Rights: Report of|
|                |  |the Independent Expert, Mr Ghanim       |
|                |  |Alnajjar, on the situation of human     |
|                |  |rights in Somalia                       |
|October 2006 -  |  |SAACID - Light Weapon Prices - Mogadishu|
|September 2007  |  |                                        |
|27 October 2006 |  |Border and Immigration Agency:          |
|                |  |Operational Guidance Note: Somalia      |
|19 December 2006|  |Reuters: UN reports growing food        |
|                |  |insecurity                              |
|21 December 2006|  |BBC News: Somali town on the brink of   |
|                |  |war                                     |
|                |  |                                        |
|23 December 2006|  |BBC News: Somalia Islamists call for    |
|                |  |help                                    |
|                |  |                                        |
|25 December 2006|  |BBC News: Ethiopia attacks Somalia      |
|                |  |airports                                |
|1 January 2007  |  |BBC News: Somalia's sudden shift in     |
|                |  |power                                   |
|2 January 2007  |  |BBC News: Ethiopians to stay on in      |
|                |  |Somalia                                 |
|2 January 2007  |  |BBC News: Fragile peace fuels Somalia   |
|                |  |fears                                   |
|9 January 2007  |  |BBC News: US 'targets al-Qaeda' in      |
|                |  |Somalia                                 |
|13 January 2007 |  |BBC News: Martial Law declared in       |
|                |  |Somalia                                 |
|11 January 2007 |  |BBC News: Fears stalk Somalia's capital |
|                |  |once again                              |
|11 January 2007 |  |ICRC calls for respect for Intl         |
|                |  |Humanitarian law                        |
|12 January 2007 |  |Integrated Regional Information Networks|
|                |  |News (IRIN): Somalia: children, women   |
|                |  |most affected by fighting               |
|17 January 2007 |  |Border and Immigration Agency: Freedom  |
|                |  |of Information Request: Somali removals |
|17 January 2007 |  |Power and Interest News Reports:        |
|                |  |Somalia's political future appears to be|
|                |  |its Pre-Courts past                     |
|18 January 2007 |  |Integrated Regional Information Networks|
|                |  |News (IRIN): Somalia: UN calls for      |
|                |  |immediate re-engagement                 |
|23 January 2007 |  |BBC News: Ethiopia starts Somalia pull  |
|                |  |out                                     |
|24 January 2007 |  |BBC News: Somali airport comes under    |
|                |  |fire                                    |
|26 January 2007 |  |BBC News: Five killed in Mogadishu      |
|                |  |attacks                                 |
|26 January 2007 |  |International Crisis Group: Somalia: the|
|                |  |tough part is ahead                     |
|28 January 2007 |  |BBC News: Somali conflict leaves region |
|                |  |unstable                                |
|2 February 2007 |  |BBC News: Mortar attacks in Somali      |
|                |  |capital                                 |
|2 February 2007 |  |IBID: Somalia enters a devolutionary    |
|                |  |cycle                                   |
|6 February 2007 |  |US Senate Committee on Foreign          |
|                |  |Relations: Exploring a Comprehensive    |
|                |  |Stabilisation, Reconstruction and       |
|                |  |Counter Terrorism Strategy for Somalia  |
|9 February 2007 |  |BBC News: Peacekeeping protests in      |
|                |  |Somalia                                 |
|13 February 2007|  |BBC News: Residents flee Mogadishu blast|
|15 February 2007|  |Integrated Regional Information Networks|
|                |  |News (IRIN): Somalia: Mogadishu         |
|                |  |residents back to living in constant    |
|                |  |danger                                  |
|19 February 2007|  |Integrated Regional Information Networks|
|                |  |News (IRIN): Somalia: violence out of   |
|                |  |control, say Mogadishu residents        |
|21 February 2007|  |Society for Threatened Peoples: African |
|                |  |peace force will not bring any peace to |
|                |  |Somalia                                 |
|22 February 2007|  |BBC News:  Airport attack in Somali     |
|                |  |capital                                 |
|23 February 2007|  |Power and Interest News Reports: Somalia|
|                |  |reverts to political fragmentation      |
|26 February 2007|  |Integrated Regional Information Networks|
|                |  |News (IRIN): Somalia: ICRC counts cost  |
|                |  |to civilians                            |
|28 February 2007|  |BBC News: More attacks in Somalia's     |
|                |  |capital                                 |
|28 February 2007|  |UN: Report of the Secretary General on  |
|                |  |the Situation in Somalia                |
|1 March 2007    |  |Integrated Regional Information Networks|
|                |  |News (IRIN): Somalia: "AU mission will  |
|                |  |not impose peace - Museveni"            |
|1 March 2007    |  |BBC News: Ugandan force 'not            |
|                |  |peacekeepers'                           |
|2 March 2007    |  |Foreign and Commonwealth Office: Country|
|                |  |Profile on Somalia                      |
|6 March 2007    |  |BBC News: African force attacked in     |
|                |  |Somalia                                 |
|6 March 2007    |  |US State Department: Country Reports on |
|                |  |Human Rights Practices 2006: Somalia    |
|8 March 2007    |  |BBC News: African force ambushed in     |
|                |  |Somalia                                 |
|9 March 2007    |  |BBC News: AU troops 'may spark Somalia  |
|                |  |war'                                    |
|12 March 2007   |  |BBC News: Somalia MPs back Mogadishu    |
|                |  |move                                    |
|15 March 2007   |  |Integrated Regional Information Networks|
|                |  |News (IRIN): Somalia: up to 40,000      |
|                |  |civilians flee Mogadishu                |
|19 March 2007   |  |Power and Interest News Reports:        |
|                |  |Somalia's drama: can the TFG do it?     |
|20 March 2007   |  |BBC News: Somali tops minority threat   |
|                |  |list                                    |
|20 March 2007   |  |Minority Groups International: Somalia  |
|                |  |tops list of countries where minorities |
|                |  |most under threat                       |
|21 March 2007   |  |BBC News: Heavy fighting in Somali      |
|                |  |capital                                 |
|22 March 2007   |  |Amnesty International: Somalia: Amnesty |
|                |  |International denounces abuses in       |
|                |  |escalating Mogadishu conflict and       |
|                |  |killing of human rights defender        |
|22 March 2007   |  |BBC News: Battles resume in Somali      |
|                |  |capital                                 |
|22 March 2007   |  |House of Commons: Immigrants: Somalia   |
|23 March 2007   |  |BBC News: Plane 'shot down' in Somali   |
|                |  |city                                    |
|23 March 2007   |  |OCHA: Somalia - Humanitarian Update     |
|29 March 2007   |  |BBC News: Helicopters fire on Somali    |
|                |  |market                                  |
|31 March 2007   |  |BBC News: Somalis cower as fighting     |
|                |  |rages                                   |
|31 March 2007   |  |BBC News: Somali violence 'worst in     |
|                |  |years'                                  |
|1 April 2007    |  |BBC News: Fighting rages in Somali      |
|                |  |capital                                 |
|4 April 2007    |  |Amnesty International: Somalia: fears of|
|                |  |resumption of conflict in Mogadishu 400 |
|                |  |civilians killed and thousands fleeing  |
|2 April 2007    |  |BBC News: Extra troops enter Somali     |
|                |  |battle                                  |
|2 April 2007    |  |BBC News: Thousands flee Somalia        |
|                |  |fighting                                |
|27 April 2007   |  |HJT Research: Somalia becomes the       |
|                |  |world's worst refugee crisis as clan    |
|                |  |divisions, 'war on terror' fuel the     |
|                |  |conflict                                |
|4 April 2007    |  |Integrated Regional Information Networks|
|                |  |News (IRIN): Somalia: UN decries deaths |
|                |  |in Mogadishu                            |
|4 April 2007    |  |Border and Immigration Agency:          |
|                |  |Operational Guidance Note: Somalia      |
|10 April 2007   |  |BBC News: Mogadishu clashes 'killed     |
|                |  |1,000'                                  |
|12 April 2007   |  |Integrated Regional Information Networks|
|                |  |News (IRIN): Somalia: fighting threatens|
|                |  |peace efforts in Mogadishu              |
|12 April 2007   |  |Power and Interest News Reports: Somalia|
|                |  |seized with stasis                      |
|13 April 2007   |  |BBC News: Ethiopia in Somali 'genocide' |
|                |  |row                                     |
|18 April 2007   |  |BBC News: Fresh fatalities in Somali    |
|                |  |clash                                   |
|19 April 2007   |  |BBC News: Heavy shelling in Somali      |
|                |  |capital                                 |
|20 April 2007   |  |BBC News: Fierce Somali clashes 'kill   |
|                |  |113'                                    |
|20 April 2007   |  |Somali.net: Punthiopians shell          |
|                |  |Children's hospital in Mogadishu        |
|22 April 2007   |  |BBC News: Scores killed in Somalia      |
|                |  |clashes                                 |
|23 April 2007   |  |BBC News: Family's nightmare escape from|
|                |  |Mogadishu                               |
|23 April 2007   |  |Kavkaz Center: Govt loses Kismayo,      |
|                |  |fighting in Mogadishu continues         |
|24 April 2007   |  |Amnesty International: Somalia:         |
|                |  |protection of civilians must be priority|
|24 April 2007   |  |BBC News: Ethiopian tanks pound         |
|                |  |Mogadishu                               |
|25 April 2007   |  |BBC News: Somalia at edge of the grave  |
|26 April 2007   |  |BBC News: Premier claims Somali         |
|                |  |'victory'                               |
|26 April 2007   |  |BBC News: Clan divisions behind Somali  |
|                |  |violence                                |
|26 April 2007   |  |BBC News: Somali woman leader's peace   |
|                |  |call                                    |
|27 April 2007   |  |BBC News: Somali is 'worst refugee      |
|                |  |crisis'                                 |
|3 May 2007      |  |Power and Interest News Reports: Somalia|
|                |  |falls into political collapse           |
|7 May 2007      |  |Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada:|
|                |  |Somalia: the situation of women         |
|7 May 2007      |  |Integrated Regional Information Networks|
|                |  |News (IRIN): Somalia: Bintow Hassas: "I |
|                |  |don't see any future here"              |
|9 May 2007      |  |Freedom House: The Worst of the Worst:  |
|                |  |the world's most repressive societies   |
|                |  |2007                                    |
|10 May 2007     |  |Integrated Regional Information Networks|
|                |  |News (IRIN): Somalia: Habibo Muhammad:  |
|                |  |"no one could survive Mogadishu"        |
|14 May 2007     |  |BBC News: Somalia - 'a depressing       |
|                |  |prospect'                               |
|14 May 2007     |  |BBC News: UN to probe Somali human      |
|                |  |rights                                  |
|14 May 2007     |  |BBC News: Mogadishu seeks a makeover    |
|15 May 2007     |  |BBC News: Ethiopia warned on Somali     |
|                |  |pullout                                 |
|16 May 2007     |  |BBC News: AU peacekeepers killed in     |
|                |  |Somalia                                 |
|17 May 2007     |  |Border and Immigration Agency: Report of|
|                |  |the Information Gathering Mission to    |
|                |  |Somalia                                 |
|22 May 2007     |  |BBC News: UN in row over crisis in      |
|                |  |Somalia                                 |
|23 May 2007     |  |Amnesty International Report 2007:      |
|                |  |Somalia                                 |
|24 May 2007     |  |IBID: Somalia: the dynamics of          |
|                |  |post-intervention political Failure     |
|6 June 2007     |  |BBC News: Ethiopia PM  makes  Somali    |
|                |  |promise                                 |
|14 June 2007    |  |Power and Interest News Reports: Somalia|
|                |  |continues its political collapse        |
|15 June 2007    |  |Integrated Regional Information Networks|
|                |  |News (IRIN): Somalia: one third of      |
|                |  |conflict victims were children - UN     |
|18 June 2007    |  |BBC News: Somalia in the eye of the     |
|                |  |storm                                   |
|19 June 2007    |  |BBC News: Amnesty for Somalia's         |
|                |  |Islamists                               |
|20 June 2007    |  |BBC News: Police stations raided in     |
|                |  |Somalia                                 |
|20 June 2007    |  |UN: Report of the Secretary General on  |
|                |  |the Situation in Somalia.               |
|25 June 2007    |  |Integrated Regional Information Networks|
|                |  |News (IRIN): Somalia: insecurity        |
|                |  |restricting aid operations              |
|25 June 2007    |  |United Nations: Report of the Secretary |
|                |  |General on the situation in Somalia     |
|26 June 2007    |  |Integrated Regional Information Networks|
|                |  |News (IRIN): Somalia: returnees killed  |
|                |  |waiting for food distribution           |
|29 June 2007    |  |BBC News: Somali PM wants UN            |
|                |  |peacekeepers                            |
|4 July 2007     |  |Integrated Regional Information Networks|
|                |  |News (IRIN): Somalia: violence forcing  |
|                |  |residents out of the capital again      |
|6 July 2007     |  |BBC News: Somali children die in mine   |
|                |  |blast                                   |
|11 July 2007    |  |BBC News: Plotters' links with East     |
|                |  |Africa                                  |
|12 July 2007    |  |BBC News: Heavy shelling in Somali      |
|                |  |capital                                 |
|19 July 2007    |  |Border and Immigration Agency: Letter to|
|                |  |Sheikh and Co                           |
|19 July 2007    |  |Power and Interest News Reports:        |
|                |  |Somalia's compromised National          |
|                |  |Reconciliation Conference               |
|20 July 2007    |  |Border and Immigration Agency: Report of|
|                |  |Fact Finding Mission to Somalia         |
|23 July 2007    |  |BBC News: Somalis flee as attacks       |
|                |  |escalate                                |
|23 July 2007    |  |Integrated Regional Information Networks|
|                |  |News (IRIN): Somalia: IDPs in dire need |
|                |  |as more flee violence                   |
|26 July 2007    |  |Integrated Regional Information Networks|
|                |  |News (IRIN): Ethiopia-Somalia: new camp |
|                |  |opened for Somali refugees              |
|27 July 2007    |  |BBC News: Eritrea 'arming' Somali       |
|                |  |militia                                 |
|31 July 2007    |  |BBC News: Somali gunmen attack          |
|                |  |Ethiopians                              |
|1 August 2007   |  |Danish Immigration Service: Human rights|
|                |  |and security in central and southern    |
|                |  |Somalia                                 |
|3 August 2007   |  |UNICEF: Calls for protection of         |
|                |  |Somalia's children, warns of unexploded |
|                |  |ordnance                                |
|9 August 2007   |  |9th European Country of Origin Info     |
|                |  |Seminar, Dr Cedric Barnes, SOAS         |
|9 August 2007   |  |Dr Cedric Barnes: Country Report -      |
|                |  |Somalia                                 |
|10 August 2007  |  |BBC News: Fierce fighting rocks         |
|                |  |Mogadishu                               |
|22 August 2007  |  |Integrated Regional Information Networks|
|                |  |News (IRIN): Somalia: displaced people  |
|                |  |branded 'terrorists' by Mogadishu Mayor |
|13 August 2007  |  |BBC News: War crimes 'rampant' in       |
|                |  |Somalia                                 |
|14 August 2007  |  |Integrated Regional Information Networks|
|                |  |News (IRIN): Somalia: policemen killed  |
|                |  |as bloodshed in Mogadishu continues     |
|15 August 2007  |  |BBC News: Somalia plans for a 'green    |
|                |  |zone'                                   |
|15 August 2007  |  |Integrated Regional Information Networks|
|                |  |News (IRIN): Somalia: "life in Mogadishu|
|                |  |is so bad we'll risk our lives to       |
|                |  |escape"                                 |
|21 August 2007  |  |BBC News: UN extends AU's Somalia       |
|                |  |mission                                 |
|3 September 2007|  |Voice of America News: 18,000 flee      |
|                |  |Mogadishu in August 50,000 since June   |
|5 September 2007|  |Integrated Regional Information Networks|
|                |  |News (IRIN): Somalia: Zahra Aldille, an |
|                |  |IDP in Merka: 'Every day we heard       |
|                |  |explosions'                             |
|7 September 2007|  |Integrated Regional Information Networks|
|                |  |News (IRIN): Somalia-Kenya: women bear  |
|                |  |the brunt of the Somali conflict        |
|10 September    |  |Voice of America News: Terror finds a   |
|2007            |  |home in Mogadishu                       |
|12 September    |  |BBC News: New Somali alliance threatens |
|2007            |  |war                                     |
|12 September    |  |UNICEF: warns of critical levels of     |
|2007            |  |malnutrition amongst Somali children    |
|13 September    |  |Foreign and Commonwealth Office: Travel |
|2007            |  |Advice on Somalia                       |
|13 September    |  |Integrated Regional Information Networks|
|2007            |  |News (IRIN): Somalia: call to help      |
|                |  |neglected IDP's                         |
|14 September    |  |BBC News: Somali insurgents attack      |
|2007            |  |police                                  |
|17 September    |  |BBC News: Somali clan unity deal        |
|2007            |  |rejected                                |
|17 September    |  |Integrated Regional Information Networks|
|2007            |  |News (IRIN): Somalia: 'what have we done|
|                |  |to deserve this?'                       |
|17 September    |  |UN Office for the Co-ordination of      |
|2007            |  |Humanitarian Affairs: Humanitarian      |
|                |  |Situation in Somalia: Monthly Analysis  |
|                |  |August 2007                             |
|19 September    |  |Power and Interest News Reports: The    |
|2007            |  |Failure of 'Reconciliation' and         |
|                |  |'Reconstruction' opens up a Political   |
|                |  |Vacuum in Somalia                       |
|21 September    |  |Integrated Regional Information Networks|
|2007            |  |News (IRIN): Somalia: hundreds of       |
|                |  |thousands need urgent aid, says         |
|                |  |Government                              |
|24 September    |  |Integrated Regional Information Networks|
|2007            |  |News (IRIN): Somalia: Nadifo Gedi: 'I   |
|                |  |have never begged but I am close to it  |
|                |  |now'                                    |
|27 September    |  |United Nations Commissioner for Human   |
|2007            |  |Rights: Following his mission to Somalia|
|                |  |expert deeply concerned about continued |
|                |  |deterioration in human rights situation |
|October 2007    |  |Human Rights Watch to the House         |
|                |  |Committee on Foreign Affairs: The Human |
|                |  |Rights and Humanitarian Situation in the|
|                |  |Horn of Africa", October 2007           |
|October 2007    |  |Letter from UNHCR, London, October 2007 |
|                |  |and Representation on Somalia (15       |
|                |  |February 2007)                          |
|3 October 2007  |  |BBC News: Fire engulfs main Somali      |
|                |  |market                                  |
|5 October 2007  |  |UN Office for the Co-ordination of      |
|                |  |Humanitarian Affairs: Somalia: Situation|
|                |  |Report - 5 October 2007                 |
|8 October 2007  |  |Integrated Regional Information Networks|
|                |  |News (IRIN): Somalia: families flee     |
|                |  |escalating violence                     |
|9 October 2007  |  |All Africa.com: Nearly seven people     |
|                |  |including four soldiers wounded         |
|9 October 2007  |  |All Africa.com: Fresh fire fight takes  |
|                |  |place in Mogadishu                      |
|9 October 2007  |  |All Africa.com: Families flee escalating|
|                |  |violence                                |
|10 October 2007 |  |All Africa.com: IDPs cause overcrowding |
|                |  |in Galgadud towns                       |
|12 October 2007 |  |BBC News: Somalia's political swords are|
|                |  |drawn                                   |
|12 October 2007 |  |Border and Immigration Agency:          |
|                |  |Operational Guidance Note               |
|16 October 2007 |  |All Africa.com: Somalia - a women       |
|                |  |beheaded a B/Weyn town in central       |
|                |  |Somalia                                 |
|16 October 2007 |  |All Africa.com: Fresh clashes and mortar|
|                |  |attacks injure over 30 people in        |
|                |  |Mogadishu                               |
|16 October 2007 |  |BBC News: Battle erupts in Somali       |
|                |  |capital                                 |
|17 October 2007 |  |All Africa.com: Four people died in     |
|                |  |dreadful combat overnight in the capital|
|                |  |Mogadishu                               |
|17 October 2007 |  |All Africa.com: 3 civilians killed in   |
|                |  |Mogadishu                               |
|18 October 2007 |  |All Africa.com: Explosions rock the     |
|                |  |capital                                 |
|19 October 2007 |  |IBID: Humanitarian Situation in Somalia |
|                |  |- Monthly Analysis                      |
|19 October 2007 |  |UN Office for the Co-ordination of      |
|                |  |Humanitarian Affairs: Somalia: Situation|
|                |  |Report - 19 October 2007                |
|22 October 2007 |  |Integrated Regional Information Networks|
|                |  |News (IRIN): Somalia: thousands flee    |
|                |  |homes in disputed region fearing renewed|
|                |  |clashes                                 |
|23 October 2007 |  |All Africa.com:  Urgent assistance plea |
|                |  |for 10,000 displaced Mogadishu families |
|23 October 2007 |  |UN: Report of the Secretary General on  |
|                |  |the situation in Somalia                |
|24 October 2007 |  |BBC News: Peacekeeping attacked in      |
|                |  |Somalia                                 |
|25 October 2007 |  |United Nations Commissioner for Human   |
|                |  |Rights: Displaced women tell tales of   |
|                |  |rape and fear in Somalia                |
|26 October 2007 |  |All Africa.com: UN agencies team up to  |
|                |  |help rape victims                       |
|26 October 2007 |  |All Africa.com: Women plagued by rape as|
|                |  |crime rules collapsed state             |
|26 October 2007 |  |Voice of America News: Somalia faces    |
|                |  |major humanitarian crisis               |
|27 October 2007 |  |BBC News: Heavy fighting in Somali      |
|                |  |capital                                 |
|28 October 2007 |  |BBC News: Mogadishu hit by fresh        |
|                |  |fighting                                |
|28 October 2007 |  |                                        |
|                |  |UN: Report of the Secretary General on  |
|                |  |the protection of civilians in armed    |
|                |  |conflict                                |
|29 October 2007 |  |BBC News: Profile: Ali Mohamed Ghedi    |
|29 October 2007 |  |Integrated Regional Information Networks|
|                |  |News (IRIN): Somalia: prime minister    |
|                |  |quits; violence rocks Mogadishu         |
|30 October 2007 |  |UN: Somalia: Mogadishu violence sets off|
|                |  |new wave of displacement                |
|31 October 2007 |  |All Africa.com: Almost 88,000 displaced |
|                |  |during weekend violence in Mogadishu    |
|31 October 2007 |  |All Africa.com: Peace bid a 'nightmare' |
|31 October 2007 |  |Somalia NGO Consortium: International   |
|                |  |NGO's cannot adequately respond to the  |
|                |  |unfolding humanitarian catastrophe in   |
|                |  |Somalia                                 |
|31  October 2007|  |UN: Latest figures show 90,000 flee     |
|                |  |fighting in Mogadishu                   |
|1 November 2007 |  |All Africa.com: CARE warns of potential |
|                |  |famine unless humanitarian access is    |
|                |  |provided to Somalia                     |
|1 November 2007 |  |All Africa.com: Kenya should help out of|
|                |  |mess                                    |
|1 November 2007 |  |BBC News Articles: Warning of Somali    |
|                |  |Catastrophe                             |
|1 November 2007 |  |BBC News: Warning of Somali             |
|                |  |'catastrophe'                           |
|1 November 2007 |  |Reuters: Mogadishu violence displaces   |
|                |  |88,000 people                           |
|2 November 2007 |  |All Africa.com: Catholic, other agencies|
|                |  |overwhelmed by humanitarian crisis      |
|2 November 2007 |  |BBC News Articles: Heavy battles in     |
|                |  |Somali capital                          |
|2 November 2007 |  |BBC News: Heavy battles in Somali       |
|                |  |capital                                 |
|2 November 2007 |  |UN Office for the Co-ordination of      |
|                |  |Humanitarian Affairs: Situation Report  |
|                |  |No.58 - 2 November 2007                 |
|3 November 2007 |  |All Africa.com: Fresh skirmishes flare  |
|                |  |up in Mogadishu                         |
|3 November 207  |  |Reuters: Life claimed combat at Bakool  |
|                |  |region in south overnight               |
|4 November 2007 |  |Reuters: Ethiopia reinforces troops in  |
|                |  |Somalia                                 |
|5 November 2007 |  |All Africa.com: Fresh clashes break out |
|                |  |in country's capital                    |
|5 November 2007 |  |Integrated Regional Information Networks|
|                |  |News (IRIN): Somalia: thousands more    |
|                |  |leave capital as troops converge        |
|5 November 2007 |  |Speech by Jonathan Evans, Head of MI5:  |
|                |  |Terrorism is 'product of extremist      |
|                |  |ideology'                               |
|5 November 2007 |  |The Independent: Fresh violence and     |
|                |  |'climate of fear' pushes Somalia towards|
|                |  |breaking point                          |
|6 November 2007 |  |Inter Press Service News Agency:        |
|                |  |Politics - Somalia: 'Humpty Dumpty has  |
|                |  |fallen off the wall'                    |
|6 November 2007 |  |United Nations Commissioner for Human   |
|                |  |Rights: Somalia: inter agency UN team   |
|                |  |finds displaced living in extremely     |
|                |  |harsh conditions                        |
|7 November 2007 |  |Integrated Regional Information Networks|
|                |  |News (IRIN): 'Somalia: Mogadishu        |
|                |  |residents trapped by violence - MSF'    |
|                |  |7/11/2007                               |
|7 November 2007 |  |IRIN: Somalia: Mogadishu residents      |
|                |  |trapped by violence -MSF                |
|                |  |                                        |
|7 November 2007 |  |UN: Report of the Secretary General on  |
|                |  |the situation in Somalia                |
|                |  |                                        |
|7 November 2007 |  |Medecins Sans Frontieres: Somalia: no   |
|                |  |place safe in Mogadishu                 |
|8 November 2007 |  |Reuters: UN peacekeeping force for      |
|                |  |Somalia not viable                      |
|8 November 2007 |  |Voice of America News: Mounting violence|
|                |  |around Mogadishu displaces tens of      |
|                |  |thousands of Somali                     |
|8 November 2007 |  |Voice of America News: Transcript of VOA|
|                |  |Somali service interview with Jendayi   |
|                |  |Frazer, Asst Secretary of State for     |
|                |  |African Affairs                         |
|9 November 2007 |  |All Africa.com: Mogadishu clashes       |
|                |  |devastating citizens                    |
|9 November 2007 |  |BBC News Articles: Dozens Die in        |
|                |  |Mogadishu reprisals                     |
|9 November 2007 |  |BBC News: Somalia peacekeepers not      |
|                |  |viable                                  |
|9 November 2007 |  |Human Rights Watch: Somalia: Mogadishu  |
|                |  |Clashes Devastating Civilians, 9/11/2007|
|9 November 2007 |  |Human Rights Watch: Somalia: Mogadishu  |
|                |  |clashes devastating civilians           |
|9 November 2007 |  |OCHA Report 59                          |
|9 November 2007 |  |Reuters: Dozens of corpses litter       |
|                |  |Mogadishu after battles                 |
|9 November 2007 |  |United Nations Office for the           |
|                |  |Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs    |
|                |  |(OCHA):  Somalia Situation Report,      |
|                |  |9/11/2007                               |
|10 November 2007|  |BBC News Articles: Somalis flee         |
|                |  |Mogadishu fighting                      |
|11 November 2007|  |Voice of America News: Somali capital   |
|                |  |empties as residents flee renewed       |
|                |  |violence                                |
|12 November 2007|  |Integrated Regional Information Networks|
|                |  |News (IRIN): Somalia: Mounting bloodshed|
|                |  |prompts pleas for help from Mogadishu,  |
|                |  |12/11/2007                              |
|12 November 2007|  |OCHA - Oct 2007                         |
|13 November 2007|  |BBC News: Somalis asked to fight        |
|                |  |insurgents                              |
|13 November 2007|  |BBC News: Displaced in Somalia - Yusuf  |
|14 November 2007|  |BBC News: Displaced in Somalia - Faduma |
|14 November 2007|  |IRIN: UN Envoy calls for Intl Justice to|
|                |  |stem violence                           |
|14 November 2007|  |Voice of America: Somali Rights Activist|
|                |  |charges all sides with war crimes       |
|15 November 2007|  |BBC News: Displaced in Somalia -        |
|                |  |Abdullahi                               |
|15 November 207 |  |HJT Country Database: European          |
|                |  |Parliament resolution of 15 November    |
|                |  |2007 on Somalia                         |
|16 November 2007|  |EU Parliament resolution on Somalia     |
|20 November 2007|  |BBC News (World, Africa): One million   |
|                |  |homeless in Somalia.                    |
|20 November 2007|  |HJT Research: Situation in Somalia is   |
|                |  |worse in Africa as UN estimates a       |
|                |  |"staggering" one million displaced      |
|20 November 2007|  |United Nations High Commissioner for    |
|                |  |Refugees (UNHCR):  Somalia: Number of   |
|                |  |displaced rises to one million          |
|20 November 2007|  |United Nations News: Concerned at       |
|                |  |conditions in Somalia, Security Council |
|                |  |urges end to violence                   |
|20 November 2007|  |United Nations News: Number of displaced|
|                |  |in Somalia hits 1 million mark - UN     |
|                |  |Agency                                  |
|20 November 2007|  |Voice of America News: Tensions Grow in |
|                |  |Somalia                                 |
|21 November 2007|  |Garowe Online: Roadblock militias attack|
|                |  |governor's convoy in central  Somalia,  |
|                |  |21/11/2007                              |
|21 November 2007|  |Garowe Online: Somalia mothers mourn as |
|                |  |crisis grows, 21/11/2007                |
|22 November 2007|  | The Independent: Somalia war-refugee   |
|                |  |crisis surpasses Darfur in its horror ( |
|                |  |Steve Bloomfield)                       |


