

Asylum and Immigration Tribunal


             AP (Withdrawals-nullity assessment) Pakistan [2007] UKAIT 00022





                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester, Piccadilly               |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 22 November 2006                           |On 23rd February 2007        |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                       SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE MACKEY
                         Immigration Judge nICHOLSON

                                   Between


                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Durrance, of Counsel instructed by Zacharia and
                    Co. Solicitors, Oldham
For the Respondent:    Mr T Dillon, Home Office Presenting Officer

Rule 17 of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules) 2005
provides the basis for withdrawal of appeals. Where a party has withdrawn
an appeal there is then nothing before the Tribunal and the matter is at an
end. The validity or effectiveness of the withdrawal can be challenged to
ascertain whether the "withdrawal" was in fact a nullity.  If a challenge
is made there will be a hearing, where the Appellant must establish, on the
balance of probabilities, that the withdrawal was invalid.  [Inexhaustive
reasons and guidelines are set out in para 57 (f).] This approach is noted
as consistent with the approach to withdrawals ("abandonment") in r.63.5 of
the Criminal Procedure Rules 2005 (S.I 2005 No 384), the Court of Appeal
decision in Reg v. Medway [1976] 2 WLR 528, and approach taken by SIAC.
      DECISION ON VALIDITY OF WITHDRAWAL AND DIRECTIONS FOR ADJOURNMENT


1.   This appeal came before us following directions  given  by  Immigration
    Judge Nicholson on 17 October 2006:

     "DIRECTIONS


        1.   This appeal number AA/08328/2006 came before Immigration Judge
             Mr Mulvenna on 8 August 2006 in Manchester.  At that time  the
             Appellant was represented by T Solicitors.   In  a  Notice  of
             Decision dated 8 August 2006  Immigration  Judge  Mr  Mulvenna
             stated that the Appellant had withdrawn the appeal  orally  at
             the hearing on 8 August 2006.


        2.   The Appellant's new representatives, Zacharia & Co Solicitors,
             have, by letter of 26 September 2006, sought to argue that the
             Appellant's former  representatives,  TS  Solicitors,  had  no
             instructions to withdraw the appeal.  They now seek to contest
             that withdrawal.


        3.   In the appeal of Adewole v SSHD (HX/64696/96) the  Immigration
             Appeal Tribunal stated that -


                  'An appeal, which was properly withdrawn,  prior  to  its
                  hearing by an Adjudicator, did not go in to  a  state  of
                  suspended animation; it ceased to exist, and there was no
                  provision  in  the  Immigration  Rules  for  it   to   be
                  resuscitated'.

             The Tribunal went on to state that, in those circumstances, the
             burden of proof lay upon an Appellant to establish on a balance
             of probabilities that there had been no proper  withdrawal  and
             that the representative  had,  in  effect,  acted  without  the
             authority or  consent  of  the  Appellant  when  purporting  to
             withdraw an appeal.


             In the appeal of El-Tuyeb v SSHD (TH/22187/94) the  Immigration
             Appeal Tribunal stated that:-


                  'Where a  withdrawal  of  an  appeal  is  contested,  the
                  Adjudicator must allow an opportunity  to  put  the  case
                  against  withdrawal.   This  reflects   the   fundamental
                  principle that each party should be able to put the  case
                  before  the  Adjudicator  and  the  need  for   this   is
                  particularly so where a notice of withdrawal is presented
                  on the day of the hearing.  Further,  where  there  is  a
                  contested withdrawal, there  should  be  a  determination
                  with reasons as to whether the  appeal  is  withdrawn  or
                  not.'

     4.  In the  light  of  these  Tribunal  decisions  it  is  directed  as
        follows:-

             (i)   The Appellant's application challenging the withdrawal of
                  this appeal should be listed for an oral hearing  with  a
                  time estimate of one hour.

             (ii)  Witness statements  of  evidence  to  be  called  at  the
                  hearing relating to the issue of the contested withdrawal
                  shall be filed at least five  days  before  the  hearing,
                  such statements to stand as  evidence  in  chief  at  the
                  hearing.


             (iii)    A paginated and indexed bundle of all  the  documents
                  to be relied on at the hearing, limited to  the  issue  of
                  the contested withdrawal, shall be  filed  and  served  no
                  later than five days before the hearing.


             (iv) The parties  shall  file  and  serve  skeleton  arguments
                  addressing the issue of the contested withdrawal.


             (v)  All documents shall be filed in duplicate as the  hearing
                  of this issue may be listed for a panel hearing.


             (vi) In line with the Tribunal decisions in  MM  [2004]  UKIAT
                  00182 and SV (Iran) [2005}  UKIAT  00160  the  Appellant's
                  representatives shall, no later than five days before  the
                  hearing -


                  (a)  Confirm in writing to the  Tribunal  that  they  have
                      submitted a copy of their letter of 26 September 2006
                      to   the   Appellant's   former   representatives   T
                      Solicitors.


                  (b)  Confirm in writing to the  Tribunal  that  they  have
                      invited  T  Solicitors  to  reply  directly  to   the
                      Tribunal before the date of the hearing.


                  (c)  Confirm in writing to the  Tribunal  that  they  have
                      sent T Solicitors a signed waiver of the Appellant to
                      any rights of privilege she may have  in  respect  of
                      her communications with T Solicitors on the issue  of
                      the contested withdrawal or confirm in writing to the
                      Tribunal why they are not in a  position  or  do  not
                      consider it appropriate to require the  Appellant  to
                      waive any privilege she may have on this issue."

2.   The appellant is a national of Pakistan and claims to have  arrived  in
    this country in August 2001 and it appears made initial application for
    asylum in January 2002.  It is unclear  whether  that  application  was
    processed or taken further by her original representatives, the IAS  in
    Manchester.  She then lodged another  application  on  28  April  2006,
    primarily based on her fears of returning to Pakistan because  she  has
    had illegitimate children, who have been born to her while she has been
    in this country.  That application was refused, in a  letter  from  the
    respondent, dated 16 June 2006.  The appellant then  lodged  an  appeal
    with this Tribunal.  When the matter came before Judge Mulvenna,  on  8
    August 2006, the appellant was then represented by  T  Solicitors.   As
    noted, Immigration Judge Mulvenna was notified that the  appellant  had
    withdrawn her appeal.  Subsequent to her short appearance before  Judge
    Mulvenna however she then instructed new representatives, Zacharia  and
    Co. By a letter of 26 September 2006 they  sought  to  argue  that  the
    appellant's  former  representatives   had   not   been   given   valid
    instructions to withdraw  her  appeal.   Accordingly,  they  sought  to
    contest the withdrawal and continue the appeal.

3.   The letter from Zacharia and Co. Solicitors to the Tribunal,  dated  26
    September 2006, stated:

         "The above named has instructed us  to  take  over  the  care  and
        contact of her asylum matter.   Our  client's  appeal  against  the
        Secretary of State's decision to refuse her asylum application  was
        listed for an appeal hearing at AIT Bradford on 18 July 2006.


         Our client has instructed us that on the day of the appeal hearing
        she was advised by her previous representative Messrs T  Solicitors
        to withdraw her appeal.  Our client clearly did this,  however  she
        instructs us that she was not aware of  the  exact  implication  of
        this and thought that her appeal would be heard at  a  later  date.
        Our client maintained that if she  was  returned  to  Pakistan  she
        would be due to her membership of  a  social  group  and  religious
        opinion (sic) she further maintains if she is returned to  Pakistan
        she will be considered an  adulteress.   Pakistan  is  governed  by
        Shariah law; under Shariah law the punishment for such a person  is
        death by stoning.


         Our client's illegitimate children  would  become  if  it  is  not
        already common knowledge in Pakistan no  doubt  as  you  are  aware
        Pakistan is an extremely patriarchal society, our client would  not
        be able to turn to the State or authorities for protection and as a
        result fears persecution and believes her life will be at  risk  in
        Pakistan (sic)


         Given the above and in the interests of natural justice we request
        that our client's appeal right be reinstated so that  she  has  the
        opportunity for her case to be heard.  She has a right  to  a  fair
        trial.


         We request that our client be allowed her appeal to be heard as it
        is of the utmost importance to her given the fact that her life and
        liberty are at stake."


4.   The preliminary issue as to whether a valid withdrawal had been  lodged
    by the appellant was set down before us as a matter for  determination,
    on the basis that if we found  in  her  favour,  the  matter  would  be
    adjourned  for  a  full  hearing  of  the  substantive   appeal.    The
    appellant's  new  representatives  presented  a  skeleton  argument,  a
    statement from the appellant, AP, dated 21 November 2006, a copy  of  a
    letter from T Solicitors  dated  15  November  2006  addressed  to  the
    appellant's new representatives, a form  of  authority  signed  by  the
    appellant dated 8 August 2006 and a copy of the letter sent to Mr T  at
    T Solicitors from Zacharia and Co. dated  9  November  2006.   (Mr  T's
    letter of 15 November 2006 responds to the letter of 9 November  2006).
    On the date of  the  hearing  we  were  presented  with  a  handwritten
    statement by a Mr L, dated 22 November 2006.  Both the appellant and Mr
    L gave evidence before us.

5.   In this case the Respondent challenged the  invalidity  of  withdrawal.
    However, we made it clear at the outset that the Respondent  could  not
    concede or agree the issue of validity,  as  the  jurisdiction  on  the
    validity or effectiveness of  the  withdrawal  was  a  matter  for  the
    Tribunal.

6.   Prior to setting out the evidence from both of the two witnesses it  is
    convenient to set out the questions that were posed by Zacharia and  Co
    to Mr T in the letter of 9 November 2006 and the response to them.

7.   The letter from Zacharia and Co of 9 November 2006 stated:

         "We shall be grateful if you  could  confirm  in  writing  to  both
         ourselves and the AIT:

         1.   Why the appellant's appeal was withdrawn.

         2.   Was an official interpreter present?

         3.   If an interpreter was present  then  a  copy  of  the  invoice
    paid.

         At present we do not think it is appropriate for our client to sign
         the waiver until we have your letter within seven days."

8.   The letter from T, Solicitors, dated 15 November 2006, states:

     "We are in receipt of your letter of 9 November and note what you have
        to say.

     We are enclosing here with a form of authority signed by  your  client
        on 8 August 2006, the morning of the asylum  appeal  hearing.   You
        will be aware that your client had given us instructions on how she
        had come to be abandoned in this  country  with  her  daughter  and
        thereafter given  birth  to  three  illegitimate  children  all  to
        different fathers.  At the early morning meeting before the hearing
        we noticed that one of the persons present, a gentleman  previously
        introduced to us as a neighbour, had a striking resemblance to  the
        copy photograph of her husband's visa application form.   We  asked
        him if he was your client's husband and he did not demur.  We asked
        our client and the gentleman we took to be her husband  to  confirm
        that the children were legitimate children of the marriage.   Again
        the writer recalls there was no objection raised by anybody in  the
        room.  Indeed the writer seems to recall that at  the  end  of  the
        meeting just before the  writer  went  to  the  Manchester  hearing
        centre the gentleman we took to be her husband did confirm his real
        identity and make some explanation as to why this false  claim  had
        been pursued.  We might add  that  when  we  attended  the  hearing
        centre  the  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer  provided  us   with
        additional evidence showing evidence of further  visa  applications
        made by your client's  husband  at  time  when  he  was  either  in
        Pakistan or in Sweden.


     You will see that the form of authority was read over to  your  client
        by Mr L.  He was not seen as an official interpreter but we have no
        reason to doubt his ability to properly interpret the  contents  of
        the authority form.  Moreover we were left in no  doubt  that  your
        client was fully aware of the gist of the conversation between  the
        writer and the person we took to be her husband."

9.   The form of authority signed by the appellant on 8 August 2006  was  as
    follows:

     "To T Solicitors




     Form of Authority


     I, A P, aka A, hereby request and authorise you to withdraw my  appeal
        against the decision of the Home Office to refuse my  asylum  claim
        and to make directions for my removal from this country.  I confirm
        that I have had the opportunity of discussing  a  copy  of  a  visa
        application form submitted  by  my  husband  to  the  British  High
        Commission.  I recognise that this document is fatal to my case.


     I confirm that the contents of this form of authority have  been  read
        out to me in my own language and I confirm that I am aware  of  the
        consequences of withdrawing this appeal.


     Dated 8th Day of August 2006


     Signed (signature of appellant)


     Through the interpretation of


     Signed (signature of Mr L)"

    The Appellant's Evidence


10.   A court interpreter, Mr Mohammed Khaliq Sayed  -  Urdu  language,  was
    provided by the Tribunal.  After a brief discussion with the  appellant
    he confirmed that  they  fully  understood  each  other  and  that  the
    language was Urdu.

11.  The appellant then adopted her statement of  21  November  2006,  which
    she agreed had been translated and read over to her.  She  agreed  that
    it should stand as evidence-in-chief.

12.  She was then cross-examined by Mr Dillon.  She agreed  she  had  signed
    the form of authority at T Solicitors on 8 August 2006.  Mr L had  read
    it through to her in Punjabi Urdu before she had signed  it.   However,
    while it had been explained she did not fully understand  its  content.
    She stated that when she went home,  with  a  copy  of  the  form,  and
    discussed the matter with a neighbour she then became  aware  that  the
    case "was finished and was closed".

13.  When asked why she was not aware that she had signed  a  withdrawal  of
    her appeal she stated that she did not know what  she  had  signed  and
    thought that Mr T was withdrawing himself from the appeal.  It was  put
    to her that, as she agreed it had been  read  back  and  there  was  no
    statement in it that Mr T was withdrawing his  representation.   Indeed
    it was put to her that as there were two references to  her  withdrawal
    of the appeal in the form it was difficult to see why she  thought  the
    appeal had not been withdrawn.  In response she said that she  did  not
    understand but considered that she  may  have  to  appeal  again.   She
    stated that she had been told to "sign, sign or you will  be  punished-
    two years."

14.  She was then asked what she had been told by Mr T at the meeting.   She
    explained that she had gone to his office but did not  understand  what
    was being said.  It had been translated to her that all of her case was
    false and she had been asked to sign.  She stated "I thought Mr T would
    not do my case".

15.  When asked about Mr T's statement relating  to  her  alleged  "husband"
    (Mr H), who attended T  Solicitors with her, she stated that  that  man
    was not her husband and it was only Mr T who stated this.

16.  She was asked whether the gentleman, (Mr  H),  was  at  court  to  give
    evidence at this hearing.  She replied  that  he  had  left  to  go  to
    Pakistan the day before and so was not available.  She  confirmed  that
    Mr L was in attendance and that he had read the statement to her.

17.  In re-examination she  confirmed  that  she  had  signed  the  form  of
    authority before the hearing that was to take place on  8  August  2006
    and understood from it that Mr T was finishing his involvement with her
    case and that she would have to get another solicitor.  It was later in
    the day that a neighbour read the form of authority/letter to  her  and
    told her that it stated the case has been finished.  She  then  decided
    that she would go to another firm of solicitors.

18.  When asked about the letter from Mr T dated 15 November 2006,  and  the
    implication that the gentleman, who had attended with her (Mr  H),  was
    her husband, she replied that she wanted to go to the court  but  Mr  T
    had told her that  she  would  be  punished.   She  stated  she  became
    confused during five or six minutes of discussions and her  "brain  did
    not function".  She stated that she then signed the document.

19.  In response to questions from us she stated that she knew Mr L  through
    an acquaintance with his wife, whom she met at their children's school.
     She stated that there was no interpreter provided by Mr T and so Mr  L
    came with her to assist, as he had done on one or two occasions in  the
    past.  She was happy for Mr L to  act  for  her  as  interpreter.   She
    explained that her own English was minimal and consisted  of  only  yes
    and no.  We also asked her about a previous statement of some  fourteen
    pages, dated July 2006, which appeared to have been interpreted to  her
    by Mr L.  She agreed that she had given the statement of fourteen pages
    and her story had been explained to the solicitors through  "Mr  L  his
    wife and somebody else - and whoever took me to the  solicitors".   She
    stated that Mr L did not interpret all of it through to her.

20.  For the purpose of clarity  we  set  out  her  full  statement  on  the
    withdrawal issue.  It states:

     "I A P resident of [address] make this statement of truth and  say  as
        follows:-


        1.   I applied for  Asylum  in  the  UK  and  the  application  was
             refused.  My Asylum appeal was listed to take place on the 18th
             July 2006.  That morning my friend Mr Mr  L  received  a  phone
             call from Mr T asking that we attend his Office  at  8.30am  to
             discuss the case.


        2.   Following his conversation with Mr T, Mr L telephoned  me  and
             told me that we need to meet Mr T in his office at 8.30.


        3.   We arrived at his Office at about 8.30 and went  into  Mr  T's
             office.  Mr T said that he had seen a photo of my  husband  and
             accused me that my husband had accompanied me on  a  number  of
             occasions at his office.  He continued to accuse my friend  who
             had come with me that he was in fact the man in the photo.   We
             were all astonished at what he was saying as this was not true.
              I was extremely upset and confused.  The conversation  had  to
             be translated to my by Mr L and because  the  conversation  was
             going back and forth I was very confused and upset.


        4.   Mr T then asked what we wanted to do about the appeal hearing.
              I told Mr L that I wished to proceed with the Appeal.   I  was
             then told that if I did and if the court found that I  was  not
             telling the truth I would  be  imprisoned  for  two  years  and
             fined.  As I was already upset I didn't know  what  to  do.   I
             thought that Mr T was withdrawing his representation.


        5.   I signed what  I  thought  was  confirmation  that  Mr  T  was
             withdrawing himself from the appeal not that he was withdrawing
             the appeal.


        6.   I later found that Mr T had withdrawn my appeal and  I  sought
             further advice.


        7.   I was not aware that my appeal was  being  withdrawn  and  ask
             that you allow my appeal to be heard.


        This statement has been translated to me in the Urdu language and I
        confirm that I have understood the contents of this statement.

        Signed: (signature)


        Dated: 21/11/06"


Evidence of Mr L

21.  Mr L confirmed his identity by providing us with a copy of his  British
    passport which had been issued in 1997.  He explained  that  he  was  a
    self-employed plumber, and was not a professional interpreter, but  had
    learned English over the many years he had been in the United  Kingdom.
    He confirmed his statement and agreed that it should stand as evidence-
    in-chief.  We now set out his statement in full:

     "I L resident of [address] make this statement of truth in support  of
        AP's Asylum Claim and say as follows:-


        1.   On the day of the Appeal hearing I received a  telephone  call
             from Mr T at about 7.45am asking us to attend his  office.   He
             had some new evidence which he wanted to discuss.


        2.   I rang AP and informed her that Mr T had asked  us  to  arrive
             earlier.  We arrived at Mr T's office at about 8.30, this  was
             myself, AP and Mr H that were present at that meeting.

        3.   Mr T showed us a document with a photograph of  AP's  husband.
             He explained that  her  husband  had  visited  the  UK  and  he
             believed that [   ] was in fact her husband.


        4.   We explained that his was not her husband and he said that  if
             we proceed with the case we would lose.


        5.   I explained this to AP but at the same time Mr T said that  we
             would be charged with perjury and could be imprisoned.  AP  was
             very upset and confirmed that she wanted to continue  with  the
             appeal.  She told Mr T that this man was not her husband.


        6.   Mr T then said he would not continue with this case  and  that
             he was going to withdraw from it.


        7.   I was of the understanding  that  he  was  going  to  withdraw
             himself from the case.  AP  had  said  to  him  she  wished  to
             continue.


        8.   Mr T then asked AP to sign the paper  for  the  withdrawal  we
             were not aware that he was going to withdraw her appeal.


        9.   We left the Office and returned home.   Mr  T  said  he  would
             forward the papers to the Court.


        10.  I ask that her Appeal is reinstated as it was not explained to
             us clearly that her appeal was being withdrawn.


             Signed: (signature of Mr L)


             Dated: 22-Nov-06"

22.  Mr L gave additional evidence to us in court.  He confirmed that  on  8
    August at approximately 8.30am he had arrived, with the  appellant,  at
    the office of Mr T.  Shortly thereafter he had been advised that it was
    Mr T's belief that Mr H (who accompanied them), was the husband of  the
    appellant.  He informed us that the appellant had said it was  not  her
    husband.  Soon after that Mr T left the room and he and  the  appellant
    were alone together to discuss the matter.  As Mr T had  said  that  he
    was not willing to go to court  Mr L informed her that he thought Mr  T
    was withdrawing from the case.  When asked by Mr  Durrance  if  he  had
    been asked to explain the consequences of withdrawing the  case,  Mr  L
    informed us that he understood from Mr T that the  appellant  would  be
    tried for perjury, but she had  still  indicated  that  she  wished  to
    proceed and go to court.  He stated that  discussion  had  taken  place
    after the letter of authority had been prepared.  He confirmed that  he
    had  acted  as  interpreter  of  the  form  of  authority  but  in  his
    explanation to the  appellant  he  had  stated  he  thought  Mr  T  was
    withdrawing from the case.  Therefore he  explained  to  the  appellant
    that she needed to sign the paper.

23.  He stated that his relationship with the appellant was that she  was  a
    friend of his wife and that their children went  to  the  same  school.
    The relationship between them was a basic and limited one.

24.  He went on to state that he was in the plumbing business and  had  done
    little other interpretation work and none in relation  to  other  court
    proceedings.

25.  He did confirm that he had explained all of the words in  the  form  of
    authority but had said to the appellant that Mr T had advised he  could
    not go ahead with the case and therefore was withdrawing from it.

26.  In cross-examination Mr L stated that he had been  with  the  appellant
    on previous occasions to explain what  Mr  T  was  saying  because  the
    appellant could not speak English.  When asked why he  arrived  at  the
    conclusion that Mr T was withdrawing from the  case,  rather  than  the
    appellant withdrawing her own claim, he stated that he had  never  been
    to court before and he just told her that she needed  to  sign.   Asked
    whether he had met the alleged husband, Mr H, on previous occasions, he
    advised that he had met him before and that Mr  H  had  been  with  the
    appellant and himself on previous occasions.  He  stayed  in  the  next
    street to the appellant but he did not know where he was "today".

27.  He was then asked whether he had felt comfortable  in  translating  the
    fourteen page statement made in July.  He explained that  he  had  been
    there to help the appellant at the earlier meeting  when  the  fourteen
    page statement was completed as he understood  Urdu.   In  response  to
    questions from us he could not recall whether he had read the whole  of
    the fourteen page statement out to her word for word but agreed he  had
    signed it on the last page.

28.  When asked about the questioning of Mr T to the alleged husband, Mr  H,
    he agreed that Mr H had not said anything, at the time, although he had
    translated on behalf of the appellant to Mr T that she had said she was
    not married to the other gentleman.

Respondent's Submissions

29.  Mr Dillon submitted that the  respondent  still  had  serious  concerns
    about  the  behaviour  and  presentation  of  this  formal  withdrawal,
    particularly given that Mr T was an experienced  practitioner  in  this
    field of the law.  It was submitted that in this situation it should be
    taken that  a  formal  withdrawal  had  been  presented  and  that  the
    withdrawal should remain in force.  The terms of the form of  authority
    document were quite explicit and in fact state on  two  occasions  that
    the appeal had been withdrawn by the appellant and that she  was  aware
    of the  consequences.   He  agreed  that  Mr  L  was  not  a  certified
    interpreter  but  had  clearly  been  involved  in  interpreting  other
    documentation, including the fourteen page statement, to the  appellant
    in the past.  As the form of authority was such a  small  statement  he
    said it was unlikely that it could be interpreted as anything else.

30.  He referred us  to  paragraph  52(2)  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
    Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 which stated that any notice of  appeal
    or application filed with the Tribunal must be completed in English and
    any other document must be accompanied  by  a  translation  in  English
    "signed by the translator to certify the translation is accurate".   He
    also noted that Rule 52(3) stated the Tribunal was  under  no  duty  to
    consider a document which was not in English or was  accompanied  by  a
    certified translation.

31.  He submitted that whilst not directly  applicable  to  this  situation,
    given the need for a certified translation, if  the  Tribunal  in  this
    case  found  that  we  could  not  accept  the  form  of  authority  or
    "withdrawal" had  been  adequately  translated  or  understood  by  the
    appellant, then the same should apply  to  the  fourteen  page  witness
    statement of the appellant.  Mr Dillon agreed with  us  that  the  real
    issue before us was: "what was the real intention of the  appellant  in
    signing the document".

32.  Mr Dillon submitted that Mr T did not consider there was any  confusion
    in the matter and that also it was not helpful that other  parties  who
    had been present on the relevant  day  in  August,  when  the  form  of
    authority had been signed, were not now available to give evidence.

The Appellant's Submissions

33.  Mr Durrance submitted, based on the results of the  directions  hearing
    set out above and the  authorities  contained  within,  that  the  task
    before the Tribunal at this time was to establish, on  the  balance  of
    probabilities, whether or not there was a proper  withdrawal.   If  the
    withdrawal had been completed without the fully informed consent of the
    appellant then, in his submission, there was no proper withdrawal.

34.  He submitted that the first issue that arose was that of language.   In
    this case an informal interpreter had been  used,  who  did  not  fully
    understand the meaning and effect of "withdrawal of representation", or
    "total withdrawal of the claim by the appellant".   He  submitted  that
    both the appellant and Mr L in their statements, had made  this  clear.
    Effectively therefore it was a situation where the  appellant  did  not
    give consent to her total  withdrawal  given  the  interpreter  himself
    thought it was a withdrawal of representation, not of  the  appellant's
    appeal.

35.  Secondly, he submitted that the circumstances  on  the  date  when  the
    alleged withdrawal was signed were ambiguous.  The  guidance  given  in
    Adewole (HX/64696/96) was of  assistance,  where  it  stated  that  the
    burden of proof lay on the appellant to establish  on  the  balance  of
    probabilities that there had been no proper  withdrawal  and  that  the
    representative had, in effect, acted without the authority  or  consent
    of the appellant when purporting to withdraw the appeal.  In this  case
    the appellant has now stated that she contested the document and states
    she made it clear to Mr T that she wished to proceed with  the  appeal.
    Mr  L  then  confirmed  this  from  his  evidence,  where  likewise  he
    considered that she wished to proceed and that it was not withdrawal of
    the  appeal  that  was   being   signed,   rather   a   withdrawal   of
    representation.

36.  While he acknowledged that Mr T had not been at court to give  evidence
    to us, he considered that this should not affect our ability  to  reach
    valid conclusions in  this  matter  as  the  Tribunal  had  heard  live
    evidence  from  the  appellant  and  Mr  L.   From  that,  without  any
    reflection at all on Mr T, as it related to issues of  translation  not
    professional competence, it was entirely possible for  us  to  conclude
    that the appellant had not understood what she was signing.  There  was
    also no suggestion, in his submission, that  there  was  anything  more
    than a tenuous relationship between the  appellant  and  ML.   In  this
    situation Mr T's evidence should be  evaluated  in  the  light  of  the
    apparent misapprehension held by him.  It showed, in  his  submissions,
    the obvious dangers of  using  unqualified  interpreters,  particularly
    those who do not understand any legal concepts or niceties  that  might
    be involved.  It was thus an apparent situation that Mr T genuinely had
    a view as to what had been explained  to  the  appellant  but,  on  the
    balance  of  probabilities;  the  informal  interpreter  used  did  not
    accurately translate or  interpret  Mr  T  or  the  form  he  prepared.
    Therefore, clearly the appellant did not follow what she was signing.

37.  In this situation, he  considered  there  was  sufficient  evidence  to
    reach the conclusion that  the  appeal  should  be  reinstated  as  the
    withdrawal was not a valid one.

38.  We reserved our determination.

The Issues

39.  We found the issues before us to be:

     a) From our assessment of  the  relevant  jurisprudence,  legislation,
        Procedure Rules both  in  Asylum  and  Immigration  cases,  and  in
        Criminal proceedings, what is the effect  of  a  withdrawal  of  an
        appeal by an appellant?
     b) Can the validity of the withdrawal be challenged before us?  If so,
     c) What evidence and standard of proof were required to  establish  an
        invalid withdrawal  had  been  lodged  by  an  appellant  with  the
        Tribunal?
     d) What other general guidelines could be given for Immigration Judges
        in assessment of applications that claim purported withdrawals were
        invalid/ ineffective and that an appeal remains extant?
     e) And finally, if the appeal  is  extant,  what  directions,  on  the
        further progress  of  this  appeal,  at  an  adjourned  hearing  or
        hearings, should be given?

The Statutory Provisions



40. We note firstly the comments of Collins J , then President of  the  IAT
    in MNM [2000] UKIAT 00005, paragraphs 15 -17, and that although this is
    not a situation where Article 6 of the  ECHR  1950  applies  we  should
    ensure that the every applicant before us obtains a fair  hearing.   We
    then move to Section 104(1) and (2) Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
    Act 2002 which sets out when appeals before this Tribunal are  pending,
    and by inference when they are not.  They provide:

          "104.   Pending Appeal

         (1) An appeal under section 82(1) is pending during the period -

                           (a) beginning when it is instituted; and

              (b)  ending  when  it  is  finally  determined,  withdrawn  or
                  abandoned (or when it lapses under Section 99).

     (2) An appeal under Section 82(1) is not  finally  determined  for  the
               purposes of sub-section (1) (b) while a  further  appeal  or
               application under Section 101(2) -

         (a)  had  been  instituted  and  is  not  yet  finally  determined,
                  withdrawn or abandoned, ..."

41.  Thus, statutorily, once "withdrawn" the appeal  is  no  longer  pending
                  and is at an end.

The Procedure Rules

42.  Rule 17 of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure)  Rules  2005
    provides:

        "Withdrawal of Appeal


        17(1)     An appellant may withdraw an appeal -


              (a) orally, at a hearing; or


              (b) at any time, by filing written notice with the Tribunal.


         (2)  An appeal shall be treated as  withdrawn  if  the  respondent
             notifies the Tribunal that the decision (or, where  the  appeal
             relates to more than one decision, all  of  the  decisions)  to
             which the appeal relates has been withdrawn.


          (3) If an  appeal  is  withdrawn  or  treated  as  withdrawn,  the
             Tribunal must serve on the parties a notice that the appeal has
             been recorded as having been withdrawn."

43.  We note however, at also Rule 59 "Errors of Procedure" which states:

          "59(1)   Where, before the Tribunal has determined  an  appeal  or
              application, there has been an error of procedure such  as  a
              failure to comply with a Rule -

             (a)  subject to these Rules, the error does not invalidate any
                 step taken in  the  proceedings,  unless  the  Tribunal  so
                 orders; and

         (b) the Tribunal may make any order, or take  any  step,  that  it
                 considers appropriate to remedy the error."

44.  The Rules therefore provide that an appellant may  withdraw  an  appeal
    orally at a hearing,  or  at  any  time  by  written  notice  with  the
    Tribunal.  However the Tribunal is left with a residual power  to  make
    any order, or take any other step, that  it  considers  appropriate  to
    remedy an error in procedure.

Commentary and Case Law

45.   We  note  firstly  paragraphs  18.104  and   18.105   of   Macdonald's
    Immigration Law and Practice (Sixth Edition - LexisNexis Butterworths).
     Paragraph 18.104 relevantly provides:

     "All appeals may be withdrawn or abandoned.  What are the distinctions
        between withdrawal and abandonment, and what are the  consequences?
        Withdrawal of an appeal implies a positive act,  while  abandonment
        suggests passive failure to prosecute  the  appeal,  or  an  action
        incompatible with pursuing it whereby it  is  deemed  abandoned  by
        statute.  In the case of a deemed withdrawal,  which  happens  when
        the decision appealed against is withdrawn,  the  positive  act  is
        that  of  the  respondent  rather  than  the  appellant,  but   the
        distinction between withdrawal and abandonment  vanishes  with  the
        concept of "deemed abandonment" when the appellant is granted leave
        to enter or remain in the UK.  Much of the case law deals with  the
        issue of who decides whether an appeal has been withdrawn, how  the
        decision is made, and whether a decision that an  appeal  has  been
        withdrawn is itself challengeable.  ...If an appeal is withdrawn or
        treated as withdrawn, the Tribunal must  serve  on  the  parties  a
        notice that the appeal has been recorded as having been  withdrawn.
        Such a notice is not a "determination" within the  meaning  of  the
        procedure Rules, or a decision on an appeal  for  the  purposes  of
        appeal or  statutory  review,  and  could  be  challenged  only  by
        judicial review.  It is clear  that  whether  an  appeal  has  been
        withdrawn is a matter for the Tribunal  and  the  courts,  not  the
        Secretary of State.  ...Now that appeal notices go  direct  to  the
        Tribunal, there is no  reason  for  withdrawal  of  appeals  to  go
        through  immigration  authorities.   When  an  appeal  is   validly
        withdrawn prior to the hearing, and the withdrawal accepted by  the
        Tribunal, the  appeal  does  not  go  into  a  state  of  suspended
        animation but ceases to exist, and any determination of the  appeal
        (on the merits) is a nullity."

46.  The provisions of Paragraph 18.105 set out the substantive  issue  that
    is before us, when it states:

        "The main difficulty  in  practice  has  been  whether  the  person
        withdrawing has the necessary instructions and authority to do  so.
        The general rule that a retainer of a solicitor includes  authority
        to compromise an action or withdraw  unless  contrary  instructions
        are expressly given,  does  not  appear  to  apply  in  immigration
        appeals, and a solicitor without instructions has been held to have
        no authority to withdraw  an  appeal.   Where  there  is  authority
        withdrawal will be effective.  ...The issue in all cases however is
        likely to be whether it is clear that  the  appellant  intended  to
        withdraw the  appeal.   If  appellants  have  signed  a  letter  of
        withdrawal, the burden is on them  to  show  that  they  instructed
        their representative not to present it, or to withdraw it."

47.  The authority cited in Macdonald for the  last  sentence  in  paragraph
    18.105 is Adewole (18538) (22 September 1998, IAT), and we now turn  to
    that case and confirm the general principles set out within it.

48.  The appellant Adewole was a Nigerian who appealed against a  ruling  of
    the Immigration Appellate Authority which informed the appellant's then
    representatives that the appellant's appeal against  refusal  to  grant
    asylum had been withdrawn and  that  this  had  taken  place  following
    receipt of a letter from the  representatives  (R  and  Company)  which
    simply stated; "Kindly withdraw the  appeal".   The  matter  then  came
    before the former Immigration Appeal Tribunal, with  a  legal  chairman
    and two lay members.  It was argued by the appellant that he had signed
    the original withdrawal document on 6 March 1996, but had rescinded  it
    the following day 7 March 1996, after consulting with some friends  and
    acquaintances at a church meeting.   R  and  Co  then,  several  months
    later, wrote to the Tribunal making the simple statement above.   While
    the evidence, in  the  form  of  affidavits  from  the  appellant,  was
    somewhat confusing, the Tribunal did note that Mr R, of R and  Company,
    was not in fact a solicitor, although he  purported  to  act  as  such.
    They came to the conclusion, in the interests of fairness and  justice,
    that the appellant after 7 March 1996 (thus before any notice was given
    to the Tribunal) did not intend to  allow  withdrawal  of  his  appeal,
    previously signed, to stand.  The matter was then treated as not having
    been withdrawn and remitted to the former IAA for determination.

49.  The Tribunal  chaired  by  Mr  O'Brien  Quinn  QC  considered  previous
    authorities of the Tribunal in Ayse Osman  [1993]  Imm  AR  417,  Singh
    [1991] Imm AR 195 and Ancharaz [1976] Imm AR 49 and appears to  approve
    the findings in these determinations.  The Tribunal noted that where it
    is contended that an appeal has not been validly withdrawn the Tribunal
    has jurisdiction to consider the matter, and:

        "[W]here an Adjudicator decides there is no  appeal  in  being,  or
        where the original Adjudicator holds that an appeal should  not  be
        listed, the Tribunal can entertain  an  application  for  leave  to
        appeal against that decision."

     From the determination in Singh it was noted relevantly that where  the
    appellant's solicitors said they were without instructions, and that an
    appeal should therefore be withdrawn, the Tribunal had  held  that  the
    solicitors had no authority to withdraw the appeal.  On page 4  of  the
    decision the situation was summarised in the following manner:

     "The situation in this matter, as we see it, is that, as was  held  by
        the Tribunal, in Ancharaz [1976] Imm AR 49,  an  appeal  which  was
        properly withdrawn, prior to its hearing, by  an  Adjudicator,  did
        not go into a state of suspended animation; it ceased to exist, and
        there was no provision in  the  Immigration  Rules  for  it  to  be
        resuscitated.  Thus, the burden of proof lay upon the appellant  to
        establish on the balance of probabilities, that he  had  instructed
        his respondent [should read representative] either not  to  present
        the letter of withdrawal, which he had signed, or to  have  it,  in
        some way withdrawn, in  order  for  him  to  satisfy  us  that  his
        original letter of withdrawal  had  been  improperly  used  by  his
        representative and that it ought to have been cancelled."


50.  We are also referred to a decision in El-Tuyeb (12643) a  determination
    of 30 October 1995 by Legal Chairman, Professor  Jackson  and  two  lay
    members.  This also concerned the issue as to whether there had been  a
    valid withdrawal.  On  the  third  page  of  this  determination  Vice-
    President Professor Jackson stated:

          "We had only this,  that  where  a  withdrawal  of  an  appeal  is
        contested, the Adjudicator must allow an  opportunity  to  put  the
        case against withdrawal.  This reflects the  fundamental  principle
        that each  party  should  be  able  to  put  the  case  before  the
        Adjudicator, and the need for  this  is  particularly  so  where  a
        notice of withdrawal is  presented  on  the  day  of  the  hearing.
        Further, where there is a contested withdrawal, there should  be  a
        determination with reasons as to whether the appeal is withdrawn or
        not."

51.  A conclusion was reached in that case that  the  appeal  had  not  been
    withdrawn and an earlier letter which had been sent to  the  respondent
    appeared to have been  superseded,  leaving  the  assumption  that  the
    appeal was still extant.

52.  In an effort to ensure consistency with other areas of the law  on  the
    issue of withdrawal, (or abandonment as it is termed  in  the  criminal
    jurisdiction)  we  have  found  helpful  guidance   in   the   criminal
    jurisdiction.  In Reg v. Medway [1976] 2 WLR 528 the Court of Appeal  (
    Lord Widgery CJ, Stephenson LJ, O'Connor, Lawson and Jupp  JJ  )  in  a
    decision delivered by Lawson J, held that the court had jurisdiction to
    grant leave to withdraw a notice of abandonment [withdrawal] of  either
    an appeal, or application for leave to appeal, only where the court was
    satisfied that the notice of abandonment was a nullity,  in  the  sense
    that the abandonment was not the result of a  deliberate  and  informed
    decision; and that there was no inherent jurisdiction to grant leave to
    withdraw a notice of abandonment because of the  existence  of  special
    circumstances.

53.  Medway was a case where the applicant had a history of mental  illness,
    and was convicted of arson offences and breach of  a  probation  order.
    Contrary to advice of a medical officer he applied to  the  Full  Court
    for leave to appeal. However, after  receiving  some  advice  form  his
    solicitors, he abandoned  the  application.   Later,  after  consulting
    different solicitors, he made an application to withdraw the notice  of
    abandonment, on  the  ground  that  the  single  judge  who  heard  the
    application had  overlooked  the  power  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  to
    substitute  an  appropriate  sentence,  if  relevant  material   became
    available after  sentence  had  been  imposed.   The  Court  of  Appeal
    dismissed the application finding the  court  had  no  jurisdiction  to
    grant the application  since  the  abandonment  was  the  result  of  a
    deliberate decision.  At 545 Lawson J stated:

        "The answer to the first question which we have to  decide  depends
        upon whether  alongside  the  jurisdiction  which  undoubtedly,  as
        authorities show, exists to give leave to withdraw  an  abandonment
        where it is shown that the circumstances are present  which  enable
        the court to say that that  abandonment  should  be  treated  as  a
        nullity, there coexists an inherent jurisdiction, in other  special
        circumstances, enabling the court  to  give  such  leave.   We  are
        satisfied and hold that there is  no  such  jurisdiction.   In  our
        judgment the kernel of what has  been  described  as  the  "nullity
        test" is that the Court is satisfied that the abandonment  was  not
        the result of a deliberate and informed decision; in  other  words,
        that the mind  of  the  applicant  did  not  go  with  his  act  of
        abandonment.  In the nature of things it is impossible  to  foresee
        when and how such a state of affairs may come about;  therefore  it
        would be quite wrong  to  make  a  list,  under  such  headings  as
        mistake, fraud, wrong advice, misapprehension and  suchlike,  which
        purports  to  be  exhaustive  of  the  types  of  case  where  this
        jurisdiction can be exercised.  Such headings can only be  regarded
        as guidelines, the presence of which may justify its exercise."

54.  The Criminal Procedure Rules 2005, (S.I. 2005, No 384, r 63.5)  on  the
    issue of withdrawal, (termed "abandonment" in those Rules), adopts  the
    approach that was taken by in Medway,  by  the  Court  of  Appeal  when
    interpreting the Criminal Appeal  Rules  1968  (S.  I.  1968  No.  1262
    -r.10).

55.  In the criminal jurisdiction the Magistrates' Courts Act 1980, s 111  ,
    provides a right of appeal against a conviction , order,  determination
    or other  proceeding  that  is  "wrong  in  law  or  is  in  excess  of
    jurisdiction..."  Rule  63.5  of  the  Criminal  Procedure  Rules  2005
    provides for notice of Abandonment of an appeal stating:


        "63.5-(1) Without prejudice to the power of the Crown Court to give
        leave for an appeal to be abandoned, and appellant may a band on an
        appeal  by  giving  notice  in  writing,  in  accordance  with  the
        following provisions of this rule, not later  than  the  third  day
        before the date fixed for hearing the appeal."


     Archbold (2007) at para 2-176 comments:

        "The Crown Court cannot  entertain  an  appeal  once  it  has  been
        validly abandoned, unless the abandonment is a nullity by reason of
        mistake or fraudulent inducement ... Nor can  the  Court  reinstate
        abandoned appeals, unless  it  is  satisfied  that  the  notice  of
        abandonment is a nullity."


56.  The approach taken in Medway, and in  the  current  Criminal  Procedure
    Rules, has been adopted by SIAC, in open, but unpublished, decisions.

Conclusions on legal issues

57.  We are satisfied therefore, that  the  legal  position  in  respect  of
    withdrawals in this jurisdiction is as follows:

    (a)  Rule 17(1) provides the basis upon which an appellant may withdraw
        an appeal.

     b) Rule 17(2) provides how  a  respondent  notifies  the  Tribunal  an
        appeal shall be treated as withdrawn,  and  Rule  17(3)  places  an
        obligation on the Tribunal to serve the  parties  notice  that  the
        appeal has been recorded as having been withdrawn.


     c) We consider the previous  case  law  in  the  former  IAT  such  as
        Adewole,  El-Tuyeb  reflect,  but  perhaps  without   the   clarity
        desirable, the fundamental principle that if a notice of withdrawal
        has been given, either orally at a hearing, or  by  written  notice
        prior to the hearing, the appeal then ceases to exist and is at  an
        end.


     d)  The  clear  guidelines  on  withdrawal/abandonment  given  in  the
        criminal jurisdiction both by the Court of Appeal in Medway, and in
        the Archbold commentary on the Criminal Procedure Rules  2005,  set
        out above, we  consider  should  be  adopted  as  the  correct  and
        consistent approach to be taken by this Tribunal.


     e) Accordingly when an application is made to challenge  a  notice  of
        withdrawal as invalid the Tribunal will then proceed  to  hear  the
        application. Based on all of the evidence  placed  before  it,  the
        Tribunal must be satisfied, on the balance of  probabilities,  that
        the withdrawal was not the result  of  a  deliberate  and  informed
        decision; "in other words, that the mind of the applicant  did  not
        go with his act of abandonment [withdrawal]" before concluding that
        the be purported withdrawal was in fact a nullity and the appeal is
        extant.

     f) Noting the comments of Lawson J in Medway (supra) and without being
        exhaustive of the reasons why a withdrawal could be found  to  lack
        validity, we consider that some guidelines  can  be  given  of  the
        types  of  cases  where  this  can  arise,  on   the   balance   of
        probabilities. These are:

     i) The Appellant has had an almost immediate change of mind, which  is
        promptly communicated to a  representative,  prior  to  the  matter
        coming for hearing before the Tribunal (as in Adewole);

    ii) A letter or notice purporting to withdraw an appeal has  been  sent
        to the Respondent, rather than to the  Tribunal  itself  -  (  NB.A
        notice of withdrawal should have no legal validity until the actual
        notice of appeal is communicated to the Tribunal, either in writing
        or at a hearing before the Tribunal );

   iii)  A  withdrawal  has  been  communicated  to  the  Tribunal   by   a
        representative without there being clear understanding, or  meeting
        of the minds, between an Appellant and the representative;

    iv)  A  withdrawal  has  been  communicated  to  the  Tribunal   by   a
        representative on the instructions of a Sponsor, (who has completed
        section  5  of  the  appeal  form),  rather  than  on  the   actual
        instructions of the Appellant;

     v) A representative has communicated a withdrawal to the  Tribunal  in
        error, either through lack of due care, or simple mistake.


58.  We emphasize that there is  no  question  of  "reinstating"  an  appeal
    which has been validly withdrawn.  Once the withdrawal notice has  been
    given to the Tribunal the  appeal  is  no  longer  pending  before  the
    Tribunal and the Tribunal has no further function; (it is in the  Latin
    form: functus officio).  The only possible  legal  issue  remaining  is
    whether the purported withdrawal is in fact a  valid  one.   If  it  is
    invalid,  then  the  appeal  remains  extant  and  pending  before  the
    Tribunal.  This point, of course, has important  consequences  relating
    to the ability to remove the Appellant  and  the  continuation  of  any
    leave he or she may have by virtue of s.3C of the Immigration Act 1971

59.  If the withdrawal application is  later  claimed  to  be  invalid,  the
    matter will be set down by an RSIJ/IJ for a  preliminary  hearing  with
    appropriate directions  to  both  parties,  for  the  conduct  of  that
    preliminary hearing.  If the matter is uncontested by the  other  party
    it will still be necessary for an RSIJ/IJ to consider all  the  issues,
    either in court or on the papers, and to reach a written decision, that
    the withdrawal is valid or otherwise.  The decision,  in  either  case,
    will then be notified to the parties together with reasons.


60.  The issue of privilege  between  solicitor/barrister  and  client,  and
    possible waiver can arise in such cases.  We consider that in line with
    MM[2004] UKIAT 00182   and SV(Iran)[2005] UKAIT 00160 there will  be  a
    need to direct the new representatives of appellants, in such contested
    claims, to confirm in writing five days before the preliminary hearing,
    that:

    (a)  they have submitted a copy of the letter/statement contesting  the
        validity  of   the   "withdrawal"   to   the   appellant's   former
        representatives;

    (b)  they have invited the  former  representatives  to  write  to  the
        Tribunal directly giving any  explanation  they  wish  to  provide,
        before the date of hearing, and to appear at that hearing  if  they
        wish to be heard;


    (c)  they have sent to the former representatives a signed waiver  from
        the Appellant to any rights of privilege he  or  she  may  have  in
        respect  of  communications  between  them  on  the  issue  of  the
        contested withdrawal, or to confirm in writing they are  not  in  a
        position, or  do  not  consider  it  appropriate,  to  require  the
        appellant to waive any privilege he or she may have on this issue.

Decision on appellant's case

61.  Having now reached our conclusions on the  correct  legal  approach  we
    have gone on to make our assessment of the credibility of the witnesses
    and other evidence before us.

62.  We are satisfied on the balance of probabilities that we have no  basis
    to conclude that the appellant and  Mr  L  lacked  credibility  in  the
    evidence they presented to us.  It is clear that the  appellant  relied
    on Mr L as an  "informal  interpreter".   He  was  the  husband  of  an
    acquaintance and it appears, accompanied the appellant to the  meetings
    with T Solicitors to assist her with translations of what was  said  to
    her and to translate back to Mr T the appellant's replies/evidence from
    Urdu to English.  While the appellant would logically have  been  aware
    that Mr  L  was  not  a  professional  or  qualified  interpreter,  his
    knowledge of English and experience with the  language  would,  we  are
    satisfied, have  been  considered  by  her  to  be  significantly  more
    comprehensive than her own.  As such she had no basis to  know  whether
    she was receiving valid or  invalid  interpretations/translations,  nor
    that her  own  story  had  been  either  accurately,  or  inaccurately,
    translated from Urdu into English.  Our assessment from his evidence to
    us is that Mr L  acted  with  the  best  of  intentions  and  that  the
    unfortunate predicament that resulted appears to have come about partly
    through  a  lack  of  funding  and  inability   to   use   professional
    interpreters.  We are satisfied that an unintentional  misunderstanding
    arose at the office of Mr T on 8 August 2006  and  based  on  the  same
    reasoning, almost certainly in the earlier appointments and  interviews
    that took place and led to the Appellant's " 14 page statement" of July
    2006.

63.  The Appellant and Mr L were consistent in their understanding  that  Mr
    T wished to withdraw from the appeal.  Their understanding of that  was
    because Mr T considered Mr H, who also attended, was indeed the husband
    of the appellant, rather than another friend who had come for  support.
    The evidence of Mr L was that he had explained the form of authority to
    the appellant as constituting a withdrawal from the  appeal  by  Mr  T,
    rather than explaining to her what was actually stated in the  form  of
    authority.  We are satisfied that  Mr  L  did  not  do  this  with  any
    intention to mislead either the appellant or Mr T,  but  through  clear
    lack of experience, knowledge of the law, and a lack of formal training
    in English language.  His English ability appears  to  be  experiential
    only, and  while  it  is  no  doubt  proficient  in  the  area  of  his
    profession, that profession is not one that is related to the  niceties
    of the law, let alone immigration or asylum law and procedure.

64.  In this situation therefore, based  upon  those  factual  findings,  we
    conclude that the form of authority dated 8  August  2006  was  wrongly
    translated to her and that she did not intend to  withdraw  her  appeal
    but merely to note Mr T was  withdrawing  his  representation  of  her.
    Thus it was an invalid withdrawal which we find to have  no  effect  in
    law and should be thus treated as a nullity.

65.  We  should  state  however,  that  in  reaching  our  conclusions  this
    decision should not in any way be seen as an adverse reflection on Mr T
    or  his  firm.   This  was  a  case  where  an  informal,   unqualified
    interpreter was used, no doubt to save costs.  The  unfortunate  result
    has been failure to achieve a "meeting of the minds".  It  was  totally
    understandable that Mr T would have reached  the  conclusion  that  the
    appellant had agreed to withdraw her appeal, whilst, at the same  time,
    the Appellant, and the informal interpreter, reached a conclusion  that
    Mr T was withdrawing his representation.  In point of fact Mr T, in his
    mind, was with the best of his known  understanding,  both  withdrawing
    the appellant's appeal and thus effectively also  withdrawing  his  own
    representation.

66.  We therefore direct that as this appeal is extant and  now  proceeding,
    it should do so firstly at a case management review hearing,  at  which
    time all the relevant issues outstanding can be identified.  Given  our
    findings on the unreliability of Mr L's interpretation,  the  Appellant
    is directed to file and serve a further statement of  the  evidence  in
    chief she seeks to rely upon in accordance with standard directions.






Signed                                  Date 1st February 2007


Senior Immigration Judge Mackey


