
MM (Status of recognised mandate refugees) Iran [2009] UKAIT 00029

                       ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at:  Birmingham                                    Date of Hearing:
22 May 2009


                                   Before:


 Mr C M G Ockelton, Deputy President of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
                       Senior Immigration Judge Renton

                                   Between

                                     MM
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the Appellant:           Mr B Bedford instructed by Sultan Lloyd
Solicitors
For the Respondent:          Mr N Smart, Home Office Presenting Officer

There is no requirement for a State Party to the Refugee Convention to
treat as a Convention refugee a person who has been recognised as a mandate
refugee within the competence of the UNHCR.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The Appellant, a national of Iran, appealed to  the  Tribunal  against
      the decision of the Respondent on 21 May 2007 to give  directions  for
      his removal as an illegal entrant,  having  refused  him  asylum.  The
      removal destination proposed in the notice of decision  is  Iran.  The
      Tribunal dismissed his appeal on the basis that the Appellant  had  no
      well-founded fear of persecution in Iran.  The  Appellant  sought  and
      obtained an order for reconsideration.  Thus the matter  comes  before
      us.


   2. The Appellant's history is as follows.   He  was  born  in  Iran.  His
      father was closely involved with a body  called  the  KDPI  and  as  a
      result thought it was advisable to leave Iran.  He therefore moved  to
      Iraq and the Appellant lived  with  him  there  for  some  sixteen  or
      seventeen years.  We were not told whether either father  or  son  had
      any lawful immigration status in Iraq.   Subsequently,  the  Appellant
      moved to Turkey, and from there he came to the United Kingdom.  It  is
      accepted that he entered the United Kingdom illegally.   His claim  to
      asylum in the United Kingdom was made 6 October 2006.

   3. That was not the first claim for asylum that  he  had  made.   He  had
      claimed asylum in Turkey. Turkey is a party  to  the  1951  Convention
      Relating to the Status of Refugees, but not to the 1967  Protocol.  It
      therefore does not recognise as Convention refugees individuals  whose
      claim arises after 1950, and, in  addition,  has  made  a  declaration
      under Art 1B confining the application  of  the  Convention  to  those
      whose fear arises from events occurring in  Europe  before  1  January
      1951.  But, as a party to the  1951  Convention,  Turkey  accepts  the
      jurisdiction of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,  as
      set out in the Statute annexed to Resolution  428(V)  adopted  by  the
      General Assembly on 14 December 1950.  Refugee status determination in
      relation to those not falling within the Convention as it operates  in
      Turkey is undertaken by the  UNHCR.   Those  whose  claims  the  UNHCR
      accepts are  "mandate  refugees",  and  are  issued  with  a  document
      intended to evidence the identity of the claimant.

   4. The Appellant's claim in Turkey was accepted by  the  UNHCR.   He  was
      issued with the relevant document, of which we have seen a copy, on  7
      January 2004.

   5. In assessing his claim under the 1951 Convention made  in  the  United
      Kingdom, the Respondent appears to have taken no notice at all of  the
      fact that the Appellant had  established  mandate  refugee  status  in
      Turkey.  The Respondent rejected the Appellant's claim because it  was
      considered that he had not made out his case.  When the Tribunal heard
      the appeal, there was argument relating to the decision-making process
      adopted by the Secretary of State and to the effect of  the  grant  of
      mandate refugee status.  The Tribunal did not ignore that grant.   But
      it nevertheless considered, on the basis of the material before it  as
      a whole, that the Appellant had not established his claim  to  have  a
      well-founded fear of persecution in Iran.   It therefore dismissed the
      appeal.

   6. Mr Bedford made a number of submissions to us, some of  which,  if  we
      may say so, were wild in the extreme.  We may summarise  them  without
      injustice as follows.

   7. First, the Secretary of State and the Tribunal were not entitled to go
      behind the grant by the UNHCR.  In accepting him as a mandate  refugee
      the UNHCR had determined in the Appellant's favour precisely the  same
      questions that the Secretary of State had to determine in deciding his
      claim under the Convention.  The Convention's requirement  in  Art  35
      that the Contracting States undertake to co-operate with the office of
      the UNHCR, prohibits Contracting States from reaching a view  contrary
      to that of  the  UNHCR  in  the  assessment  of  an  individual  case.
      Although that obligation was, before 10 October  2006,  an  obligation
      merely in international law, unenforceable in the English  courts,  it
      became a matter of enforceable European law on that date: that  was  a
      consequence of the coming into force of  the  Qualification  Directive
      2004/83/EC. Thus the assessment of the Appellant's claim by the  UNHCR
      was binding on the Secretary of State and binding on the Tribunal.

   8. Secondly, the Appellant, being a person with a  well-founded  fear  of
      persecution in Iran, and being  (by  whatever  means)  in  the  United
      Kingdom, was entitled to the benefits of the Qualification  Directive,
      including the grant of a right of residence for three years under  Art
      24 of that directive.   The provisions of  the  Procedures  Directive,
      2004/85/EC (which might otherwise have allowed the United Kingdom  not
      to grant a right of residence), did not apply to the Appellant's claim
      as his right  to  a  residence  permit  arose  before  the  Procedures
      Directive came into force on 1 December 2007.

   9. We have read the letter from the UNHCR indicating its  view  that  the
      establishment of mandate refugee status should be regarded  by  States
      Party to the 1951 Convention as establishing the individual's claim to
      refugee status under the Convention.     But  we  entirely  reject  Mr
      Bedford's submission.   First, there is neither in that letter, nor in
      any other material to which he was able to direct our  attention,  any
      suggestion that the obligation of co-operation is an  obligation  laid
      upon Contracting Parties to accept, and regard themselves as bound by,
      a determination of status by the UNHCR.   Such an  obligation  is  not
      implicit in the nature of co-operation, and is not mentioned in any of
      the places where one would expect that it might  be  mentioned  if  it
      applied.  It is not, for example, mentioned in the letter to which  we
      have referred.   Mr Bedford sought to explain  that  omission  on  the
      ground that an obligation arising from European law would not  be  one
      to which the UNHCR would naturally refer.  But Mr  Bedford's  case  is
      that before it  became  an  obligation  in  European  law  it  was  an
      obligation in international law arising from Art 35 of the Convention,
      and the UNHCR operates under international, not European law.  So  his
      explanation does not meet the point.


  10.  Secondly, Mr  Bedford  was  unable  to  refer  us  to  any  materials
      suggesting that the obligation exists.

  11. Thirdly, the Qualification Directive, upon which Mr Bedford relies for
      the incorporation of  the  obligation  into  European  law,  does  not
      suggest it exists, but, on the contrary, appears to us to suggest that
      it does not.  Preamble 15 to the Directive reads as follows:-

        "Consultations with the United Nations High Commission for Refugees
        may provide valuable guidance for member  states  when  determining
        refugee status according to Article 1 of the Geneva Convention."

      We cannot envisage that the preamble would have been expressed in that
      form if there were an accepted obligation to comply with decisions  of
      the Commissioner.   Mr Bedford sought to explain  this  submission  by
      saying that preamble 15 refers to  only  general  matters  of  country
      guidance.   There is in our view no basis for that submission.


  12. Article 21 of the Procedures Directive refers to the role of the UNHCR
      and requires members states to allow  the  UNHCR  to  have  access  to
      applicants for asylum and to information on them, and:-


         "(c) to present its views,  in  the  exercise  of  its  supervisory
         responsibilities under Article 35 of the Geneva Convention, to  any
         competent authorities regarding individual applications for  asylum
         at any stage of the procedure."


      Again, there is no suggestion that the member  state  is  obliged  to
      accept those views.


  13. The view that the grant of mandate  refugee  status  does  not  oblige
      others to regard the individual  as  having  established  a  right  to
      refugee status under the  Convention,  receives  considerable  support
      from the ECtHR in Y v Russia (application no. 20113/07)  to  which  Mr
      Smart referred us.   In that case, Y, a national of China, obtained in
      Russia a grant of mandate refugee status  from  the  UNHCR.   He  then
      sought status as  a  resident  in  St  Petersburg.   But  the  Russian
      authorities decided that he should be deported as a person who had  no
      lawful status in Russia.  In due course he was deported.    His  claim
      against Russia was on the basis that his deportation was a  breach  of
      Art 3 of the ECHR.  In determining whether  that  was  the  case,  the
      court considered whether, on the facts, he was at  risk  of  treatment
      contrary to Art 3 in China, on the basis upon which he  claimed:  that
      is, as a practitioner of Falun Gong.  The court concluded that no such
      risk existed.  In paragraphs 90-91 of its judgment it  noted  that  it
      was  regrettable  that  the  UNHCR  had  not  been  notified  of   the
      deportation proceedings against the claimant, but concluded  that  the
      claimant had not established that his removal would breach Art 3.


  14. This decision is not directly on point, because the  ECtHR  is  not  a
      state party to the Refugee Convention, and is  not  an  organ  of  any
      state which is a party to the  Refugee  Convention.   But  Mr  Bedford
      accepted that if the claimant in Y v Russia was a refugee, his removal
      to China would have been a breach  of  Art  3.   There  is  simply  no
      suggestion at all in the judgment, that either the Russian authorities
      or the court were required to accept, from the  Appellant's  grant  of
      mandate refugee status, that he was to be regarded as a person who was
      at risk of persecution in China.

  15. The treaty obligation submitted by Mr Bedford to bind the Secretary of
      State and the Tribunal does not in our judgement exist.  Art 37 of the
      Convention imposes an obligation of co-operation with the  UNHCR,  not
      of subjection to the UNHCR.  Individual States Party to the Convention
      are entitled to reach their own assessments of refugee status, and are
      not bound by any assessment by the UNHCR.

  16. That conclusion is sufficient to determine this  reconsideration,  but
      we should note  in  addition  that  Mr  Bedford's  primary  underlying
      submission that, in accepting that the Appellant was a mandate refugee
      who  came  under  the  jurisdiction  of  the  UNHCR,  the  UNHCR   was
      determining precisely the same issues as arose in a  claim  under  the
      Refugee Convention, is, to say the least, extremely questionable.  The
      jurisdiction ad personam of the UNHCR is set  out  in  Art  6  of  the
      Statute.  The only paragraph of that article that could be relevant to
      the Appellant is Art 6B: -

         "Any other person who is outside the country  of  his  nationality,
         or if he has no nationality, the country  of  his  former  habitual
         residence,  because he has or had well-founded fear of  persecution
         by reasons of his race,  religion, nationality or political opinion
         and is unable or, because of  such  fear,  is  unwilling  to  avail
         himself of the protection of the government  of the country of  his
         nationality, or, if he has no nationality, to return to the country
         of his former habitual residence."

  17. Mr Bedford submitted to us  that  there  was  no  material  difference
      between those words and the words in Art 1A of the Refugee Convention.
       We pointed out the absence of reference to a particular social group,
      and he said there was no material difference for the purposes of  this
      case; but that was a submission by which it is very difficult  to  see
      the force in view of his primary submission that  a  determination  of
      mandate refugee status is in general sufficient for  the  purposes  of
      the Convention.  In any event, however, it is clear from  the  wording
      of Art 6, in particular the tenses, that the jurisdiction of the UNHCR
      extends over persons who would not be regarded as Convention refugees.
        A Convention refugee is a person  who  is  outside  his  country  of
      nationality and has a well founded fear of persecution.  A person  who
      left his country because he had such a  fear  may  or  may  not  be  a
      Convention refugee now; but, whether or not he is a Convention refugee
      now, he is included within the words of Art 6B.  It  is  obvious  that
      there are many individuals  within  Art  6B  who  are  not  Convention
      refugees.   That the UNHCR  should  have  jurisdiction  over  them  is
      entirely understandable in view of the UNHCR's general functions;  but
      it is in our view  entirely  unarguable  that  every  mandate  refugee
      should be regarded as a  Convention  refugee.  (See  also  R(Hoxha)  v
      Special Adjudicator  [2005] UK HL 19 at [85].)


  18. In view of the conclusion we have reached, we do not need to  deal  in
      detail with Mr Bedford's submission relating to the entitlement  to  a
      residence permit for three years.  We say  only  this.   Mr  Bedford's
      argument was to the effect that between the implementation date of the
      Qualification Directive (10 October 2006) and  the  implementation  of
      the Procedures Directive (1 December 2007) there was no  provision  by
      which a member state could decline to admit an application  to  status
      determination on the basis that he had been recognised as a refugee in
      a first country of refuge outside the European Union.   Thus,  such  a
      person would be entitled to recognition as a refugee in  the  European
      Union, with all the benefits that that brings after 10  October  2006,
      even if his entry into a member state was both illegal and unsupported
      by any need to flee his present circumstances.  In  other  words,  for
      that period of nearly 14 months,  there  was  no  effective  provision
      against refugees entering the European Union illegally and acquiring a
      right of residence in the Union for a minimum period of three years as
      laid down in the Directive.  We say only that we think that conclusion
      is extremely unlikely to be right.   The  Qualification  Directive  is
      one of a number of pieces of European legislation gradually developing
      and imposing the common European asylum system, and none of  them  can
      be properly understood without the others.


  19. In his written skeleton, Mr Bedford also made submissions relating  to
      whether the Appellant was removable to Turkey.   No such matter arises
      in this appeal.

  20. As we have indicated, the Tribunal after considering all the  evidence
      before it, concluded that the Appellant had  not  established  a  well
      founded fear of persecution in Iran.  We have rejected by Mr Bedford's
      only substantive  attack  on  that  conclusion,  which  was  that  the
      Tribunal was not entitled to consider the matter at all.   There is no
      proper basis upon which it can be said that the Tribunal erred in  law
      in reaching the conclusion it did.   We  accordingly  order  that  its
      determination, dismissing this appeal, shall stand.



                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT

