
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal

     TK (Immigration Rules -policy-Article 8) Jamaica [2007] UKAIT 00025



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 13 February 2007                           |On 12 March 2007             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                      SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE CHALKLEY
                      Senior Immigration Judge P R LANE

                                   Between

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, KINGSTON

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr M Harris, Counsel, instructed by Messrs Barnes
                    Harrild & Dyer Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr G Saunders, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



The policy of the Secretary of State, to which the  Immigration  Rules  give
effect, is essentially a matter for  the  executive  and  legislature.  Care
must accordingly be exercised in considering submissions  which  involve  an
assertion that an appellant falls within the spirit of the  Rules.  Even  if
an appellant's case can properly be found to fall within  the  spirit  of  a
particular provision of the Rules,  her  case  does  not  thereby  become  a
wholly exceptional one, for the purposes of Article 8. That finding will  be
one factor to consider in deciding whether, in all  the  circumstances,  the
immigration decision, if implemented,  would  involve  a  violation  of  her
article 8  rights.  Where  her  case  falls  within  the  ambit  of  another
provision of the Rules, but she is unable  to  meet  its  requirements,  the
weight to be given to that factor is likely to be limited.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellants, female citizens of  Jamaica  born  respectively  on  20
    June 1987 and 25 January 1990,  applied  on  15  June  2005  for  entry
    clearance to the United Kingdom in order  to  join  their  father,  the
    sponsor, a person present and settled in this country.  On 11 July 2005
    the respondent refused the appellants' applications and  they  appealed
    against that decision to the  Tribunal.   Their  appeal  was  heard  at
    Hatton Cross on 16  August  2006  by  Immigration  Judge  Knowles.   He
    dismissed   the   appellants'   appeals.    On   15   September    2006
    reconsideration of the Immigration Judge's decision was  ordered  under
    section 103A of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

2.   The relevant provision of the Immigration Rules is as follows:

        "297.     The requirements to be met by a person seeking indefinite
               leave to enter the United Kingdom as the child of a parent,
               parents or a relative present and settled or being admitted
               for settlement in the United Kingdom are that he:

               (i) is seeking leave to enter to accompany or join a parent,
                  parents or a relative in one of the following
                  circumstances:


                  (a)      both parents are present and settled in the
                       United Kingdom; or


                  (b)      both parents are being admitted on the same
                       occasion for settlement; or


                  (c)      one parent is present and settled in the United
                       Kingdom and the other is being admitted on the same
                       occasion for settlement; or


                  (d)  one parent is present and settled in the United
                       Kingdom or being admitted on the same occasion for
                       settlement and the other parent is dead; or


                  (e) one parent is present and settled in the United
                       Kingdom or being admitted on the same occasion for
                       settlement and has had sole responsibility for the
                       child's upbringing; or


                  (f) one parent or a relative is present and settled in
                       the United Kingdom or being admitted on the same
                       occasion for settlement and there are serious and
                       compelling family or other considerations which make
                       exclusion of the child undesirable and suitable
                       arrangements have been made for the child's care; and




                  (ii)     is under the age of 18; and


                  (iii)    is not leading an independent life, is unmarried
                       and is not a civil partner, and has not formed an
                       independent family unit; and


                  (iv)     can, and will, be accommodated adequately by the
                       parent, parents or relative the child is seeking to
                       join without recourse to public funds in
                       accommodation which the parent, parents or relative
                       the child is seeking to join, own or occupy
                       exclusively; and


                  (v) can, and will, be maintained adequately by the
                       parent, parents, or relative the child is seeking to
                       join, without recourse to public funds; and

                  (vi)     holds a valid United Kingdom entry clearance for
                       entry in this capacity."

3.   The background to the application is as follows.  The  sponsor  married
    the mother of the appellants in 1986 in Jamaica.  He left that  country
    in 1998 and claimed asylum in the United Kingdom.  It is common  ground
    that the sponsor has never been recognised as a  refugee.   The  mother
    left Jamaica in March 2001 for the United Kingdom, taking with her  the
    two younger sisters of the appellants.  The basis on which  the  mother
    gained leave to enter the United Kingdom was as a student.  The sponsor
    was granted indefinite leave to remain in the United Kingdom on 4 April
    2005.  Given that the sponsor  was  then  ordinarily  resident  in  the
    United Kingdom,  he  became  on  that  day  "settled",  as  defined  in
    paragraph 6 (interpretation) of the Immigration Rules.  The sponsor and
    the two younger daughters obtained indefinite leave to remain by reason
    of the Secretary of State's Family ILR Exercise.

4.   The appellants' mother did not have indefinite leave to remain  in  the
    United Kingdom at the date of the decision;  nor  does  she  have  such
    leave today.  By the date of the hearing before the Immigration  Judge,
    the mother had, however, been  given  limited  leave  to  remain  until
    January 2008, on the basis of her marriage to the sponsor.

5.   After their mother left Jamaica, the appellants lived in  that  country
    with their maternal aunt, their  maternal  grandmother  and  a  cousin.
    Each of the appellants had her own room in the home of  the  aunt,  who
    looked after them, with the assistance of the grandmother.

6.   At the hearing, the Immigration Judge was told by the sponsor that  his
    wife did not bring the appellants with her when she came to the  United
    Kingdom in 2001, as he and his wife had taken the view that it would be
    better for their education if the appellants remained in Jamaica.   The
    sponsor told the Immigration Judge that he had not visited  Jamaica  as
    he had been working to support his family but his wife had returned  on
    one occasion to Jamaica.  The appellant's mother confirmed that she did
    not bring the appellants with her because she did not wish  to  disturb
    their education.  She had returned to Jamaica in 2003 for a month.  She
    said that one of the appellants had been sexually assaulted in Jamaica.
     When it was put to  her  that  she  could  return  to  live  with  the
    appellants in Jamaica, she said that this  would  have  the  effect  of
    splitting up the family.  It was put to her that she had caused that to
    happen when she came to the United Kingdom.  She replied that that  was
    not intended to be a permanent arrangement.  When asked what  prevented
    the sponsor from returning with her to Jamaica, she said  that  he  had
    been working in that country as a security guard and  had  prevented  a
    robbery.  As a result, he had been threatened and  he  feared  for  his
    life, even though eight years had elapsed.  In addition, one of the two
    daughters who were in the United Kingdom tended to become fearful  when
    she read about violence in Jamaica.

7.   In his findings, the Immigration Judge concluded  that  the  appellants
    satisfied the maintenance and accommodation requirements  of  paragraph
    297.  So far as paragraph  297(i)(f)  was  concerned,  the  Immigration
    Judge concluded on the evidence that the appellants had not shown  that
    there were serious and compelling family or other considerations  which
    made their exclusion undesirable.  The appellants appeared to be living
    relatively comfortably in Jamaica and were being  educated.   They  had
    been in the care of their aunt since 2001.   There  was  no  suggestion
    that the aunt had abandoned  the  appellants  or  intended  to  do  so.
    Although the Immigration Judge understood that  the  appellants  missed
    their parents and siblings, the appellants were not,  at  the  date  of
    decision, young children.

8.    The  Immigration  Judge  then  considered  whether  the   respondent's
    decision was a violation of Article 8 of the ECHR.  On  behalf  of  the
    appellants, it was submitted that, in considering  that  question,  the
    Immigration Judge should have regard to the judgment of Collins J in  R
    v Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal  ex  parte  Lekstaka  [2005]  EWHC  745
    (Admin).   The  submission,  as  the  Immigration  Judge  recorded   at
    paragraph  65  of  his  determination,  was  that  "truly   exceptional
    circumstances can be found on  the  basis  that  the  appellants'  case
    complies with the spirit of  the  Immigration  Rules,  albeit  not  the
    letter."  The Immigration Judge  accepted  that,  had  the  appellants'
    mother been settled, as well as the sponsor, the appellants  would  not
    have had to satisfy the requirements of paragraph 297(i)(f), that there
    be  serious  and  compelling  family  or  other  considerations  making
    exclusion undesirable, and could instead  have  relied  upon  paragraph
    297(i)(a). Nevertheless, the Immigration Judge considered that the case
    of Lekstaka could be distinguished because there:

     "The appellant and the sponsor found themselves in  a  situation  which
        was not in any way of their making.  The appellant in that case had
        been effectively orphaned  by  the  conflict  in  Kosovo.   He  was
        prevented from seeking leave to remain in the United Kingdom  as  a
        dependant by virtue of being a nephew rather than  a  son,  despite
        the fact that his uncle had treated him as a  son  of  the  family"
        (paragraph 66).

9.   By contrast, the parents of the appellants in  the  present  case  "did
    make a free choice to split up the family, albeit one that they made on
    behalf  of  the  appellant"  (paragraph  67).   At  paragraph  68,  the
    Immigration Judge noted that the sponsor had not visited the appellants
    during the eight years in which he had been in the United  Kingdom  and
    that the mother had only visited them once in five years.  Although the
    mother had had a good reason to go to Jamaica to  be  with  the  second
    appellant, following the allegation of sexual assault upon  the  second
    appellant, she had chosen not to do so.  The sponsor claimed  that  the
    Home Office had his passport,  thereby  preventing  him  from  visiting
    Jamaica, but the Immigration Judge found that there  was  "no  evidence
    that he has pressed the department for its return."

10.  At paragraph 69, the Immigration Judge considered that there  had  been
    ample opportunity for the appellants to make  their  application  since
    the mother had left Jamaica in 2001, but it was  made  only  five  days
    before the first appellant's eighteenth birthday "following  which  she
    could not have succeeded under  the  Immigration  Rules  by  virtue  of
    paragraph 297(ii)."

11.  At paragraph 70, the  Immigration  Judge  concluded  by  recalling  his
    findings that there were no serious  and  compelling  family  or  other
    considerations which rendered the exclusion of the appellants from  the
    United Kingdom undesirable.  Those findings were, he considered,

        "equally applicable to the Article 8 claim.  There  is  nothing  in
        the Immigration Rules that is inconsistent with  the  Human  Rights
        Convention.  While it is not difficult to have  sympathy  with  the
        appellants and their family, sympathy cannot amount to  exceptional
        circumstances.  There is no general obligation on the UK to respect
        their choice of residence.  In my judgment,  there  is  nothing  so
        truly  exceptional  about  this  case  such   as   to   render   it
        disproportionate  to  require  the  appellants   to   satisfy   the
        Immigration Rules."

12.   The  grounds  which  accompanied  the  appellants'   application   for
    reconsideration of the Immigration Judge's decision contended that  the
    Immigration Judge failed to consider whether the appellants fell within
    the "spirit" of paragraph 297(i),  in  that  although  the  appellants'
    mother was not settled in the United Kingdom at the date  of  decision,
    she was "residing in  the  UK  and  was  not  intending  to  return  to
    Jamaica."  The purpose of paragraph 297(i), according to  paragraph  12
    of the grounds,

     "is to prevent a child obtaining entry clearance  to  settle  with  one
        parent in the UK when the other parent is based in another country.
         This is not the case with  the  appellants'  parents,  both  being
        based in the United Kingdom.  In this sense the [Immigration Judge]
        was being invited to consider that  the  parents'  arrangement  was
        within the spirit of the Rules."

13.  According to the grounds, the Immigration Judge,  however,  "failed  to
    consider whether the parents' own in situation regarding settlement  in
    the UK is of itself so within the spirit of the Rules as to be  capable
    of being truly exceptional."

14.  As was the case before the  Immigration  Judge,  the  grounds  seek  to
    place reliance on  the  judgment  in  Lekstaka.   It  is,  accordingly,
    necessary to see what that case was about.  The  proceedings  concerned
    the judicial review of a refusal by the Immigration Appeal Tribunal  to
    grant the appellant permission to appeal against the  determination  of
    an adjudicator.  The appellant, who came from Kosovo as a  minor,  lost
    his father, who was killed in Kosovo, and endured the disappearance  of
    his mother and sister.  Having arrived here in 1999 when he was 16, the
    appellant's asylum claim was refused in October  2002.   The  appellant
    based his claim to remain in the United  Kingdom  on  the  family  life
    which he enjoyed with his uncle and aunt, who had been granted  refugee
    status in the United Kingdom.  At paragraph 31 of the judgment, Collins
    J, having quoted from passages of the judgment of Laws LJ  in  Huang  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005] EWCA  Civ  105,  held
    that it was plain from that case "that the scope  for  it  being  found
    that  a  removal,  notwithstanding  a  breach  of  Article   8(1),   is
    disproportionate is very small indeed.  But one has of course  to  look
    at the facts of an individual case."  The learned judge then held:-

         "32. The position here boils down, as it seems to me, to this.  The
             claimant had effectively become an orphan in  the  sense  that
             his father had been killed  and  his  mother  and  sister  had
             disappeared, and apparently have still disappeared.  There  is
             no suggestion  that  they  have  been  traced  or  are  indeed
             traceable.  He had no family in Macedonia.  He had  no  family
             or relations to go to in Kosovo.  The  only  potential  family
             that he had were his uncle and aunt who were in this country."

15.  The Court then considered what  the  appellant's  position  might  have
    been, at an earlier stage, under  the  Immigration  Rules  and  "family
    policy":-

         "37. If one looks back and wonders whether he would have  qualified
             at an earlier stage, one finds, first of all, that had he been
             a son, as opposed merely to a nephew, he would, on the face of
             it, have been able to gain entry as a dependant had he applied
             before he reached the age of 18.  Certainly it is difficult to
             conceive that there would have been any bar under  the  Rules.
             He certainly would have qualified.  Equally,  had  he  been  a
             son, a dependant, as opposed to a nephew, and had  the  family
             not been granted asylum, he  would  have  qualified  to  enter
             under the family policy.  Furthermore, it was policy to  allow
             the family of refugees who were granted that  status  to  join
             them in this country and he would have qualified on that basis
             too as the dependant son, if he had applied to come before  he
             reached the age of 18.

     38. Mr Beard submits that it is not appropriate and not proper to  look
             back in that way and to ask what would have  happened  if  the
             situation had been somewhat different.  But  it  seems  to  me
             that one is entitled to see whether, in all the circumstances,
             this case  falls  within  the  spirit  of  the  Rules  or  the
             policies, even if not within the letter.  It does in  my  view
             quite plainly fall within the spirit because,  albeit  only  a
             nephew, he has no other family - his father having been killed
             and his mother and sister having disappeared - and he has been
             treated by his uncle as if he  were  indeed  the  son  of  the
             family and  that  in  my  judgment  is  certainly  capable  of
             constituting an exceptional state of affairs."

16.  The Court found that the adjudicator had not gone into the question  of
    whether the case  was  exceptional  "in  any  detail"  (paragraph  39).
    Having considered the ECHR case of Sen v Netherlands (2003) 36 EHRR 81,
    Collins J considered that one had to look to see whether the  facts  of
    the present case came within the principle laid down by the ECHR:-

     "but it must be obvious, I would have thought, that to return  someone
        in the circumstances of a case such as this,  however  healthy  and
        however able to look after himself, to Kosovo, where he has no one,
        and thus break all his family ties that he has left,  is  something
        which does indeed require very weighty reasons.  In my view  it  is
        arguable that those reasons do not exist in  the  circumstances  of
        this case" (paragraph 45).

17.  At paragraph 48, the Court expressed  itself  satisfied  that  the  IAT
    should have granted permission to appeal and that  there  was  "a  real
    chance of success and, accordingly, I propose to quash the decision  of
    the IAT and to return the matter for fresh consideration to be given."

18.  Although not relied upon by Mr Harris at the  reconsideration  hearing,
    the Tribunal considers that it is relevant to note that  the  Court  of
    Appeal had occasion, some months after the  judgment  in  Lekstaka,  to
    deal with a similar issue.  In Shkembi v Secretary  of  State  for  the
    Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ 1592, the issue was whether the IAT had
    dealt satisfactorily with  an  Article  8  claim,  on  appeal  from  an
    adjudicator, in the case of a citizen of Albania  who  arrived  in  the
    United Kingdom in 2000,  together  with  his  wife  and  son,  and  who
    unsuccessfully claimed asylum.  The Court of Appeal held that  the  IAT
    had been wrong to  refuse  an  adjournment,  in  order  to  enable  the
    appellant to adduce evidence as to what the then Secretary of State for
    the Home Department had said during a radio interview, on  the  subject
    of a concessionary policy, whereby he would not  remove  families  with
    children who had come to the United Kingdom prior to October 2000.  The
    issue appears to have been whether the then Secretary of State:-

        "had indicated that the reason for the concession was that it would
        be disproportionate to remove those to whom the concession  was  to
        apply and that that view  had  been  expressed  personally  by  the
        Secretary of State  in  a  radio  broadcast  on  27  October  2003"
        (paragraph 7).

     Although the appellant accepted that he and his family:-

        "clearly  fell  outside  the  strict  terms  of  that   concession,
        nonetheless the rationale for the concession applied to the  family
        and, accordingly, there was a proper basis for  saying  that  there
        could and should be a departure from  the  normal  which  was  that
        those refused asylum should be refused leave to enter this country"
        (paragraph 4).

     The judgment of Latham LJ concluded as follows:-

         "14. Mr McCullough, on behalf of the  respondent,  relies  on  this
             court's decision in Huang [2005] 3 WLR Page 488.  In that case
             this court dealt in some detail with the basis upon which  the
             appellate authorities should deal with cases where the  would-
             be immigrant raised Article 8 issues.  He submits  that  on  a
             proper reading of that decision the Tribunal will  essentially
             be required to consider whether the Adjudicator could properly
             have concluded as a matter of law that there were  exceptional
             circumstances  which  should  override  the  policy   of   the
             Secretary of State in circumstances such as these.  He has  to
             accept that this court made it clear in paragraphs 52 to 54 of
             that decision that matters of policy  are  matters  which  are
             capable of  being  justiciable,  but,  as  Mr  McCullough  has
             rightly submitted, the  position  will  usually  be  that  the
             Article  8  rights  of  would-be  immigrants  will  have  been
             properly considered in the formulation of policy.   That  does
             not, however, mean that merely because in  a  given  case  the
             claim by the would-be immigrant does not, within the terms  of
             the policy, have any entitlement to remain here,  that  is  of
             itself clearly an answer because, as the court explained,  the
             Adjudicator, in accordance with the decision of [the] House of
             Lords  in  Razgar,  has  an  independent  assessment  of   the
             situation to perform.  The consequence is that the Tribunal in
             the present case would have been entitled to consider, and  if
             the matter is returned to the Tribunal will have to  consider,
             what the true policy in this situation is and  decide  whether
             it does or does not apply to the appellant [on] the  facts  as
             we understand them, but that is simply a matter at the  moment
             of argument before us.


         15.  The policy does not  strictly  apply  to  the  appellant  but,
             nonetheless, Mr Nathan is entitled, it seems to me,  to  argue
             that if and insofar as a rationale can be  discerned  for  the
             policy  the  Tribunal  can  consider  whether  or  not  as   a
             consequence the Adjudicator was wrong to  conclude  that  this
             was merely a  concession  which  the  Secretary  of  State  is
             entitled either to depart from or to require strict  adherence
             to, but goes further than that and  justifies  the  conclusion
             that his is an exceptional case.


         16.  I do not wish to hold out any hope to the appellant that  that
             latter argument can succeed on the facts of this case.  But he
             was given leave to appeal to the Tribunal on that basis and it
             seems to me that he is entitled to have that  appeal  properly
             resolved by the Tribunal which Parliament has provided for the
             determination of that appeal, rather than  this  court  taking
             upon itself any other role than that which it seems to  me  we
             should take in this case, which is to say that  the  procedure
             that was adopted by the Tribunal was unfair and  the  decision
             that it made was one which cannot stand.  It is on that basis,
             on that basis only, that I would allow this appeal."

19.  Both Shkembi and, to a degree at least, Lekstaka concerned policies  of
    the Secretary of State, as opposed to the Immigration  Rules.   Whilst,
    as Huang makes plain, those Rules are themselves the  manifestation  of
    government policy on immigration  matters,  the  structure  of  section
    86(3) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002,  which  sets
    out the circumstances in which  the  Tribunal  must  allow  an  appeal,
    accords a particular significance to the  Rules.   The  Tribunal  must,
    under section 86(3)(a), allow an appeal insofar as  it  thinks  that  a
    decision  against which the appeal is brought or is  treated  as  being
    brought "was not in accordance  with  the  law  (including  immigration
    rules)" or if a  discretion  should  have  been  exercised  differently
    (section 86(3)(b)). Otherwise, the Tribunal  must  dismiss  the  appeal
    (section 86(6)).  Thus, so far as the immigration appellate  system  is
    concerned, the Immigration Rules are part of "the law" and  the  policy
    to which they give effect is essentially the preserve of the  executive
    and legislature.  As Laws LJ held at paragraph 56 of Huang:-

        "...  the  material  policy  is  given  first  by   the   statutory
        requirement that persons who are not British citizens require leave
        to enter or  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom;  secondly  and  more
        particularly by the Immigration Rules, made  by  the  Secretary  of
        State subject to  Parliamentary  approval.   The  Rules  state  the
        detail of immigration policy, and in doing so prescribe  in  effect
        what classes of aliens will in the ordinary way be allowed to enter
        the United Kingdom and which will  not.   The  adjudicator  has  no
        business whatever to question or  pass  judgment  upon  the  policy
        given by the Rules.  In our judgment his duty, when faced  with  an
        Article 8 case where the would-be immigrant has no claim under  the
        Rules, is and is only to see whether an exceptional case  has  been
        made out such that the requirements of proportionality  requires  a
        departure from the relevant Rule in the particular circumstances."

20.  Neither the High Court in Lekstaka nor the Court of Appeal  in  Shkembi
    is to be taken as holding that a person who  can  show  that  he  comes
    within the "spirit" of the Rules or the  underlying  "rationale"  of  a
    particular policy  has  thereby  demonstrated  that  his  is  a  "truly
    exceptional" case, as required by Huang, such that giving effect to the
    immigration decision in his case would involve a violation  of  Article
    8.   In  Lekstaka,  the  High  Court  returned  the  matter  for  fresh
    consideration to be given by  (now)  this  Tribunal.   In  Shkembi  the
    matter was remitted to the Tribunal so that it could determine  whether
    the then Secretary of State had accepted that his  policy  involved  an
    acceptance  that  to  remove  those  covered   by   it   would   be   a
    disproportionate interference with their Article 8 rights. In the light
    of that finding, the Tribunal would then decide whether the appellant's
    case was an exceptional one.

21.  Accordingly, the general proposition that derives from those two  cases
    is, the Tribunal considers, that the issue of whether  a  person  falls
    within the spirit of the Rules or the rationale of a policy is a matter
    which is capable of affecting the determination of whether, in all  the
    circumstances, the immigration decision, if implemented, would  involve
    a disproportionate interference with Article 8 rights.   The  essential
    question remains whether, looked at in the round, the case is  a  truly
    exceptional one.

22.   Confirmation of this proposition can be found in the judgment  of  the
    Court of Appeal in SB (Bangladesh) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home
    Department [2007] EWCA Civ 28. The  Tribunal's  determination  in  that
    case contained the finding that the  appellant  "only  just  failed  to
    qualify for admission" under paragraph 317 of  the  Immigration  Rules.
    The Court approved the Tribunal's view that this  was  "a  fact  to  be
    counted in her favour" in deciding whether her  removal  would  violate
    Article 8 (paragraph 30 of the judgment). But Ward LJ was at  pains  to
    stress that:

              "The ultimate test is, of course, that set  out  in  paragraph
    59 of the judgment of the Court of Appeal in Huang [2005] EWCA Civ 105,
    namely:

                       'The true position in our judgment is that the  Human
    Rights Act 1998 and s. 65(1) require the adjudicator to allow an appeal
    against removal or deportation brought on Article  8  grounds  if,  and
    only if, he concludes that the case is so exceptional on its particular
    facts that the imperative of proportionality demands an outcome in  the
    appellant's favour notwithstanding that he  cannot  succeed  under  the
    Rules'" (paragraph 31).

23.  In assessing the weight to be given to a finding that  a  person  falls
    within the spirit but not the letter of  an  immigration  rule,  it  is
    necessary to bear in mind  the  following  point.  The  fact  that  the
    Immigration Rules are generally regarded as being compatible  with  the
    United Kingdom's obligations under the ECHR does not mean that each and
    every provision of those  Rules  represents  only  the  barest  minimum
    needed to ensure such compliance.  A good illustration of this point is
    to be found at paragraphs 352A to G of  the  Rules.   Those  paragraphs
    make provision for certain family members of a refugee to have leave to
    enter or remain in the United Kingdom, in circumstances which,  so  far
    as the position of maintenance and accommodation  without  recourse  to
    public funds is concerned, are  more  generous  than  the  requirements
    imposed upon family members seeking  leave  to  enter  or  remain  with
    persons who are not refugees.  It has not, however, to  our  knowledge,
    ever been successfully contended that being a  refugee  or  the  family
    member of a refugee enhances a person's rights under Article 8  of  the
    ECHR.  In other words, paragraphs 352A to G are more generous than  the
    ECHR alone would require them to be.

24.  Because of the nature of  the  Tribunal's  jurisdiction,  as  described
    above, considerable care must be exercised in  considering  submissions
    which involve the assertion that an appellant falls within  the  spirit
    of the Immigration Rules.  The policy to be  adopted  in  the  case  of
    aliens who wish to enter or remain in the United Kingdom  is  a  matter
    for the elected government, not for us.  Any invitation to  search  for
    what is said to be the spirit of the Rules  must  be  resisted  if,  in
    reality, the Tribunal is being invited to re-write government policy.

25.  The grounds in the present case are a  good  example  of  this  danger.
    They invite us  to  find  that  the  underlying  purpose  of  paragraph
    297(i)(a) is merely to require both parents to be "based" in the United
    Kingdom; or, at least, that if one parent  is  "settled",  then  it  is
    enough if the other parent is  "based"  here.   The  Tribunal  sees  no
    reason whatsoever to adopt any such interpretations.  On the  contrary,
    it is entirely  comprehensible  that  the  Secretary  of  State  should
    require both parents to be free  from  any  legal  restriction  on  the
    period for which they may remain in this country.  Quite apart from the
    fact that the concept of being settled is a well-established legal one,
    which is normally easy to prove, a person who has only limited leave to
    remain is plainly in a more precarious position  than  someone  who  is
    not, however  much  she  may  consider  herself  to  be  "based"  here.
    Paragraph 10 of the grounds suggests that all that is  needed  to  meet
    the alleged spirit of paragraph 297(i)(a) is residence  in  the  United
    Kingdom, together with the absence of an  intention  to  leave  or,  as
    paragraph 11 would have it, an intention to seek settlement.  But  such
    a test is capable of covering  a  wide  variety  of  people,  including
    illegal entrants, whose position may be precarious in the extreme.

26.  However, if the appellants  in  the  present  case  had  been  able  to
    identify a dichotomy between the true purpose  of  paragraph  297(i)(a)
    and the way in which that provision has been drafted,  this  is  not  a
    case where the appellants are outside paragraph  297  altogether.  They
    still fall within  paragraph  297(i)(f),  which  provides  a  mechanism
    whereby persons seeking entry who  have  only  one  settled  parent  or
    relative in the United Kingdom may nevertheless succeed  if  there  are
    "serious and compelling  family  or  other  considerations  which  make
    exclusion of the child undesirable and suitable arrangements have  been
    made for the child's care."  As the  Immigration  Judge  found  in  the
    present case, the circumstances of the appellants were,  looked  at  in
    the round, not such as to show on balance that paragraph 297(i)(f)  was
    satisfied in their case.  The test in that  provision  of  serious  and
    compelling  family  or  other  considerations  is,  in  itself,  almost
    certainly more generous than would be required in order to ensure  that
    paragraph 297 was, in general, compliant with the ECHR.

27.  Accordingly, in the circumstances  of  this  particular  case,  even  a
    finding  that  the  appellants'  circumstances  were   not   materially
    different from those of persons, both of whose parents were settled  in
    the United Kingdom, could not possibly have  compelled  the  conclusion
    that their circumstances were as  a  result  so  exceptional  that  the
    respondent was violating Article 8 by not giving them  entry  clearance
    to this country.  It would have been a  factor  to  consider;  but  the
    weight to be given to it would necessarily have been  affected  by  the
    fact that the  appellants  had  not  met  the  threshold  of  paragraph
    297(i)(f).

28.  It is clear from the Immigration Judge's determination  that  he  found
    no significant reason why the family could not re-establish  itself  in
    Jamaica.  The sponsor has  not  been  recognised  as  a  refugee.   The
    assertion regarding the aftermath of his activities as a security guard
    was, in any event, extremely thin. The alleged sexual  assault  appears
    to have been an isolated incident. Although the appellants' mother told
    the Immigration Judge that one of the daughters in the  United  Kingdom
    became distressed whenever she thought  about  Jamaica,  there  was  no
    medical evidence to show that this was likely  to  pose  a  significant
    impediment to the family's return.

29.  In conclusion, the case for the appellants, based upon  Article  8,  is
    upon analysis no more than an attempt to compel the United  Kingdom  to
    respect  their  choice  of  residence.   The   determination   of   the
    Immigration Judge does not contain a material  error  of  law  and  the
    Tribunal accordingly orders that it shall stand.






                                           Senior Immigration Judge P R Lane

                                                         Date:
