

Asylum and Immigration Tribunal

         NG ("on a regular basis" para 159A(ii)) Bulgaria [2006] UKAIT 00020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 1 February 2006                              |On 28 February 2006        |
|Prepared on 2 February 2006                     |                           |


                                   Before

                 Mr H J E Latter (Senior Immigration Judge)
                 Mr L V Waumsley (Senior Immigration Judge)

                                   Between


                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - SOFIA

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Stanage of counsel, instructed by Harrison
                    Bundy & Co, solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Petterson, Home Office Presenting Officer

The purpose of the reference to "on a regular basis" in  paragraph  159A(ii)
is to ensure that there is a genuine connection  between  the  household  in
which the relevant applicant is  employed  as  a  domestic  worker  and  his
employer.  That requirement would scarcely be served if it  were  sufficient
for the employer to use that household only on an infrequent basis.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant, a citizen of  Bulgaria,  has  appealed  with  permission
    against the determination of a Designated Immigration  Judge  (Mr  P  J
    Wynne), sitting in Bradford,  in  which  he  dismissed  her  appeal  on
    immigration grounds only against the respondent's  decision  to  refuse
    her application for entry clearance to come to the United Kingdom as  a
    domestic worker in a private household.

    Background

2.   On 19 April 2005, the appellant applied to  the  respondent  for  entry
    clearance to come to the United Kingdom as  a  domestic  worker  for  a
    period of one year in order to undertake employment with  her  existing
    employers, Dr and Mrs Cookson, as a nanny for their two young children.
     Her application fell to be considered under  the  terms  of  paragraph
    159A of the Statement of Changes  in  Immigration  Rules  (HC  395)  as
    amended which reads as follows:

        "159A.    The requirements to be met by a person seeking  leave  to
                  enter the United Kingdom as a domestic worker in a private
                  household are that he:
                    i) is aged 18-65 inclusive;
                   ii) has been employed as a domestic worker for one  year
                       or more immediately prior to application  for  entry
                       clearance under the same roof as his employer or  in
                       a household that the employer uses for himself on  a
                       regular basis and where there is evidence that there
                       is a connection between employer and employee.
                  iii) that he intends to travel to the United  Kingdom  in
                       the company of his employer, his  employer's  spouse
                       or his employer's minor child;
                   iv) intends to work full-time as a domestic worker under
                       the same roof as his employer or in a household that
                       the employer uses for himself on a regular basis and
                       where there is evidence that there is  a  connection
                       between employer and employee;
                    v) does not intend to take employment except within the
                       terms of this paragraph; and
                   vi) can  maintain  and  accommodate  himself  adequately
                       without recourse to public funds; and
                  vii) holds a valid United  Kingdom  entry  clearance  for
                       entry in this capacity."

3.   The respondent's decision in response to  the  appellant's  application
    was made on same  date.   He  concluded  that  the  appellant  had  not
    satisfied the requirements for entry clearance in the  capacity  sought
    by her, and refused her application accordingly.  The grounds on  which
    he did so are set out in his notice of refusal in the following terms:

        "You have applied for entry clearance to the United  Kingdom  as  a
        domestic worker.
         . BUT:
         . I am not satisfied, on the balance of  probabilities,  that  you
           meet the  requirements  of  Paragraph  159A  (Immigration  Rules
           18/9/2002), in particular:
         . You have been employed as a domestic worker for one year or more
           immediately prior to application for entry clearance  under  the
           same roof as (employer [sic] or in a household that the employer
           uses for himself on a regular basis and where there is  evidence
           that there is a connection between employer and  employee  (159A
           (ii));
           You intend to work full-time as a domestic worker under the same
           roof as your employer or in a household that the  employer  uses
           for himself on a regular basis and where there is evidence  that
           there is a connection between employer and employee (159A (iv));
           You do not intend to take employment except within the terms  of
           this paragraph (159A (v));
         . Because:
         . Mr and Mrs Cookson have not employed you in accordance with  the
           above requirements.
         . You said you live separately in your own house with your husband
           and daughter.
         . You have worked for Mrs Cookson's parents and not for Mr and Mrs
           Cookson.
         . You said you were made redundant from your  previous  employment
           and that you are now retired.


        I therefore refuse your application."

4.   The appellant exercised her right to appeal  to  an  Immigration  Judge
    under section 82(1) of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
    2002.  This is the appeal  which  came  before  Mr  P  J  Wynne  on  29
    September 2005.  As will be seen from the extract from  the  notice  of
    refusal  set  out  above,  the  respondent  refused   the   appellant's
    application for three reasons, namely that he was  not  satisfied  that
    she had been employed for a period of one year or more in  a  household
    complying with the requirements  of  paragraph  159A(ii),  he  was  not
    satisfied that she intended to work full-time as a domestic worker in a
    household complying with the requirements of  paragraph  159A(iv),  and
    finally he was not satisfied  that  she  intended  to  take  employment
    except within the terms of paragraph 159A.   However,  at  the  hearing
    before   the   Designated   Immigration   Judge,    the    respondent's
    representative confirmed that he was no longer relying on the third  of
    those reasons.  This was recorded by the Designated  Immigration  Judge
    at paragraph 20 of his determination.  He then  proceeded  to  consider
    the other two grounds on which the application had been refused.

5.   Oral evidence was given before the Immigration Judge  by  both  Dr  and
    Mrs Cookson.  The Designated Immigration Judge accepted their  evidence
    in its entirety.  Nevertheless, he concluded at paragraphs 44 and 45 of
    his determination that  the  appellant  had  not  been  employed  as  a
    domestic worker for a period of one year or more immediately  prior  to
    the date of her application under the same roof as her employers or  in
    a household that they used for themselves on a regular basis and  where
    there was evidence that there was a  connection  between  her  and  her
    employers.  He also concluded at paragraph 47 of his determination that
    he was not satisfied that the appellant intended to work "full-time" as
    a domestic worker in a household complying  with  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 159A(iv).  He therefore found against the appellant  on  both
    those points, and dismissed her appeal accordingly.

6.   The  appellant  then  applied  for,  and  was  granted,  an  order  for
    reconsideration  by  this  Tribunal.   The  grounds  contained  in  her
    application  for  review  raise  four  separate  issues  which  may  be
    summarised as follows:

    (1)  The Designated Immigration Judge's conclusions  at  paragraphs  44
         and 45 of his determination are contradictory;
    (2)  He failed to take proper account  of  the  respondent's  published
         Immigration Directorate Instructions;
    (3)  The "scenario that the IJ [Immigration Judge] contends  would  not
         be the will of parliament [sic] is one which is misplaced given the
         caveat contained within the rules";
    (4)  He acted in a manner which was procedurally unfair  in  concluding
         that he appellant had not had the requisite intention to work full-
         time as a domestic worker when that was not an issue which had been
         raised by the respondent when refusing her application,  or  during
         the course of the hearing before him.


    We will therefore consider each of those grounds in turn.

    Ground 1

7.   The first ground  raised  by  the  appellant  is  that  the  Designated
    Immigration Judge has made contradictory findings at paragraphs 44  and
    45 of his  determination.   It  is  averred  in  her  grounds  that  at
    paragraph 44 he made a finding to the effect that she had been employed
    as a domestic worker for a period of one year or more immediately prior
    to the date of her application "in a household that her  employer  used
    for himself on a regular basis".  However,  at  paragraph  45,  he  had
    arrived at the opposite conclusion.   It  was  therefore  unclear  what
    finding he had actually intended to make on the point.

8.   With respect to the appellant's counsel (not Mr  Stanage)  who  drafted
    the grounds of appeal on her behalf, this ground  is  misconceived.   A
    careful reading of both paragraphs  44  and  45  of  the  determination
    discloses that there is in fact no contradiction between  the  findings
    made by the Designated Immigration Judge.

9.   The assertion made on the appellant's behalf arises out  of  the  final
    sentence of paragraph 44 in  which  the  Designated  Immigration  Judge
    stated:

        "I am satisfied on the latter part  of  the  sub-paragraph  because
        there is evidence that there is a connection between Richard  [i.e.
        Dr Cookson] and Maria [i.e. Mrs Cookson] and the  appellant  during
        the one year prior to the entry clearance application, by virtue of
        the telephone records within Mr Mikejevic's [appellant's counsel's]
        bundle as well as the trips/visits paid by  Richard  and  Maria  to
        Bulgaria during that period."

    However, it is clear from  that  sentence  read  in  context  that  the
    Designated Immigration Judge was referring to the requirement contained
    in  paragraph  159A(ii)  that  in  the  case  of  an  entry   clearance
    application where the applicant has not been employed for the preceding
    year under the same roof as her employer (it is common  ground  between
    the parties that that did not apply in the appellant's case),  but  has
    been employed instead in a household that the employer uses for himself
    on a regular basis, there must be  evidence  of  a  connection  between
    employer and employee.  The Designated Immigration Judge  concluded  on
    the  evidence  before  him  that  the  requisite  connection  had  been
    demonstrated in the appellant's case.  He was not making a finding that
    the appellant had been employed "in a household that her employer  used
    for himself on a regular basis".  The appellant's counsel  who  settled
    the grounds on her behalf has misread the sentence in question.   There
    is no contradiction of the kind contended for in this ground.

10.  At this point, it  is  appropriate  to  deal  with  the  main  argument
    advanced on the appellant's  behalf  during  oral  submissions  by  her
    counsel who appeared before us, namely that the Designated  Immigration
    Judge had erred in concluding on  the  evidence  before  him  that  the
    household in which  the  appellant  had  been  employed  for  the  year
    preceding her entry clearance  application,  namely  the  home  of  Mrs
    Cookson's parents, did not constitute a "household  that  the  employer
    used for himself on  a  regular  basis".   In  this  regard,  we  heard
    submissions  from  both  representatives  as  to  the  meaning  of  the
    expression "on a regular basis".  Mr Stanage argued that  "regular"  in
    this context did not connote frequent, and that the visits paid  by  Dr
    and Mrs Cookson during the relevant period to the home of Mrs Cookson's
    parents, where their young son Harry was being looked after, partly  by
    his grandparents  and  partly  by  the  appellant,  could  properly  be
    regarded as use of that home by  Dr  and  Mrs  Cookson  "on  a  regular
    basis".

11.  Mrs Petterson, who appeared before us  on  behalf  of  the  respondent,
    argued that there was no perversity or irrationality on the part of the
    Designated Immigration Judge in concluding, as he had  done,  that  the
    visits paid by Dr and  Mrs  Cookson  during  the  period  of  one  year
    immediately prior to the appellant's application were so infrequent and
    short as not to constitute use "on a regular basis".  In  this  regard,
    it is important to bear in mind that reconsideration lies on a point of
    law only.  It would therefore only be if we were to conclude  that  the
    Designated Immigration Judge had  made  a  material  error  of  law  in
    arriving at his decision that we would be entitled to interfere with it
    and to substitute our own decision.

12.  The term "regular" which appears in paragraph 159A(ii) is  not  defined
    in the Immigration Rules.  It does not  appear  in  the  interpretation
    section at paragraph 6 of the Rules.  It is therefore to be interpreted
    in  accordance  with  its  ordinary  dictionary  meaning,  giving   the
    Immigration Rules a purposive interpretation, rather  than  seeking  to
    interpret them with the  strictness  that  might  apply  if  they  were
    statutory provisions.  In this regard, we have given  consideration  to
    the definition of the word  "regular"  which  appears  in  the  current
    edition of the New Shorter Oxford English Dictionary.   The  dictionary
    definition sets out a range of  different  meanings,  but  for  present
    purposes the only meanings which are arguably relevant are those  which
    appear in paragraphs 3  and  4  of  the  definition  respectively.   At
    paragraph 3, the following definition appears:

        "Recurring or repeated  at  fixed  intervals,  recurring  at  short
        uniform intervals.  Habitually or  customarily  used,  received  or
        observed; habitual, constant".

     At paragraph 4, "regular" is defined as meaning:

        "Observing fixed times for or never failing in the  performance  of
        certain actions or duties."

13.  Stated shortly, Mr Stanage's submission was that for  the  purposes  of
    paragraph 159A(ii), use of a household "on a  regular  basis"  did  not
    require that such use  should  be  frequent.   He  did  not  offer  any
    suggestion as to what else the expression might be intended to mean  in
    this particular context.  Mrs Petterson, on the other hand, adopted the
    opposite submission, namely that in  this  context,  "regular"  implied
    frequent or habitual.

14.   We  have  little  (if  any)  hesitation  in  preferring   the   latter
    submission.  In some contexts, an event may properly  be  described  as
    happening "regularly", even though it happens infrequently.   To  adopt
    the example which was raised during the course of argument  before  us,
    Halley's Comet comes close to the Earth once in every  76  years.   The
    reappearance of the Comet is an event which can  be  predicted  with  a
    high degree of accuracy many decades, indeed centuries, in advance.  To
    that extent, the appearance of the Comet may fairly be described as one
    which takes place "on a regular basis".

15.  However, that is plainly not the meaning  that  the  expression  "on  a
    regular basis"  is  intended  to  bear  in  the  context  of  paragraph
    159A(ii).  On  the  contrary,  it  is  clearly  intended  to  bear  the
    alternative  meaning  contained  in  paragraph  4  of  the   dictionary
    definition set out above,  namely  "habitually  or  customarily  used".
    That was the view adopted by the Designated Immigration  Judge,  albeit
    not in precisely those terms.  It is a view which in our opinion he was
    right to adopt.  The purpose of the reference to "on a  regular  basis"
    in paragraph 159A(ii) is to ensure that there is a  genuine  connection
    between the household in which the relevant applicant is employed as  a
    domestic worker and his employer.  That requirement would  scarcely  be
    served if it were sufficient for the employer  to  use  that  household
    only on an infrequent basis.  By way of example,  it  might  be  argued
    that attendance at the household on but a single occasion each year  on
    25 January to celebrate Burns Night  could  properly  be  described  as
    "regular" attendance, but only in the sense of being  attendance  which
    recurred at a fixed interval, and clearly not in  the  sense  of  being
    attendance for habitual or customary use.  In the context of  paragraph
    159A(ii), it is plainly the latter sense in which  the  term  is  being
    used.

16.  That was the conclusion reached by the  Immigration  Judge.   It  is  a
    conclusion which was properly open to him.  There was no arguable error
    of law on his part in interpreting the expression "on a regular  basis"
    in that way.  In light of the evidence  before  him  as  to  the  short
    length of time which Dr and Mrs Cookson had spent at the  grandparents'
    house during the relevant period of one year  as  recorded  by  him  at
    paragraphs 34(m) and (o) of his determination, it was  manifestly  open
    to him to conclude that neither Dr  nor  Mrs  Cookson  had  "used"  the
    relevant household "on a regular basis" during that year.

17.   That  conclusion  is  in  itself  sufficient  to   dispose   of   this
    reconsideration.  Nevertheless, for the sake of completeness, we  shall
    now deal with the other grounds raised on the appellant's behalf.

    Ground 2

18.  The second ground  argued  on  the  appellant's  behalf  was  that  the
    Designated Immigration Judge had failed to take proper account  of  the
    respondent's own Immigration Directorate  Instructions  at  Chapter  5,
    Section 12, dealing with the  issue  of  domestic  workers  in  private
    households.  In particular, it was argued that he had  failed  to  take
    proper account of paragraphs 2.2 and 2.3 of those Instructions.

19.  The appellant's grounds as drafted by her counsel assert at the end  of
    paragraph 7 that those two paragraphs "make it clear that  the  purpose
    of the Rule is to ensure  the  authenticity  of  the  employer/employee
    relationship".  With respect to the counsel concerned, we fail  to  see
    the relevance  of  that  assertion  in  light  of  the  fact  that  the
    Designated Immigration Judge accepted  the  evidence  advanced  on  the
    appellant's behalf that her employers were Dr and Mrs Cookson, not  Mrs
    Cookson's parents, as contended for by the respondent.  In light of the
    fact that the Designated Immigration  Judge  found  in  favour  of  the
    appellant  on  that  issue,  the  relevance  of   ground   2   to   the
    reconsideration before us is an elusive one, to put it at its lowest.

    Ground 3

20.  Ground 3 as set out in the appellant's  grounds  is  relatively  short.
    Despite that, we are bound to say that it  is  difficult  to  ascertain
    what it is intending to mean.  The ground in question reads as follows:

        "It is asserted that the IJ's role was  to  determine  whether  the
        claimant complied with the Rules, there is no ambiguity within  the
        rules and the SSHD has issued guidance via which his officer should
        interpret the rules.   In  any  event  the  scenario  that  the  IJ
        envisages does not arise by virtue of the use of  the  words  "uses
        for himself on a regular basis".  It is therefore  clear  that  the
        scenario that the IJ contends would not be the will  of  Parliament
        is one which is misplaced given the  caveat  contained  within  the
        rules."

21.  So far as we can discern the point which that  ground  is  intended  to
    raise, it appears to be a reference to the  first  three  sentences  of
    paragraph 45 of the Designated  Immigration  Judge's  determination  in
    which he stated:

         "However, I have come to the conclusion that Richard  and  Maria's
         visits in themselves do not constitute using for  themselves  on  a
         regular basis the household in which the Appellant was employed  in
         the year immediately preceding the entry clearance application.   I
         say  that  because  had  Parliament  intended  this   to   be   the
         consequence, I believe that the sub-paragraph would spell out  that
         any employer visiting the household  in  which  the  Appellant  was
         employed during that one year period would suffice for the  purpose
         of the Rule.  The wording of the Rule  patently  does  not  mention
         that situation at all."

22. The point which the Designated Immigration Judge  was  making  in  that
    passage is an  entirely  valid  one,  namely  that  if  Parliament  had
    intended that a single  visit,  however  short,  to  the  household  in
    question during the year  immediately  preceding  the  entry  clearance
    application would suffice, then Parliament  would  have  said  so.   He
    concluded that  Parliament  intended  that  more  than  a  fleeting  or
    isolated visit was required.

23. He was clearly right to do so.  What  Parliament  required  was  either
    that the employment should have taken place "under the same roof as his
    employer" (a requirement which the appellant was unable to satisfy), or
    that it should have taken place in a "household that the employer  uses
    for himself on a regular  basis".   The  Designated  Immigration  Judge
    concluded that  use  "on  a  regular  basis"  required  more  than  the
    occasional and relatively brief visits made by Dr and  Mrs  Cookson  to
    the grandparents' home during the material period.  He was right to  do
    so.  This ground discloses no arguable error of law on his part.

    Ground 4

24.  The allegation raised in ground 4 is one of  procedural  unfairness  on
    the part of the Designated  Immigration  Judge  in  that  he  erred  in
    dismissing the appellant's appeal for  a  reason  which  had  not  been
    raised by the respondent when refusing the appellant's application, and
    which had not been raised during the course of the hearing before  him.
    If that allegation were made out, it would certainly disclose an  error
    of law on the  Designated  Immigration  Judge's  part.   Whilst  it  is
    properly open to an Immigration Judge to  raise  a  fresh  issue  which
    appears to him to be a potentially material one, even  if  it  has  not
    been raised by the parties themselves, it  is  obviously  necessary  in
    those circumstances that the party affected by  the  new  issue  raised
    should not be taken by surprise, and should, if necessary,  be  granted
    an adjournment to enable him to respond to a point which he  could  not
    reasonably have been expected to anticipate and prepare for.

25.  However,  that  is  not  the  position  here.   On  the  contrary,  the
    complaint raised in ground 4 is that it was procedurally unfair for the
    Designated Immigration Judge to conclude, as he did at paragraph 47  of
    his determination, that the employment which it was proposed  that  the
    appellant should undertake for Dr and Mrs Cookson following her arrival
    in the United Kingdom would not be on a "full-time"  basis  because  it
    was the intention that she should only work for four  hours  a  day  on
    five days a  week.   With  respect  to  the  counsel  who  drafted  the
    appellant's grounds, this is not  a  new  issue  which  the  Designated
    Immigration Judge raised himself.

26.  On the contrary, it is an issue  which  was  raised  in  terms  by  the
    respondent in his notice of refusal.   It  appears  in  his  notice  of
    refusal as set out above in the following terms:

        "I am not satisfied, on the balance of probabilities, that you meet
        the requirements of paragraph 159A (Immigration  Rules  18/9/2002),
        in particular: ......


        You intend to work full-time as a domestic worker  under  the  same
        roof as or in a household that the employer uses for himself  on  a
        regular  basis  and  where  there  is  evidence  that  there  is  a
        connection between employer  and  employee  (159A(iv))."  (emphasis
        added)

27.  The assertion in ground 4 that the Designated Immigration Judge  raised
    this issue himself, and did not give the appellant a  fair  opportunity
    to respond to it is wholly without foundation.  It was an  issue  which
    had been raised expressly by the respondent in his notice  of  refusal.
    It  was  not  one  which  had  been  withdrawn  subsequently  by   him.
    Accordingly, the appellant was fairly on notice  that  it  was  one  on
    which the respondent was still relying.  It was therefore  for  her  to
    meet  that  objection  as  best  she  could.   There  was  no  arguable
    procedural unfairness on the part of the Designated  Immigration  Judge
    in concluding that she had not done so.  This ground is without  merit.



28.  For the above reasons, we have found against the appellant in  relation
    to all the grounds which were advanced on her  behalf  before  us.   It
    therefore inevitably follows  that  there  is  no  possible  basis  for
    interfering with the Designated Immigration Judge's conclusion.  On the
    contrary, it is clear from his determination read as a  whole  that  he
    gave painstakingly careful consideration to the evidence, both oral and
    documentary, which was before him.   Having  done  so,  he  made  clear
    findings of fact on the material issues.

29.  Although he found both  Dr  and  Mrs  Cookson  to  be  wholly  credible
    witnesses, he nevertheless concluded that the appellant had  failed  to
    satisfy the requirements of either paragraph 159A(ii) or  (iv)  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  It was on the basis  of  that  conclusion  that  he
    dismissed her appeal.

30.   This  experienced  Designated  Immigration  Judge  has  given  proper,
    intelligible and adequate reasons for  arriving  at  his  findings  and
    conclusions.  They are findings and  conclusions  which  were  properly
    open to him on the evidence.  The appellant  has  failed  to  show  any
    arguable error of law on the part of the Designated Immigration  Judge.
    There is therefore no basis for  doing  otherwise  than  upholding  his
    decision.

    Decision

31.  The original Tribunal did not make a material error  of  law,  and  the
    original determination of the appeal shall stand.



Signed                          Date

L V Waumsley
Senior Immigration Judge
