
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

          Kareem (Proxy marriages - EU law) [2014] UKUT 00024(IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 30 October 2013                            |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                     Mr C.M.G. Ockelton, Vice-President
                         Upper Tribunal Judge McKee
                    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McCarthy

                                   Between


                            SAHEED GBADEBO KAREEM
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms C Callinan, Counsel instructed by Owoyele Dada &
                    Co Solicitors, London
For the Respondent:    Mr S Allan, Home Office Specialist Appeals Team

 a. A person who is the spouse of an EEA national who is a qualified person
    in the United Kingdom can derive rights of free movement and  residence
    if proof of the marital relationship is provided.
 b. The  production  of  a  marriage  certificate  issued  by  a  competent
    authority (that is, issued according to the registration  laws  of  the
    country where the marriage took place) will usually be sufficient.   If
    not in English (or Welsh  in  relation  to  proceedings  in  Wales),  a
    certified translation of the marriage certificate will be required.
 c. A document which calls itself a marriage certificate will not  raise  a
    presumption of the marriage it purports to record unless  it  has  been
    issued by an authority with legal power to create or confirm the  facts
    it attests.
 d. In appeals where there is no such marriage certificate or  where  there
    is doubt that a marriage certificate has been  issued  by  a  competent
    authority, then  the  marital  relationship  may  be  proved  by  other
    evidence.  This will  require  the  Tribunal  to  determine  whether  a
    marriage was contracted.
 e. In such an appeal, the starting point  will  be  to  decide  whether  a
    marriage was contracted between the appellant and the qualified  person
    according to the national law of  the  EEA  country  of  the  qualified
    person's nationality.
 f. In all such situations, when resolving issues  that  arise  because  of
    conflicts of law,  proper  respect  must  be  given  to  the  qualified
    person's rights as provided by the  European  Treaties,  including  the
    right to marry and the rights of free movement and residence.
 g. It should be assumed that, without independent  and  reliable  evidence
    about the recognition of the marriage under the laws of the EEA country
    and/or the country where the  marriage  took  place,  the  Tribunal  is
    likely to be unable to find that sufficient evidence has been  provided
    to discharge the burden of proof.  Mere production of  legal  materials
    from the EEA country or country where the marriage took place  will  be
    insufficient evidence because they will rarely show  how  such  law  is
    understood or applied in those countries.  Mere assertions  as  to  the
    effect of such laws will, for similar reasons, carry no weight.
 h. These remarks apply solely to the question of whether  a  person  is  a
    spouse for the purposes of  EU  law.   It  does  not  relate  to  other
    relationships that might be regarded as similar to  marriage,  such  as
    civil partnerships or durable relationships.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a Nigerian citizen.  He says he is married to a  Dutch
    citizen who is working in the United Kingdom.  Although  the  Secretary
    of State accepts that the person the appellant describes as his wife is
    a qualified person  for  the  purposes  of  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006, she does not accept that the appellant
    is married as claimed.

 2. The appellant states that he married his wife on 26 November 2011 in  a
    ceremony that neither of them attended.  The ceremony took place in his
    father's home in Mushin, Lagos State, Nigeria by proxy.  The  appellant
    says that his marriage was conducted in accordance with  customary  law
    and was subsequently registered by the  local  customary  court,  which
    issued a marriage certificate.  In support of his claim, the  appellant
    has produced an affidavit from his father, a court order, the  marriage
    certificate and statements from the appellant and others.

 3. The Secretary of State's reason for disputing  that  the  appellant  is
    married is, in essence, that she does not  believe  that  the  evidence
    produced is sufficient to  establish  that  the  appellant  is  married
    according to Nigerian law.  If the appellant is not  married  according
    to the laws of the country in which the marriage is said to have  taken
    place, then he is not married according to English law.

 4. Within the Secretary of State's reasoning is an  assumption  that,  for
    the purposes of EU law, a Member State can use its own legal  order  to
    determine whether or not a person is married to another.   We are aware
    that the same assumption was presented and adopted  without  discussion
    by the Tribunal in CB (Validity of  marriage:  proxy  marriage)  Brazil
    [2008] UKAIT 00080 and that  a  number  of  unreported  Upper  Tribunal
    decisions have done likewise.

 5. We have found no legal basis in EU law  for  such  an  assumption.   We
    recall that a Member State cannot use its own legislation to  determine
    whether a person is a family member (cf Jia (C-1/05) [2007] Imm AR 439,
    para 36) because doing so has the potential of restricting the exercise
    of rights of free movement and residence.  Therefore, we do  not  adopt
    this assumption and turn instead to EU  law  to  determine  the  proper
    approach to the legitimate question posed by the Secretary of State.

The meaning of spouse in EU law

 6. The Member States do not share a  common  definition  of  spouse,  each
    state defining marital  relationships  for  itself.   For  example,  in
    several Member States a person cannot be a spouse if of the same sex as
    the partner whilst the laws of other  Member  States  describe  such  a
    person as a spouse.  Similarly, whilst many  Member  States  refuse  to
    describe any person in a polygamous relationship as a spouse other than
    the person first married, the laws of other Member States may recognise
    all partners as spouses in certain circumstances.  In terms of EU  law,
    the law of marriage can be said to be  within  the  competence  of  the
    Member States.

 7. The Court of Justice of the European Union (CJEU) has found that in  EU
    law spouse refers solely to the question of whether a marriage has been
    contracted (cf Diatta (C-267/83) [1985] ECR  567,  para  20;  Reed  (C-
    59/85) [1986] ECR 1283, para 15) but this does not help us identify who
    is a spouse for the purposes of EU  law  because,  as  we  have  shown,
    marital relationships are not defined in the same way  in  each  Member
    State.

 8. EU law affords the Charter of Fundamental Rights the same  legal  value
    as the Treaties and has regard to the human rights convention (ECHR) as
    part of the common tradition  of  the  Member  States  (see  Treaty  on
    European Union, article 6).  Article 9 of the Charter  mirrors  article
    12 ECHR in recognising  that  the  right  to  marry  is  guaranteed  by
    national law.

 9. We mention at this juncture the fact that in this appeal  we  are  only
    concerned with the question of whether the appellant has  contracted  a
    marriage.  We are  not  considering  whether  he  is  in  a  registered
    partnership or a durable relationship.  These issues do  not  arise  in
    this appeal, the  appellant  never  having  argued  that  he  is  in  a
    registered partnership and having produced no evidence of cohabitation.
     These are different types of relationships and, as  confirmed  in  the
    European jurisprudence  just  cited,  cannot  be  regarded  as  marital
    relationships for the purposes of  EU  law.   Of  course,  marriage  is
    special kind of contractual relationship recognised by law as effecting
    a change in civil status.  Unlike a non-marital 'durable relationship',
    it cannot be established merely by  proof  of  facts,  for  example  of
    cohabitation: establishing a marriage requires both proof  of  relevant
    facts and demonstration that a relevant legal order regards those facts
    as constituting a marriage.

10. We conclude that in EU law the question of whether a  person  is  in  a
    marital relationship is governed by the national  laws  of  the  Member
    States.  In other words, whether a person is married is a  matter  that
    falls within the competence of the individual Member States.

11. In addition to these points, the CJEU has  established  that  a  Member
    State can expect persons claiming to be  family  members  to  establish
    that they meet the requirements of EU law (cf Jia (C-1/05)  [2007]  Imm
    AR 439,  para  37ff).   Article  10(2)(b)  of  the  Citizens  Directive
    (2004/38/EC)[1] indicates that non-EEA  nationals  can  establish  that
    they are family members by the production of a  document  attesting  to
    the existence of a family relationship.  We are  also  aware  that  the
    jurisprudence of the CJEU just cited indicates that in the absence of a
    document attesting to the existence of  a  family  relationship,  other
    evidence may be considered.

12. From this we infer that usually a  marriage  certificate  issued  by  a
    competent authority will be sufficient evidence  that  a  marriage  has
    been contracted. Of course, a document  which  merely  calls  itself  a
    marriage certificate does not have any  legal  status.   A  certificate
    will only have legal status if it is issued by an authority with  legal
    power to create or confirm  the  facts  it  attests,  that  is,  by  an
    authority that has such competence.  Where a marriage document  has  no
    legal status or where such status is unclear,  other  evidence  may  be
    used to establish that a marriage has been contracted.   However,  once
    again we find that these principles do not help us determine whether  a
    person is a spouse because it will depend on identifying the  authority
    with legal power  to  create  or  confirm  that  a  marriage  has  been
    contracted.

13. Whilst considering  the  issue  of  evidence  of  marriage,  we  remind
    ourselves that the proof of the law of another country is by  evidence,
    including proof of private international law  of  that  other  country.
    Such evidence will not only have to identify relevant legal  provisions
    in the other country but identify how they apply in practice.    A lack
    of evidence of relevant foreign law will normally mean that  the  party
    with the burden of proving it will fail.

14. In light of the preceding considerations, the question we  must  answer
    is how we might  identify  which  national  legislation  applies  in  a
    particular situation and how the relevant national legislation  applies
    to the facts of the present case.

15. To answer this question, we start from the fact that the rights of free
    movement and residence stem directly from Union citizenship.  According
    to the Treaties, a person having the nationality of a Member State is a
    Union citizen.  It follows from these provisions that a Union citizen's
    rights of free movement and residence are intrinsically linked to  that
    person's nationality of a Member State.  Judgments of the CJEU indicate
    that where there are issues of EU law that involve the nationality laws
    of Member States, then the law that applies will  be  the  law  of  the
    Member  State  of  nationality  and  not  the  host  Member  State  (cf
    Micheletti (C-369/90) [1992] ECR  I-4239,  para  10  &  14).   This  is
    because nationality remains within the  competence  of  the  individual
    Member States.

16. Spouses' rights of free movement  and  residence  are  derived  from  a
    marriage having been contracted and depend on  it.   In  light  of  the
    connection between the rights of free movement and  residence  and  the
    nationality laws of the Member States, we conclude that, in a situation
    where the marital relationship is disputed,  the  question  of  whether
    there is a marital relationship is to be examined  in  accordance  with
    the laws of the Member State  from  which  the  Union  citizen  obtains
    nationality and from which therefore that citizen derives free movement
    rights.

17. The same conclusion may  readily  be  reached  by  a  different  route.
    Within EU law, it is essential that Member States facilitate  the  free
    movement and residence rights of  Union  citizens  and  their  spouses.
    This would not be achieved if it were left to a host  Member  State  to
    decide whether a Union citizen has contracted  a  marriage.   Different
    Member States would be able to reach different conclusions  about  that
    Union citizen's  marital  status.   This  would  leave  Union  citizens
    unclear as to whether their spouses could move freely  with  them;  and
    might mean that the Union citizen could move with  greater  freedom  to
    one Member State (where the  marriage  would  be  recognised)  than  to
    another (where it might not be).  Such difficulties would  be  contrary
    to fundamental EU law principles.  Therefore, we  perceive  EU  law  as
    requiring the identification of the legal system in which a marriage is
    said to have been contracted in such a way as to ensure that the  Union
    citizen's marital status is not at risk of being differently determined
    by  different  Member  States.   Given  the  intrinsic   link   between
    nationality of a Member State and free  movement  rights,  we  conclude
    that the legal system of the nationality  of  the  Union  citizen  must
    itself govern whether a marriage has been contracted.

18. Although we adopt this approach in order to determine this appeal,  and
    although we believe that  it  will  apply  in  all  situations  we  can
    envisage, we recognise that it may not apply in every  situation.   For
    example, we are aware of the judgments of the CJEU that explain that  a
    Member State cannot apply its competence in a way that  would  restrict
    the rights a person has as a Union citizen even where EU law  does  not
    provide a harmonised approach that is applicable throughout  the  Union
    (cf Garcia Avello (C-148/02) [2003] ECR  I-11613;  Rottmann  (C-135/08)
    [2010]  3  CMLR  2).   A  Member  State  must  always  have  regard  to
    fundamental rights, including equal treatment and decisions must always
    be proportionate.

19. In addition, we have not examined whether  this  approach  would  apply
    where a Union citizen derives Union  citizenship  from  more  than  one
    nationality (for example a dual Irish-British citizen, as  in  McCarthy
    (C-434/09) [2011] Imm AR 586),  or  where  a  British  citizen  may  be
    returning to  the  United  Kingdom  having  exercised  rights  of  free
    movement in another Member State.  These are not matters that arise  in
    this appeal and we reach no conclusion on them.

20. In addition to the issues discussed in paragraphs 6  to  17  above,  we
    recall that a Member State may refuse to admit or  may  expel  a  Union
    citizen or a family member where it would be contrary to public health,
    public  policy  or   public   security.    In   relation   to   marital
    relationships, issues of social order that relate to public policy  may
    arise, such as in relation to forced marriages and polygamous marriages
    (cf COM(2009) 313/4 [2], ss. 2.1.1, 3.1).  In such situations, however,
    there is no question as to whether a marriage has been  contracted  but
    what is necessary to maintain social order.  Similarly, where there  is
    an allegation of a marriage of convenience, the question is not  as  to
    whether there is a legal marriage but whether there has been  an  abuse
    of rights.

Is the appellant the spouse of a qualified person?

21. We return to the question of whether the appellant is the spouse  of  a
    qualified person  for  the  purposes  of  EU  law.   In  light  of  our
    discussion, we must first seek to determine the legal system  in  which
    we have to establish whether the appellant is in a marital relationship
    and only then can we examine the evidence.

22. The appellant says he is married  to  a  Dutch  national  and  that  he
    derives a right of residence from her.  It is accepted she is  resident
    in the United Kingdom.  There is no reason to regard her residence here
    as requiring us to treat her as being more connected to the laws of the
    United Kingdom for EU law purposes than to the laws of the Netherlands.
     We therefore turn to Dutch law.

23. The appellant's claimed marriage did not take place in the Netherlands.
     The claim is that the  ceremony  took  place  in  Nigeria  whilst  the
    appellant and his claimed spouse remained in the United Kingdom.  We do
    not know whether according to Dutch law the marriage would be  regarded
    as having been  celebrated  in  Nigeria  or  the  United  Kingdom,  the
    appellant and his claimed spouse having  been  present  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  As indicated above, we have no basis on which to  impose  the
    approach to this question adopted in the United Kingdom.

Extracts from the Dutch Civil Code

24. The appellant's evidence includes extracts from the Dutch  Civil  Code.
    Although this is presented as evidence, there is no  indication  as  to
    whether the version provided is up to date.  Furthermore, we have  been
    given no assistance as to how it should be interpreted or as to whether
    the appellant's  marriage  ceremony  would  be  regarded  as  a  lawful
    marriage under the Dutch Civil Code.

25. The extracts from the Dutch Civil Code that  we  have  been  given  are
    English translations of articles 1:31 to 1:80 and 10:27 to  10:59.   We
    have not been provided with the original Dutch version or  confirmation
    that the translation is either authorised or certified.   Nevertheless,
    we examine the documents before us.


26.  Article  10.31  is  headed,  Recognition  of  foreign  marriages.   It
    provides:


        Article 10:31
        (1) A marriage that is contracted outside the Netherlands and  that
        is valid under the law of the State where it took place or that has
        become valid afterwards according to  the  law  of  that  State  is
        recognised in the Netherlands as a valid marriage.
        ...
        (3) For the purposes of paragraph 1 and 2, the word 'law'  includes
        rules of private international law.
        (4) A marriage is presumed to be valid if  a  marriage  certificate
        has been issued by a competent authority.


27. The following article contains a restriction on this general rule:


        Article 10:32
        Irrespective of what is provided for in Article 10.31,  a  marriage
        that is contracted outside the Netherlands shall not be  recognised
        in the  Netherlands  where  such  recognition  obviously  would  be
        incompatible with Dutch public order.


28. The passages we cite  are  silent  on  whether  a  proxy  or  customary
    marriage would be recognised in  the  Netherlands  or  whether  such  a
    marriage  would  be  incompatible  with  Dutch  public  order.   We  do
    recognise,   however,   that   article   1:66   permits   marriage   by
    representation in  certain  circumstances,  which  would  suggest  that
    marriage in the absence of one of the parties would not be contrary  to
    Dutch public order.   However,  as  we  have  indicated,  we  have  not
    received evidence on these complex issues and have been given  no  help
    on how Dutch law might apply.


29. In addition to this concern,  we  take  note  of  article  10:27  which
    explains that section 10.3  of  the  Civil  Code  which  addresses  the
    contracting and recognition of the  validity  of  marriages,  of  which
    articles 10:31 and 10:32 are part, is to implement  the  Convention  on
    the Celebration and Recognition of the validity of marriages, concluded
    at the Hague on 14 March 1978.  The appellant has provided  us  with  a
    copy of that Convention.  We recognise that the Netherlands is among  a
    very short list of countries  to  have  ratified  this  Convention  and
    mention that it cannot be regarded as being applicable across  the  EU.
    However, even insofar as it applies to the Netherlands,  we  note  that
    article 8 of the Convention, which addresses  the  recognition  of  the
    validity  of  marriages,  specifically  excludes  proxy  marriages  and
    informal marriages from its scope.


30. Notwithstanding any of the above, and bearing  in  mind  the  provision
    contained in article 10:31(4), we have examined whether the appellant's
    marriage would be presumed because of the production  of  the  document
    headed, Native Law & Custom Marriage Certificate.  For marriage  to  be
    presumed, article 10:31(4) indicates that the marriage certificate must
    be issued by a competent authority.

31. In order to decide whether  the  appellant's  document  is  a  marriage
    certificate issued by a competent authority we  must  examine  Nigerian
    law, with particular reference to the laws relating to registration.

Was the appellant's marriage certificate issued by a competent authority?


32. The Secretary of State has provided in evidence  the  Nigerian  Births,
    Deaths, Etc (compulsory Registration) Act 1992 and two letters from the
    British High Commission, Abuja which discuss how Nigerian law might  be
    interpreted and applied, although perhaps not from the point of view of
    a person with legal expertise.

33. The two letters from the High Commission are dated 4  February  and  22
    May 2013.  They explain that the  information  they  contain  has  been
    obtained from Nigerian lawyers and given that the  Secretary  of  State
    relies on their observations it  can  be  assumed  that  she  does  not
    dispute the accuracy of the information contained.   In  addition,  the
    letters have been accompanied by various Nigerian legal sources.

34. The letter of 4 February 2013 confirms that proxy marriages,  including
    those where neither the bride nor groom are present, are fairly  common
    and are recognised according to Nigerian  customary  law  because  such
    marriages are not merely the union of the couple but also the families.
     Such marriages will be legally binding where celebrated in  accordance
    with the native law and custom of the particular community.  The letter
    continues by describing the registration of such marriages.  We examine
    those factors in detail below.

35. The letter of 22 May 2013 contains  further  descriptions  of  Nigerian
    laws, identifying three different legal systems relating  to  marriage;
    native law and custom, statutory law and Sharia law.   Proxy  marriages
    can only be accepted as  valid  in  Nigerian  law  if  conducted  under
    customary  law.   Where  legal  requirements   prescribe   a   marriage
    certificate to be presented, then only a certificate issued  under  the
    Marriage Act will be acceptable.  Hence, most couples conduct "registry
    weddings" in addition to their customary marriage.

36. This letter also confirms amongst others the following points which are
    relevant to this appeal:


     i. A Nigerian citizen can marry a foreigner by proxy  under  customary
        law in a ceremony that is held in Nigeria.
    ii. The validity of a customary marriage in Nigeria does not depend  on
        it being registered within 60 days.
   iii. No certificates are issued in respect of customary marriages by any
        recognised official body and no official records are kept.

37. We turn to the Nigerian Births, Deaths, etc  (Compulsory  Registration)
    Act 1992.  Part V of the  1992  Act  relates  to  the  registration  of
    customary marriages or divorces.   This  legislation  appears  to  have
    been amended and supplemented by a Statutory Instrument in 1996.   Part
    VII of the 1996 legislation indicates that there is a requirement  that
    a customary marriage should be registered within sixty  days  and  that
    certain details are to be provided  and  included  in  any  certificate
    issued.

38. The details required for registration are the names of  the  bride  and
    groom, their marital  status,  their  occupations,  their  ages,  their
    States of origin, the address of their usual place of residence,  their
    nationalities, the name of the persons who consented  to  the  marriage
    and the respective relationship of  those  persons  to  the  bride  and
    groom.  The certificate should include most of these  details  together
    with the registration  number,  the  date  of  marriage,  the  date  of
    registration and the signature of the court registrar.

39. We recognise that these provisions appear to give a  different  picture
    to that provided by the  High  Commission  about  whether  a  customary
    marriage could be registered and whether certificates could be  issued.
    We do not know the reason for this difference.  It may be something  as
    simple as the relevant  legislation  never  having  been  brought  into
    force.  This reflects the difficulties that arise  in  the  absence  of
    independent and reliable evidence regarding how the laws of  a  country
    are applied.  We are unable to resolve this conflict on  the  basis  of
    the information available to us but this is not material in this appeal
    for the following reasons.


40. The certificate provided by the appellant does not include many of  the
    elements required by the statutory provisions.  For  example,  it  does
    not give the background details of the appellant or his  claimed  wife.
    We also note that although we are advised that the  customary  marriage
    ceremony occurred on 26 November 2011,  the  marriage  certificate  was
    issued on 1 March 2012, well outside the sixty  day  period  stated  in
    Nigerian law.


41. In addition to these points, we are aware that the same  Nigerian  laws
    make provision about who can be a registrar.  We have no evidence  that
    the person who  signed  the  certificate  or  the  court  order  was  a
    registrar.  The court order, for instance, is  silent  on  whether  the
    marriage has been registered according to Nigerian law.  In considering
    these issues we have not found the 1966 academic source supplied by the
    appellant, Keay, E A and SS Richardson The Native and Customary  Courts
    of Nigeria to assist on  these  issues,  although  we  consider  it  in
    relation to other points below.


42. In light of these considerations we are  wholly  unpersuaded  that  the
    certificate has been issued by a competent authority in  Nigeria.   The
    document is no more than a written note of a statement made by a person
    with no legal authority.  In other  words,  the  document  is  not  the
    emanation of an authority with legal power to create or confirm what it
    attests; it adds nothing to the case.  This is the same  conclusion  we
    would have reached had we merely adopted the  information  provided  by
    the  British  High  Commission  which  suggested   that   no   official
    certificates were issued to confirm customary marriages.

43. Bearing in mind the provisions of the Dutch Civil  Code  that  we  have
    cited, the absence of a marriage certificate that has been issued by  a
    competent authority in Nigeria, the "Native Law  &  Customary  Marriage
    Certificate" not meeting that requirement, means that on  the  face  of
    the Dutch law we have seen, no presumption under  Art  10.31(4)  arises
    from the production of this document.

Is the marriage otherwise valid in Nigerian law?


44. This does not mean, however, that the marriage would not be  recognised
    in Nigeria, the primary question apparently posed by  Dutch  law.   The
    legislation provided by the Secretary  of  State  relates  to  Nigerian
    federal law and not to customary law.  The appellant's original grounds
    of appeal included detailed argument about the  plurality  of  laws  in
    Nigeria.  That argument is well presented and evidenced and  we  accept
    that there are three types of law that relate to marriage  in  Nigeria;
    federal law, native law and custom (i.e. customary law) and Sharia law.

45. We are aware  that  customary  law  is  respected  under  the  Nigerian
    Constitution, copies of which have been provided by both  parties.   We
    have been provided  with  two  scholarly  authorities  about  customary
    marriages in Nigeria together with some Nigerian  jurisprudence.   They
    are consistent on  the  fact  that  although  customary  marriages  are
    recognised as lawful marital relationships  in  Nigeria,  it  is  often
    difficult to establish that an actual marriage has taken place.


46. The academic authority relied on by the appellant is a  book;  Kasunmu,
    Alfred B Nigerian Family Law (Butterworths, London, 1966).  At the  end
    of chapter 4 there is a short section on proof of customary  marriages.
    It recommends, in the absence of any official registration, the calling
    of witnesses to prove a customary marriage.  This approach is  approved
    by the Nigerian courts and various authorities are cited.  The  article
    by Harinder Boparai, "The Customary and Statutory Law  of  Marriage  in
    Nigeria",  published  in  The  Rabel   Journal   of   Comparative   and
    International Private Law 46 Jahrg., H.3 (1982) pp  530-557  (published
    by Mohr Siebeck GmbH & Co. KG) agrees, but in addition refers to  there
    being an incomplete  registration  system  of  customary  marriages  in
    certain provinces through a system of bye-laws.

47. We have no evidence that the State of Lagos has introduced bye-laws for
    the registration of customary  marriages.   The  article  by  Keay  and
    Richardson does indicate that bye-laws have been adopted by most states
    in western Nigeria for "greater certainty as to the  fact  of  marriage
    and amount of dowry paid if any,  to  obviate  protracted  litigation."
    However, no details are given with regard to  the  situation  in  Lagos
    State.  The lack of evidence  on  this  point  further  undermines  the
    appellant's claim that he has produced a marriage certificate issued by
    a competent authority.  However, at this juncture  we  are  considering
    the other evidence of marriage that has been provided.

48. We have been provided with the Supreme Court of Nigeria's  judgment  in
    Abisogun v Abisogun and others 1 (1963) All Nigeria LR  75.   It  dealt
    with the situation where a person claimed  to  inherit  from  her  late
    husband because she was his first wife, having been married  by  Native
    Law and Custom.  The Supreme Court not only confirmed that it  was  for
    the appellant to establish that such a marriage  had  taken  place  but
    that it "must be established with a high degree of certainty." Although
    the appellant in that appeal had relied on the testimony of a  witness,
    her elder brother, that evidence was considered insufficient because of
    the passage of time and the close connection  of  the  witness  to  the
    appellant, particularly  where  there  was  strong  evidence  that  the
    appellant's late husband had  contracted  another  marriage  under  the
    Marriage Ordinances.

49. In addition to this authority, Ms  Cullinan  refers  us  to  Abidoun  v
    Soluade and Beckley [1943] 17 NLR 59.  In  its  judgment,  the  Supreme
    Court of Nigeria  referred  to  the  fact  that  a  customary  marriage
    ceremony among Yorubas would seem to  be  inseparable  from  the  legal
    incident  of  the  marriage  payment.   Of  course,  we  recognise  the
    limitation of this authority in that it  relates  to  Yoruba  customary
    marriages.  However, it is an indication of the significance  of  dowry
    in customary marriage law in Nigeria.

50. Amongst the  Secretary  of  State's  papers  is  reference  to  another
    Nigerian authority, Lawal v Younan (perhaps Lawal v Younin  [1961]  All
    Nigeria LR 245 but we were given neither the reference nor  a  text  of
    the judgment).  It is mentioned  in  a  webpage  attributed  to  Online
    Nigeria but without a citation.  The commentary suggests that in  order
    to establish that a valid customary law marriage has been contracted, a
    person will need to provide  the  customary  law  of  marriage  of  the
    locality concerned and the essentials of such marriage,  together  with
    evidence to show that the essentials of marriage were met, including by
    witness evidence.  There are other references to how the weight  to  be
    given to witness evidence might vary depending on whether that evidence
    was challenged.

51. We have also been provided with the  Lagos  High  Court's  judgment  in
    Okpanum v Okpanum and another (1972) All Nigeria LR 201, which held  in
    relation to Ibo customary law that:

        "In order to constitute a valid customary marriage  there  must  be
        parental consent and mutual agreement between the parties,  coupled
        with the payment or part payment of dowry;  alternatively,  coupled
        with  such  ceremonies  as  are  recognized  by  the  community  as
        constituting a valid marriage."

    Again, we recognise that this conclusion is specific  to  a  particular
    area, referring to Ibo customary marriages.  It would be wrong to  draw
    conclusions from it that apply to all customary marriage  practices  in
    Nigeria.

52. We can, however, infer from these authorities that in a number  of  the
    customary marriage systems in Nigeria, the payment of  a  dowry  is  an
    important element for establishing whether such  a  marriage  occurred.
    Although, as suggested by  Keay  and  Richardson,  some  practices  are
    changing, there is no evidence that there has been a significant change
    in the traditional bases for establishing a  customary  marriage.   For
    instance, Keay and Richardson made their observations in 1966,  yet  in
    relation to customary marriages among the Ibo people, in 1972 the Lagos
    High Court still found that a dowry was an essential element.

53. The balance of the evidence before us is that a dowry is a  requirement
    of a customary marriage in Nigeria, and indeed there appears to  be  no
    evidence to the contrary.  Similarly, and to the contrary, we  conclude
    on the balance of probabilities that a customary marriage will  not  be
    regarded as a marriage in Nigerian law unless there is evidence of  the
    parties' consent, that they have the capacity to marry and  that  there
    has been a formal giving away of the bride (i.e.  parental  consent  to
    the marriage).  Unless evidence demonstrates that these requirements do
    not apply in the relevant community these criteria will  be  the  usual
    starting point for deciding if a marriage has been contracted.

54. We recognise that this cannot be an exhaustive  list  because,  as  the
    Nigerian case law indicates, the requirements  for  a  marriage  to  be
    accepted as having been contracted by  custom  and  native  law  varies
    within Nigeria.  We are aware from other sources that the parents or at
    least a member of both the bride and groom's families should be present
    at the proxy marriage ceremony because a customary marriage is a  union
    between two families rather than just two individuals.  But this  point
    has not arisen in the appeal before us and we merely mention it  as  an
    observation that the list in the  preceding  paragraph  should  not  be
    regarded as exhaustive.

55. It is with these points in mind that we have to consider whether it  is
    more likely than not that the appellant has  shown  that  his  marriage
    would be treated as a valid marriage in Nigeria.

56. The appellant has provided a number of letters from people who say they
    are friends or family and who say they  attended  the  ceremony  on  26
    November 2011.  There is no evidence in the letters that the parents of
    the bride gave consent.  There is reference to a dowry  being  received
    on behalf of the bride's family but no details of the dowry are  given.
    The affidavit provided by  the  appellant's  father  does  not  mention
    either dowry or parental consent.

57. The appellant has provided two statements, one from him  and  one  from
    his claimed wife.   Neither  statement  has  been  signed.   Both  were
    written some time after the appeal had been dismissed by the First-tier
    Tribunal.  We find that the contents of the statements do not carry any
    weight and do not, in any event, provide any useful evidence  regarding
    whether the marriage is valid according to Nigerian law.

58. We find the evidence overall is extremely weak and  that  it  would  be
    insufficient to discharge  the  standard  of  proof  indicated  by  the
    Supreme Court of Nigeria.  Even if we were to assume  the  capacity  of
    the parties to marry, which is unchallenged, the absence of these other
    essential elements means we can only conclude that the parties  fall  a
    long way short of demonstrating that they would be  regarded  as  being
    married according to Nigerian law

59. At the hearing, Ms Callinan asked for permission to  submit  additional
    documents.  Although we examined those documents we did not admit  them
    as evidence because they had not  been  submitted  in  accordance  with
    directions.  We acknowledge, as Mr Allan  observed,  that  this  appeal
    relates to an EEA decision and there would be  nothing  preventing  the
    appellant  making  a  fresh  application  if  his  appeal  were  to  be
    dismissed.

60. Nevertheless, the request to admit the further documents  fortifies  us
    in our decision that the evidence available to the First-tier  Tribunal
    was insufficient to establish that the appellant's  customary  marriage
    would be  recognised  in  Nigeria.   This  is  because  the  additional
    evidence was the first time that the  appellant  attempted  to  confirm
    that a dowry was paid and that the parents of the  bride  consented  to
    the marriage.  We regard this as an acknowledgement that the  documents
    previously submitted were inadequate.

61. We record one further observation about the additional evidence we  saw
    but did not admit.  Among those documents was a letter from the  father
    of the appellant's claimed wife in Dutch together with  another  letter
    signed by the same person but in English.  We  were  advised  that  the
    second letter was intended to be a translation of the first.  We  noted
    that it was not a translation, our ability in reading Dutch identifying
    that it did not contain the same information as in the English  letter.
    We had no  information  about  the  English  language  ability  of  the
    signatory of those letters and do not know if  he  signed  the  English
    version believing it to have the same content as the letter  in  Dutch.
    If we had admitted these documents, we would have had serious  concerns
    about their reliability.

The relevance of United Kingdom marriage law in this appeal

62. We return to the  question  of  whether  Dutch  law  would  regard  the
    appellant as having married in the United Kingdom or Nigeria.  We  have
    no means of answering this question because we do not  know  how  Dutch
    law applies in such circumstances.  However, in light  of  the  factual
    finding  we  have  made,  we  consider  that  the  question  would   be
    irrelevant.

63. The relevant law of the United Kingdom that would apply to this  appeal
    were it not a matter of EU law would be the law of  England  and  Wales
    (the laws of marriage in the United  Kingdom  being  different  in  its
    constituent jurisdictions).  The  proper  approach  under  the  law  of
    England and Wales has been set out by the Tribunal in CB  (Brazil)  and
    there is no need for us to repeat it.  In  summary,  a  proxy  marriage
    would be regarded as valid under English and Welsh law if it was  valid
    according the law of the place where it took  place,  recognising  that
    the marriage took place where it was celebrated.

64. The fact  that  the  evidence  does  not  support  the  view  that  the
    appellant's proxy marriage would be regarded as a marriage  in  Nigeria
    means that it would not be regarded as a  marriage  under  the  law  of
    England and Wales.

Conclusions

65. In light of our findings, we are not satisfied that the  appellant  has
    shown that he is in a marital relationship with a qualified person  and
    therefore he cannot benefit from EU free movement and residence  rights
    on that basis.  We have reached our conclusion on the  basis  that  the
    appellant's marriage is not one that would be recognised in the laws of
    the Netherlands because it would not be recognised  under  the  law  of
    Nigeria, and insofar as relevant, nor in England and Wales.

Final remarks

66. The re-making of the decision in this appeal arose from the finding  of
    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge S J Hall  on  28  February  2013  that  the
    determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Suchak contained an error on
    a point of law and had to be set aside.   It  is  well  known  that  in
    addition to addressing the appellant's own circumstances,  this  appeal
    would seek to give general guidance as to how similar appeals  -  those
    involving proxy customary marriages - might be considered.

67. We make the following general observations.

     a. A person who is the spouse of an EEA national who  is  a  qualified
        person in the United Kingdom can derive rights of free movement and
        residence if proof of the marital relationship is provided.

     b. The production of a marriage  certificate  issued  by  a  competent
        authority (that is, issued according to the  registration  laws  of
        the  country  where  the  marriage  took  place)  will  usually  be
        sufficient.  If not in English (or Welsh in relation to proceedings
        in Wales), a certified translation of the marriage certificate will
        be required.

     c. A document which calls itself a marriage certificate will not raise
        a presumption of the marriage it purports to record unless  it  has
        been issued by an authority with legal power to create  or  confirm
        the facts it attests.

     d. In appeals where there is no such  marriage  certificate  or  where
        there is doubt that a marriage certificate has  been  issued  by  a
        competent authority, then the marital relationship may be proved by
        other evidence.   This  will  require  the  Tribunal  to  determine
        whether a marriage was contracted.

     e. In such an appeal, the starting point will be to decide  whether  a
        marriage was contracted between the  appellant  and  the  qualified
        person according to the national law of  the  EEA  country  of  the
        qualified person's nationality.

     f. In all such situations, when resolving issues that arise because of
        conflicts of law, proper respect must be  given  to  the  qualified
        person's rights as provided by the European Treaties, including the
        right to marry and the rights of free movement and residence.

     g. It  should  be  assumed  that,  without  independent  and  reliable
        evidence about the recognition of the marriage under  the  laws  of
        the EEA country and/or the country where the marriage  took  place,
        the Tribunal is  likely  to  be  unable  to  find  that  sufficient
        evidence has been provided to discharge the burden of proof.   Mere
        production of legal materials from the EEA country or country where
        the marriage took place will be insufficient evidence because  they
        will rarely show how such law is understood  or  applied  in  those
        countries.  Mere assertions as to the effect of such laws will, for
        similar reasons, carry no weight.

     h. These remarks apply solely to the question of whether a person is a
        spouse for the purposes of EU law.  It does  not  relate  to  other
        relationships that might be regarded as similar to  marriage,  such
        as civil partnerships or durable relationships.

Decision

The determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Suchak contained an error  on
a point of law and it is set aside.

We re-make the decision and dismiss the appeal against the EEA  decision  of
7 September 2012.


                               Signed                     Date


                               John McCarthy
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
-----------------------
[1] Directive 2004/38/EC of the European Parliament and of  the  Council  of
29 April 2004 on the right  of  citizens  of  the  Union  and  their  family
members to move and reside freely within the territory of the Member  States
amending Regulation (EEC) No 1612/68 and  repealing  Directives  64/221/EEC,
68/360/EEC, 72/194/EEC, 75/34/EEC,  75/35/EEC,  90/364/EEC,  90/365/EEC  and
93/96/EEC.
[2] COM(2009)  313/4  is  the  Communication  from  the  Commission  to  the
European Parliament on guidance for better transposition and application  of
Directive 2004/38/EC on the right of citizens of the Union and their  family
members to move and  reside  freely  within  the  territory  of  the  Member
States.

