
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

MR (permission to appeal: Tribunal's  approach)  Brazil  [2015]  UKUT  00029
(IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Kings Court, North Shields           |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 05 December 2014                           |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                The President, The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey
                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Holmes


                                   Between


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


                                     MR

                                                                  Respondent

                   Anonymity Direction Made under Rule 14


Representation:

 Appellant:   Ms Rackstraw, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
 Respondent:  Ms M Rasoul, instructed by Halliday Reeves Solicitors

   1) A judge considering an application for permission  to  appeal  to  the
      Upper Tribunal  must  avoid  granting  permission  on  what,  properly
      analysed, is no  more  than  a  simple  quarrel  with  the  First-tier
      Tribunal judge's assessment of the evidence.


   2) When granting permission to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  it  is
      unsatisfactory merely  to  state  that  the  applicant's  grounds  are
      arguable.

   3) The requirement, emphasised in Nixon (permission to  appeal:  grounds)
      [2014] UKUT 368 (IAC),  to  engage  with  each  and  every  ground  of
      application,  need  not  involve  anything  of  an  unduly  elaborate,
      burdensome or analytical nature.  The reasons for granting or refusing
      permission to appeal, in whole or part, in any given case will  almost
      invariably be capable of being expressed  in  a  concise  and  focused
      manner.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


Introduction

 1. This appeal originates in a decision made on behalf of the Secretary of
    State for the Home Department (hereinafter the  "Secretary  of  State")
    dated 18 December 2013.   By  this  decision  the  application  of  the
    Respondent, a national of  Brazil  aged  33  years,  for  a  derivative
    residence  card  under  the  Immigration   (European   Economic   Area)
    Regulations 2006 (hereinafter the "2006 Regulations") was refused.  The
    Respondent appealed, successfully,  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (the
    "FtT"). The Secretary  of  State  appeals,  with  permission,  to  this
    Tribunal.

 2. In the context of this  appeal,  the  relevant  provision  of  the  EEA
    Regulations is regulation 15A.  This is one of the new provisions which
    was introduced by the  Government,  by  amendment,  purportedly  giving
    effect to the decisions of the CJEU in a series of cases, in particular
    Chen (Case C-200/02) and  McCarthy  (Case  C-434/09).   Regulation  15A
    describes the conditions which  a  person  must  satisfy  in  order  to
    qualify for a so-called "derivative" right of residence.   This species
    of right does not stem directly from Directive 2004/38/EC.   Rather, it
    may be conveniently described as indirect in nature.  It is derivative,
    in the sense that where it arises it  derives  from  the  status  of  a
    relevant EEA national and the direct rights attendant  thereon.   These
    amendments took effect on 16 July 2012.

 3. By regulation 15A(1), a person is entitled to  a  derivative  right  to
    reside in the United Kingdom provided that the specified  criteria  are
    satisfied.  In the  context  of  this  appeal,  it  is  unnecessary  to
    reproduce regulation 15A. The relevant EEA national is the Respondent's
    child, now aged ten years and of whom the  Respondent  is  the  primary
    carer.  The sole issue is whether this child "would be unable to remain
    in the United Kingdom" if the Respondent were refused  her  application
    for a derivative right of residence and, hence, would  be  required  to
    leave the United Kingdom.  Factually, the key issue  addressed  in  the
    Secretary of State's decision was whether the child's father  would  be
    able to care for the child if the Respondent were required to leave the
    United Kingdom.  The  conclusion  made,  in  substance,  answered  this
    question in the affirmative.

 4. On appeal, the FtT disagreed with the Secretary of State's  assessment.
    It was uncontentuous that the Respondent has  been  the  primary  carer
    and, in effect, the sole residential parent of  the  child  during  the
    whole of her ten years since birth in the various countries  concerned.
    The evidence available  to  the  Judge  included  documentary  evidence
    emanating from the father, members of his family  and  family  friends,
    together with the testimony of the father and the Respondent.  Much  of
    the evidence focused on the period during which mother and  child  have
    been residing in the United Kingdom viz from October 2012.   The  Judge
    gave particular consideration to self evidently material issues such as
    the father's marital and  family  circumstances,  contact  between  the
    father and the child and the attitude of the father's spouse.   On  his
    own initiative, the Judge explored the issue of whether, in  the  event
    of the Respondent's departure from the  United  Kingdom,  it  would  be
    possible for the child to go to live with her father  and  his  family.
    It  is  clear  that  the  Judge  explored  this  important  issue  with
    appropriate care and in suitable depth.  The Judge  then  made  certain
    discrete findings, based on those  aspects  of  the  relevant  evidence
    which he found credible and persuasive or the opposite, as the case may
    be: see [64] - [67] and [72].  These led him to an omnibus  conclusion,
    or finding, expressed in the following terms:

         "It seems to me then that on the evidence actually  before  me,  it
         has been shown that [the child] would not be able to live with  her
         father .......  if the Appellant had to leave the United Kingdom. I
         accept the evidence of both [the father] and the Appellant on  this
         point."


    These are the key passages  in  the  determination.   Commendably,  the
    Judge then examined two other hypotheses, namely the possibility of the
    child living with relatives of the father and the  possibility  of  the
    child living in some statutory care framework.



 5. We emphasise that there is no suggestion  that  the  Judge  misdirected
    himself in law.  Rather, permission to appeal was sought, and  granted,
    on the basis that the Judge had "diminished"  certain  aspects  of  the
    Respondent's evidence and, in terms, should have  reached  a  different
    conclusion.  The essence of the complaint advanced in  the  grounds  of
    appeal is encapsulated in the following sentence:

         "The Judge should have found that the Appellant could  not  satisfy
         the requirements of the Regulations and  dismissed  the  appeal  on
         this basis."


    Within this passage, considered in tandem with  the  remainder  of  the
    grounds, one finds the key to the application for permission to appeal:
    a simple quarrel with the Judge's assessment of the various  pieces  of
    evidence considered and ensuing  findings,  nothing  more  and  nothing
    less. The grounds of appeal, properly analysed, resolve to this.


 6. In Nixon (permission to appeal: grounds) [2014] UKUT 368, this Tribunal
    drew attention to rule 24(5) of the  Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal
    (Procedure) Rules 2005, UTIAC  Guidance  Note  2011  and  a  series  of
    related "elementary requirements and standards".   We  draw  particular
    attention to [6]:

         "[6] Given recent experience, it may be timely  to  formulate  some
             general  rules  of  practice.  It  is  axiomatic  that   every
             application for permission to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
             should identify, clearly and with all  necessary  particulars,
             the error/s of law for which the moving party contends.   This
             must  be  affected  in  terms  which  are   recognisable   and
             comprehensible.    A   properly   compiled   application   for
             permission  to  appeal  will  convey  at  once  to  the  Judge
             concerned the error/s of law said to have been committed.   It
             should not be necessary for the permission Judge to  hunt  and
             mine in order to  understand  the  basis  and  thrust  of  the
             application.  While in some cases it will be possible for  the
             permission Judge to  engage  in  a  degree  of  interpretation
             and/or making inferences for this purpose, this  should  never
             be assumed by the applicant and cannot operate as a substitute
             for a properly and thoroughly compiled application.  These are
             elementary requirements and standards."




    We do so for the purpose of pointing out, with some emphasis, that  the
    application for permission to appeal in the present case did not comply
    with the governing rules and principles. In passing,  we  observe  that
    the successor to rule 24(5) of the now superseded 2005  Rules  is  rule
    33(5) of the Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration  and
    Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014.



 7. Next, we draw attention to the terms in which permission to appeal  was
    granted in this case:

         "The grounds on which permission to appeal is  sought  submit  that
         the Judge erred in law in that he failed correctly to interpret and
         apply the requirement arising from Regulation 15A(2)(c) of the 2006
         EEA Regulations that the Appellant's British citizen daughter would
         be unable to reside in the UK or another EEA State if the Appellant
         were required to leave. This is arguable."


    As appears from our assessment and conclusions above, we consider  that
    no arguable error of law was disclosed in the  permission  application.
    The fundamental defect in the application was its failure to articulate
    any identifiable or recognisable error of law.  Thus there was no basis
    for granting permission  to  appeal.   Moreover,  the  terms  in  which
    permission to appeal  was  granted  are  unsatisfactory.  Neither  this
    formula nor anything kindred is acceptable. In Nixon, it was stated, in
    [8]


         "It  may  be  worth  emphasising  that,  irrespective  of   whether
         permission to appeal is granted on all of the grounds  advanced  or
         some thereof only,  a  reasoned  decision  is  always  required  in
         respect of each and every ground, which reinforces the necessity of
         considering all grounds with scrupulous care."


    It  is  appropriate  to  add  that  nothing  of  an  unduly  elaborate,
    burdensome or analytical nature is expected of  the  permission  Judge.
    The reasons for granting or refusing permission to appeal, in whole  or
    in part, in any given case will almost invariably be capable  of  being
    expressed in a concise and focused manner.  In most cases, a couple  of
    carefully constructed sentences will suffice.  Adherence to this basic,
    but indispensable, discipline will ensure that only  worthy  candidates
    overcome the threshold.   We are confident that  compliance  with  this
    fundamental requirement would have identified the present  case  as  an
    entirely unworthy candidate for the grant of permission.


 8. To conclude, the decision of the FtT in this  case  was  unimpeachable.
    On behalf of the Secretary of State, the application for permission  to
    appeal was launched on a wing and a prayer. It was manifestly devoid of
    any substance or merit and should have been exposed accordingly.


DECISION

 9. We dismiss the Secretary of State's appeal and affirm the  decision  of
    the FtT.






                             Bernard  McCloskey


                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY

          PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER


                                                     Date:  05 December 2014
