
AA (Language diagnosis: use of interpreters) Somalia [2008] UKAIT 00029

                       ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at:  Manchester                                    Date of Hearing: 5
October 2007


                                   Before:


 Mr C M G Ockelton, Deputy President of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
                        Immigration Judge P J G White

                                   Between

                                     AA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the Appellant:           Mr. M. Schwenk, instructed by Clifford
Johnston & Co
For the Respondent:          Miss A O'Conner, Home Office Presenting
Officer

It is no part of an interpreter's function to  report  on  the  language  or
dialect used.  The expertise needed to identify a  language  or  dialect  is
not  typically  the  expertise  of  an  interpreter.   In  any   event,   an
interpreter should not be in the position  of  giving,  or  being  asked  to
give, evidence on a contested issue.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Somalia.  Having been  granted  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom as an unaccompanied minor she applied  for
    variation of her leave on asylum grounds.  The respondent  refused  her
    application.  The appellant appealed and in a determination sent out on
    25 May 2007 an Immigration Judge dismissed her appeal.   The  appellant
    sought and obtained and order for  reconsideration.   Thus  the  matter
    comes before us.

 2. The appellant's claim is that she is a member of a minority  clan,  and
    there is no real doubt that if she is able to establish that, then  her
    appeal should succeed.  She says that her clan is Reer Hamar,  sub-clan
    Morshe.  Reer Hamar is  one  of  the  Benadiri  group  of  clans.   The
    respondent has consistently challenged her claim  to  clan  membership.
    The Immigration Judge  considered  the  evidence  before  him  in  some
    detail.  He rejected her account of her history in Somalia,  describing
    it  as  "so  riddled  with  inconsistencies,  both   subjectively   and
    objectively, that there is no reasonable likelihood of her claim  being
    true".  In relationship to her clan membership, he took the  view  that
    her not telling her truth about her  own  history  cast  doubt  on  her
    assertions about her clan membership, and he  rejected  other  evidence
    before him which, if accepted, might have supported  her  claimed  clan
    membership.

 3. The ground for reconsideration raises a number of issues.   They  point
    out that the language or dialect spoken by the appellant is regarded as
    an important diagnostic factor in relation to clan  membership,  as  is
    apparent both from the respondent's Operational Guidance Note of  April
    2007 and the decision of the Tribunal in AJH [2003] UKIAT  00094.   The
    grounds  then  challenge  the  Immigration  Judge's  approach  to   the
    assessment of the language or dialect spoken  by  the  appellant.   The
    grounds go on to aver that the Immigration Judge failed to consider all
    the evidence in the round and that he paid too little attention to oral
    evidence from witnesses other than the appellant herself.

 4. Despite the importance  of  the  issue  of  whether  the  evidence  was
    considered in the round, we must look first at  matters  going  to  the
    language or dialect spoken by the appellant.

 5. We are content to take the  following  account  from  the  grounds  for
    reconsideration:

        "The Appellant submits that it has long been  custom  and  practice
        within the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (and its forerunner, the
        Immigration Appeal Tribunal) that the language  and/or  dialect  an
        Appellant  is  speaking  can  be  established  by   arranging   the
        appropriate interpreter for the Appeal Hearing and establishing, at
        the hearing, whether the Appellant can speak  the  language/dialect
        they claim to be able to speak.  Thus, for  example,  it  is  clear
        that in KS (Minority Clans - Bajuni -  Ability  to  speak  Kabjuni)
        Somalia CG [2004] UKAIT 00271, the Tribunal relied  on  information
        from  the  Court  Interpreter  to  establish  the  extent  of   the
        Appellant's ability to speak Kibajuni (see paragraphs 8 and  45  of
        KS).

      At the case management review hearing in this appeal, which  was  held
        on 11 April 2007, a Somali interpreter who  spoke  the  Reer  Hamar
        dialect was specifically requested in order that the  Appellant  be
        able to establish her fluency of this dialect  at  the  substantive
        hearing.

      At the beginning of the Substantive Appeal  on  23rd  April  2007  the
        Appellant's counsel raised the issue of the dialect spoken  by  the
        Appellant and requested that the  Court  Interpreter  be  asked  to
        confirm that the Appellant was speaking  the  Reer  Hamar  dialect.
        The Court Interpreter refused point blank to either confirm or deny
        the dialect spoken  by  the  Appellant.   The  Court  Interpreter's
        position was that this was not part of his  job.   The  Appellant's
        representative asked the Immigration  Judge  to  intervene  and  to
        require the Court Interpreter to confirm or deny whether or not the
        Appellant was speaking the Reer  Hamar  dialect.   The  Immigration
        Judge refused to do this.

      The Court Interpreter had been booked  in  order  to  speak  the  Reer
        Hamar dialect.  He confirmed at the start of the  hearing  that  he
        did indeed speak this dialect.  The Appellant respectfully  submits
        that his refusal (it is difficult to see how it could have been  an
        inability) to confirm or deny whether the Appellant was speaking in
        the Reer Hamar dialect was wrong.  The Appellant submits  that  the
        Immigration  Judge  erred  by  upholding  the  Court  Interpreter's
        refusal.  This constituted an error which led to unfairness to  the
        Appellant.

       As  a  consequence  of  the  interpreter's  refusal  to  confirm  the
        Appellant's dialect and of the Immigration Judge's refusal  to  ask
        him to do so, the Appellant's  representative  requested  that  the
        interpreter supplied by the  Appellant's  solicitors,  who  was  in
        attendance at Court,  be  called  to  comment  on  the  Appellant's
        dialect.  The interpreter was called Mr. Cali and his  evidence  is
        dealt with  by  the  Immigration  Judge  at  Paragraph  33  of  his
        Determination, where he states:

      'Turning now to the evidence of Mr Cali; he attended  the  hearing  in
             his capacity as a freelance Somali interpreter employed by  the
             Appellant's  solicitors  to  assist  their  counsel  in  taking
             instructions from the Appellant prior to the hearing.  To  that
             extent I find that Mr. Cali is hardly an  independent  witness.
             Furthermore his evidence was limited to expressing  an  opinion
             that the Appellant spoke the Reer Hamar dialect of Somali which
             he stated is only spoken by members of minority clans from  the
             Mogadishu area.  Having regard to the fact that Mr Cali is  not
             an independent witness, the fact that  there  was  no  evidence
             whatsoever before me as to his expertise as a linguist, then  I
             find that I cannot place any weight upon Mr Cali's evidence.'

      The  Appellant  respectfully  submits  that  the  Immigration  Judge's
        treatment of Mr Cali's evidence is unfair.  Clearly, there  was  no
        evidence of Mr Cali's [expertise] as a linguist  available  because
        he was called at the lat minute following the  surprising  position
        taken by the Court Interpreter.  Furthermore, it was wrong  of  the
        Immigration Judge to consider that Mr Cali was not independent.  As
        the Immigration Judge notes, Mr Cali was  a  freelance  interpreter
        employed  by  the  Appellant's  solicitors  on  this  basis.    The
        Immigration Judge has failed to explain how this means that  he  is
        not  independent  and  his  evidence  cannot  be   trusted.    Most
        interpreters employed by the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  are
        freelance operatives engaged by the AIT on a similar  basis  as  Mr
        Cali was engaged by the Appellant's solicitors.  It would be  wrong
        to  suggest  that  interpreters  employed  by  the  Court  are  not
        independent.  It is consequently unfair to reject the  evidence  of
        Mr  Cali  largely  on  the  unsubstantiated  basis  that  he  lacks
        independence.  It is clear from Paragraph 33,  quoted  above,  that
        the only two reasons the Immigration Judge rejected  Mr  Cali  were
        because of his perceived lack of independence and because there was
        no evidence before the  Immigration Judge as to his expertise as  a
        linguist.  Both of these allegations are  unfair  for  the  reasons
        given above.

      The fact that there was no evidence before the  Immigration  Judge  as
        to Mr Cali's [expertise] as a linguist and the  fact  that  he  was
        employed  by  the  Appellant's  solicitors  as  described  by   the
        Immigration Judge would have been clear to  the  Immigration  Judge
        before Mr Cali was called to give evidence.  The Immigration  Judge
        does not rely on anything Mr Cali said in his evidence to undermine
        his credibility.  Consequently, the Immigration  Judge  would  have
        been aware of these defects in Mr Cali's evidence before  he  heard
        it.  In these circumstances  it  is  respectfully  submitted  that,
        particularly in view of what transpired previously at the  hearing,
        it was unfair of the Immigration Judge not to  bring  this  to  the
        attention  of  the  Appellant's  representative  who   could   have
        considered whether or not to seek an adjournment to obtain  further
        or better evidence of the Appellant's linguistic  abilities  or  to
        have requested that the case be reconvened with a  different  Court
        Interpreter.

      Further, or alternatively, the Appellant submits that the  Immigration
        Judge has given insufficient reasons for rejecting the evidence  of
        Mr Cali.  The Appellant submits that Mr Cali gave detailed evidence
        of the dialect spoken in Somalia, and Mogadishu in particular,  and
        that this evidence was in accordance with the  objective  evidence,
        particularly the Somali Minorities Report of 2000.

      The question of the dialect spoken by the Appellant is,  according  to
        case law and confirmed by  the  Home  Office  Operational  Guidance
        Note, very important to the determination of  ethnicity  in  Somali
        cases, if not determinative.  The Immigration Judge has  failed  to
        make a finding on this key issue, despite the Appellant's strenuous
        attempts to establish that she speaks the Reer Hamar dialect.   The
        Appellant submits that the Immigration Judge's failure  to  make  a
        finding on this key issue renders his conclusions unsafe."

 6. In his oral submissions, Mr. Schwenk took us to KS.  In that  case  the
    interpreter who appeared at an earlier hearing,  had  reported  to  the
    adjudicator that although he was putting questions to the appellant  in
    Kibajuni, the appellant  was  consistently  replying  in  Swahili.   On
    appeal the Tribunal  asked  to  be  informed  if  the  appellant  spoke
    Swahili.  The interpreter on this occasion was able to report that  the
    appellant was speaking Kibajuni save on  one  occasion.   The  Tribunal
    clearly took that matter into account in concluding that the  appellant
    had the clan membership she claimed.  Mr. Schwenk also referred  us  to
    the case to which reference was made in the Operational Guidance  Note,
    which despite the way it is dealt with in that note and by  the  e.i.n.
    database (which in our experience is often inaccurate) is called SA and
    others.  In that case it appears that the grants  to  leave  to  appeal
    were accompanied by comments by the Vice President  who  granted  leave
    that the appellant would be expected to show that he spoke Kibajuni or,
    if not, to explain why not; and that the Court Interpreter would be  of
    assistance in determining  that  question.   Further  on  in  the  same
    determination, in its assessment of the expert evidence before it,  the
    Tribunal notes that an expert who speaks the  language  or  dialect  in
    question is more likely to be able to give  persuasive  evidence  about
    the language spoken by an individual then an expert who does not  speak
    the language or dialect in question.  Mr. Schwenk relied on  these  two
    cases as evidence of a practice by the Tribunal in having such  matters
    assessed by the Court Interpreter.

 7. It is difficult to make specific comment on the detailed issues arising
    in  KS  and  SA,  without  fuller  information  than  appears  in   the
    determinations themselves.  In fact the Vice President  whose  comments
    are reported in SA was the same person who ordered  reconsideration  in
    the present case; and the Chairman of the Tribunal in SA was  the  same
    as the Chairman of the Tribunal in KS.  It may be, therefore, that  any
    such practice as alleged by Mr. Schwenk is not in  fact  widespread  in
    the Tribunal.  Whether or not it is widespread, we are quite clear that
    in circumstances such as in  the  present  case  it  ought  not  to  be
    adopted, and we are also certain that nobody should have  assumed  that
    it was part of the function of the  Court  Interpreter  to  resolve  an
    issue of this sort.  We  come  to  that  conclusion  for  two  separate
    reasons.  The first  relates  to  the  function  and  expertise  of  an
    interpreter.   An  interpreter's  function   is   to   comprehend   and
    communicate,  not  to  assess  or  analyse.   A  person's   skills   in
    interpretation lie in his ability to understand what is being  said  to
    him in one language (or  dialect)  and  communicate  it  accurately  in
    another language (or dialect).  It is simply  wrong  to  say  that  the
    abilities  of  an  interpreter  necessarily  import   an   ability   to
    distinguish accurately between different dialects and  to  be  able  to
    attribute dialects to different sources.  A person whose first language
    is  French  may  attain  standards  of  near  perfection   in   English
    interpretation, without being able to say with accuracy whether  he  is
    dealing with a person from Ipswich or Indiana, or even  with  a  person
    whose own first language was not English.  As  an  interpreter  he  may
    widen his vocabulary base and his understanding  of  different  accents
    and dialects so that he can cope with whatever version  of  English  is
    used by the person for whom he  is  interpreting,  without  needing  or
    wanting or being required to consider or work out what the dialect  is,
    but merely to do his own job of understanding  and  communicating.   Of
    course an interpreter may know (or think he knows) something about  the
    type of language or dialect the person for whom he is  interpreting  is
    using: but that is quite a different matter.  It is  not  part  of  his
    function as interpreter.

 8. An interpreter may find that he cannot  interpret,  because  he  cannot
    understand what is being said to him.  That may  be  because  it  is  a
    language that he does not understand, or may be because it is a dialect
    that he does not understand.   But,  so  far  as  his  function  as  an
    interpreter is concerned, the only thing one can say is that in present
    circumstances he cannot interpret.    It  is  still  not  part  of  his
    function as an interpreter to identify the language (or  dialect)  that
    he cannot understand.  It is sufficient that he cannot  understand  it.
    An interpreter who speaks and understands more  than  one  language  or
    dialect may be able to say with precision which he is working in, or he
    may not.  No doubt he is more likely to be able to distinguish  between
    two languages than between two dialects, but the boundary  between  the
    notions of different languages and different dialects is a rather fluid
    one.  In KS  it  appears  that  the  interpreters  used  were  able  to
    distinguish clearly between Swahili and Kibajuni and did so.   It  does
    not follow from that, and it could not probably be taken to follow from
    that, that every interpreter ought to  be  able  to  distinguish  every
    language or dialect.

 9. That leads us to the second reason.  It is in our view in  the  highest
    degree undesirable for the interpreter as a Court official to be  asked
    to contribute in any way to the determination of a contested issue.  In
    his task of comprehension and communication, the interpreter  needs  to
    have and maintain the confidence of  all  those  with  whom  he  deals,
    including  the  witness  evidence  whose  is  being  interpreted,   the
    representatives of both parties and the judge.  He cannot maintain that
    confidence if there is the slightest suspicion that he is, in addition,
    taking some part in assessing the evidence, on which  he  will  in  due
    course report to the Court.  For that reason we  have  the  gravest  of
    doubts about whether the course of action recommended by the person who
    gave leave to appeal in the SA cases and apparently  in  part,  at  any
    rate, adopted by the Tribunal in both and SA and others and KS,  should
    ever be followed.  The  Court  Interpreter  is  a  vital  part  of  the
    immigration  appellate  process.   It  is  very  important   that   the
    interpreter's position should not  be  compromised  in  any  way.   The
    interpreter is not himself a witness  and  should  not  be  invited  to
    become one.  If it happens that the interpreter cannot  understand  the
    language or dialect being used, he will of course have to say  so.   At
    that point it may be necessary to check that the language requested  by
    the person whose evidence is to be interpreted  is  indeed  a  language
    that falls within the interpreter's portfolio.  But it is unlikely that
    any more detailed information from the interpreter could properly  form
    the basis of the Tribunal's findings of fact.

10. We see no reason to dissent from the Tribunal's observation in  SA  and
    others that an expert who speaks a particular language  or  dialect  is
    more likely to be able to  provide evidence of whether  another  person
    speaks that language or dialect than is a person who does not have that
    linguistic competence.  But it  does  not  follow  from  that  (and  we
    venture to suggest that nobody could think it followed from that)  that
    every person who speaks a particular  language  or  dialect  is  to  be
    regarded as an expert, able to assess whether some  other  person  that
    language or dialect, or, if not, what dialect is being spoken.

11. For  these  reasons  we  reject  Mr.  Schwenk's  submissions  that  the
    interpreter ought to have been regarded as  an  expert,  able  to  give
    evidence as an expert, and ought to have been required to give his view
    on the language or dialect being spoken  by  the  appellant.   We  also
    reject his submission that what occurred at the hearing was  unexpected
    or unfair.  There was  no  proper  reason  to  assume  that  the  Court
    Interpreter would become an expert witness in the case.

12. So far as concerns the evidence of Mr. Cali, the position appears to be
    that  because  of  the  unrealistic  expectations   about   the   Court
    Interpreter, Mr. Cali, who was present at the  hearing,  was  asked  to
    give his opinion on the language or dialect being spoken  being  spoken
    by the appellant.  Mr. Cali is also an interpreter.   He  was  not  the
    Court Interpreter, so there is no reason why he should not have been  a
    witness  and  have  given  evidence.    But,   however   undoubted   or
    unchallenged his competence as an interpreter, there is  no  reason  at
    all to suppose that  he  has  the  additional  expertise  necessary  to
    identity  accurately  the  language  or  dialect   being   used.    The
    Immigration Judge  may  have  been  wrong  to  over-emphasise  what  he
    described as Mr. Cali's lack of independence, but  he  was  undoubtedly
    right to find, as he did, that there was no  evidence  at  all  of  Mr.
    Cali's expertise to give evidence on the matter in question, which is a
    matter that the Court itself is incapable of assessing, save  with  the
    assistance of a properly qualified expert.

13. There has been no doubt that the appellant's  claim  to  specific  clan
    membership is at the  heart  of  this  appeal.   As  Mr.  Schwenk  very
    properly asserts, such  a  claim  inherently  involves  a  claim  about
    language.  There was not before  the  Immigration  Judge  any  evidence
    properly capable of resolving questions  relating  the  language  being
    used by the appellant in the appellant's favour.  It was therefore  not
    a matter on which the Immigration Judge could be  expected  to  make  a
    finding in her favour.  His failure to record any finding at all on the
    issue, if it constitutes an error, which we  doubt,  is  not  material.
    The appellant has not established  that  she  speaks  the  language  or
    dialect appropriate to her claimed clan membership.

14. We turn then to the other principal allegation in the grounds, that the
    Immigration Judge did not look at the evidence in the  round.   In  his
    submissions, Mr. Schwenk made specific  reference  to  the  Immigration
    Judge's analysis of the appellant's evidence about  the  striped  cloth
    particular to the Benadiri, and to his treatment of his evidence  of  a
    third witness who gave evidence supporting the appellant's  claim.   So
    far as concerns the evidence of the cloth, it is possible, taking it in
    isolation, to show that by itself  it  might  not  have  supported  the
    Immigration Judge's conclusions.  But to analyse it in that  way  would
    be to commit the very error of which Mr. Schwenk complains.  The burden
    of the Immigration Judge's conclusions on the appellant's own  evidence
    of her clan membership was that  the  appellant's  knowledge  was  very
    limited and very vague.  At each stage it is possible to show that  the
    answers given by the appellant are consistent  with,  or  not  terribly
    inconsistent with, her claimed clan membership: the Immigration Judge's
    view was that they were nevertheless not answers  of  the  details  and
    fullness that he would have expected of  a  person  who  had  the  clan
    membership claimed by the appellant.  We have  read  his  determination
    with care, with the benefit of Mr. Schwenk's submissions, and  it  does
    not appear to us that the Immigration Judge's treatment of the evidence
    before him discloses any error of approach  that  could  amount  to  an
    error of law.

15.  We  must  say  something  separately  about  the  Immigration  Judge's
    treatment of the third witness  before  him,  who  it  was  said  could
    endorse the appellant's claims.  That was a witness who  asserted  that
    she had met the appellant in the United Kingdom, having been introduced
    by a mutual friend and that, from what  the  appellant  told  her,  she
    "realised" that the appellant was someone she  had  known  in  Somalia,
    having last seen her when she was three years old, and that the witness
    was  thus  able  to  confirm  the  appellant's  clan  membership.   The
    Immigration Judge did not believe this witness.  He said that  she  had
    made up a story in order to assist the appellant.

16. It is of course right to say that evidence is to  be  considered  as  a
    whole, and that in many circumstances it is impossible to reach a  view
    on contested matters without looking at all the  evidence  relating  to
    those matters.  The position here, however, was  that  the  Immigration
    Judge considered that the appellant's account of her  own  history  was
    entirely unreliable.  The  witness  gave  an  account  of  meeting  the
    appellant which was perhaps in itself barely  credible,  but  which  in
    particular showed that the witness' assessment of  the  appellant  must
    have been based on the material which the Immigration  Judge  rejected,
    and did not therefore add to it.   In  the  circumstances  it  is  very
    difficult indeed to see that the Immigration  Judge's  perhaps  cursory
    treatment of the third witness' evidence constituted a  material  error
    of law.

17. For the reasons we have given we conclude that  the  Immigration  Judge
    made no material error of law and  we  order  that  his  determination,
    dismissing this appeal, shall stand.








                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT


