

Asylum and Immigration Tribunal

                      HC & RC (Trafficked women) China CG [2009] UKAIT 00027

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |                             |
|on 11th November 2008                         |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                       SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE STOREY
                      SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE SPENCER
                                MS S E SINGER

                                   Between

                                     HC
                                     RC

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the appellant:     Ms N Finch, counsel, instructed by Luqmani Thompson
& Partners
For the respondent:    Mr G Saunders, Home Office presenting officer


 1)  Although  the  Chinese  authorities  are  intent  upon  rescuing   and
    rehabilitating  women  and  girls  trafficked  for  the   purposes   of
    prostitution, there are deficiencies in the measures they have taken to
    combat the problem of trafficking. The principal deficiencies  are  the
    lack of a determined effort to deal with the complicity of corrupt  law
    enforcement officers and state officials and the failure to penalise as
    trafficking acts of forced labour, debt bondage, coercion,  involuntary
    servitude or offences committed against male victims.


 2) Women and girls in China do not in general face a real risk of  serious
    harm from traffickers. Where, however, it can be established in a given
    case that a woman or a girl does face a real risk of  being  forced  or
    coerced into prostitution by traffickers, the issue of whether she will
    be able to receive effective protection from the authorities will  need
    careful consideration in the light of background evidence  highlighting
    significant deficiencies in the system of  protection  for  victims  of
    trafficking. But each case, however, must be judged on its  own  facts.
    China is a vast  country  and  it  may  be,  for  example,  that  in  a
    particular part of Chine  the  efforts  to  eliminate  trafficking  are
    determined and the level of  complicity  between  state  officials  and
    traffickers is low. If an appellant comes from such an area, or if  she
    can relocate to such an area, there may be no real risk to her.

 3) The Chinese state has an obligation to house the homeless and will  not
    allow their citizens to starve. Therefore a returned  trafficked  woman
    without family support will not be allowed by the authorities  to  fall
    into a state of destitution.

 4) Due to reforms of the Chinese household registration  system  known  as
    the "hukou" system it is unlikely  that  a  returned  trafficked  woman
    would be obliged to return to the place where she is  registered.   The
    reforms have made it relatively easy for ordinary  migrant  workers  to
    get legal, albeit temporary, urban registration and there is no  reason
    why this should not extend to returned trafficked women.

 5) Pre-marital sex is now commonplace in China and women's  earning  power
    growing, particularly in the wealthy cities of the east.  As  a  result
    the number of single mothers in China is growing, albeit from  a  small
    base and although a birth permit may not be obtained, nonetheless it is
    possible for hukou for the child of a  single  mother  to  be  obtained
    depending upon where the application is made.

 6) It is not inevitable that a returned trafficked woman would be punished
    for having left China illegally. Punishment is unlikely for  those  who
    seek and obtain the assistance of the All-China Women's Federation  and
    for those able to give information to the authorities about snakeheads.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The background

 1. The first named appellant is a citizen  of  the  People's  Republic  of
    China (PRC), born on 15th July 1990.  The second named appellant is her
    dependant daughter, born on 10th November 2006. Their  appeals  against
    the decision of the respondent, made on 18th May 2007  to  remove  them
    from the United Kingdom to the  PRC  having  refused  the  first  named
    appellant's asylum, humanitarian protection  and  human  rights  claims
    were dismissed on all grounds after  a  hearing  by  Immigration  Judge
    Devittie in a determination promulgated on 18 October 2007.  We propose
    to refer to the first named appellant as "the appellant".

 2. After an order for reconsideration was refused by the Tribunal on  22nd
    January 2008, Forbes J ordered  reconsideration  and  on  20  May  2008
    Senior Immigration Judge Latter found that the  immigration  judge  had
    made a material error of law in his determination of  the  appeals  for
    the reasons set out  in  Appendix  A  hereto.   He  decided,  with  the
    agreement of the parties'  representatives,  that  the  reconsideration
    should be adjourned for a re-assessment of whether the appellant  would
    be at a real risk of serious harm and be able to look  to  the  Chinese
    authorities for adequate protection on return.   He  ordered  that  the
    judge's findings of primary fact were to stand.

 3. Thus the matter came before us.  In determining the issues before us we
    have had regard to the oral evidence of Dr Jackie Sheehan, a number  of
    bundles submitted on behalf of the appellant, namely bundle  A,  bundle
    B1 (objective material),  bundle  B2  (objective  material),  bundle  C
    (authorities), bundle D (third expert report and sources),  a  skeleton
    argument from the appellant's counsel dated 28th October 2008, a bundle
    submitted on behalf of  the  respondent  entitled  "Bundle  E",  a  COI
    Service Country of Origin information request and the submissions  made
    on behalf of both parties.

 4. The immigration  judge  accepted  that  the  core  of  the  appellant's
    testimony was reasonably likely to be true, Ms Finch did not  call  the
    appellant to give evidence.  In his determination the immigration judge
    set out a summary of the appellant's asylum interview and  her  witness
    statement prepared for the hearing before him, dated  31st  July  2007,
    which is the latest statement  from  the  appellant  contained  in  the
    appellant's bundle A.  As there is no issue in relation to the  primary
    facts found by the  immigration  judge  we  summarise  the  appellant's
    claim.  She was born in the village of Nan Shan in Hefei City in  Anhui
    province, where she was looked after by  her  grandmother  between  the
    ages of 6, when she was orphaned, and 10, when  her  grandmother  died.
    Thereafter she left her home village and took a train and ended  up  in
    Sezhuan where she lived on the street with  many  other  children  like
    herself.  She would scavenge in bins for food and sometimes  find  work
    which was very difficult because of her age.   She  would  collect  and
    recycle cans.  When she was about 12 a couple took pity on her and  she
    stayed with them until they moved in 2002, after which she  went  to  a
    rural area outside the city and worked as a domestic worker.  In August
    2002 she moved back to the city and continued to live on  the  streets.
    In February 2003 she was asked to deliver a parcel to Beijing for 2,000
    yuan for which she was paid in advance.  She  arrived  in  Beijing  and
    found a hostel to stay in but was unable to contact the people to  whom
    she was to deliver the parcel.  She went to the police who allowed  her
    to stay for a few days.  She left the parcel in a supermarket safe  but
    it disappeared.  She was found by those to whom she was to deliver  the
    parcel and threatened by them, as a result of which she ran away to Bao
    Ting City where she lived for about  a  year.   She  lived  with  other
    children and they found ways of getting money in order to survive.   In
    March 2004 she was caught by the people to whom she had  been  supposed
    to deliver the parcel and imprisoned by them for two or three days  and
    badly treated.  She managed to escape and then moved to a place  called
    Jian Zhao near Sizhuan, where she stayed for about a year.   She  moved
    around but ended up back in Beijing where she was told she could get an
    identification card.  She worked in restaurants  but  had  problems  in
    getting work because she was  very  young  so  she  obtained  a  forged
    identity card which showed her to be older, which helped.

 5. It was in 2005 when the appellant was aged about  14  or  15  that  she
    became involved in prostitution.  She met a middle-aged  Chinese  woman
    while she was employed washing dishes.  She  had  been  told  that  she
    could find her work to make a lot of money.  She was approached by this
    woman at a time when she did not know what the work involved.  She went
    on a journey by minibus with this woman and two other young  girls  and
    arrived at a house in Sizhuan.  She stayed in a room and waited  to  be
    given work.  After two or three days she  was  told  she  had  to  take
    clients.  She was told that if she wanted money then she  had  to  have
    sex with a man who was brought to her.  The arrangement  continued  for
    perhaps six to seven months.  The appellant was very frightened of  the
    woman, who said that if she ever ran away  she  would  find  her.   The
    appellant used to make perhaps 200 yuan from each client, half of which
    she would be able to keep.  The arrangement continued and she was  able
    to save some money.  What kept her going was that she was setting aside
    money and she thought that one day she would be  able  to  escape.   In
    November 2005 she had saved 7,000 yuan.  Another girl in the same house
    said that she knew of an agent who could help her to get away.  She met
    the agent and handed to him the  7,000  yuan  and  her  mother's  ring.
    Subsequently he took her to an airport on 20th December  2005  and  she
    left China. In her interview for the  purposes  of  an  age  assessment
    report she said that she  travelled  with  a  snakehead  and  that  the
    country they flew to was Russia. She was met by a man who took her to a
    house where she was locked in.  He later told her that she  would  have
    to be his mistress and have sex with him when he required it  and  with
    others when he was not there.  In February 2006 he said he  was  taking
    her with some other women to another country to which  they  travelled,
    she thought, towards the end of February 2006.  She was  frightened  of
    this man who called himself CB and was afraid that he would hurt her if
    she did not do what he said.  She stayed in the new country  for  about
    two weeks and then moved to a different country,  which  it  seems  was
    Russia, where the same thing happened again, only  this  time  she  was
    pregnant but she did not mention this to CB.  They then went to another
    country where the same thing happened and where they stayed for  nearly
    five months.  She was conscious that her  pregnancy  was  beginning  to
    show, although no one said anything.  CB came and said that she had  to
    leave.  They took a train to a small place from where she flew  to  the
    United Kingdom, arriving on 2nd December 2006.

 6. In paragraph 8(c) of his determination the immigration judge quoted the
    penultimate paragraph of the appellant's  statement,  dated  31st  July
    2007, which read as follows:-

        "Since the decision to refuse my asylum application I am aware that
        the emphasis has moved in my case about the issues of  prostitution
        and how the agent brought me to the United Kingdom.  From the start
        of my case, at the asylum screening interview I made it plain  that
        I had been forced to work as a prostitute, both in my  country  and
        on the way to the United Kingdom.  From the preliminary statement I
        emphasised that "I am scared of being in my  country.   I  did  not
        want to be a prostitute and I do not want to be in  this  situation
        again.  I was very scared when I had to do this.  I  was  sometimes
        hurt and I always felt bad and I have trouble talking about many of
        the things that happened.  I thought that by coming here I would be
        safe.  I have  never  chosen  to  have  sex  with  anyone.   I  was
        threatened and I felt that I had no choice.  I want to forget those
        things.  When I think of them and have to talk I get upset.  I  get
        angry and sad and I cry a lot." (B5) And so I do not think that  it
        can be said that I had not emphasised this fear from the start."

The written expert evidence

 7. Dr Jackie Sheehan adopted the contents of her three reports, these were
    dated respectively 26th July 2007, 29th April 2008 and 29 October 2008.
     Dr Sheehan has  a  BA  in  Chinese  Studies  from  the  University  of
    Cambridge (1989) and a PhD  in  Chinese  History  from  the  School  of
    Oriental and African Studies, University of London  (1995).   Following
    three years of full-time doctoral study, she has spent the last  twelve
    years researching, teaching and publishing on aspects of  the  People's
    Republic of  China  since  1949.   She  is  presently  employed  as  an
    Associate Professor in Contemporary Chinese Studies in  the  School  of
    Contemporary Chinese Studies at  the  University  of  Nottingham.   Her
    research  interests  include  the  development  of  autonomous   social
    organisations in the PRC and the legal  and  political  treatment  they
    receive, the Chinese Communist Party,  the  government's  responses  to
    grass  roots  political  initiatives,  opposition  and   dissent,   and
    contemporary Chinese  concepts  of  and  legal  protection  for  civil,
    political, social and economic rights.  She reads and  speaks  Mandarin
    Chinese and visits the PRC two to three times per year.

 8. In her first report, Dr Sheehan said that the  appellant's  account  of
    her life as a street child after the death of her paternal  grandmother
    was a typical one.  Her account of how  she  originally  became  a  sex
    worker in China was also a fairly typical one.  Although  it  might  be
    thought she was very na�ve not to realise the nature of  the  well-paid
    work she was offered until she was forced to have sex  with  a  client,
    her gender, rural origins and lack of education  all  meant  she  would
    have been even more ignorant of  sexual  matters  and  unaware  of  her
    likely destination.  This would still have been the case had  she  been
    significantly older than 14 or 15 years of age at the time.

 9. Dr Sheehan was of the opinion that prejudice  against  pre-marital  and
    extra-marital  sex,  unmarried  mothers,  illegitimate   children   and
    prostitution was of a different order of magnitude in the PRC  compared
    with, say, the United Kingdom.  It was regarded as a terrible  personal
    misfortune not to marry and have a child in the PRC and as a failure of
    duty to one's ancestors.  Marriage has remained  near  universal  (over
    99% of Chinese marry at least once in their lives, and 97.5%  of  women
    were married by the age of 35).  She expressed the view that the amount
    of 7,000 yuan paid by the appellant was a low figure to be taken out of
    the country.  She believed that the agent and/or  his  contacts  abroad
    must have intended to make their money back from forcing her to work in
    the sex industry.  They may not have announced this intention  to  her,
    but it was the only way in which a young woman like her could  possibly
    be expected to pay off a substantial debt owed for  her  false  papers,
    travel and subsistence, including travel from  Russia  to  two  unknown
    countries and eventually to the United Kingdom.

10. Dr Sheehan turned to the issue of the appellant's likely  circumstances
    if she were  returned  to  the  PRC  as  an  un-married  mother  of  an
    illegitimate child, including any punishment she might face for leaving
    China and for breaching family-planning regulations with the  birth  of
    her child, her and her child's vulnerability to exploitation by people-
    traffickers in the PRC and the efficacy or otherwise of the  protection
    available to women in her position against such exploitation.  As noted
    in paragraph 35.06 of the COIR on China of April 2007, very little  was
    known about the treatment and practice of  individuals  repatriated  to
    China with the imposition of either fines or  prison  sentences  "to  a
    considerable extent a mystery."  A prison sentence of up  to  one  year
    was the prescribed penalty for leaving China illegally,  although  some
    scholars suggested that the punishment was likely to  be  substantially
    "at the discretion of local officials."   Computerised  record  systems
    were used at every international border crossing,  including  even  the
    more remote land borders with central Asia and she did not  believe  it
    would be possible for the appellant to escape  detection  if  she  were
    returned to China.  Although when she left China she was too  young  to
    have been issued with a resident ID card, which  all  Chinese  citizens
    must carry with them, she  would  have  had  a  household  registration
    (hukou) status of her own recorded, namely a rural one,  and  thus  she
    was likely to be returned to rural Anhui, where she was born.  In order
    to stay in an urban area where she might be more likely  to  find  work
    she would need to obtain false documents, which were available in China
    but relatively expensive for good quality forgeries,  as  people  found
    with fake documents were liable to detention and  often  in  very  poor
    conditions  before  custody  and  repatriation  to  their  proper  home
    district.  Dr Sheehan stated that if this  was  not  known  they  could
    remain in detention centres, known as Custody and Repatriation Centres,
    for long periods of time where a mixture  of  indigent,  the  homeless,
    street children, run-a-ways, the mentally ill, victims of  trafficking,
    unemployed migrants, people  suspected  of  crimes,  petitioners  whose
    grievances had not been satisfactorily resolved and so  on  were  held.
    The mixing in centres of suspected people traffickers and their  likely
    victims had been noted with concern by human rights organisations which
    characterised the centres less as the welfare  institutions  they  were
    supposed to be and more as "holding  pens"  with  "abusive  conditions"
    which had resulted in deaths on some occasions.  She expressed the view
    that given the appellant's lack  of  relatives  in  China  or  economic
    resources of her own, together with her rural local status, she and her
    child would be vulnerable to ending up in such a centre if returned  to
    the PRC.  In passing we observe that there seems to be a  contradiction
    in what Dr Sheehan  has  said  in  that  the  appellant's  proper  home
    district is in fact known.

11. Dr Sheehan expressed the view that whether held in a  detention  centre
    for custody and repatriation  or  not,  the  appellant  would  be  very
    vulnerable to exploitation by people traffickers if returned to  China.
    The prevalence of human trafficking in the PRC was acknowledged by  the
    authorities who admitted that the many thousands of  cases  dealt  with
    and tens of thousands of women  and  children  freed  from  traffickers
    represented merely "the tip of the iceberg" of the phenomenon in China.
     The NGO Human Rights in China had observed that:

          "Despite reported initiatives to suppress all forms of trafficking
         in  an  exploitation  of  women,  efforts  have  fallen  short   of
         substantive protection  due  to  limited  legislative  definitions,
         administrative detention of prostitutes, and policy execution."

      There were  severe  penalties  available  in  law  to  punish  people-
    trafficking offences but they did not seem to have had  much  deterrent
    effect to date.  She quoted a publication by Dr Michael Palmer in  1996
    which said that:

         "Imposing the death penalty for certain forms of dealing  in  women
         and children may be another example of the  lawmakers'  fallacy  to
         which post-Mao  China  is  particularly  prone:  that  severity  of
         punishment is the most significant  feature  of  the  law.   Severe
         punishment is imposed for a crime in the expectation that  it  will
         have a greater deterrent impact.  This approach overlooks the  fact
         that the certainty of being detected and punished may well  have  a
         greater deterrent effect than the severity of the penalty."

       Dr  Sheehan  expressed  the  view  based  on  the   report   of   the
    International  Labour  Organisation   "Girls   for   sale:   Preventing
    Trafficking in China", 25th November 2005, that Anhui  province  was  a
    major "sending" area for trafficked women and children.   Even  if  the
    appellant were able to relocate to another area,  which  was  unlikely,
    her lack of family or social networks to  protect  her  interests,  her
    poverty, her status as a never-married mother would still  make  her  a
    likely target for traffickers.  She said that paragraph  33.07  of  the
    COIS Report of September 2006, observed that centres for the "transfer,
    training  and  rehabilitation"  physically   and   psychologically   of
    trafficked women had opened in Kunming, in Hunnan province, Chengdu  in
    Sichuan province  and  Xuzhou  in  Jiangsu  province.   These  centres,
    however, accommodate only  2,000  women  in  a  country  in  which  the
    authorities themselves admitted  that  an  estimated  10,000  -  20,000
    victims a year represented the tip of the iceberg.  The closest  centre
    for the appellant, assuming that she would be returned to her old  home
    district in Anhui, would be the Xuzhou one which was approximately  150
    miles away from her home district, which further reduced  the  odds  of
    her becoming one of the small number of women who could be accommodated
    in these centres.  She mentioned paragraph 33.07  of  the  COIS  report
    which cited the existence of legal aid and legal counselling centres in
    30 provinces and autonomous regions of the PRC as sources of  help  for
    trafficked women and children, but pointed out that these centres  were
    for general legal  aid  and  counselling  and  not  solely,  mainly  or
    specifically for the benefit of vulnerable women and children  who  had
    been trafficked and/or sexually exploited.  It had been estimated  that
    legal aid in China only covered about 25% of demand from defendants  in
    criminal cases who could not afford to pay for a lawyer from their  own
    resources and in addition priority for legal aid was given to  criminal
    defendants facing the death penalty and to the  handicapped,  aged  and
    minors claiming compensation in personal injury cases.

12. Dr Sheehan expressed the view that should the appellant be compelled to
    work in the sex industry again she could expect little assistance  from
    the Chinese police.  Where the rights and interests of women in the sex
    industry were concerned,  it  had  been  noted  that  anti-prostitution
    campaigners tended to target the women  themselves  rather  than  their
    employers/pimps or their clients.  Some campaigns had  been  associated
    with high levels of police brutality towards sex workers.   The  police
    had also been described as one of the "seven vicious wolves" preying on
    contemporary  Chinese  society,  a   category   which   also   included
    prosecutors and gangsters (Triads).  It had been  documented  that  PSB
    officers, the PSB being the regular police force in the PRC, had  taken
    the side of traffickers or pimps in cases  involving  women  trafficked
    for sexual exploitation, regarding it as their duty to return the women
    to their "owners".  In the 1990s in the PRC the PSB  and  the  People's
    Liberation Army themselves ran large  numbers  of  businesses  such  as
    massage parlours and karaoke bars in  which  prostitution  took  place.
    The PLA in particular were strongly  discouraged  from  involvement  in
    such businesses and forced to close  many  down  after  1998,  but  the
    period had left a strong  impression  on  many  Chinese  that  the  law
    enforcement and security services not only failed to crack down on such
    establishments, but often had a  direct  interest  in  them,  and  were
    therefore the worst people to turn to for a sex worker  who  was  being
    exploited and needed help.

13. Dr Sheehan expressed the opinion that the appellant's gender would  put
    her at a disadvantage if she were returned to the PRC.  China was still
    a strongly patriarchal society and a young woman living alone,  without
    family support was a vulnerable figure.  The birth of a child made  her
    situation more serious since it contravened the PRC's laws and policies
    on population control and family planning, commonly known as the  "one-
    child policy".  Great weight was and still is attached to the effective
    enforcement of the policy, which had been closely linked with the PRC's
    achievement of its economic-development goals.   Dr  Sheehan  mentioned
    that the term "one-child policy" was a misnomer  in  some  respects  as
    couples in  certain  circumstances,  since  1984  at  least,  had  been
    permitted more than one child.  There  was  a  limited  and  regionally
    variable relaxation of policy.  Violation of the one-child  policy  was
    generally punished with fines, which could  be  up  to  ten  times  the
    average annual income.  Punishment could also  include  deprivation  of
    benefits for children born "outside the quota" and sometimes for  other
    family members as well.   Concern  about  the  prevalence  of  coercive
    measures such as late abortions and forced sterilization, and cases  of
    the authorities taking children away from their parents had led to  the
    CCP government in recent years  breaking  the  link  between  achieving
    family-planning quotas and local officials' pay and promotion, a policy
    adjustment which was believed to have reduced the incidence of excesses
    in the enforcement previously very common in rural areas.  However, the
    law was still very strictly enforced in  urban  areas  and  reports  of
    coercive and illegal measures being used against women  still  emerged.
    Experts in the field conceded that it was impossible to generalise from
    the  relatively  small  number  of  well-documented  cases  as  to  how
    widespread coercion and abuses were since the  passing  of  the  Family
    Planning Law.  The system of permits to give birth was not available to
    unmarried women.  As she was unmarried, if the appellant were to return
    to China her child would be deemed  to  have  been  born  "outside  the
    quota", or illegally.  She would be subject  to  financial  and  social
    penalties, probably being required to pay a substantial amount  by  way
    of a "social compensation fee " and the child  would  be  discriminated
    against in e.g. access to school places.  She might be required to  pay
    extra for her child's education.

14. If the appellant  were  returned  to  the  PRC  as  the  mother  of  an
    illegitimate baby, she  and  her  child  would  be  subject  to  severe
    discrimination  and  considerable   long-term   social   and   economic
    disadvantages.  Her chances of marriage would be  greatly  affected  by
    the fact she had already had a child.  Because of the hukou regulations
    she would not be able to chose to live within  an  administrative  area
    which allowed couples, where one  party  already  had  a  child  before
    marriage took place, to give birth to a second child, permitted in some
    areas for the past two to three years  in  recognition  of  the  rising
    divorce rate in the PRC and the increased incidence of  step  families.
    Like most measures announced as applying to "single-parent families" in
    the PRC, it was not intended to apply to never-married mothers, only to
    divorcees and widows.  It was very unlikely  any  man  would  agree  to
    marry the appellant as he would be giving up his only chance to have  a
    child of his own.  There would be pressure from not only  the  man  but
    also from his parents who, in the absence of a pension system  covering
    most PRC citizens, would expect to rely on  their  blood  relatives  in
    their old age.  Had the appellant's child been a boy,  it  is  possible
    she might find in-laws prepared to allow their son to adopt him, but it
    was, in her view, far more likely that they would prefer the chance for
    him to father a child, especially a son, of his own.  If she resided in
    an administrative area, which permitted couples a  second  child  where
    one partner already had a  child,  she  would  still  be  at  a  severe
    disadvantage in seeking a marriage  partner  for  the  reasons  already
    given.  Children of one-parent families in  the  PRC  were  subject  to
    considerable societal prejudice and disadvantage, even where they  were
    the legitimate offspring of a divorced or widowed mother rather than  a
    never-married mother.  They were typically regarded by  e.g.  teachers,
    medical practitioners, law enforcement personnel as  much  more  likely
    than the average child to exhibit delinquent behaviour, break the  law,
    or suffer from mental  health  problems,  as  well  as  being  severely
    economically disadvantaged.  Recent reports had noted  that  more  than
    50% of single-parent families in China (the vast majority of which  are
    headed by women) experience economic difficulties, and 43% have incomes
    less than RMB 300 yuan (about �67) per month.  The  Women's  Federation
    had noted that 79% of China's juvenile delinquents  were  from  single-
    parent families and in the same article the head of a reform school  in
    Beijing reported that more half the young offenders in his  institution
    were from single-parent families.  Leadership of  Chinese  schools  and
    universities were socially and culturally conservative as a rule and no
    educational institution would be likely to take a student who  admitted
    to being an unmarried mother.  The appellant's job prospects would also
    be severely limited by her status as  the  mother  of  an  illegitimate
    child, as would her access to housing.  Both rural and urban China were
    presently suffering considerable  levels  of  unemployment  and  under-
    employment in what is still a patriarchal society,  as  preference  for
    jobs tends to be given to men over women.  The jobs which had attracted
    tens of millions of migrants to China's  urban  areas  since  the  late
    1980s were mostly on offer to men, and such work as is offered to young
    women with few qualifications, such  as  live-in  domestic  service  or
    childcare, would very  probably  be  refused  to  the  appellant  by  a
    prospective employer aware of her illegitimate child.

15. In her second report Dr Sheehan mentioned that the US State  Department
    Report dated July 2007 stated that the PRC remained  on  a  Trafficking
    Tier 2 Watch List for 2007, which was the third  consecutive  year  and
    represented deterioration from its Tier 2 status position  in  2001  to
    2004.  The report stated that the PRC government did not  fully  comply
    with the minimum standards for the elimination of trafficking, but  was
    making significant efforts to do so.  She stated that those aspects  of
    its anti-trafficking measures for  which  the  PRC  was  commended  and
    recognised as making "significant efforts" were not those most relevant
    to protecting someone like the appellant.  One area of improvement  was
    identified  as  "sustaining  efforts  to  enforce  its   laws   against
    trafficking" and better cross-border co-operation with  countries  like
    Burma, Thailand and Vietnam; and limited co-operation and liaison  with
    the United States law enforcement agencies on  specific  cases,  though
    not systematically.   The  report  described  the  range  of  penalties
    available for the offences of forced prostitution, abduction, and  some
    forms of commercial sexual exploitation as "sufficiently  stringent  to
    deter".  She repeated the point that Professor Michael Palmer disagreed
    with this assessment.  She stated that for  organised-crime  syndicates
    involved in trafficking, the risks of detection and prosecution may not
    in fact be very great as such groups were often under the protection of
    government or CCP officials.  The USSD  2007  Report  also  noted  that
    despite its general anti-corruption measures, the PRC  government  "did
    not demonstrate concerted efforts to investigate and punish  government
    officials  specifically  for  complicity  in  trafficking".   The  main
    weaknesses in the PRC's anti-trafficking efforts were identified in the
    USSD Report as victim care and protection and tackling trafficking  for
    involuntary servitude or forced labour which were precisely  the  areas
    on which the appellant and her child would rely for protection  against
    re-trafficking if they were returned to the PRC.  The report  confirmed
    an estimated minimum of 10,000 to 20,000 victims of trafficking a  year
    in China and this did not include cases of  international  trafficking,
    the  extent  of  which  the  report  described  as  considerable.   She
    expressed  the  view  that  this  statistic   for   investigation   and
    prosecution for trafficking often cited by the Chinese  authorities  in
    their own defence did not  demonstrate  that  the  situation  regarding
    trafficking was under control, or even that it was improving.  The COIR
    of December 2007 cited statistics that in the period 2001 to 2003, more
    than 20,000 trafficking cases  were  "cracked  down  upon",  more  than
    40,000 trafficked women and children were rescued and over 8,500  cases
    were brought to court involving over 15,000 defendants.  The period was
    that of the last national anti-crime "Strike Hard" campaign of the PRC,
    which  might  account  for  the  high  volume  of  cases  said  to   be
    investigated then.  Since the end of 2003, however, the PRC  status  on
    the USSD Watch List had deteriorated and the USSD 2007 Report cites for
    the reporting period  3,371  cases  of  trafficking  investigated,  371
    victims rescued and 415 suspected traffickers  arrested  by  provincial
    governments.  No data was given on  the  outcome  of  the  3,371  cases
    investigated, or on convictions  for  trafficking  offences  generally.
    The statistics suggested that in the 2007 reporting period, fewer cases
    were investigated and fewer victims rescued  than  in  2001-2003.   The
    generally agreed minimum number of victims per year of 10,000 to 20,000
    indicated that by the  Chinese  authorities  own  admission  they  were
    failing to apprehend most traffickers and  therefore  failing  to  free
    their victims or protecting those victims from re-trafficking.

16. In relation to the criticism  of  the  PRC  for  its  failure  to  show
    evidence  of  increasing  efforts  to  improve   comprehensive   victim
    protection services, she mentioned that there was also a rehabilitation
    centre for victims on the Guangxi-Vietnam border, but it  only  offered
    short-term rehabilitation for a maximum of 30 women and  was  aimed  at
    victims of cross-border trafficking.  The 2007 USSD Report provided the
    additional information regarding the Kunming  centre  that  victims  of
    commercial and  sexual  exploitation  were  not  offered  psychological
    assistance and were generally sent home after a  few  days.   The  USSD
    Report  concluded  that  since  2007,  progress  and   protection   and
    rehabilitation for trafficking victims was modest and  that  protection
    services remained temporarily inadequate  to  address  victims'  needs.
    The Ministry of Public Security stated that Chinese trafficking victims
    returning from abroad were not punished or  fined,  but  the  All-China
    Women's Federation (ACWF) reported that protection from punishment  was
    only on an ad hoc basis,  with  intervention  from  ACWF  staff.   This
    raised the possibility that the appellant would face penalties from the
    PRC authorities if returned there which would either worsen her already
    difficult economic situation (if she were fined) which in itself  would
    put her at greater risk of re-trafficking, or, if she were sentenced to
    a period of detention, would publicly identify her as someone  who  had
    been involved in the sex industry, which in turn would  expose  her  to
    further risk  of  re-involvement  in  that  industry  in  targeting  by
    traffickers.

17. Dr Sheehan quoted what she described as a rather confused statement  by
    the Deputy Minister of Public Security, Mr Zhang Xinfeng from  December
    2003 which claimed  that  the  PRC  had  now  shifted  from  "combating
    trafficking" to "anti-trafficking" which she read as a claim  that  the
    emphasis had shifted to prevention rather than dealing with cases after
    trafficked people had become victims.   Mr  Zhang,  however,  was  also
    quoted as saying that  "China  does  not  have  a  safety  net  against
    trafficking in women and  children"  which  directly  contradicted  the
    first claim and suggested that the  shift  of  prevention  remained  an
    aspiration.  He are also quoted as saying that 2,500 trafficking  cases
    were solved in 2006, constituting 80% to 90% of the total, and that  no
    law enforcement personnel were involved in any trafficking cases.   She
    said that the latter statement was contradicted by  evidence  from  the
    cases of trafficked un-free labour in the Henan and Shanxi brick  kilns
    exposed in 2007, and she did not  accept  that  2,500  cases,  if  that
    figure were accurate, could be known to constitute 80% to 90% of  total
    trafficking cases, given a minimum annual number of victims  of  10,000
    to 20,000.   The report was quoted in the Beijing Youth Daily which was
    the mouthpiece of the Beijing branch  of  the  Communist  Youth  League
    which was  a  CCP-controlled  mass  organisation.   She  would  require
    further details of corroboration of the more  striking  claims  in  the
    article before accepting them as evidence of a breakthrough in  China's
    anti-trafficking efforts.

18. Dr. Sheehan reiterated the view that the appellant's lack of family  or
    social network to protect her interests and her poverty if returned  to
    China would make her a likely target for traffickers.   Both  work  and
    accommodation were activities fraught  with  risk  for  a  young  woman
    alone.  Some people-traffickers would typically disguise as  offers  of
    legitimate work and/or accommodation, an intention either to force  the
    woman into marriage to a paying husband or to compel her to work in the
    sex industry in China or  sometimes  overseas.   However  cautious  the
    appellant tried to be she would remain extremely vulnerable to the many
    fake employment agencies and training providers in  China,  which  were
    actually  fronts  for  people-trafficking.   The   2007   USSD   Report
    highlighted the PRC's "failure to show evidence of  increasing  efforts
    towards trafficking for  involuntary  servitude"  as  one  of  the  key
    weaknesses  in  its  anti-trafficking  efforts  and  found  that  legal
    penalties which could be imposed on employers for  forced  labour  were
    "not sufficiently  stringent"  urging  the  PRC  to  "take  significant
    measures to  improve  in  these  areas".   She  stated  that  the  only
    relatively  safe  way  to  find  work  in  China  was  to  go  on   the
    recommendation of a family member or someone from the same home village
    or small town and the appellant's background precluded her  from  doing
    this.  She would therefore have no choice but to go to exactly the kind
    of agency that traffickers exploited.

19. Dr Sheehan said that seeking accommodation would  pose  major  problems
    for the appellant and her child.   Rented  accommodation  of  a  decent
    standard was expensive in urban China, scarcely affordable to  a  young
    woman who relied on either very limited state benefits or  a  low  wage
    from the kind of job she could realistically expect to  get.   Although
    accommodation would be cheaper in rural areas, it was hard to  come  by
    but rural couples tended not to have spare rooms for rent to  strangers
    and would be very reluctant to take in a young  woman  who  was  not  a
    relative, particularly one with an illegitimate child and  particularly
    if there was a man living under the same roof, for fear of  gossip  and
    moral disapproval from neighbours.  Anyone in the  countryside  or  the
    city who did offer to take in the appellant and her  child  as  tenants
    might well do so with the intent of informing people traffickers  of  a
    likely target  and  claim  a  reward  for  providing  the  information.
    Although the eventual abolition of the household registration or  hukou
    system was being planned in several provinces, the system had  not  yet
    been abolished in any area of China and was still very  much  in  force
    for the time being.  Measures which were  being  discussed  centred  on
    reducing  the  barriers  between  urban  and  rural  residency   as   a
    recognition of the high level of rural-to-urban  migration  now  taking
    place in China and on adapting the system to changes in Chinese  social
    expectations and family structure, for example by making it easier  for
    spouses from different places to move their registration  to  a  shared
    residence and to enable elderly citizens to move in  with  their  adult
    children.  It was  not  intended  under  present  proposals  to  remove
    restrictions on internal  mobility  completely,  or  to  allow  Chinese
    citizens to live wherever they wished or to move to certain  areas,  as
    an automatic right.  As things stood, the appellant would have to start
    from her home area, one of the poorest provinces in Eastern China  and,
    in order to move, find a job in a different  part  of  China  and  then
    apply for permission to move there.  Permission would be unlikely to be
    given unless she had been able to arrange a permanent job paying enough
    to cover her living expenses and, as a young woman with  little  formal
    education or work experience and no remaining family  connections,  she
    would face severe practical difficulties in trying to settle  and  find
    work  in  any  city  in  China.   Attempts  to  find  both   work   and
    accommodation in any part of China would be likely to expose her to the
    risk of trafficking.  Dr Sheehan repeated  the  evidence  that  it  was
    pretty easy to obtain all kinds of fake documents  in  China,  but  she
    stated  it  was  risky  for  anyone  in  the  PRC  to  rely   on   fake
    documentation, especially cheaper poor quality fakes which  are  easily
    detected, for a long period of time in  order  to  live  outside  their
    registered area. It was reported in the December COIS report  that  new
    plastic ID cards with embedded computer chips, introduced in 2004, were
    supposed to be used by all Chinese adults by the  end  of  2008,  which
    would also make  it  more  difficult  and  expensive  to  get  hold  of
    convincing fakes.  The only other legitimate way in which the appellant
    could acquire household registration for  a  different  part  of  China
    would be to marry someone with a legal registration elsewhere, but  her
    illegitimate child would make it extremely difficult for her to find  a
    husband.

20. In her third report, Dr  Sheehan  mentioned  the  report  of  a  recent
    investigation published in the Guardian  of  11th  October  2008  which
    described a network of brothels in the  United  Kingdom  through  which
    Chinese women and girls were circulated in:

           "a  criminal  enterprise  that  blurs  the   boundaries   between
         trafficking and smuggling, ensnaring girls and women  who  in  many
         cases leave China of their own free will.  Often sent with the best
         wishes of their community, which has clubbed together  to  pay  the
         exorbitant fees, the victims cannot bear  to  tell  their  families
         what they have been forced to do on arrival."

      She stated that there was  considerable  stigma  attached  to  Chinese
    women who had been trafficked, whether into forced marriage or into the
    sex industry, which had become a factor  hampering  Chinese  government
    efforts to rescue and rehabilitate trafficked women and girls since the
    victims and their families did not want to be identified in  public  as
    having been trafficked.  She quoted a Human Rights in China  report  of
    30th June 1995 which suggested the principal reason for  discrimination
    against trafficked women was that their families  felt  that  this  had
    caused them a loss of face, particularly the fact that  the  women  had
    had sex with their buyers, regardless of whether this was  forced  upon
    them.  Dr Sheehan expressed the view that the prejudices around women's
    sexual behaviour  in  China  were  very  long-standing  ones,  and  not
    something about which popular opinion would have  changed  dramatically
    even over a period of thirteen  years  since  the  publication  of  the
    report.  A BBC report on the same subject dated 28th  April  2000  said
    that according to Chinese state media, women who  had  been  forced  to
    work as prostitutes often faced prejudice if  they  returned  to  their
    home villages.  The situation had caused one academic to appeal to  the
    Chinese press not to reveal the identities of rescued women as this was
    making it harder for them to find husbands.

21. In relation to the adequacy of protection  against  re-trafficking,  Dr
    Sheehan mentioned that the 2008 US State Department Report showed  that
    the PRC remained on a trafficking Tier 2 Watch List for 2008 which made
    it the fourth consecutive year.  The 2008 report stated  that  the  PRC
    government did not fully comply with  the  minimum  standards  for  the
    elimination of trafficking but it was making significant efforts to  do
    so.  She quoted an article by Emily  E  Schuckman  published  in  2006,
    stating that corrupt law enforcement officers and government  officials
    were a barrier to combating prostitution  and  trafficking.   Officials
    were bribed by pimps or brothel  owners  or  offered  perks  when  they
    themselves visited the brothel.   These  actions  indicate  the  silent
    encouragement of prostitution and, intentionally or  not,  trafficking.
    Prostitution was an embarrassment to the Communist Party  which  touted
    its ability to eliminate social problems.  Party officials often  opted
    to just avoid the issue.  The USSD 2008 report also noted that  despite
    its general  anti-corruption  measures,  the  PRC  government  had  not
    demonstrated concerted efforts to  investigate,  prosecute  and  punish
    government officials for complicity in trafficking.   The  USSD  Report
    2008 welcomed the  establishment  of  the  Office  for  Preventing  and
    Combating Crimes of Trafficking in Women and Children and the  December
    2007 release of its National Action Plan  to  Combat  Trafficking,  but
    pointed out that it had not been accompanied by any  plans  to  provide
    local and provincial government with the  resources  to  implement  the
    plan.  There was no reason to suppose that any  of  the  rehabilitation
    centres were better resourced or able to provide a  more  comprehensive
    service for the relatively small number of trafficked women which  they
    could accommodate.  The 2008 USSD report  confirmed  that  there  still
    remained overall an  inadequate  number  of  shelters  for  victims  of
    trafficking  and  there  continued  to  be  no   dedicated   government
    assistance  programmes  for  victims  and  China  continued   to   lack
    systematic victim identification procedures to identify victims of  sex
    trafficking among those whom it arrested for prostitution.

22. Dealing with the ability of the appellant to obtain employment, one new
    matter referred to was  the  coming  into  force  of  the  2007  Labour
    Contract Law which had resulted in a number  of  low-end  manufacturing
    operations in eastern China which did typically employ unskilled female
    labour relocating to less-protected labour  markets  in  e.g.  Vietnam.
    Female  university  graduates  fared  worse  than  men  in   a   highly
    competitive labour market.  The end of  segregation  by  occupation  in
    industry was a major factor undermining  equal  pay  legislation,  with
    women workers heavily concentrated in the lowest-income groups in  both
    urban and rural China.  There was also evidence that women had suffered
    disproportionately  in  the   large-scale   lay-offs   and   employment
    restructuring which China had undergone over the past  ten  years,  and
    had come to be regarded by many employers as too  expensive  to  employ
    because of their rights to maternity leave and a younger retirement age
    then men.

23. In relation to the stigma and social prejudice that the  appellant  and
    her daughter would be subjected to if returned to  the  PRC,  a  recent
    article in the New York Times noted that more unmarried women in  major
    Chinese cities were now having premarital sex, but still in a situation
    of extreme ignorance about sex and reproductive health.   China  was  a
    society that  was  extraordinarily  repressive  in  relation  to  human
    sexuality  and  where  even  the  privileged  and   educated   minority
    constituting male college students had  been  found  to  have  received
    little sex education and to  rely  instead  on  male  peers,  books  on
    hygiene and  health,  news  media,  novels  and  pornographic  art  for
    information.  A recent article provided some statistics on the incident
    of premarital  sex  in  China  while  noting  that  studies  of  sexual
    behaviour among Chinese populations were still not common, partly as  a
    hangover from the years of sexual repression,  and  partly  because  of
    traditional reluctance to discuss sexual issues.  The few studies  that
    addressed premarital and extramarital sex showed that it had increased,
    dramatically, in some urban areas, but that traditional values  persist
    and China had not reached the levels of permissiveness seen in  Western
    countries.  The figures given for the proportion of  Chinese  who  have
    had premarital sex range from 9% to 52% (the latter figure was  from  a
    study of Anhui province, a major "sending" area for both  migrants  and
    victims of trafficking, and included both men and women; other  studies
    gave significantly higher figures  for  men  who  reported  having  had
    premarital sex, so it could be assumed that the Anhui figure  would  be
    lower if it referred to women only).

24. Dr Sheehan said she believed that the appellant's youth and her  status
    as a single mother and a trafficked  woman  would  lead  to  her  being
    profiled as a likely sex worker, both by the authorities and in general
    opinion in China.  There was a risk of her ending up working in the sex
    trade again either if trafficked within China or as a  last  resort  if
    unable to support herself and the  child  in  any  other  way.   Single
    motherhood carried a considerable social stigma with it in China.   She
    quoted a New York Times article of 13 May 2007 observing that:

         "A single, pregnant woman faces enormous social stigma  and  shame
        and has few options beyond abortion.  Single motherhood  is  almost
        non-existent, and unmarried pregnant women rarely carry a pregnancy
        to term in order to place a child up for adoption."

      Even divorced single mothers in China were  subject  to  heavy  social
    disapproval and were almost universally  blamed  for  the  break-up  of
    their marriages, so that presenting  herself  as  divorced  would  only
    slightly reduce  the  prejudice  with  which  the  appellant  would  be
    regarded in Chinese society.  Never-married  mothers  belonged  to  the
    most stigmatised category of all and young  single  mothers  were  very
    conspicuous in Chinese  society,  because  of  their  rarity,  and  the
    presence of a child would confirm to any observer the sexual history of
    the mother, which brought into play all the prejudices and  assumptions
    that mentioned.  An unmarried woman with no relatives would be unlikely
    to be able to reciprocate favours received and, in  the  absence  of  a
    family member powerful and well resourced enough to reciprocate on  her
    behalf, she would be an isolated and vulnerable figure.

The oral expert evidence

25. In oral evidence Dr Sheehan said the appellant  had  no  identification
    document.  She was now over 18 and therefore she would need a residence
    identification card and a household registration  document.   She  said
    that the local police would have a copy, which  said  who  her  parents
    were and her date of birth.  That would show the only place  where  she
    could legally live unless she obtained a permit to live elsewhere.  She
    said that permits were usually given for work or for marriage.  To  get
    permission to live elsewhere she would need to show that she had a  job
    arranged in an urban area and that she would be paid  enough  to  cover
    her expenses.  She said the system  in  China  was  designed  to  limit
    migration and the  use  of  resources.   She  said  there  were  quotas
    depending on qualifications to second and third  tier  cities  such  as
    Shanghai.  She said she knew the appellant's province as a poor area in
    eastern China.  It was prone to flooding and historically difficult  to
    make a living there and it was an area from which people tended  to  be
    driven out from time-to-time by flooding.  She said that the  appellant
    would have difficulty in getting employment due to the lack  of  family
    support.  She would have difficulty in getting into farming because she
    would need to obtain land.  Technically she was entitled to a share  of
    land, but redistribution was every ten years or every so often.   Women
    were at a grave disadvantage and women without a family  at  a  greater
    disadvantage.  Some areas did  not  redistribute.  She  said  that  the
    appellant's grandmother would have had land which would have gone  back
    into rotation.  She said that land  would  be  forfeited  if  the  user
    permanently migrated or was unable to cultivate it.

26. Dr Sheehan said that migration to get factory work was not as  easy  as
    it used to be due to the present economic downturn and it was the lower
    end of manufacturing which employed unskilled women which  went  first.
    She said that in June of 2008 a new Labour Contract Law came into being
    which was intended to squeeze out the worst  employers,  but  they  had
    gone quicker than expected to places such as Vietnam and Bangladesh and
    50,000 factories had closed.  In order to obtain employment  one  would
    need to have connections to know when hiring  was  taking  place.   The
    appellant would be likely to get turned away as a woman if she went  to
    the factory gate.   She  said  factory  owners  would  be  looking  for
    unmarried women between the ages of 18 and  25  and  would  not  expect
    children.  She said the women would live ten to twelve in  dormitories.
    Those who had children would rely upon their workmates  to  look  after
    them when they were not on shift, but employers would be  reluctant  to
    employ them.   In  China  employers  were  wary  of  women  because  of
    maternity leave and early retirement.  Ms Finch asked Dr Sheehan if the
    appellant would be able to train.  She said she would if she could find
    the fees.  She said, however, companies  were  much  keener  to  employ
    young people out of school and were reluctant to train  those  even  in
    the late thirties.  She said there was a ready supply of  new  leavers.
    She said in one of the migrant villages in Beijing there were signs for
    textile outworkers to train, but one needed to pay upfront.   She  said
    handwritten bits of  paper  could  be  seen  on  doors  which  promised
    training but these might very well be fake.  The money would  be  taken
    and no training or employment provided.  She said there were  not  near
    enough sufficient inspectors to stop this happening.   Unless  you  had
    the guidance of people you knew you could trust there would be  a  risk
    of loss.

27. Dr Sheehan was asked about the Chinese view of unmarried mothers.   She
    said that the popular view was that there should  not  be  any  because
    there should not be sex before  or  outside  marriage.   She  said  new
    Shanghai  novelists  might  write  about  sex,   but   that   was   not
    representative of the wider  view.   She  said  single  motherhood  was
    uncommon because of the pressure to terminate the pregnancy, to give up
    the baby to a state institution  or  to  abandon  it.   She  was  asked
    whether there was a stigma attached to trafficked women.  She said that
    they were not regarded as victims like the victim of domestic violence.
     She said they were seen as women who should have known better, but got
    in with bad people.  They were seen as immoral and lost all benefits of
    family and community.  She said they were people with whom  others  did
    not  want  to  be  associated.   She  was  asked  how  the   widespread
    prostitution in China correlated with women being trafficked.  She said
    her students took it that it was being tolerated, but in  fact  it  was
    not tolerated.  She said it was very common because the Chinese culture
    set store by male potency, which created a demand for prostitution.  It
    was not OK to practise on decent women.   Once  a  woman  was  in  that
    category there was no chance of restoring her reputation  and  emerging
    on the other side.  The fact that a woman had been trafficked would  be
    seen as her own fault.

28. Dr Sheehan was asked whether people would know that the  appellant  had
    been trafficked if she returned to China.  She said they would not  but
    she would return with a baby and no apparent father.  The fact that she
    was a migrant at a young age might suggest a  pattern  of  trafficking.
    Dr Sheehan was asked whether shelters would be available.  She said she
    had not been to any.  Apart from one on  the  Vietnamese  border  there
    were three of them which had a total capacity of 2,000 places.  The one
    closest to the appellant's home was over  100  miles  away.   She  said
    there was little evidence  about  them.   According  to  the  US  State
    Department Report they did not offer  a  psychological  assessment  and
    sent women home after a short stay.  She did not know the criteria  for
    admission.  She said the evidence suggested they were  for  victims  of
    internal trafficking.

29. Ms Finch asked Dr Sheehan what would happen to the appellant on  return
    at the border.  She said she would be travelling on a  travel  document
    and so officials would be aware that she had migrated  illegally.   She
    said the COIR explained that we do not know what happens.  The  penalty
    was of detention of up to a year.  She said for ordinary  migrants  the
    probability was that they would receive only three months.  Even if she
    got through immigration control  she  would  run  a  risk  due  to  her
    economic difficulties.  She said that she would  need  to  go  back  to
    Anhui and apply for a residence card.  She said that would  be  a  very
    inhospitable environment.  She said that she would have no  family,  no
    great education and/or work skills.  She was asked  about  registration
    of her daughter.  She said that that was a  vexed  question.   Although
    there was not such a thing as a "black child", the fact was that  there
    were substantial penalties for breaching the One  Child  Family  Policy
    and one could be fined  multiples  of  one's  annual  income.   If  the
    appellant could not pay, the child  would  be  treated  differently  in
    relation to access to school.  She referred to the reply  at  paragraph
    1.2 of the COI Service Country  of  Origin  Information  Request  which
    stated that in a report  on  illegal  births  and  abortions  in  China
    published in the journal, Reproductive Health, in August 2005,  it  was
    said that the Chinese Family Planning Regulations did not  include  the
    concept of an 'illegal child' and  the  law  prohibited  discrimination
    against children born outside marriage, but  said  that  children  from
    illegal pregnancies may not be  registered  or  treated  equally  until
    their parents paid the fines imposed as punishment.  In relation to the
    reply at 1.1 that Chinese marriage laws did not prevent unmarried women
    from having babies, she said that China Daily had had a running  debate
    for four to five years, sparked off  by  a  hospital  in  one  province
    offering IVF to high-earning and unmarried women who  were  unqualified
    for marriage.  There was a question of whether it would be  lawful  for
    such a woman to have IVF treatment leading to the  birth  of  a  child.
    She said it was still unlawful since an unmarried woman could not apply
    for a birth permit.  She said it was suggested that one did not need  a
    birth permit, but one was needed.   She said it was a very muddy  area.
    She said that the Family Planning Law  of  2002  took  preference  over
    other Chinese law and over the law  guaranteeing  a  minimum  level  of
    provision.

30. Dr Sheehan was asked about  the  hukou  system.   She  said  that  some
    articles suggested a liberalisation.  She said that in some  provinces,
    of which Anhui was not one, there was a loosening of the rules to  take
    account of elderly parents who had children who had migrated.  She said
    that parents were responsible for their unmarried  children  for  life.
    She said that the reforms did not mean that  you  could  go  where  you
    liked in China.  She said the Chinese  were  recognising  that  migrant
    labour was necessary, but they would not make it a free-for-all.

31. In cross-examination Mr Saunders pointed out to  Dr  Sheehan  that  the
    maximum penalty for illegal exit was twelve months and asked  her  what
    was the lowest.  She said  it  was  at  the  discretion  of  the  local
    authorities.  Mr Saunders asked whether it could be just a warning.  Dr
    Sheehan said that was so.  She said that if you could give  information
    about snakeheads they would send you away.  Mr Saunders  asked  whether
    in relation to the final option, if you could not pay, they  could  let
    you off.  She said if you could not pay they could allow you to pay  in
    instalments or waive the fine  in  cases  of  financial  calamity.   Mr
    Saunders asked why they would not let the appellant  off.   Dr  Sheehan
    said that they might.  She said that there was a suggestion that  women
    returned were profiled as prostitutes.  Mr Saunders  asked  Dr  Sheehan
    where the penalty in breach of the one child system  would  be  levied.
    She said it would be at the local level in Anhui.  She said the penalty
    would be set according to income.  Mr Saunders asked what would  happen
    if she could not pay.  She said she could  pay  in  instalments  or  it
    would be waived.  She said that property could be confiscated, but  the
    appellant had none.  Mr Saunders asked whether  her  grandmother  would
    have owned her house.  She said the position varied enormously and  she
    could not generalise.  She said possibly it was taken over if it  still
    existed.  She would have been allocated land for twenty years.

32. Mr Saunders asked whether, if the appellant went  back  to  Anhui,  the
    police would have copies of her documents.  She said they  would  issue
    her with an identity card which they were not legally able to withhold.
     Mr Saunders suggested to Dr Sheehan that the appellant would  be  able
    to get documentation and would face a fine for breaching the One  Child
    Policy but to what extent was unknown.  Dr Sheehan agreed.  Mr Saunders
    pointed out that in paragraph 12 of her most recent report, Dr  Sheehan
    explained that the appellant's employment  opportunities  were  limited
    and asked about other menial employment such as working  on  the  land.
    She said that was work for men which women only did if all of  the  men
    had migrated.  Mr Saunders asked about domestic labour.   She  said  no
    one in her area would offer that sort of  employment.   She  said  that
    employment as a nanny in a big city was possible, but the appellant had
    a baby of her own.  Mr Saunders asked whether Chinese  authorities  had
    an obligation to house people.  She said that was the case.   She  said
    there were shelters, but one was not supposed to remain in  them.   She
    said the local authority had the obligation to house the  homeless  and
    they would not let people be destitute.  She  said  that  one  did  see
    homeless people on the streets in China, just as one did here, but  the
    authorities would not let people starve  or  be  destitute.   She  said
    there was a basic provision for them.  Mr Saunders asked,  in  relation
    to the attitude of the community, whether there was any  other  way  in
    which people would know that she had been  trafficked  apart  from  her
    baby.  She pointed in reply to the fact that she had  been  abroad  and
    had been out of the area.  She said the appellant would have the burden
    of proof and she  would  need  a  serious  alibi.   Mr  Saunders  asked
    whether, if she got to a city,  she  would  be  able  to  survive.   Dr
    Sheehan said that they were tightening up on identity  cards.   It  was
    much harder to fake identification.  She would still  need  to  make  a
    living and looking for work would  expose  her  to  the  same  kind  of
    network as last time.

33. Mr Saunders drew the attention of Dr Sheehan to the figures given by Mr
    Zhang which she had quoted in paragraph 10 of  her  second  report  and
    then drew her attention to the figures which she gave in paragraph 6 of
    her report, attributed in the COIR of December 2007 to the Ministry  of
    Public Security.  He submitted  that  that  represented  a  substantial
    effort.  Dr Sheehan agreed, but said that the figures did not show that
    the problem  was  effectively  handled.   No  figures  were  given  for
    convictions or showed whether those convicted were still in  jail.   Mr
    Saunders asked whether she could provide any figures and she said  that
    she could not.  When Mr  Saunders  again  suggested  that  the  figures
    quoted by the Ministry of Public Security showed a substantial  effort,
    Dr Sheehan pointed out that the figures given were over three years for
    the period 2001 to 2003, when 8,500 cases were brought to  court.   She
    said that had to be set against the estimate that there were 10,000  to
    20,000 victims of trafficking per year.  She said  those  figures  were
    given when China was on Tier 2 and now China was on the  Tier  2  Watch
    List which demonstrated that China was not doing so well.  The  figures
    were given at a time when the anti-crime  "Strike  Hard"  campaign  was
    taking place.  In her opinion that was a blunt instrument when multiple
    cases were undertaken and a very short time was spent  in  court.   She
    questioned  whether  they  were  prosecuting  the  right  people.   She
    suspected that  the  "big  fish"  were  well  protected.   Mr  Saunders
    referred to the statement by Mr Zhang that 2,500 trafficking cases were
    solved in 2006, constituting 80% to 90% of the  total  and  asked  what
    that total was.  Dr Sheehan said she presumed he meant the total number
    of cases of trafficking.  She said that she found the statement that no
    law enforcement personnel were involved, unlikely.

34. Mr Saunders drew the attention of Dr Sheehan to the China National Plan
    of Action on Combating Trafficking in Women and Children (2008 -  2012)
    issued by the State Council of China on 13th December 2007.   He  asked
    whether this was a sincere or a cosmetic plan of  action.   Dr  Sheehan
    said  that  the  Chinese  authorities  genuinely  did  want  to  combat
    trafficking.  They were fed up of being on the Tier 2 Watch List.   She
    said that the problem was that there were no resources to  go  with  it
    whatsoever.  The result was  that  the  government  relied  upon  local
    government diverting resources.  She said that in some areas that could
    not be afforded.  She said that the government  would  get  praise  and
    international credit, but they would see that they needed to put  money
    into the plan and eventually they would.  She said it was  a  bad  time
    economically.  She said  the  Chinese  definition  of  trafficking  and
    forced labour never included male victims.  In China they  were  female
    and so the problem had a lower status in the eyes of the government.

35. In answer to questions from the Tribunal, Dr Sheehan said that she  had
    not been in contact with women's organisations in China.  She said that
    even if the appellant had been  a  professional  person  who  had  gone
    abroad and had an illegitimate child, there would still be a stigma  in
    China.  There was still a stigma to a degree if a woman was divorced or
    a widow as they were termed single women.  If it were known  the  child
    was the child of an unmarried mother then the parents of other children
    would not want their child to play  with  him.   She  said  wealth  and
    family were better protection than anything else.  She  said  that  the
    population of the appellant's province was 50 to 60 million.  She  said
    it was a very diffuse population, with few big cities.  She said  there
    were a couple of major railway junctions which were big cities, for the
    rest it was a network of villages equally spaced.  She  said  that  the
    appellant's actual area was a rural county and that it would be  easier
    to obtain permission to apply to live in  another  rural  county.   She
    said there were 40 counties with maybe half a million in each.  She was
    asked whether, with a population of hundreds of  thousands,  one  would
    expect to find different levels of employment opportunities.  She  said
    that one would, but the only kind of  service  industry  job  would  be
    domestic service.  She said that if  local  shopkeepers,  for  example,
    wanted a nanny for their children,  the  appellant  would  struggle  to
    obtain that sort of  employment.   Often  the  requirement  was  filled
    within a family and often a person might be taken in  with  a  view  to
    marriage for the son of the household.  To expect a person to take in a
    young woman with a baby they did not know was  expecting  a  lot.   She
    agreed that the appellant must have moved out of her rural county at an
    early age without permission.  She said she was not sure how they would
    deal with minors.  There was no point in sending her back if she had no
    family.  She said they would have to put her in  an  institution.   She
    agreed  that  she  would   have   existed   outside   the   system   of
    identification, as many did.  She said that that was a pyramid  and  by
    the time that those who did it reached their late teens, most  of  them
    had been rounded up.  She said if there were 0.1% of the population who
    did so, that would be 8 million.  She said they lived a very precarious
    existence, always working illegally and  they  could  always  be  taken
    advantage of because they could not go to the police.  She agreed  that
    it had been reported that repatriation centres had been abolished after
    a migrant had been caught without papers and detained.  He  turned  out
    to have papers, had a degree and was a  graphic  designer  and  of  the
    middle class.  This created a  scandal.   They  had  been  replaced  by
    unofficial detention of people who did not belong  in  urban  areas  in
    hostels and hotels where they were not allowed out and conditions could
    be abusive.

The submissions

36. Mr Saunders conceded that in the light of the what Baroness  Hale  said
    in the House of Lords in Hoxha & Anor v Secretary of State for the Home
    Department [2005] UKHL 19 and the determination of the tribunal  in  SB
    (PSG - Protection Regulations - Reg 6) Moldova CG [2008] UKAIT 00002  a
    person in the appellant's position could be a member  of  a  particular
    social group.  He  submitted,  however,  that  there  was  insufficient
    evidence to show that she would be persecuted as such or  subjected  to
    article 3 ill-treatment.  The immigration judge had come to  the  right
    conclusion, although for insufficient reasons.  He submitted  that  the
    appellant claimed to fear harm, first of all on entry  and  then  at  a
    local level.  He submitted that the penalty for unlawful  exit  because
    of a child would be likely to be at the  lower  end.   The  appellant's
    greatest difficulty was an economic one.  He submitted,  however,  that
    there were mechanisms to save her from destitution.  The state  locally
    was not supposed to let people descend into destitution.   Dr  Sheehan,
    in her reports and in her oral evidence, had given an  account  of  the
    difficulties the appellant might face in obtaining employment,  but  to
    go from there to say that she would have to resort to prostitution  was
    to go too far.  When she was younger and more vulnerable  she  had  not
    been abducted.  She had ended up as a prostitute through naivety.   Now
    she was aware of the position, if it were to arise again.  Even if  one
    accepted that she was to undergo a degree of economic  instability,  it
    would not mean she was going to fall into  prostitution.   Mr  Saunders
    said he was not saying that there had been no persecution in the  past,
    but it did not follow that the appellant would  be  persecuted  in  the
    future.  It was not as if her fear was based on  those  who  trafficked
    her previously wanting to get hold of her again.  In  relation  to  the
    question of the adequacy of protection, he submitted that the  measures
    taken by the Chinese government did indicate a  substantial  effort  on
    their part.  There was clearly disagreement about the methods  used  by
    China's authorities.  Professor Palmer thought  better  protection  was
    offered by a greater  chance  of  detection  in  preference  to  savage
    sentences.  It was clear, however, that the Chinese had cracked down in
    the campaign referred to as the "Strike Hard" campaign.  May be it  had
    not been as effective as intended and more money was needed, but  there
    was an intention on the part of the Chinese authorities  to  deal  with
    the problem as shown by the plan for 2008 to 2012.  He  submitted  that
    the legal aid and legal counselling centres referred to in paragraph 11
    of Dr Sheehan's first report did not  specifically  exclude  vulnerable
    women and children who had been trafficked and/or sexually exploited.

37. Ms Finch relied upon her skeleton argument.  She drew our attention  to
    the documents mentioned in it and stated that the chronology was not in
    dispute.  In the skeleton there was a summary of the  appellant's  case
    between paragraphs 11 and 12.  It was said that  she  was  at  risk  of
    persecution for reasons of her membership of a particular social group.
     Sexual exploitation and enforced prostitution and forced  labour  were
    sufficiently serious by their nature and/or  repetition  to  amount  to
    persecution.  There was a reasonable  degree  of  likelihood  that  the
    appellant, as a former victim of trafficking for enforced  prostitution
    and a single unmarried woman from a rural area with a young  child  and
    no family support would, if returned to China,  be  re-trafficked  into
    enforced prostitution and similar forms of sexual  exploitation  and/or
    indentured servitude either within China or another country.  There was
    also a reasonable degree of likelihood that she and her daughter  would
    experience treatment which would amount to persecution  on  account  of
    the fact that she was a single mother.   There  was  no  practical  and
    effective protection available to the appellant and her child in China.
     It would be unduly harsh to the appellant and her  child  to  move  to
    live elsewhere in  China.    She  was  also  entitled  to  humanitarian
    protection and protection under article 3 of the ECHR.   In  a  section
    dealing with membership of a  particular  social  group,  a  number  of
    authorities were referred to together with Regulation 6 of the  Refugee
    or  Person  in  Need  of   International   Protection   (Qualification)
    Regulations  2006  and  the   UNHCR's   Guidelines   on   International
    Protection.  It was submitted that there was a serious possibility that
    the fact that the appellant had had a child out of wedlock  at  such  a
    young age would lead to an assumption that she had been a prostitute in
    the past.  In China there was a cultural expectation that  women  would
    be chaste and there were a number of social taboos and prejudices about
    sexual activity.   There  was  strong  disapproval  of  premarital  and
    extramarital activity and having a child out of wedlock, which had  all
    combined to ensure the  appellant's  social  exclusion.   In  addition,
    women who were discovered to be prostitutes in China were often treated
    as criminals, not as victims and no investigations were carried out  to
    see whether they were victims of trafficking.   Under  the  heading  of
    persecution it was submitted that both the act of being trafficked  and
    the fact of being sexually exploited and forced into  prostitution  was
    capable of constituting persecution for the  purposes  of  the  Refugee
    Convention.

38. In relation to risk on return and the likelihood of the appellant being
    re-trafficked into forced prostitution in  the  skeleton  argument  the
    appellant relied upon the reports by Dr Sheehan, a statement from Julie
    Barton,  Poppy  Project,  dated  1st  September  2007,  the  US   State
    Department Trafficking Persons Report of June 2008, an article  by  Xin
    Ren  entitled  "Violence   Against   Women   under   China's   Economic
    Modernisation, an article entitled, "China and Hong Kong" from a  Fact-
    Book on the Global Exploitation, a China Human Rights fact sheet  dated
    March 1995, a UN Inter - Agency Project  on  Human  Trafficking:  China
    Country page and an extract from  Internal  Migration  in  Contemporary
    China by D Davin dated 1999.  It  was  submitted  that  the  background
    evidence indicated that China was a  source,  transit  and  destination
    country for men  and  women  trafficked  for  the  purposes  of  sexual
    exploitation and forced labour.  Domestic trafficking remained the most
    significant problem, with an estimated  20,000  victims;  90%  of  this
    number had been trafficked from six provinces, one  of  which  was  the
    appellant's own province of Anhui.  China  remained  on  the  US  State
    Department Trafficking Tier 2 Watch List for 2008, for  a  fourth  year
    which represented a deterioration of its status since the end of  2003.
    Trafficking in China for sexual exploitation and  indentured  servitude
    was widespread and endemic and the authorities  were  failing  to  deal
    with what was an increasing problem.

39. The  NGO  Report  by  Human  Rights  in  China  in  June  2006  on  the
    Implementation of the Convention of the Elimination  of  all  forms  of
    Discrimination against Women in the People's Republic of  China  stated
    in paragraph 22 that:

          "poor rural girls, already disadvantaged in education, health  and
         employment opportunities ... ... fall prey  to  trafficking  to  be
         exploited sexually, or to serve as potential brides or labourers."

      If the appellant would have to return  to  her  home  area  under  the
    hukou system, she was from one of the poorest provinces in  east  China
    which was a major source for trafficking.  If she wanted  to  move  she
    would have to apply for permission which was unlikely to  be  given  in
    the absence of a permanent job.  If the appellant wanted to  remain  in
    an urban area she would have to do so illegally or by obtaining fake ID
    which would cost her money and there was  a  high  risk  that  the  PRC
    authorities  would  detect  her  fake  ID.   Those  found   with   fake
    documentation or those without documentation in urban areas were liable
    to detention in centres containing some of the most vulnerable  members
    of society.  The centres were abusive in their conditions and act as  a
    magnet for people traffickers.  If the appellant were returned to China
    there was a serious possibility  she  would  find  herself  in  such  a
    detention centre.  It would be virtually impossible for  the  appellant
    to  find  herself  accommodation  and  work  in   order   to   survive.
    Rehabilitation centres for victims of trafficking did exist,  but  they
    could accommodate 2,000 people out of an  estimated  10,000  to  20,000
    victims a year.  The  closest  to  the  appellant's  home  was  several
    hundreds of miles away.  The USSD Report described progress in 2006  in
    protection and rehabilitation of PRC trafficking  victims  as  "modest"
    and  concluded  that  "protection  services  remained   temporary   and
    inadequate to address victim's needs".  Seeking  private  accommodation
    would pose major problems for the appellant as anyone who takes her  in
    as a tenant might well do so with the  intention  of  informing  people
    traffickers in order to claim a reward.  Seeking employment would place
    the appellant  at  risk  of  re-trafficking  since  in  order  to  find
    employment the appellant's only option is to approach an  agency,  many
    of which are fake and a front for people  trafficking.   The  appellant
    did not have any established family networks which were the main  route
    to finding safe employment.  There was also a possibility that  on  her
    return the appellant would be fined or imprisoned as a  punishment  for
    leaving  the  country  illegally,  which  would  worsen  her   economic
    situation which in itself would put her at greater risk  of  being  re-
    trafficked.  If she were fined or sentenced to a period of detention it
    would publicly identify her as someone who had been involved in the sex
    industry, which in turn  would  expose  her  to  further  risk  of  re-
    involvement in the sex industry and targeting by traffickers.

40. In dealing with sufficiency of protection the skeleton argument  relied
    upon the UNCHR Trafficking Guidelines dated April 2006, in paragraph 23
    of which it was said where a state failed to take such reasonable steps
    as were within  its  competence  to  prevent  trafficking  and  provide
    effective protection and assistance to victims, the fear of persecution
    of the individual was likely to be well-founded.  The mere existence of
    a law prohibiting  trafficking  in  persons  would  not  of  itself  be
    sufficient to exclude the  possibility  of  persecution.   If  the  law
    existed but was  not  effectively  implemented,  or  if  administrative
    mechanisms were in  place  to  provide  protection  and  assistance  to
    victims but the individual concerned was unable to gain access to  such
    measures, the state may be deemed unable to extend  protection  to  the
    victim, or prevent  the  potential  victim,  of  trafficking.   It  was
    repeated that China was placed on the Tier 2 Watch List for the  fourth
    consecutive year for its failure to show evidence of increasing efforts
    to  improve  comprehensive  victim  protection  services  and   address
    trafficking for involuntary servitude.   China  did  not  prohibit  the
    commercial sexual exploitation involving coercion or fraud, nor did  it
    prohibit all forms of trafficking, such as debt  bondage.   Vice  crime
    syndicates played a significant role in trafficking  and  the  risk  of
    detection and prosecution for such groups was not great  as  they  were
    often under  the  protection  of  government  or  PRC  officials.   The
    statistics and investigations of prosecutions for trafficking cited  by
    the Chinese government demonstrated that the government  did  not  have
    trafficking under control and  that  this  situation  had  deteriorated
    since 2003.  Women in the sex industry do not seek protection from  PRC
    officials as they often take the side  of  the  traffickers  or  pimps.
    Trafficked women often have  the  most  to  fear  from  law-enforcement
    personnel.  Sexual rehabilitation centres for  victims  of  trafficking
    exist, but are inadequate for the reasons set out above.

41. Under the heading of "Lone Mother" it was submitted in the  alternative
    that returning the appellant and her daughter to China would amount  to
    a breach of the Refugee Convention and it would also be unduly harsh to
    expect her to relocate within China as a single mother with  no  family
    or friends to support and protect her.  In particular the hukou system,
    coupled with her own personal circumstances, would result in her facing
    utter destitution and an existence below a bare  subsistence  level  in
    any place or relocation.  Single mothers  and  their  offspring  suffer
    severe and  long-term  discrimination  in  China,  due  to  the  strong
    disapproval of pre-marital and extra-marital sex.  Despite the Marriage
    Act of 1982 guaranteeing children born out of wedlock the  same  rights
    as children born within marriage, in practice the  former  were  deemed
    illegitimate by the Chinese  government.   Applications  for  household
    registration from peasants  and  working  class  mothers  with  limited
    education, money and status were routinely rejected.  Denial  of  hukou
    to children born outside marriage consequently led to denial of  access
    to health services and  enrolment  in  education  institutions.   As  a
    group, single mothers  were  faced  with  fewer  job  prospects,  lower
    earning ability and limited access to housing.  They  had  considerably
    diminished prospects of marriage due to the  Chinese  government's  One
    Child Policy and their low social status.  The quality  of  opportunity
    for single mothers from peasant and working class backgrounds and their
    offspring  in  China  to  access  basic  resources,  education,  health
    services, food, housing, employment and the fair distribution of income
    had a substantial impact on their capacity to subsist.  It also impeded
    their right to development under international law.  It  was  submitted
    that the appellant as a single, unmarried woman from a rural area, with
    a young child and no family support, if returned to  China  would  face
    economic  hardship  and  systematic  discrimination  by   the   Chinese
    government and civil society, which threatens her capacity  to  subsist
    and amounts to persecution.   The  appellant  relied  upon  an  article
    entitled, "Birthrights" in the  Guardian  newspaper  on  24th  December
    2002, an article entitled "Single Chinese Mothers beset with  troubles"
    in the China Daily for 18th December 2004, Dr Sheehan's first report, a
    paper from the Research Directorate  of  the  Immigration  and  Refugee
    Board of Canada entitled, "China Reforms Household Registration  System
    (Hukou) (1998 - 2004)", dated February 2005, and a  report  from  Human
    Rights in China entitled, "Not Welcome at the Party: Behind the  Clean-
    up Of China's Cities -  A  Report  on  Administrative  Detention  under
    'Custody and Repatriation'", dated September 1999.   It  was  submitted
    that if the appellant were not entitled to protection under the Refugee
    Convention on this  basis  then  she  should  be  granted  humanitarian
    protection or discretionary leave to  remain.   The  latter  should  be
    granted in recognition that she and her daughter would not be  able  to
    continue to enjoy private life if removed to China  as  they  would  be
    rendered absolutely destitute and would be also ostracised for breaking
    fundamental norms and practices of Chinese society.

42. In her oral submissions Ms Finch submitted that the appellant had  been
    persecuted in the past.  She had been trafficked as a minor.  Her  fear
    was that because of her past she  would  be  liable  to  be  trafficked
    internally or out of China in the future.  It was true that at the  age
    of 15 she had been enticed into  prostitution,  but  a  minor  was  not
    capable of consenting to being a  prostitute.   Ms  Finch  referred  to
    Articles 34 and 35 of the United Nations Convention on  the  Rights  of
    the Child by which state parties undertook to protect  the  child  from
    all forms of  sexual  exploitation  and  sexual  abuse  and  would,  in
    particular, take all appropriate national, bi-lateral and multi-lateral
    measures to prevent the inducement or coercion of a child to engage  in
    any unlawful sexual activity by which they should take all  appropriate
    measures to prevent the  abduction  of  the  sale  of  all  trafficking
    children for any purpose or in any form.   She  also  referred  to  the
    Council of Europe Convention on Action  against  Trafficking  in  Human
    Beings, which in Article 4 included in the definition of trafficking in
    human beings trafficking by deception and  the  abuse  of  power  of  a
    person in a position of vulnerability.

43. Ms Finch submitted that in the case of SB  the  Tribunal  looked  at  a
    former victim of trafficking in the context of  the  society  that  she
    would return to.  The appellant was not able  to  step  back  into  any
    society easily.  She would be stigmatised  as  having  previously  been
    trafficked.  An assumption would be  made  about  her  because  of  her
    return to a rural county as unmarried and with a child.   At  the  very
    least she would be taken to have  broken  the  conventions  about  pre-
    marital sex, but it would be likely that it would be presumed that  she
    had been involved in the sex trade.  Given her age  there  would  be  a
    presumption that she was exploited and trafficked.  She  would  not  be
    regarded as merely a single mother, but  as  someone  who  had  allowed
    herself to mix with exploiters.   It  was  plain  from  the  background
    evidence that the Chinese had no concept  of  such  women  as  victims.
    There was a certain contradiction  in  that  Chinese  society  expected
    women to be chaste.  There was a  strong  disapproval  of  sex  outside
    marriage, yet Chinese society was rife  with  prostitution  and  was  a
    source country for trafficking in women and children.

44. Ms Finch referred to the USDOS Trafficking Persons  Report  dated  June
    2008 which stated that the PRC was the source, transit and  destination
    country for men, women and children  trafficked  for  the  purposes  of
    sexual exploitation and forced labour.  China was on the Tier  2  Watch
    List and had been for the last four  years.   Tier  3  comprised  those
    countries of which no complaint was made.  Tier 1 comprised those where
    protection was lacking.  In  2004  Tier  2  comprised  those  countries
    largely tackling the problem.  Tier 2  was  subsequently  divided  into
    two.  The Tier 2 Watch List included those  countries  making  progress
    but not meeting on a practical  level  sufficient  measures  to  combat
    trafficking.  China had remained on the Watch List since 2004.  It  was
    not accepted that China was taking practical steps  to  deal  with  the
    problem.  Women were being shipped out all over the world.   There  was
    a grey area between smuggling and trafficking.  The appellant felt that
    she was paying to get out of China to improve her situation but she had
    been trafficked. It was not a  question  of  China  even  reaching  the
    minimum level required.  The figures for 2006 to 2007 showed  that  few
    cases were tackled  and  sometimes  the  victims  were  punished  which
    suggested that they were not seen as victims.  Recommendations had been
    made in the report, namely for China to  provide  adequate  funding  to
    local and provincial governments to implement the new  national  action
    plan for  establishing  a  form  of  victim  identification  procedures
    conduct public awareness campaigns to inform the public  of  the  risks
    and dangers of trafficking.  There was no  system  in  place  in  China
    whereby vulnerable people would be identified and  provision  made  for
    their rehabilitation and for teaching them new skills.  The report said
    that China did not have a comprehensive  nationwide  victim  protection
    service, although it had taken some steps to improve intra-governmental
    co-ordination and co-operation in vulnerable southern border provinces.



45. Ms Finch submitted that  the  absence  of  a  comprehensive  nationwide
    victim protection service was important in the appellant's case because
    she would go  back  to  China  in  a  vulnerable  position.   Her  past
    circumstances were not the same as for other women who may be returned.
     It was accepted that she was an orphan and that after her  grandmother
    died she had no other family members.  From the age of 10 to 15 she had
    lived as a street  child.   She  did  not  develop  community  ties  or
    friendships upon which she might rely.  The  ties  that  she  did  make
    pulled her into prostitution and led her to being trafficked.  She  had
    no employment experience.  Due to the registration system she would  go
    back to a rural county in a poor province where she had no land,  house
    and could not be employed as a labourer due to her lack  of  experience
    and gender and where it was unlikely she would be  employed  given  the
    level of social stigma against an unmarried woman with a child and  the
    implication  that  she  was  or  had  been  a   prostitute.    It   was
    inconceivable that she would be wanted as a nanny since most  employers
    wanted a nanny to devote their time to their own children.

46. Ms Finch acknowledged that it was the case that there was a very  basic
    safety net at local level which the expert said was  only  a  temporary
    measure until the person got on her feet.  It was  not  clear  how  she
    would do that without an opportunity for employment in a rural  county.
    She could only move elsewhere if she found a job.  It might be possible
    if she were higher up the employment ladder where one could send  a  CV
    or had family connections.  It was not open to  this  appellant.    She
    could not turn up at the factory gate looking  for  employment  holding
    the hand of a toddler.  There were only three shelters where  the  stay
    was limited, even if she had a  place.   She  was  in  a  situation  of
    extreme vulnerability to further exploitation.  Ms Finch submitted that
    she was more aware than when she had been 15 years old, but  older  men
    had been duped into thinking they  were  being  recruited  for  genuine
    employment.  She  submitted  that  having  a  child  would  not  be  an
    impediment to being re-trafficked.  The child herself  would  be  at  a
    disadvantage.  Chinese society had been happy to see the  appellant  on
    the streets collecting tins.  When her grandmother died,  those  around
    her were content to see her left  to  her  own  devices.   This  was  a
    society that regularly abandoned female children to their own devices.

47. Ms Finch was asked to deal with the subjective element on the  part  of
    someone who was returned to China on the understanding that one  person
    might have a resolve that she would never be trafficked  again  whereas
    another may not.  Ms Finch was asked to say  how  the  Tribunal  should
    regard the appellant.  She submitted the effect on the appellant  could
    be seen by the length of time it took for  her  to  disclose  what  had
    happened to her, which was not surprising given  the  Chinese  attitude
    towards sex.  She was still only 18 and her child was 2 years old.  She
    was very scared of being returned.  From her  previous  life  she  knew
    what it was like to be at the bottom of the pile.   She  would  not  be
    resigned to live that  kind  of  life.   Faced  with  the  question  of
    vulnerability, she submitted that the appellant was scared and did  not
    have a lot of life experience.  When one  considered  the  evidence  of
    false training and recruitment, the fact that she had paid money in the
    past did not mean that she would recognise all scams in the future.

48. In relation to the government action plan she submitted that  that  was
    aspirational.  As the expert said  it's  achievement  would  depend  on
    funding.  It reflected an analysis of the weaknesses in Chinese society
    and its proposals were directed to what they saw were those  weaknesses
    in "our society".  Section 2 of the Operational Measures  and  Division
    Responsibilities advocated support for poor women in rural areas and it
    was acknowledged that the recruitment process of job seekers, employers
    and job brokers should be regulated.  These were people  the  appellant
    would  have  to  rely  upon.   A  further  aim  was  to  actively   and
    successfully reform, monitor and educate criminals  who  traffic  women
    and children to reduce the rate of re-offending.  This  clearly  showed
    that the authorities believed that they were not doing  enough  to  re-
    educate traffickers.  When recommending  that  they  should  resolutely
    combat the "buyers market" for  crimes  of  trafficking  in  women  and
    children, it was recognised that there existed at the moment  a  buyers
    market.  In suggesting that they  should  strengthen  social  care  for
    trafficked women and children and help them to smoothly return and  re-
    integrate into society, a problem was acknowledged which was a  problem
    for the appellant.  Ms Finch suggested that throughout the document was
    aspirational.  She made  reference  to  a  Chinese  government  website
    which, in  commenting  on  the  government  action  plan,  stated  that
    government agencies as well as NGO representatives paid regular follow-
    up visits to women delivered from trafficking.   They  also  encouraged
    the community to take good care of these women rather than  to  discard
    them.  She submitted that the funding would be crucial  and  the  money
    was just not there to implement the plan.  Ms  Finch  took  us  through
    passages in her skeleton argument which it is not necessary to  mention
    in any detail since we have already dealt with it.

Our conclusions

49. The burden of proof is upon the appellant to show to  the  standard  of
    reasonable degree of likelihood or substantial  grounds  for  believing
    that there is a real risk of serious harm on return to the  PRC  for  a
    Refugee Convention reason or alternatively so as  to  entitled  her  to
    humanitarian protection or protection under article 3 of the ECHR.  Our
    decision must be based on the entirety of the evidence.



A brief evaluation of the evidence of Dr Sheehan

50. We bear in mind that in paragraph 120 of their judgement in  NA  v  The
    United Kingdom - 25904/07 [2008] ECHR 616 the European Court  of  Human
    Rights said that in respect of reports the authority and reputation  of
    the author, the seriousness of the investigation by means of which they
    were  compiled,  the  consistency  of  their  conclusions   and   their
    corroboration by other sources were all relevant considerations.

51. We are grateful to Dr Sheehan for both the written  and  oral  evidence
    which she has presented on behalf of the appellant. As a researcher and
    teacher of contemporary Chinese studies and as a result of  her  visits
    to the PRC she clearly has a familiarity with Chinese society which  of
    course is helpful in the  compilation  of  her  reports.  In  her  oral
    evidence she told us that on her last visit to  China  she  spent  time
    examining documents which  might  well  have  given  her  a  degree  of
    expertise assessing the genuineness of  documents.   We  did  have  the
    impression,  however,  that  more  generally  her  expertise   lay   in
    assembling items of background material which provided  the  basis  for
    her expressions of opinion, rather than having an expertise which  gave
    her the confidence to be able to predict what was likely to happen in a
    given situation.  The disadvantages of such an  approach  are  several.
    In the first place a misreading of the background material may  distort
    the value of Dr Sheehan's opinion.  An example of this lay in the  fact
    that in paragraph 9 of her first statement Dr  Sheehan  said  that  the
    appellant might find herself in a Custody and Repatriation centre which
    typically housed some of the most marginalised groups in society.  This
    suggestion was  adopted  in  paragraph  36  of  the  skeleton  argument
    submitted on behalf of the appellant.  Dr Sheehan, however,  failed  to
    observe that the background  material  demonstrates  that  Custody  and
    Repatriation centres were abolished in 2003.  It  was  only  in  cross-
    examination when it  was  put  to  her  that  these  centres  had  been
    abolished that she acknowledged this to be  the  case.   Had  this  not
    occurred the Tribunal could very easily have been misled.

52. A further example was the opinion of Dr Sheehan that women  would  only
    be employed to work the land if all the men had migrated or would  only
    help out as a member of a family.  In her article entitled "40  Million
    Missing Girls" dated 7th October 2005, Laurel  Bossen  dealt  with  the
    three basic explanations for Chinese gender discrimination the first of
    which was that sons were necessary for heavy  farm  labour.   She  said
    that rural women had contributed to a  large  proportion  of  the  farm
    labour in China for nearly 50 years.  The fact that many men  had  left
    farming to women and migrated to towns and cities in search  of  better
    incomes since the 1970s undercut their "heavy labour" argument.  It  is
    apparent, therefore, that women in rural areas  had  carried  out  farm
    labour even before the migration of men to  towns  and  cities  in  the
    1970s.  Furthermore it is interesting to note that in the  HRIC  report
    entitled "Implementation of the Convention on the  Elimination  of  all
    Forms of Discrimination against Women in the People's Republic of China
    dated June 2006 it is stated that unmarried rural women participated in
    non-farming work at the same rates as men.

53. Yet a further example is provided by  Dr  Sheehan's  opinion  that  the
    hukou system would force the appellant to  return  to  the  place  from
    which she came in Anhui province.  The most recent  detailed  objective
    material relating to the hukou system with which we were  provided  was
    the Refugee Board of Canada paper, published in February 2005,  dealing
    with the reforms of the  hukou  system  between  1998  and  2004.   Set
    against one of the conclusions in that paper  that  the  hukou  reforms
    have meant  that  the  government  can  no  longer  restrict  migrants'
    entrance to the cities her opinion, as we shall see, seems to  be  over
    rigid and outdated.

54. Another disadvantage is that on a number of occasions when  Dr  Sheehan
    was invited to express an opinion she was  not  able  to  do  so.   One
    example of this was when she was asked by Ms Finch what would happen to
    the appellant on return at the border.  Her reply  was  that  the  COIR
    explained that we did not  know.   It  was  only  when  pressed  by  Mr
    Saunders that she conceded that as the appellant had no  means  it  was
    possible she might not have  to  pay  a  penalty  for  having  migrated
    illegally.  Another example was when Dr Sheehan described the situation
    of unmarried women having children as a muddy area  in  view  the  fact
    that an unmarried woman could not obtain a  birth  permit.    There  is
    background evidence, however, to which we shall  refer  in  due  course
    which describes the situation of a number of unmarried mothers who have
    regularised the position of their children. We do not make  an  adverse
    assessment of Dr Sheehan but  merely  point  to  these  matters  as  an
    illustration of the limitation on the value of her evidence, since  she
    herself does not have such a familiarity with what actually happens  in
    the PRC to enable her to offer an explanation  of  what  is  likely  to
    happen in any given situation.

Assessment of the general position for women returnees  with  a  history  of
trafficking

    State protection

55. Paragraph 1.06 of the Country of Origin  Information  Report  on  China
    dated 1st June 2008 indicates that the CIA World Fact Book, dated  15th
    April 2008, recorded that China's  population  numbered  1,330,044,605.
    It said that in its Country Profile for China, dated August  2006,  the
    US Library of Congress noted, "60%-62% of the population lived in rural
    areas in 2004, whilst 38% lived in urban settings. ..."  Various  items
    of background evidence confirm the  opinion  of  Dr  Sheehan  that  the
    trafficking of women for prostitution in China is  a  serious  problem.
    In the section dealing with the trafficking of persons,  the  US  State
    Department Report on Human  Rights  Practices  dated  11th  March  2008
    stated:-

         "Domestic and cross-border trafficking continued to be  significant
         problems, although the exact numbers of persons involved could only
         be estimated due to a huge itinerant  population  of  approximately
         150 million.  The MPS reported about 3,000 cross-border trafficking
         cases but stated this figure is  decreasing  by  approximately  20%
         every year.   NGOs  estimated  the  number  of  victims  trafficked
         internally each year was between 10,000 and 20,000."

      The passage under the heading "Women" said:-

         "Although prostitution is illegal,  experts  estimated  that  there
         were between 1.7 and 5 million women involved  in  prostitution  in
         the country.  The commercialisation of sex and related  trafficking
         in women trapped tens of thousands of women in a cycle of crime and
         exploitation  and  left  them  vulnerable  to  disease  and  abuse.
         According to  state-run  media,  one  out  of  every  five  massage
         parlours in the country  was  involved  in  prostitution  with  the
         percentage higher in cities.  Up to  80%  of  prostitutes  in  some
         areas had hepatitis."

      US State Department "Trafficking in Persons Report"  dated  June  2008
    stated:-

         "The People's Republic of China (P.R.C.) is a source, transit,  and
         destination country for men, women, and children trafficked for the
         purposes of sexual exploitation and forced labour.  The majority of
         trafficking in China occurs within the country's borders, but there
         is also considerable international trafficking of  P.R.C.  citizens
         to Africa, Asia, Europe, Latin America, the Middle East, and  North
         America,  which  often  occurs  within  a  larger  flow  of   human
         smuggling.  Chinese women are lured abroad through  false  promises
         of legitimate employment, only to be forced into commercial  sexual
         exploitation, largely in Taiwan, Thailand, Malaysia, and Japan."

      It is clear from the International Labour Organisation Report  of  the
    CP-TING Project that the province  from  whence  the  appellant  comes,
    Anhui, is a 'sending' province in  China.   The  report  described  the
    project's aim to make migration channels safe for girls who  wanted  to
    leave their rural villages operating in the three  'sending'  provinces
    in Central  China  (Anhui,  Henan  and  Hunan)  which  had  a  combined
    population of 223 million inhabitants.

56. As a matter of perspective the figure of  20,000  cases  of  trafficked
    women per year represents less than .002% of the population  of  China.
    Applied to the population of the United  Kingdom  it  would  mean  that
    there were virtually no trafficked women.

57. It is not necessary for us to consider the reasons for  the  growth  in
    prostitution in China  which  was  explained  by  Dr  Sheehan,  or  the
    increase in trafficking.  Suffice it to say that her book "Children  in
    the Sex Trade in China" published by Save the Children,  Sweden,  Julia
    O'Connell Davidson stated that most had followed one  of  three  routes
    into prostitution.  Some had migrated in search of other forms of work,
    but had been unable to find jobs, or to live on the  wages  from  other
    work.  They thus became vulnerable to pressure from others to enter the
    sex industry, or to making a decision to engage in sex work.  Some  had
    been tricked and trafficked into the sex  trade  when  they  sought  to
    migrate for factory, farm, restaurant, hotel or  domestic  work.   Some
    had chosen to migrate into sex work because it was more highly rewarded
    than any occupation available to  uneducated  and  even  many  educated
    women.

58. There is disagreement in the background material as to whether China is
    fulfilling its responsibilities to deal with trafficking of women.  The
    United Nations Inter-Agency Project on Human Trafficking in the Greater
    Meikong sub-region in dealing with China says this:-

         "The Chinese government takes  its  duty  and  responsibilities  to
         prevent and prohibit domestic and  cross-border  human  trafficking
         seriously  and  fulfils  its  commitment   to   the   international
         community.  Positive measures will  continue  to  be  initiated  in
         China  including  alleviating  poverty,  increasing   chances   for
         employment,  improving  legislation  and  law  enforcement,  public
         education, and building a long-term  social  mechanism  to  prevent
         trafficking."

      In March 1995 the Christusrex China Human Rights Fact  Sheet,  dealing
    with the abduction and trafficking of women, acknowledged that the  PRC
    government had enacted various laws to combat the sale  of  women,  but
    the statistics released by the government did not reliably indicate the
    scale of the problem.  It can be seen from  the  Criminal  Law  of  the
    People's Republic of China (1997) that there are a considerable  number
    of  articles  in  the  Criminal  Code  which  provide  for  substantial
    penalties for offences relating to the sexual  exploitation  of  women.
    The criticism of the Chinese authorities in dealing with  the  problems
    of trafficking does not centre on  failing  to  criminalise  activities
    relating to the trafficking of women or failing to provide  for  severe
    penalties, apart  from  that  contained  in  the  US  State  Department
    Trafficking in Persons Report dated June 2006  which  stated  that  the
    Chinese definition of the term "trafficking" did not  include  acts  of
    forced  labour,  debt  bondage,  coercion,  involuntary  servitude   or
    offences committed against male victims.  In this connection it can  be
    seen from Article 240 of Chapter 4 of the  Chinese  Criminal  Law  that
    seducing, tricking or forcing abducted women into prostitution, selling
    abducted women to others who in turn force them into prostitution is  a
    criminal  offence.   Criticism  rather  centres  on  the  lack  of  the
    effective  prosecution  of  offenders,  a  failure  to  deal  with  the
    complicity of state  officials,  the  lack  of  provision  of  adequate
    funding to local and provincial governments to fund the new  additional
    action plan, the  lack  of  formal  victim  identification  procedures,
    provision for their protection and rehabilitation and  the  failure  to
    conduct broad public awareness campaigns to inform the  public  of  the
    risks  and  dangers  of  trafficking.   The  US  Department  of   State
    Trafficking Persons Report dated June 2008 states as follows:-

         "The Government of the  P.R.C.  does  not  fully  comply  with  the
         minimum standards for the elimination of trafficking;  however,  it
         is making significant efforts to do  so.   Nevertheless,  China  is
         placed on Tier 2 Watch List for the fourth consecutive year for its
         failure to provide evidence of increasing efforts to  combat  human
         trafficking from  the  previous  year,  particularly  in  terms  of
         punishment of trafficking crimes and the protection of Chinese  and
         foreign victims of trafficking.  Victims are sometimes punished for
         unlawful acts that were committed as a direct result of their being
         trafficked   -   such   as   violations   for    prostitution    or
         immigration/immigration  controls.   ...    Additional   challenges
         facing the P.R.C. Government  include  the  enormous  size  of  its
         trafficking problem and the significant  level  of  corruption  and
         complicity in  trafficking  by  some  local  government  officials.
         Factors impeding progress in anti-trafficking efforts include tight
         controls over civil society  organisations,  restricted  access  of
         foreign  anti-trafficking  organisations   and   the   government's
         systemic lack of transparency."

59. In our view Dr  Sheehan  has  validly  criticised  the  statistics  put
    forward by the Chinese authorities.  She referred to the article by Xin
    Ren, "Violence against  Women  under  China's  Economic  Modernisation"
    stating that according to government  reports,  between  1990  -  1991,
    65,236 people were arrested for involvement in the sale  of  women  and
    children.  From 1993 - 94, another 50,000 traffickers were arrested  in
    a further 33,100 cases.   The authorities reported that 27,000  people,
    including 2,700 children, were rescued.  However, even  the  government
    admitted that this was just the  tip  of  the  iceberg  concerning  the
    problem of women trafficking.  The China Rights Forum in  their  report
    on "The Property of Men: The Trafficking and Domestic Abuse  of  Women"
    dated 30th June 1995 gives slightly different  figures.   The  official
    report stated that in 1991 and 1992 the Public  Security  Bureau  (PSB)
    uncovered 50,000 cases  of  trafficking,  arrested  70,000  people  and
    rescued 40,000 women and children.  The figures released  in  1993  and
    1994 reported 24,751  women  and  2,731  children  rescued  and  49,839
    traffickers arrested.  The report went on to say that the total  number
    of women  abducted  and  sold  may  be  double  the  official  numbers,
    according to one Chinese journalist who covered women's  issues  for  a
    number of years.

60. The United Nations Inter-Agency Project on  Human  Trafficking  in  the
    Greater Meikong Sub-Region in dealing with the arrest  and  prosecution
    of traffickers, painted a fairly positive picture of the  role  of  the
    Ministry of  Public  Security  (MPS)  in  the  national  fight  against
    trafficking in women and children.  The report says that from  1991  to
    2000, MPS organised four campaigns  to  combat  trafficking  women  and
    children in selected areas across the country.  From 2001 to 2003,  the
    police cracked down  on  20,360  cases  of  trafficking  in  women  and
    children, arrested 22,010  criminals,  and  rescued  42,215  trafficked
    women and children.  Local procuratorates approved 7,186  arrest  cases
    (sic) of trafficking in women and children, arresting  13,995  suspects
    and approved 226 arrest cases of buying trafficked women and  children,
    arresting 416 suspects.  8,442 cases of trafficking women and  children
    were brought to court by  public  prosecution,  which  involved  15,000
    defendants.  177 cases of trafficked women and children were brought to
    court by public  prosecutions,  which  involved  358  defendants.   The
    report, however, does not deal with more recent figures which suggest a
    far less optimistic picture.

61. We agree with the comment by Dr Sheehan that the figures given  in  the
    US Department of State Report on Human Rights Practices for 2007 do not
    provide any data on the outcome of the 3,371 cases investigated  or  on
    convictions for traffic offences generally.  It is the  case  that  the
    Department of State Trafficking  in  Persons  Report  dated  June  2008
    states that MPS reported investigating 2,375 cases  of  trafficking  of
    women and children in 2007 which was significantly lower than the 3,371
    cases it cited in 2006.  The report said these statistics  were  likely
    to have been based on China's definition of the term "trafficking".  We
    agree with Dr Sheehan suggestion that  the  statistics  suggested  that
    fewer cases were investigated and fewer victims rescued than in 2001  -
    2003.  She criticised in our view,  with  good  reason,  the  statement
    attributed to Mr Zhang, the Deputy Minister of Public Security, on 15th
    December 2007 taken from the Beijing Youth  Daily  and  reported  human
    trafficking.org "China improves effort to  combat  trafficking  through
    regional mechanisms", that 2,500 trafficking cases were solved in  2006
    constituting 805-  90%  of  the  total  and  that  no  law  enforcement
    personnel were involved in any trafficking cases.   Dr  Sheehan's  view
    was that she did not accept that  2,500  cases,  if  that  figure  were
    accurate, could  be  known  to  constitute  80  to  90%  of  the  total
    trafficking, given a minimum annual number  of  victims  of  10,000  to
    20,000 and she would require further details and corroboration  of  the
    claims made in the  article  before  accepting  it  as  evidence  of  a
    breakthrough in China's anti-trafficking efforts, given the  weight  of
    evidence to the contrary.   The  suggestion  that  no  law  enforcement
    personnel were involved in any trafficking  cases  was  belied  by  the
    report of the release of hundreds of slave  labourers  in  summer  2007
    from the notorious brick kilns in Shanxi in which there  was  collusion
    between the police and labour protection officials and the kiln owners.
     That they were was also borne out by the article by Emily E Schuckman,
    quoted by Dr Sheehan, entitled, "Anti Trafficking Policies in Asia  and
    the Russian Far East:  A  Comparative  Perspective"  published  in  the
    winter of 2006 to the effect that:-

         "Corrupt law enforcement officers and government officials  were  a
         barrier to combating prostitution and trafficking.  Officials  were
         bribed by pimps or  brothel  owners  or  offered  perks  when  they
         themselves visited the brothel.  These actions indicated the silent
         encouragement  of   prostitution   and,   intentionally   or   not,
         trafficking.  Prostitution was an embarrassment  to  the  Communist
         Party, which touted  its  ability  to  eliminate  social  problems.
         Party officials often opted to just avoid the issue."

    The US State Department Report for 2008 also  noted  that  despite  its
    general  anti-corruption  measures,  the   PRC   government   had   not
    demonstrated concerted efforts to  investigate,  prosecute  and  punish
    government officials for complicity in trafficking.

62. We also accept Dr Sheehan's criticism of the  Chinese  government,  for
    failure  to  make  sufficient  provision  for  transfer,  training  and
    rehabilitation centres for victims.  She  acknowledged  that  provision
    had been made in areas that  were  major  trafficking  "sending"  areas
    namely in Kunming, in Yunnan province, Chengdu,  Sichuan  province  and
    Xuzhou in Jiangsu  province,  but  these  centres  were  only  able  to
    accommodate 2,000 women out of an estimated minimum of 10,000 to 20,000
    victims a year.  In our view given the scale of the  problem  there  is
    clearly insufficient provision for the  rehabilitation  of  victims  of
    trafficking.

63. In Bagdanavicius and Anor, R (On the Application  of)  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2003] EWCA Civ 1605, the Court of Appeal
    held that sufficiency of state protection, whether from state agents or
    non-state actors, meant a willingness and ability on the  part  of  the
    receiving state to provide through its legal system a reasonable  level
    of protection from ill-treatment of which the claimant for asylum had a
    well-founded fear.  The effectiveness of the system provided was to  be
    judged normally by its systemic ability to deter and/or to prevent  the
    form of persecution of which there was a risk, not just  punishment  of
    it after the event.  In the light of our assessment of the situation we
    take the view that although the problem of trafficking in  China  is  a
    large one in terms of overall numbers, given the small numbers involved
    in relation to the size of the female population of China, it cannot be
    said that the  deficiencies  in  the  system  of  state  protection  in
    themselves give rise to a risk of serious  harm  from  traffickers  for
    women and girls generally.  Where, however, in a given case it  can  be
    established that there is a real risk of a woman or girl  being  forced
    or coerced into prostitution, at the present time it is  unlikely  that
    it could be successfully argued that this would  be  so  despite  there
    being in place an adequate  system  of  state  protection.  Each  case,
    however, must be decided on its own facts.  We hesitate  to  express  a
    definitive view because China is a vast country  and  it  may  be,  for
    example, that in a particular part of China the  efforts  to  eliminate
    trafficking are determined and the level of  complicity  between  state
    officials and traffickers is low.

    The hukou system

64. A consideration of this appeal requires some reference to  the  Chinese
    household registration system (HRS) known as the "hukou"  system  which
    was implemented in China in the 1950s to improve migration control  and
    economic planning.   The paper from the Immigration and  Refugee  Board
    of Canada dealing with the "hukou" system dated February 2005, makes it
    plain that  the  status  of  a  person's  hukou  was  characterised  as
    agricultural (rural) or non-agricultural (urban).  Traditionally  there
    were numerous social benefits and privileges associated with  an  urban
    hukou, including the provision of basic food, better  employment,  high
    incomes, subsidised housing, the right to free education, medical care,
    social  security  and  pensions.   Although  those  benefits  had  been
    significantly reduced in the last decade, there  were  still  important
    opportunities  reserved  for  urban  hukou  holders,  particularly   in
    relation to better housing, education and  employment.   The  situation
    led academics and human rights activists to describe the HRS system  as
    being discriminatory in nature because it restricted  the  movement  of
    rural hukou holders by requiring them to obtain  temporary  permits  to
    reside in cities.  These temporary permits, however,  did  not  entitle
    their holders to the benefits and rights enjoyed by regular urban hukou
    holders, and until the reforms of 2003, migrants who  did  not  possess
    these permits were considered illegal, could  be  detained,  fined  and
    sent back to their permanent resident  locations.   Internal  migrants,
    particularly  from  rural  areas  constituted  the  vast  majority   of
    detainees under the  Custody  and  Repatriation  system  until  it  was
    abolished in 2003.

65. According to one source quoted in 2005,  in  the  last  six  years  the
    process of obtaining temporary resident permits had become considerably
    easier and simpler.  National reforms  of  the  hukou  system  included
    allowing those of less than 18 years of age to choose to inherit  their
    hukou status from either parent,  facilitating  hukou  conversions  for
    spouses previously separated by hukou restrictions, prioritising  hukou
    conversions for aged people who depended on their children for care, as
    well  as  facilitating  the   hukou   conversion   of   investors   and
    professionals and their family members.  In 2000 the  government  began
    to eliminate quotas limiting hukou registrations in  small  cities  and
    towns and in March 2001 a State Council circular ordered  small  cities
    of less than 100,000 inhabitants to  grant  hukous  to  residents  with
    fixed jobs and homes beginning in October 2001.   In  August  2003  the
    Ministry of Public Security (MPS) approved additional measures aimed at
    easing travel restrictions, particularly  in  western  areas  of  China
    which included allowing  educated  people  wishing  to  work  in  these
    regions the option of changing their permanent  hukou  registration  to
    their area of work and allowing parents to register  their  new  born's
    birth in either parents' place of permanent residence.  The elimination
    of the Custody and Repatriation Scheme in 2003 had a significant impact
    on  the  HRS  (Household  Registration  System),  for   example,   many
    provincial and municipal governments throughout China sped up their HRS
    reforms.  State council regulation  ordered  that  migrant  workers  no
    longer be arrested for not possessing  the  right  papers  and  ordered
    police to provide urban residency documents to any  migrant  who  found
    employment.

66. The report indicated  that  the  application  of  HRS  reform  policies
    promulgated at the national level varied  widely  among  the  different
    provinces and cities, making generalisations impossible.  According  to
    Beatriz Carrillo, one of the report's sources, "liberalisation" of  the
    HRS was more likely in smaller urban areas, whereas  the  larger  urban
    centres tightly managed their HRS.  Despite  the  regional  variations,
    the qualifications required to obtain urban registration tended  to  be
    similar and often  consisted  of  having  fixed  residence  and  stable
    employment (usually one year on the job) in an urban area.  During 2003
    several provinces and major  cities  began  to  speed  up  local  hukou
    reforms prompted by the outcry resulting from the March 2003  death  of
    Sun Zhigang, a 27-year old  university  graduate,  in  the  custody  of
    Gangzhou policemen, after he was arrested  for  not  carrying  identity
    documents.  This case was  referred  to  in  evidence  by  Dr  Sheehan.
    Beijing, for example, introduced further reforms in the summer of 2003,
    by issuing a  new  type  of  hukou  registration  called  "The  Beijing
    Employment and Residence Permit", which would give its holders, "rights
    to housing, education, investment, social and medical insurance  and  a
    driver's licence".  In order to be issued with such a permit,  however,
    a person must be residing in Beijing, be employed,  have  a  Bachelor's
    degree and two years of employment experience.  That meant according to
    the South China Morning Post that only a select few would qualify.

67. Under the section dealing with the human  rights  implications  of  the
    hukou reforms the report says that  although  the  hukou  reforms  have
    facilitated population movement and  created  opportunities  for  rural
    migrants, academics and human rights activists who  have  analysed  the
    effect of these reforms on contemporary Chinese society generally agree
    that the reforms have failed in  eliminating  the  social  gap  between
    urban and rural residents.   The  report  said  that  Beatriz  Carrillo
    explained that one of the problems with the  hukou  reforms  was  that,
    even though the government could no longer restrict migrants'  entrance
    to the cities, it still could, through the hukou system, establish  who
    was and who was not an "urban citizen".  The  report  stated  that  the
    hukou booklet is usually required  for  school  registration  in  local
    public schools, and when applying for  an  original  or  a  replacement
    personal identity card.  Although it was not required for medical care,
    it could be used for identification purposes anywhere that an  identity
    document was required.  According to Fei-Ling Wang, another source,  if
    a member of a household travelled abroad with  the  original  hukou  in
    his/her possession, the family back home would have  no  difficulty  in
    obtaining a duplicate hukou booklet.

68. The report said that according  to  Beatriz  Carrillo,  individuals  in
    China did not need to use their hukou on a regular basis.   They  could
    use their national identity card at the bank  and  at  most  government
    departments, even while travelling within China.   According  to  Wang,
    another of the report's sources, persons caught with a  fake  hukou  in
    their possession were  punishable  by  fines  only,  but  those  caught
    producing and selling fake documents may be prosecuted.  Hukou remained
    a key identity document in China and those  who  required  fake  hukous
    were usually rural migrants  attempting  to  improve  their  access  to
    social  benefits  by  acquiring  urban  hukous.   A  Guangdong  survey,
    reported in an article by Anita Chan entitled "Exploitation of  Migrant
    Workers in China's Export Manufacturing Sector" dated 9 December  2004,
    referred to in the report, found that 80% of overseas  owned  companies
    in China were not concerned about whether or not the documents used  by
    job applicants were forged because it had no effect on productivity.

69. The reforms also included the introduction in  1985  of  the  Temporary
    Residence Certificate which allowed internal migrants wishing to reside
    in urban areas for more than three  months  to  register  legally  with
    local hukou authorities.  The new stipulation was important in that  it
    tacitly allowed  "spontaneous"  migration  into  urban  areas,  whereas
    previously, temporary work had to be "arranged between  the  recruiting
    urban work units and the supplying communes".   It  did  not,  however,
    entitle their holders to the urban benefits associated with the regular
    urban hukou and often in addition to the TRC migrants were required  to
    obtain additional documents, such  as  work  permits,  family  planning
    permits and to pay administration and application fees in order to work
    in urban areas.  Also in 1985 the photo-equipped resident identity card
    (RIC), also referred to as the  citizen  identity  card,  was  adopted.
    According to one author, the personal  identity  card  has  a  national
    serial number, carries  personal  information  as  well  as  the  hukou
    location of its holder, but does not carry the discriminatory insulting
    reference to hukou  categorisation.   The  RIC  shifted  the  focus  of
    population registration from the household to the individual  and  from
    one book per household to one card per person.  Beatriz Carrillo stated
    that in the last two to four  years  the  personal  identity  card  had
    become the most important identification document in China.  The report
    says that hukou issuance was the responsibility of the PSB.  People can
    travel relatively freely within  China,  in  order  to  legally  change
    permanent residence, one still needs approval from the Public  Security
    Bureau (PSB).  Household registration is issued by the  PSB  office  in
    the place of permanent hukou registration which is  sometimes  not  the
    place of residence.  If a request to change a person's permanent  hukou
    residence is approved, the individual must notify the PSB office in the
    original hukou zone to have his/her name deleted, as well as notify the
    PSB in the new hukou zone, where  his/her  name  would  be  registered.
    Those who travel overseas for more than a year must cancel their  hukou
    when applying for their passports and may restore their previous  hukou
    upon returning to China.

70. The report states that according to a source, "Today's  China",  people
    can travel relatively freely.  Generally "the worst punishment that  an
    illegal migrant (floater) faces is forcible return to his/her home town
    or village".  This is often a  losing  battle  as  the  floater  simply
    returns to the area from which they were  removed.   In  addition,  the
    reforms  introduced  in  2003  have  greatly  limited  repatriation  to
    "paupers and criminals", while making it relatively easy  for  ordinary
    migrant workers to get legal, albeit temporary, urban registration.

71. The effect of the background material before us on this topic is  borne
    out by the material before the Tribunal in JC (double jeopardy: Art  10
    CL) China CG [2008] UKAIT 00036.  In that case  the  Tribunal  received
    evidence from Dr Michael Dillon, a Senior Lecturer in  Chinese  History
    in the department of East Asian Studies in the University of Durham who
    had been teaching and researching on the PRC for over 30 years and  who
    had made research visits to many regions of China.  In  his  report  he
    explained  to  the  Tribunal  that  the  hukou   system   of   personal
    identification was currently  being  reformed  and  was  no  longer  an
    effective tool of social control.  In  oral  evidence  he  agreed  that
    there were 80-120,000,000 migrant workers in China  some  of  whom  had
    hukou registration where they worked and some of whom did  not.   There
    were competing views as to whether it should be retained  or  not.   It
    could not be ruled  out  when  considering  internal  relocation.   The
    Tribunal  also  received  evidence  from  Professor  Fu,  an  Associate
    professor at Hong Kong University, who as an insider had access to  the
    Peking University database.  In one of his reports he said that to work
    legally a person should have a hukou but in practice the hukou was less
    significant than in the past.  He noted  that  almost  10%  of  China's
    working population worked away from their home area  without  a  proper
    hukou, (100 million out of a total of 1,330 million).   They  were  not
    monitored by the authorities and although they lacked the  legal  right
    to be in the cities where they lived, they remained  nevertheless,  for
    as long as they wished.  He said hukou now mainly functioned as a means
    of delivery of education and medical care for hukou owners rather  than
    as an effective mechanism of state control.

72. In her submissions to the Tribunal in JC the appellant's representative
    drew attention to the US State Department Report for 2006, dated  March
    2007, which dealt with the need for hukou  in  rather  less  favourable
    terms, stating that it was particularly  difficult  for  peasants  from
    rural areas to obtain household registration in  more  developed  urban
    areas.  The report went on to state, however, that  some  major  cities
    maintained programmes to provide migrant  workers  and  their  children
    access to public education and other social services  free  of  charge.
    Many cities and provinces continued experiments aimed at abolishing the
    distinction between urban and rural residents in household registration
    documents.

73. The tribunal in JC also noted that in her evidence Dr Sheehan said that
    border police used computerised systems into which passport details was
    manually entered, which would bring up any  visa  information  but  not
    hukou information.

74. Overall it appears to us in the light  of  the  reforms  of  the  hukou
    system, particularly those described in  the  Immigration  and  Refugee
    Board of Canada paper, that a returned trafficked woman  would  not  be
    obliged by the authorities to return to her place of origin.

Generally

75. The article entitled "Girls for  Sale:  Preventing  Trafficking  within
    China" dated 25th November 2005 referred to a new  project  to  prevent
    trafficking in children and youth for  labour  exploitation  which  was
    begun in April 2004 as the result of co-operation between  the  Chinese
    authorities and the ILO International Programme on the  Elimination  of
    Child Labour.  The project started in Guizhou and was called  the  "CP-
    Ting Project".  The  article  said  that  the  project  aimed  to  make
    migration channels safe for girls that  wanted  to  leave  their  rural
    villages.  It focused on adolescent girls and young women and put  them
    in contact with decent employers that offered decent jobs.  The article
    mentioned  that  through  a  partnership  with  the  All-China  Women's
    Federation (ACWF),  the  CP-Ting  Project  had  mobilised  a  range  of
    relevant ministries, at  both  national  level  and  in  five  selected
    provinces, to develop a comprehensive set of interventions  to  prevent
    trafficking girls and young women,  monitoring  progress  and  document
    lessons learnt.  The article stated that within the sending  provinces,
    project partners were preparing for large-scale interventions  in  nine
    target counties, with a population from  300,000  to  1  million.   The
    project and its partners would increasingly  work  on  offering  policy
    advice, contributing to the development of agreements on safe migration
    between sending and receiving provinces, procedures to licence  amongst
    recruitment  agencies,  and  a  national   policy   plan   to   prevent
    trafficking.  We take the view that it cannot be said that the  Chinese
    authorities are oblivious to the problems of trafficked women returning
    to China and are taking positive steps to assist them.

76. The background evidence shows that the  number  of  single  mothers  in
    China is growing.  The  article  "Single  Chinese  mothers  beset  with
    trouble" in the China  Daily  dated  18  December  2004  describes  the
    difficulties  of  two  single  mothers  in  particular  and  says  that
    education is the most important issue for single mother families.   The
    final paragraph of the report says that more people have  realised  the
    difficulties faced by single parent families, especially single  mother
    families.  Beijing and Tianjin have both set up single parents clubs to
    offer psychological counselling and parenting courses to single parents
    - including the divorced and widowed.  The article by Howard  W  French
    entitled, "Single Mothers in China Forge a Difficult  Path"  dated  6th
    April 2008 refers to the cases of three single mothers.  It  says  that
    in a society where until  quite  recently  pre-marital  sex  was  often
    punished, the issue of single motherhood had been  slow  to  enter  the
    public arena, but  now  a  new  awareness  of  the  issue  was  raising
    questions about the status of women in China as well  as  other  rights
    issues  like  the  hukou,  or  residents  permit,  a  central  tool  of
    population control passed down from  the  Maoist  era  that  restricted
    movement by linking people with towns of their birth.  The article said
    that  official  statistics  on  the  number  of  single  mothers   were
    unavailable in China but, with  pre-marital  sex  now  commonplace  and
    women's earning power growing, particularly in the  wealthy  cities  of
    the east, experts believed their numbers were rising fast, albeit  from
    a small base.  It quoted the case of one single mother  who  said  that
    she  checked  out  Shanghai's  Public  Security  Bureau's  website  and
    discovered an item indicating that children born  outside  of  marriage
    could apply for hukou.  The article said that every province and  major
    city had some leeway in how to apply the rules, although it did say for
    peasants and working-class mothers without  much  education,  money  or
    standing, choices could seem limited.  In our view this evidence  shows
    that hukou can be obtained for the children of  single  mothers.   Very
    much depends upon where the application  is  made.   The  two  articles
    quoted the experiences of six single mothers.  In none of the cases was
    it suggested that it was thought that  the  women  concerned  had  been
    prostitutes or had been trafficked.   In these circumstances we are not
    satisfied that by reason of having a child a returned trafficked  woman
    would  be  identified  as  someone  who  had   been   trafficked   into
    prostitution.

77. A Human Rights in China report dated 30th June  1995  states  that  the
    principal reasons for discrimination against trafficked women were that
    their families  felt  that  this  had  caused  them  a  loss  of  face,
    particularly the fact that the women had had  sex  with  their  buyers,
    regardless of whether this was forced upon them.  The BBC  News  Report
    dated 28th April 2008 says that according to  state  media,  women  who
    have been forced to work as prostitutes often faced prejudice  if  they
    return to their home villages.  We take the view, however, that  it  is
    unlikely that a returned trafficked woman would be obliged to return to
    her place of origin or to her family, notwithstanding that her position
    would be significantly better if she had family support.

78. We accept the evidence of Dr Sheehan that  although  in  China  legally
    there is not such a thing as an "illegal child" i.e. a child  born  out
    of an "illegal pregnancy", and the law prohibits discrimination against
    children born outside marriage, nonetheless, as is stated in the  reply
    to the Country of  Origin  Information  Request,  children  of  illegal
    pregnancies may not  be  registered  or  treated  equally  until  their
    parents pay the fines imposed as punishment.  Dr  Sheehan  conceded  in
    cross-examination, however, that the fine to which a person who had  no
    land and had no means was liable might very well be waived.  This  view
    is supported by the Extended Response to  Information  Request  by  the
    Immigration and Refugee Board in Ottawa, in dealing with Article 53  of
    the Criminal Law in relation to fines, which  said  that  if  a  person
    truly had difficulties in paying because he had  suffered  irresistible
    calamity, consideration might be given according to  the  circumstances
    to granting him a reduction  or  exemption.   The  Ministry  of  Public
    Security (MPS) has stated that Chinese  trafficking  victims  returning
    from abroad were not punished or fined.  Even if the All-China  Women's
    Federation offers only ad hoc intervention on their own  initiative  to
    protect  women  from  punishment  we  see  no  reason  why  a  returned
    trafficked woman should not herself approach  the  ACWF  on  return  to
    China. Dr Sheehan conceded that the  Chinese  authorities  were  intent
    upon rescuing and rehabilitating trafficked women and girls.  Given the
    efforts which are genuinely being made by the  Chinese  authorities  to
    assist trafficked women we are not satisfied that  it  can  be  assumed
    that such a woman on return to  China  would  be  punished  either  for
    having left illegally or for  having  had  a  child  without  approval,
    particularly if she has no means.

79. We cannot accept the evidence of Dr Sheehan to the  effect  that  women
    would only be employed to work the land if all the men had migrated  or
    would only help out as a member of a family.  In her  article  entitled
    "40 Million Missing Girls" dated 7th October 2005, Laurel Bossen  dealt
    with the three basic explanations for Chinese gender discrimination the
    first of which was that sons were necessary for heavy farm labour.  She
    said that rural women had contributed to a large proportion of the farm
    labour in China for nearly 50 years.  The fact that many men  had  left
    farming to women and migrated to towns and cities in search  of  better
    incomes since the 1970s undercut their "heavy labour" argument.  It  is
    apparent, therefore, that women in rural areas  had  carried  out  farm
    labour even before the migration of men to  towns  and  cities  in  the
    1970s.  Furthermore it is interesting to note that in the  HRIC  report
    entitled "Implementation of the Convention on the  Elimination  of  all
    Forms of Discrimination against Women in the People's Republic of China
    dated June 2006 it is stated that unmarried rural women participated in
    non-farming work at the  same  rates  as  men.   Despite  the  economic
    downturn, which is affecting the PRC as well  as  other  parts  of  the
    world, we take the view that there are opportunities,  albeit  limited,
    for returned trafficked women to obtain work in the PRC both  in  urban
    and rural areas.

80. As regards the risk of a returned trafficked woman  facing  persecution
    or serious harm by virtue of facing poor socio-economic  conditions  we
    have no difficulty in  accepting  that  claims  of  this  kind  can  in
    principle succeed. In its  recent  determination  in  AM  &  AM  (armed
    conflict: risk categories) Somalia CG [2008] UKAIT 00091  the  Tribunal
    observed:

         "Albeit holding that  claims  for  protection  against  refoulement
         based  on  dire  socio-economic  circumstances  are  normally   not
         decisive when considering Article 3 ill-treatment,  the  Strasbourg
         Court has not excluded that in certain extreme circumstances,  such
         circumstances could give rise to  a  violation  of  a  nonderogable
         right: see below paras 86-88. Further, as has been  made  clear  by
         the Court on many occasions (e.g. in Kalashnikov v  Russia   [2002]
         ECHR 596) and by UK courts and the Tribunal, for  ill-treatment  to
         arise  under  Article  3,  it  does  not  necessarily  have  to  be
         intentional or deliberate: see  R  (On  the  appellant  of  Adam  v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005] UKHL 66; [2006] 1
         AC at [55]. Hence,  whilst  there  will  always  be  heavy  factual
         obstacles in the way of a finding that socio-economic circumstances
         can constitute persecution, there is no reason of principle  why  a
         claim of this kind cannot succeed."


81. In her second report, in a  reference  to  the  cost  of  decent  urban
    accommodation Dr Sheehan said that the appellant would scarcely be able
    to afford it on either limited state benefit or a  low  wage  from  the
    type of job that she could realistically expect to get.  She  conceded,
    however, in cross-examination that the Chinese state at a  local  level
    had an obligation  not  to  allow  people  to  become  destitute.   She
    conceded that the Chinese state had an obligation to house the homeless
    and she said that they would not let people starve.  Our attention  has
    not been drawn to any background material confirming this  opinion  but
    on the other  hand  no  background  material  has  been  drawn  to  our
    attention which demonstrates that  this  is  not  the  case.  Therefore
    despite our reservations about the evidence of Dr Sheehan we accept her
    evidence that this is the case. In these circumstances we do not accept
    that a returned trafficked woman would face utter  destitution  and  an
    existence below a bare subsistence level.

Summary of general conclusions

82. Our general conclusions may be summarised as follows:

    1.      Although the Chinese authorities are intent upon  rescuing  and
       rehabilitating women  and  girls  trafficked  for  the  purposes  of
       prostitution, there are deficiencies in the measures they have taken
       to combat the problem of trafficking. The principal deficiencies are
       the lack of a determined effort  to  deal  with  the  complicity  of
       corrupt law enforcement officers and state officials and the failure
       to penalise as trafficking acts  of  forced  labour,  debt  bondage,
       coercion, involuntary servitude or offences committed  against  male
       victims.


    2. Women and girls in China do not in  general  face  a  real  risk  of
       serious harm from traffickers. Where, however, it can be established
       in a given case that a woman or a girl does  face  a  real  risk  of
       being forced or coerced into prostitution by traffickers, the  issue
       of whether she will be able to receive effective protection from the
       authorities  will  need  careful  consideration  in  the  light   of
       background evidence highlighting  significant  deficiencies  in  the
       system of protection for victims  of  trafficking.  But  each  case,
       however, must be judged on its own facts. China is  a  vast  country
       and it may be, for example, that in a particular part of  Chine  the
       efforts to eliminate trafficking are determined  and  the  level  of
       complicity between state officials and traffickers  is  low.  If  an
       appellant comes from such an area, or if she can relocate to such an
       area, there may be no real risk to her.


    3. The Chinese state has an obligation to house the homeless  and  will
       not allow their citizens to starve. Therefore a returned  trafficked
       woman without family support will not be allowed by the  authorities
       to fall into a state of destitution.

    4. Due to reforms of the Chinese household registration system known as
       the "hukou" system it is unlikely that a returned  trafficked  woman
       would be obliged to return to the place  where  she  is  registered.
       The reforms have  made  it  relatively  easy  for  ordinary  migrant
       workers to get legal, albeit temporary, urban registration and there
       is no reason why this  should  not  extend  to  returned  trafficked
       women.

    5. Pre-marital sex is now commonplace  in  China  and  women's  earning
       power growing, particularly in the wealthy cities of the east. As  a
       result the number of single mothers in China is growing, albeit from
       a small base and although  a  birth  permit  may  not  be  obtained,
       nonetheless it is possible for hukou  for  the  child  of  a  single
       mother to be obtained depending upon where the application is made.

    6. It is not inevitable that  a  returned  trafficked  woman  would  be
       punished for having left China illegally. Punishment is unlikely for
       those who seek and obtain the assistance of  the  All-China  Women's
       Federation and for those able to give information to the authorities
       about snakeheads.

The position of the appellant on return to China

The risk of re-trafficking in her own home area

83.   Paragraph 339K of HC 395 provides as follows:

      "The fact that a person has already been  subject  to  persecution  or
      serious harm, or to direct threats of such persecution or  such  harm,
      will be regarded as a serious indication of the person's  well-founded
      fear of persecution or real risk of  suffering  serious  harm,  unless
      there are good reasons to consider that such  persecution  or  serious
      harm will not be repeated."

84. We bear in mind that the appellant has been subjected to persecution by
    having been trafficked for the purposes of  prostitution  but  for  the
    reasons which follow we  do  think  that  there  are  good  reasons  to
    consider that the appellant will not be trafficked  again  No  evidence
    has been adduced before us to show that those who were responsible  for
    trafficking the appellant  previously  would  be  in  any  position  to
    identify her and abduct her.  CB has been aware  that  she  is  in  the
    United Kingdom since he made the arrangements for her to  travel  here.
    There is no evidence that he has made any approach  to  her  whatsoever
    while she has been in the United Kingdom and there is no evidence  that
    he would be in a position to know that she had returned to  China.  The
    appellant is not somebody who has exhibited any signs of willingness to
    act as a prostitute.  On the contrary, in her statement dated 31st July
    2007, as has been seen, she indicated that she had never wanted to be a
    prostitute and did not want to be in the  same  situation  again.   She
    said that she had never chosen to have sex with anyone.   We  see  some
    force in Ms Finch's submission that it should not be assumed  that  the
    appellant is wise enough to avoid being trapped by, for example,  false
    offers of employment, since it is apparent  that  through  naivety  she
    previously put herself in position where she was susceptible  to  being
    trafficked. Nonetheless in our view the appellant is clearly now a very
    resourceful young woman, having lived alone from the age of 10 to 14 or
    15 years, and has accumulated considerable experience  of  fending  for
    herself.  She  is  now  fully  aware  of  the  dangers  in  considering
    employment which offers to pay a considerable amount  of  money.   From
    her statement we take it that  she  is  now  an  adult  woman  who  has
    repudiated the life she had been forced to live  previously.  In  these
    circumstances we are satisfied that the appellant would not  be  likely
    to find herself in a situation where through naivety there was  a  real
    risk that she would be re-trafficked.  Although it is the case that the
    province of Anhui is one of those from which  the  greatest  number  of
    women is trafficked, the appellant was  not  in  fact  trafficked  from
    there. Dr Sheehan said that  the  population  was  between  50  and  60
    million so that the chances of the appellant even  being  propositioned
    for re-trafficking are relatively small.

85. We have to consider, however, whether  the  appellant's  resolution  to
    avoid prostitution might be overborne by her circumstances.  Dr Sheehan
    seemed uncertain as to what would happen to the appellant on arrival in
    the People's Republic of China.  She conceded that she did not know  to
    what extent the appellant would face a fine  for  having  a  child.  In
    cross-examination she indicated that any penalty would  be  imposed  at
    the local level in Anhui.  She accepted that any fine to which she were
    liable might well be waived as she had no means to  pay  a  fine.   She
    made the point that the efforts of  the  authorities  to  re-habilitate
    trafficked  women  were  hampered  by  the  stigma  attached   to   the
    identification of them as such in  the  eyes  of  their  families.   As
    indicated above the Human Rights in China report dated 30th  June  1995
    states that the principal reasons for discrimination against trafficked
    women were that their families felt that this had caused them a loss of
    face. In the appellant's case she has no family so that this  principal
    cause of  discrimination  would  not  arise.    Dr  Sheehan  stated  in
    evidence in chief that people would not know  that  the  appellant  had
    been trafficked if she returned to China, although the  fact  that  she
    had a child and she was a migrant at such a young age might  suggest  a
    pattern of  trafficking.   She  maintained  that  the  women  who  were
    discovered to be prostitutes in China were often treated as  criminals.
    Given the increasing number of single mothers in  China,  however,  and
    the fact that the appellant would be returning from the United  Kingdom
    where there are no limitations on young women having children  even  if
    unmarried, we take the view that it is unlikely that she would be known
    to have been a  prostitute.   Even  if  at  the  point  of  return  the
    authorities elicited from her that she had been trafficked, then it  is
    likely that they would see very  little  point  in  punishing  her  for
    having been trafficked out of China.  Dr Sheehan  herself  acknowledged
    that if a returnee who had been trafficked could give information about
    snakeheads she would not be punished.

86. Although in Ms Finch's oral submissions to us it was asserted that  the
    appellant had no employment experience, an examination of the  evidence
    shows this not to be the case.  In her interview on 15th May  2007  for
    the purposes of an age  assessment  report  on  behalf  of  the  London
    Borough of Camden, the appellant said that after she separated from the
    couple who looked after her for five to six months she went to a  rural
    area outside the city and worked as a domestic  worker  in  a  farmer's
    family home.   She said that sometimes she would also pick  vegetables.
    She also said that after having escaped the men who sought  the  parcel
    that she had taken to Beijing, she started work  washing  dishes  in  a
    restaurant, after which she  became  a  domestic  cleaner  for  several
    months until she began work as a sex worker.  In  paragraph  6  of  her
    witness statement dated 31st July 2007, she confirmed  that  after  she
    separated from the couple she went to a rural area outside the city  of
    Sichuan and worked as a domestic worker.  In paragraph 15 of  the  same
    statement she said she ended up back in Beijing  where  she  worked  in
    restaurants and obtained a forged identification card which showed  her
    to be older which helped her obtaining work.  During her age assessment
    interview she also said that she worked as a domestic servant after she
    had been trafficked.  The assertion by Ms Finch is therefore not  borne
    out by the facts of the appellant's case.

87. It was Ms Finch's contention,  as  set  out  in  paragraph  53  of  the
    skeleton argument, under the  heading  "Lone  mother"  that  the  hukou
    system coupled with her own personal circumstances would result in  the
    appellant facing utter  destitution  and  an  existence  below  a  bare
    subsistence level in any place or relocation.  Reference was to  Januzi
    v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2006] UKHL 5 in which the
    House of Lords was concerned with the issue of  the  reasonableness  of
    internal re-location, but not to any background material.   As  already
    mentioned above in her second report, in a reference  to  the  cost  of
    decent urban accommodation, Dr Sheehan said that  the  appellant  would
    scarcely be able to afford it on either limited state benefit or a  low
    wage from the type of job that she could realistically expect  to  get.
    She conceded, however, in cross-examination that the Chinese state at a
    local level had an obligation not to allow people to become  destitute.
    She conceded that the Chinese state had  an  obligation  to  house  the
    homeless and she said that they would not let people starve.   Although
    it was suggested that the appellant was allowed to live on the  streets
    her evidence was that she left  the  area  where  she  lived  with  her
    grandmother when her grandmother died.  She did  not  assert  that  she
    ever approached the authorities for assistance and  was  refused  help.
    In these circumstances the submission that if  returned  to  China  the
    appellant  would  face  destitution  and  an  existence  below  a  bare
    subsistence level anywhere is not  borne  out  by  the  opinion  of  Dr
    Sheehan.  Moreover, there is no part of the background  material  which
    suggests that the appellant would become destitute.  This  applies  not
    only to her own home area of  China  but  also  to  any  place  of  re-
    location.

88. Mention was made by Dr Sheehan of the  intervention  of  the  All-China
    Women's Federation to prevent the punishment  of  women  who  had  been
    trafficked, having left China illegally.  We take  the  view  that  the
    appellant would not be completely left to her own devices on return  to
    China and would in fact have the opportunity of some sort of assistance
    through the auspices of  the  All-China  Women's  Federation.   It  was
    conceded  by  Dr  Sheehan  that  assistance  would  be  provided   with
    subsistence and a roof over her head until such time as  the  appellant
    got on her feet.  Despite the difficulties that there might  inevitably
    be in her obtaining employment, we are satisfied that she has developed
    some useful skills which would assist in qualifying her for  employment
    such as domestic work or agricultural work.  It may very well  be  that
    she would encounter a degree of prejudice but, nonetheless, it is clear
    from the articles referring to the six single mothers  mentioned  above
    that, despite whatever prejudice  they  encountered,  they  were  still
    pleased to have had their children, which demonstrates in our view that
    they had not encountered  overwhelming  prejudice.  Moreover  they  had
    managed  to  make  childcare  arrangements  whilst  they  worked  which
    suggests that this would be open to the appellant to do  as  well.   We
    are also satisfied that whatever the  economic  difficulties  might  be
    that the appellant would encounter, she would not be permitted to  sink
    into destitution, either for herself or for her child.

Internal relocation

89.   In paragraph 5 of his opinion in  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department v. AH (Sudan) & Ors [2007] UKHL 49 Lord  Bingham  said  that
    in paragraph 21 of his opinion in Januzi  he  summarised  the  correct
    approach to the problem of internal relocation in terms with which  all
    his noble and learned friends agreed, as follows:
      "The decision-maker, taking  account  of  all  relevant  circumstances
      pertaining to the claimant and his  country  of  origin,  must  decide
      whether it is reasonable to expect the claimant to relocate or whether
      it would be unduly harsh to expect him to do so . .  .  There  is,  as
      Simon Brown LJ aptly observed in Svazas v Secretary of State  for  the
      Home Department, [2002] 1 WLR 1891, para 55, a spectrum of cases.  The
      decision-maker must do his best to decide,  on  such  material  as  is
      available, where on the spectrum the particular case falls. . . .  All
      must depend on a fair assessment of the relevant facts."
      He went on to say that It was, or should be, evident that the  enquiry
    must be directed to the situation of the  particular  applicant,  whose
    age, gender, experience, health, skills and family ties may all be very
    relevant. There was no warrant for excluding, or  giving  priority  to,
    consideration  of  the  applicant's  way  of  life  in  the  place   of
    persecution. There was no warrant for excluding, or giving priority to,
    consideration of conditions generally prevailing in the  home  country.
    He did not underestimate the difficulty of  making  decisions  in  some
    cases. But the difficulty lay in applying the test, not  in  expressing
    it. The humanitarian object of the Refugee Convention was to  secure  a
    reasonable measure of protection for those with a well-founded fear  of
    persecution in their home country or some part of it;  it  was  not  to
    procure a general levelling-up of living standards  around  the  world,
    desirable though of course that was.

90.   Even if we were wrong in not being satisfied as to the extent  of  the
    risk of serious harm to the appellant in her own home area we take  the
    view that there would be no real risk of serious harm as  a  result  of
    being trafficked in an urban centre in China, such as  Beijing  or  any
    other large urban centre.  There is no evidence which suggests that the
    appellant would face a greater  risk  of  falling  into  the  hands  of
    traffickers than anywhere else in China.  While it is true that it  was
    in Beijing that the appellant was attracted by the idea  of  earning  a
    lot of money, it was in Sizhuan, rather than Beijing, that her work  as
    a prostitute began. What we have said about the appellant's  resolution
    to avoid the possibility of being re-trafficked,  however,  applies  to
    wherever she might to relocate in China.

91. As to the reasonableness of expecting the appellant  to  relocate  away
    from her own home area, we do not agree with Dr Sheehan's statement  in
    paragraph 17 of her second report that  the  appellant  would  have  to
    start from her home area or her oral evidence that still the only place
    in China where she could legally live was her  home  village  in  Anhui
    province.  If, as is stated in the Canadian Country of Origin  Research
    Paper, the hukou reforms have meant that the government can  no  longer
    restrict  migrants'  entrance  to  the  cities,  it  follows  that  the
    appellant would be  able  to  obtain  legal,  albeit  temporary,  urban
    registration.  In her oral evidence Dr Sheehan stated  that  on  return
    the appellant would be entitled to a personal identity card, which  the
    police would not be able to withhold.   The  Refugee  Board  of  Canada
    Paper indicates that that could be used to  obtain  a  duplicate  hukou
    booklet.  We therefore take the view that the appellant would  be  able
    to relocate to a city such as Beijing.  Beijing is  a  city  where  the
    appellant has lived and worked previously.  The  chances  of  obtaining
    employment of the sort of which she has had previous experience, such a
    working in a restaurant  or  doing  domestic  work  would  probably  be
    greater than in her own home area.  We see no reason why, even  if  she
    were  to  have  to  rely  initially  upon  assistance  from  the  local
    authorities, she should not  be  able  to  obtain  work  and  fend  for
    herself.  Moreover, the chances of being able to obtain hukou  for  her
    child would  also  be  greater  since  the  evidence  suggests  a  more
    enlightened policy is adopted towards single mothers and Beijing  is  a
    city where single mother clubs have been established.  The appellant in
    any event would feel more comfortable in returning to a place where she
    was not known, given that she is a single mother.   What we said  about
    being satisfied that whatever the economic difficulties might  be  that
    the appellant would encounter, she would not be permitted to sink  into
    destitution, either for herself or for her child in her own  home  area
    of China, also applies to  any  place  of  relocation  and  we  do  not
    consider, taking all of her personal circumstances into  account,  that
    it would be unreasonable for the appellant  to  relocate  elsewhere  in
    China away from her own home area.

92. In these circumstances we are not satisfied that the appellant would be
    at a real risk of persecution and/or serious harm if  she  were  to  be
    returned to the People's Republic of China.

Decision

The immigration judge made a material error of law in his  determination  of
the appeals.

Accordingly the following decision is substituted.

The appeals on asylum grounds are dismissed.

The appeals on humanitarian protection grounds are dismissed.

The appeals on human rights grounds under articles 3 and 8 of the  ECHR  are
dismissed.



Signed



Senior Immigration Judge Spencer

































                                 Appendix A

REASONS FOR THE DECISION THAT THERE IS AN ERROR OF LAW IN THE DETERMINATION


1.    This is the reconsideration of  an  appeal  against  the  respondent's
    decision made on 18 May 2007 to remove the appellant and her  dependent
    child as illegal entrants following the  refusal  of  their  claim  for
    asylum.

Background

2.    The appellant is a citizen of China.  She arrived in this  country  on
    2 September 2006 using a false  passport.   She  claimed  asylum  on  4
    September 2006.  Her child was born on 10 November 2006.

3.    The appellant said that she  was  born  on  15  July  1990.   She  was
    orphaned at the age of 6 and the grandmother she went to live with died
    when the appellant was 10.  By early 2000 she was living rough  on  the
    streets of Sizhuan collecting and selling tins.  By 2005 she had become
    involved in prostitution.  When she was doing domestic work she had met
    a woman who said she could get her work  which  would  pay  handsomely.
    The appellant did not initially  know  what  the  work  entailed.   The
    appellant and other young girls were taken on a journey that took about
    two and a half hours and it was only later that it became apparent that
    she was caught up in prostitution.  She was able to save some money and
    by November 2005 she had about 7,000 Yuan.  She contacted an agent  but
    he told her that all he could do with that amount was to  send  her  to
    Russia.

4.    The appellant left China in December 2005.  In February 2006 she  went
    to other countries but returned to Russia.  She realised at that  stage
    that she was pregnant but was afraid to tell her agent.  She was  taken
    to another country where she stayed in a house with Chinese men who had
    sex with her.  She was then told that she had to leave and arrangements
    were made for her travel to this country and she claimed  asylum.   Her
    claim was refused by the respondent for the  reasons  set  out  in  the
    Reasons for Refusal letter dated 18 May 2007.  The respondent  did  not
    accept that the appellant was under the age of 18, that  she  qualified
    for asylum or that she would be at risk of serious harm  on  return  to
    China.

The Hearing Before the Immigration Judge

5.    The judge accepted that the appellant was a minor as she claimed.   He
    found that she had become destitute, went  into  prostitution  and  was
    trafficked into Eastern  Europe.   He  took  into  account  the  expert
    evidence that it was not uncommon for a  trafficker  to  abandon  young
    victims when they became pregnant.  It was argued  that  the  appellant
    would be at risk on return because she had left China illegally,  would
    be the victim of discrimination as an unmarried mother with a child and
    would be at real risk  of  being  re-trafficked  for  the  purposes  of
    prostitution.  However, the judge was not satisfied that the  appellant
    and her child would be at risk  of  treatment  which  would  amount  to
    persecution.  He said that the appellant would be exposed to a range of
    social and economic disadvantages, but they would not amount to serious
    harm.  He accepted that the appellant's  child  as  the  product  of  a
    single parent would suffer economic and social  discrimination  and  be
    classed as a "black" child and that as a single parent the  appellant's
    marriage prospects would be bleak as would her prospects of  employment
    in urban areas.

6.    So far  as  the  risk  of  re-trafficking  was  concerned,  the  judge
    accepted  that  there  were  efforts  under  way  to  give   sufficient
    protection in China to women  in  the  appellant's  circumstances.   He
    noted that the US State Department Report on trafficking  was  critical
    of failings by the Chinese authorities in addressing this  problem  but
    it did point out that several progressive measures had  been  taken  in
    earnest to meet the challenges posed by trafficking.

7.    The judge summarised his conclusions by finding that there was a  risk
    of the appellant being re-trafficked but he was  satisfied  that  there
    existed a system that was able and willing to afford  protection  to  a
    person  in  the  appellant's  circumstances.   He  accepted  that   the
    appellant would suffer a measure of hardship on return but  found  that
    it would not amount to persecution.  The appellant was a minor and  had
    a young child to care for but  the  judge  found  that  there  were  no
    substantial grounds for believing that she would suffer serious harm on
    return.

Grounds and Submissions

8.    In the grounds it is argued that  the  judge  failed  to  give  proper
    weight to paragraph 339K of the Immigration Rules providing that  where
    a person had already  been  subject  to  persecution,  this  should  be
    regarded as a serious indication of a well-founded  fear  unless  there
    were good reasons to consider that  it  would  not  be  repeated.   The
    appellant had been found not only to have been trafficked from China in
    December 2005, but to be at future risk of  re-trafficking  on  return.
    There was no evidence to indicate such a  significant  change  to  show
    that the appellant would be able to look to the Chinese authorities for
    protection.   The  judge  had  also  failed  to  consider  whether  the
    protection offered would be practical and effective.  The grounds refer
    to the UNHCR Trafficking Guidelines April 2006  and  in  particular  to
    paragraphs 22 and 23 dealing  with  sufficiency  of  protection.   They
    argue that the judge has merged the concepts  of  a  well-founded  fear
    with the need for sufficiency of protection and that he  erred  by  not
    making a finding on whether the appellant was a member of a  particular
    social group and in his finding that she had not established a  private
    and family life in this country.

9.    Reconsideration was refused by the Tribunal but ordered  by  the  High
    Court (Forbes J) on the basis that the grounds relating to the risk  of
    persecution and the sufficiency of protection had substance.

10.   Ms Finch adopted the grounds.  She submitted that the  judge  did  not
    deal with the issue of whether the appellant had a well-founded fear of
    persecution  as  a  discreet  issue,  separate  from   sufficiency   of
    protection.  Forced prostitution, particularly when the appellant was a
    minor, could be equated with institutionalised rape.   Sexual  violence
    fell  within  the  definition  of  inhuman  and   degrading   treatment
    prohibited by article 3 of the  Human  Rights  Convention.   Without  a
    proper assessment of what  the  risk  was  to  the  appellant,  it  was
    impossible to make a finding on the sufficiency  of  state  protection.
    She argued that the judge had adopted only parts of the expert evidence
    overlooking those which supported the appellant's  case.   He  had  not
    fully evaluated  the  objective  evidence  in  the  light  of  his  own
    acceptance of the fact that the appellant was under  18  and  would  be
    returned to China  with  a  baby  of  her  own.   He  had  referred  to
    shortcomings in the protection offered but did not identify them and he
    had not dealt adequately with the expert evidence.

11.   Ms Karunatilake submitted that the judge had properly focused  on  the
    risk to the appellant on return.  He had looked at the various  aspects
    of the risk: her illegal exit, the fact that she was unmarried  with  a
    child and the risk of re-trafficking.  He had taken  into  account  the
    harsh penalties against trafficking imposed in China.  It was  for  him
    to assess as a  question  of  fact  whether  the  economic  and  social
    disadvantages suffered by the appellant would amount to persecution  or
    serious harm.  The judge had reached a decision properly open to him on
    the evidence.

The Material Error of Law

12.   The issue for me at this stage of the reconsideration is  whether  the
    original Tribunal materially erred in law.  The judge accepted that the
    appellant was a minor when trafficked from China and was still a minor.
     He found  that  she  had  become  destitute  in  China  and  had  been
    trafficked into Russia and Eastern Europe for prostitution and that her
    trafficker had arranged for her to  come  to  this  country  after  she
    became pregnant.  She had a young child and the judge made  a  specific
    finding that there was  a  risk  of  her  being  re-trafficked.   I  am
    satisfied that the judge failed  properly  to  take  into  account  the
    expert evidence from Dr Sheehan in her report of 26 July 2007.  It  was
    her opinion that the appellant would be very vulnerable to exploitation
    by people traffickers  if  returned  to  China.   She  noted  that  the
    appellant's home province of Anhui  was  a  major  "sending"  area  for
    trafficked women and children, but the closest centre for the appellant
    would be the Xuzhou centre about 150 miles away from her home  district
    and this would reduce the odds of the appellant  becoming  one  of  the
    small number of women who could be accommodated in such centres.

13.   It was Dr Sheehan's view that if the appellant was compelled  to  work
    in the sex industry again she could expect little assistance  from  the
    Chinese police.  The anti-prostitution campaigns of the PSB  tended  to
    target the women themselves rather than their employers/pimps or  their
    clients.  She commented that China was  still  a  strongly  patriarchal
    society and a young woman living alone without family support would  be
    a vulnerable figure.  The birth of the appellant's child would make her
    situation even  more  serious  since  it  contravened  child  laws  and
    policies on population control and  family  planning.   The  system  of
    permits to give birth only applied to married couples.   The  appellant
    would be subject to financial and social penalties for  the  fact  that
    her child had been born "outside the quota".  The  appellant  would  be
    subject to severe discrimination and considerable long-term social  and
    economic advantage.

14.   I am also not satisfied that the assessment of risk to  the  appellant
    and the availability of protection has taken into account her  age  and
    her own specific circumstances.  There is certainly  evidence  to  show
    that the Chinese authorities have taken action against trafficking, but
    the issue is whether the  appellant  in  her  particular  circumstances
    would be able to access  protection  against  the  risk  of  being  re-
    trafficked.  The US State Department Report had placed China in a  tier
    two watch category since 2005.  The  judge  accepted  that  there  were
    shortcomings in the protection offered by the Chinese  authorities  but
    particularly in the light of the appellant's past history, he  did  not
    explain why he took the view that effective  and  practical  protection
    would now be available for her on  return.   For  these  reasons  I  am
    satisfied that the judge erred in law.

15.   Both representatives agreed that if the judge had erred  in  law,  the
    proper course would be for this reconsideration to be adjourned  for  a
    re-assessment of whether the appellant would be at real risk of serious
    harm and be able to  look  to  the  Chinese  authorities  for  adequate
    protection on return.  The judge's findings of primary  fact  have  not
    been challenged and are to stand.










                                 Appendix B

              LIST OF BACKGROUND MATERIALS BEFORE THE TRIBUNAL


|    |                  |  |The Search for Modern China: A           |
|    |                  |  |Documentary Collection: Lu Xun: My Views |
|    |                  |  |on Chastity: 1918                        |
|    |                  |  |China Since 1978: Chapter 17: Population |
|    |                  |  |(author not stated|)                     |
|    |                  |  |www.jaegercamp.info: Law Safeguarding    |
|    |                  |  |Women's Rights and Interests of the      |
|    |                  |  |People's Republic of China (1992)        |
|    |                  |  |Chapters I to IX                         |
|    |                  |  |www.jaegercamp.info: Government of       |
|    |                  |  |China's Plan of Action To Prevent,       |
|    |                  |  |Protect, Prosecute and Reintegrate       |
|    |                  |  |Xin Ren: Violence against Women under    |
|    |                  |  |China' Economic Modernisation: Resurgence|
|    |                  |  |of Women trafficking in China            |
|    |                  |  |Xinran: The Good Women of China: Chapters|
|    |                  |  |2, 5, 6, 7, 8 and 13                     |
|    |March 1995        |  |China Human rights Fact Sheet            |
|    |30 June 1995      |  |Human Rights in China: The property of   |
|    |                  |  |men: the trafficking and domestic abuse  |
|    |                  |  |of women                                 |
|    |1996              |  |Michael Palmer: The Re-emergence of      |
|    |                  |  |Family Law in Post-Mao China: Marriage,  |
|    |                  |  |Divorce and Reproduction                 |
|    |1996              |  |Harry Wu with George Vecsey:             |
|    |                  |  |Troublemaker: One Man's Crusade against  |
|    |                  |  |China's Cruelty                          |
|    |Post 1996         |  |Chinese Family: Continuity and change    |
|    |                  |  |(author not stated)                      |
|    |1997              |  |www.jaegercamp.info: Criminal Law of the |
|    |                  |  |People's Republic of China (1997):       |
|    |                  |  |Chapters IV & VI                         |
|    |Post September    |  |Factbook on Global Sexual Exploitation:  |
|    |1998              |  |China and Hong Kong                      |
|    |1999              |  |Delia Davin: Internal Migration in       |
|    |                  |  |Contemporary china (excerpts)            |
|    |9 August 1999     |  |South China Morning post: Reform-minded  |
|    |                  |  |minister gets credit for putting short   |
|    |                  |  |leash on No 1 wolf                       |
|    |September 1999    |  |Human Rights in China: Not Welcome at the|
|    |                  |  |Party: Behind the "Clean-up" of China's  |
|    |                  |  |Cities - a Report on Administrative      |
|    |                  |  |detention under "Custody and             |
|    |                  |  |Repatriation"                            |
|    |22 September 1999 |  |Immigration and Refugee Board Canada:    |
|    |                  |  |Extended Response to Information Request |
|    |2000              |  |Zeng Yi: Marriage Patterns in            |
|    |                  |  |Contemporary China                       |
|    |2000              |  |Li Yongping and Peng Xizhe: Age and Sex  |
|    |                  |  |Structures                               |
|    |2000              |  |Tyrene White: Domination, resistance and |
|    |                  |  |accommodation in China's one-child       |
|    |                  |  |campaign                                 |
|    |2000              |  |Du Peng and Tu Ping: population Ageing   |
|    |                  |  |and Old Age Security                     |
|    |28 April 2000     |  |BBC News Online: China arrests           |
|    |                  |  |prostitution gang                        |
|    |2001              |  |Julia O'Connell Davidson: Children in the|
|    |                  |  |Sex trade in China                       |
|    |4 August 2001     |  |The Daily Telegraph Damien Mc Elroy:     |
|    |                  |  |Chinese region 'must conduct             |
|    |                  |  |20,000abortions'                         |
|    |7 May 2002        |  |UNHCR: Guidelines on International       |
|    |                  |  |Protection: "Membership of a particular  |
|    |                  |  |social group" within the context of      |
|    |                  |  |Article 1A(2) of the 1951 Convention     |
|    |                  |  |and/or its 1967 Protocol relating to the |
|    |                  |  |Status of Refugees                       |
|    |2 September 2002  |  |Congressional-Executive Commission on    |
|    |                  |  |China: Women's Rights and China's New    |
|    |                  |  |Family Planning Law                      |
|    |2 September 2002  |  |South China morning post: New family     |
|    |                  |  |planning law might end abuses            |
|    |28 December 2002  |  |South China morning post: One-child      |
|    |                  |  |policy should not be relaxed too fast,   |
|    |                  |  |warns official                           |
|    |2003              |  |Vernon Mei-Ying Hung: Reassessing        |
|    |                  |  |Reeducation Through Labor                |
|    |2004              |  |Consortium for Street Children: China    |
|    |24 June 2004      |  |The Guardian: John Gittings: Birth Rights|
|    |5 October 2004    |  |Human Rights in China: One-Child Policy  |
|    |                  |  |Opponent Tortured                        |
|    |14 December 2004  |  |US House of Representatives: Committee on|
|    |                  |  |International Relations: China human     |
|    |                  |  |Rights Violations and Coercion in One    |
|    |                  |  |child Policy Enforcement: Submission by  |
|    |                  |  |Human rights in China                    |
|    |18 December 2004  |  |China Daily: Single Chinese mothers beset|
|    |                  |  |with troubles                            |
|    |22 December 2004  |  |Joseph A D'Agostino: More persecution of |
|    |                  |  |China's Women and Children               |
|    |2005              |  |Human Rights Watch: China: World Report  |
|    |February 2005     |  |Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada: |
|    |                  |  |China Reforms of the Household           |
|    |                  |  |Registration System (Hukou) (1998-2004)  |
|    |7 October 2005    |  |ZNet: Laurel Bossen: Forty Million       |
|    |                  |  |Missing girls                            |
|    |25 November 2005  |  |International Labour organization: Girls |
|    |                  |  |for sale: Preventing trafficking within  |
|    |                  |  |China                                    |
|    |7 April 2006      |  |UNHCR: Guidelines on International       |
|    |                  |  |Protection: The application of Article   |
|    |                  |  |1A(2) of the 1951 Convention and/or 1967 |
|    |                  |  |Protocol relating to the Status of       |
|    |                  |  |Refugees to victims of trafficking and   |
|    |                  |  |persons at risk of being trafficked      |
|    |June 2006         |  |Human Rights in China: Implementation of |
|    |                  |  |the Convention on the Elimination of All |
|    |                  |  |Forms of Discrimination against Women in |
|    |                  |  |the People's Republic of China           |
|    |14 June 2006      |  |Susan Trevaskes: Severe and Swift justice|
|    |                  |  |in China                                 |
|    |11 August 2006    |  |Committee to Eliminate Discrimination    |
|    |                  |  |against Women Recognises China's Advances|
|    |                  |  |since last Review, but urges Greater     |
|    |                  |  |Progress                                 |
|    |October 2006      |  |Asylum Policy Instruction: Gender issues |
|    |                  |  |in the Asylum Claim                      |
|    |30 October 2006   |  |COI Service: Country of Origin           |
|    |                  |  |Information Request                      |
|    |Winter 2006       |  |Emily Shuckman: Antitrafficking Policies |
|    |                  |  |in Asia and the Russian Far East: A      |
|    |                  |  |Comparative Perspective                  |
|    |14 March 2007     |  |South China Morning Post: Poor outlook   |
|    |                  |  |for the unemployed                       |
|    |13 May 2007       |  |The New York Times: Jim Yardley: Today's |
|    |                  |  |Face of Abortion in China Is a young,    |
|    |                  |  |Unmarried Woman                          |
|    |22 May 2007       |  |Xinhua Mews Agency: China mulls reform of|
|    |                  |  |household registration system            |
|    |20 June 2007      |  |The Guardian Newspaper: Jonathan Watts:  |
|    |                  |  |Going Under                              |
|    |21 June 2007      |  |China Daily: China strikes at root of    |
|    |                  |  |brick kiln slavery                       |
|    |11 July 2007      |  |Un Inter-Agency Project on Human         |
|    |                  |  |Trafficking in the Greater Mekong        |
|    |                  |  |Sub-region : China: accessed on 11 July  |
|    |                  |  |2007                                     |
|    |13 December 2007  |  |China National Plan of Action on         |
|    |                  |  |Combating trafficking in Women and       |
|    |                  |  |Children (2008-2012)                     |
|    |1997              |  |Comment on Humantrafficking.org: China   |
|    |                  |  |National Plan of Action on Combating     |
|    |                  |  |Trafficking in Women and children        |
|    |                  |  |(2008-2012) from humantrafficking.org    |
|    |7 January 2008    |  |Humantrafficking.org: China Improves     |
|    |                  |  |Efforts to Combat Trafficking through    |
|    |                  |  |Regional mechanism: adapted from Beijing |
|    |                  |  |Youth Daily: 15 December 2007            |
|    |11 March 2008     |  |US Department of State: Human Rights     |
|    |                  |  |Practices Report on China                |
|    |6 April 2008      |  |The New York Times: Howard W French:     |
|    |                  |  |Single Mothers in China Forge a Difficult|
|    |                  |  |Path                                     |
|    |1 June 2008       |  |UK Border Agency: Country of Origin      |
|    |                  |  |Information Report                       |
|    |June 2008         |  |US Department of State: Trafficking in   |
|    |                  |  |Persons Report (extract)                 |
|    |10 October 2008   |  |Statement by the Head of Chinese         |
|    |                  |  |Delegation: Session of Conference of the |
|    |                  |  |Parties to UNTOC                         |
|    |11 October 2008   |  |Cathy Scott-Clarke and Adrian Levy: It is|
|    |                  |  |down your street and in your lane        |









