
AL & Others (Malaysia BOCs) Malaysia [2009] UKAIT 00026

                       ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL





                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at:  Field House                                        Date of
Hearing: 29 April 2008


                                   Before:


 Mr C M G Ockelton, Deputy President of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
                      Senior Immigration Judge Spencer

                                   Between

                                     AL
                                     LT
                                     ST
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the Appellant:           Mr M S Gill QC, instructed by Christine Lee &
Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:          Mr R Palmer, instructed by the Treasury
Solicitor


     1. Malaysian British Overseas Citizens (BOCs) who have (or have had)
        Malaysian nationality cannot derive from their status as BOCs a
        right to enter or reside in the UK.
     2. The refusal to recognise such a right is not a breach of Arts 3, 8
        or 14 of the ECHR.
     3. A Malaysian BOC does not lose Malaysian nationality by a unilateral
        voluntary act of applying for a BOC passport or of purported
        renunciation of nationality.  Deprival of nationality and
        acceptance of renunciation require a formal act of the Federal
        Government and are not automatic or irreversible.






                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    Introduction

 1. The Appellants are nationals  of  Malaysia  and  are  British  Overseas
    Citizens (BOCs). They appealed to the Tribunal against decisions of the
    Secretary of State to give directions for their removal as overstayers.
    An Immigration Judge allowed their appeals on human rights grounds. The
    Secretary of State sought and obtained orders for reconsideration. Thus
    the matter comes before us.

 2. The basis of the  Appellants'  claim  is  that  their  status  as  BOCs
    entitles them to remain in  the  United  Kingdom  now  that  they  have
    arrived here and sought BOC passports. That claim  is  a  very  complex
    one, made at a number of different levels. There is considerable  scope
    for confusion, and we have to say that those working on behalf  of  the
    Appellants have done little to minimize the possibilities of confusion.
    As we shall explain below, it appears to us that the Appellants'  claim
    is partially based partly on unmerited assumptions, partly on misstated
    facts and partly on an apparent interweaving of two entirely  different
    arguments.  In the circumstances we have done our best to extract  from
    the documents and the submissions put  before  us  on  the  Appellants'
    behalf such material as might have assisted them in  the  claims  which
    they make. In doing so we have done our best to adhere to the principle
    that the Tribunal is concerned with legal rights, rather than political
    arguments, and the Appellants should succeed if the  law  is  on  their
    side, but that we have no jurisdiction to change the law on the grounds
    of sympathy either for the Appellants or for their ancestors.   On  the
    Appellants' behalf it is said that that the Respondent's  treatment  of
    BOCs both generally and from Malaysia has not been entirely consistent.
    That may be right: it is certainly right to say that it  has  not  been
    easy to discern any complete consistency in the Respondent's practices,
    despite a claim of transparency made on her behalf before us.

 3. These appeals are test cases intended to deal in general with BOCs from
    Malaysia. The Immigration Judge  treated  the  first  Appellant's  case
    separately, as do we. That is because, in addition to the  claim  based
    on his nationality and status,  he  claims  that  that  the  homosexual
    relationship into which he has entered  here  means  that  his  removal
    would disrupt his family life and that  he  would  suffer  problems  in
    Malaysia. We shall deal in general with the overarching claims made  by
    the Appellants as BOCs before  looking  separately  at  the  additional
    features of the first Appellant's claim.

 4.  These  appeals  have  a  considerable  history  before  the  Tribunal.
    Following  the  orders  for  reconsideration  there   were   directions
    hearings. It was said on behalf of the Appellants that  the  Respondent
    was thought to be in the course of formulating a  comprehensive  policy
    on BOCs. Whether or not that was right, no new policy has emerged,  and
    it took a very long time for it to be clear that there was to be  none.
    Following the oral hearing we delayed writing our determination in case
    there was further  material,  either  by  way  of  expert  evidence  on
    Malaysian law, or further  information  about  Lee  Thean  Hock,  whose
    Judicial Review proceedings in Malaysia we shall  also  mention  below.
    The production of this determination has also been further  delayed  by
    illness in the Tribunal and, finally, by the fire at Field House.   The
    Appellants and the Respondent, by  letters  to  the  Tribunal  dated  9
    December 2008 and 2 December 2008 respectively,  confirmed  that  there
    were no further submissions  that  they  wish  to  make  based  on  any
    developments since the date of the hearing.

 5. In addition, the construction of this determination has  been  rendered
    exceptionally difficult by the way in which the case on behalf  of  the
    Appellants was presented.  We do our best in what follows  to  identify
    the strands in the Appellants' arguments and deal with  each  in  turn.
    But even then the process is not unproblematic, because of the  partial
    way in which material was put before us.  Mr Gill QC based  submissions
    on  the  effect  of  Malaysian  law  on  part  only  of  the  Malaysian
    Constitution, to the exclusion of  other  parts  of  the  Constitution,
    which he did not cite.  He based submissions  on  the  UK  Government's
    present position on part  only  of  a  ministerial  statement,  to  the
    exclusion of the rest of the statement, which  he  did  not  cite.   He
    based submissions on the Government's practice  on  anecdotal  material
    that he knew to be incomplete.  He raised much of his case on  the  use
    of the word 'citizen' in the British Nationality Act 1981  without  any
    reference to the context in which that word is used.  He argued  racial
    discrimination without identifying any relevant  disadvantage  suffered
    by those against whom the  discrimination  is  alleged.   It  might  be
    thought that a case that has to be put in that way is unlikely to  have
    very much merit:  but as this is supposed to be a  test  case  we  have
    felt obliged to look at the material as  comprehensively  as  we  could
    even without Mr Gill's assistance.  We have had to supply much  of  the
    contexts ourselves.


    The Appellants

 6. The first Appellant was born on 19 August 1970.  He came to the  United
    Kingdom on 25 January 1999 and was granted leave to enter as a  visitor
    until 26 July 1999.   He left, apparently during the currency  of  that
    leave.   He returned to the United Kingdom  on  2  December  2000  with
    entry clearance as a student expiring on 31 October 2002. He made an in-
    time application for an extension of his leave. He  was  granted  leave
    until 31 January 2004. He made an application for further leave out  of
    time. That was refused, and he  then  applied  on  22  April  2005  for
    indefinite  leave  to  remain  outside  the  Immigration  Rules.   That
    application was refused  and  the  decision  against  which  the  first
    Appellant appeals is a decision to give directions for his  removal  as
    an overstayer dated 30 June 2006.

 7. The first Appellant also applied for a BOC passport.  At  the  date  of
    hearing before  the  Immigration  Judge  (8  September  2006)  no  such
    passport had been issued,  but  we  have  seen  photocopies  of  a  BOC
    passport issued to him on 30 October 2006.

 8. As we have indicated, the first Appellant's claim is based in part on a
    homosexual relationship. We will set out the evidence relating to  that
    part of the claim  when  we  come  to  deal  with  it,  later  in  this
    determination. No enquires about return  to  Malaysia  have  been  made
    specifically on his  behalf.   So  far  as  we  know,  he  retains  his
    Malaysian passport.

 9. The second Appellant was born on 19 December  1977.   He  came  to  the
    United Kingdom on 11 July 2001 and was  granted  six  months  leave  to
    enter as a visitor.  He overstayed. On 21 November 2003 he applied  for
    indefinite leave to remain in the United Kingdom  on  the  basis  that,
    having applied for and received  a  BOC  passport,  he  was  no  longer
    entitled to Malaysian citizenship, had no right to live in Malaysia and
    could not return there. The second Appellant also applied  for  British
    citizenship on 13 February 2004: that  application  was  refused  on  2
    March 2005. His application for indefinite leave to remain was  refused
    on 14 July 2006 and on that  date  the  Respondent  gave  notice  of  a
    decision to direct his removal as an overstayer.  It  is  against  that
    decision that the second Appellant appeals.

10. There has been correspondence on the second Appellant's behalf  between
    his solicitors and the High Commission of Malaysia in London, which has
    produced a response to which we shall refer in due course.  It  appears
    that his Malaysian passport was sent to the Malaysian  High  Commission
    in connection with these enquiries and has not been returned to him.

11. The third Appellant was born on 23 April 1978.   He came to the  United
    Kingdom on 19 June 2000 and was granted leave to enter for six  months.
    He made an in-time application for leave to remain as a  student.  That
    application was refused on 2  July  2001.  He  appealed  unsuccessfully
    against that decision. He then on 19 May 2002  applied  for  indefinite
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom as  a  BOC.  He  obtained  a  BOC
    passport, after that application, on 28 June 2002. On 28 July 2006  his
    application for indefinite leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom  was
    refused, and he was served with  notice  of  intention  to  direct  his
    removal as an overstayer. It is against that decision that he  appeals.
    In his case, like that of the  first  Appellant,  there  have  been  no
    specific enquiries made in relation to the possibility of his returning
    to Malaysia.   His evidence before the Immigration Judge  was  that  he
    still had his Malaysian passport.

    The basis of the Appellants' claims

12. The Appellants claim that, as BOCs  who  have  since  arriving  in  the
    United Kingdom applied for and obtained BOC passports, they have ceased
    to enjoy the benefits of Malaysian citizenship and  are  therefore  not
    returnable to Malaysia. The arguments supporting that claim, are, as we
    have indicated, complex and sometimes confused. The  Immigration  Judge
    understood the arguments put to him, and contained largely in Mr Gill's
    skeleton argument (upon which the Appellants also  rely  before  us  in
    resisting the Respondent) as falling  under  a  number  of  categories,
    which he dealt with in turn.

13. The Immigration Judge dealt first with the claim that the  Respondent's
    decisions were not in accordance with the law in general administrative
    law terms. He concluded that, as BOCs, the Appellants had no  right  of
    abode in the United Kingdom and that there  was  therefore  no  primary
    illegality in refusing them indefinite leave to remain. He rejected the
    argument that the success of some other claimants, in  applications  or
    appeals  that  might  be  superficially  similar,  gave   the   present
    Appellants a legal entitlement. He  rejected  arguments  based  on  any
    policy of the Respondent: he took the view that there was  no  relevant
    policy that had been published.

14.   The Immigration Judge went on to consider Art 3. His  conclusions  are
    entirely contained within paragraph  48  of  his  determination,  which
    reads as follows:

         "48.     It is submitted on behalf of all three appellants that as
           they are British overseas citizens, they are entitled not to  be
           removed from United Kingdom as their removal will mean that  the
           United Kingdom is in breach of its obligations under  Article  3
           of the Human Rights Convention.  It  is  also  argued  that  the
           respondent who has to  establish  that  the  appellants  can  be
           removed to Malaysia for purposes of settlement and on  whom  the
           burden falls of establishing this fact has not done so.  Two  of
           the appellants have  been  granted  British  overseas  citizen's
           passports which mean that they lose their Malaysian  nationality
           and would not be readmitted. It is argued that  the  appellant's
           position is that of "flying  Dutchmen."  The  second  and  third
           appellant have acquired BOC passports and there is no  issue  as
           to their BOC status. The third appellant however still  has  his
           Malaysian passport in his possession and has not been taken away
           from him by the Malaysian authorities. The first  appellant  has
           not been issued  with  a  BOC  passport  as  yet.  The  evidence
           produced by the appellants' legal representatives  clearly  show
           that the Malaysian High Court came to its  decision  [Lee  Thean
           Hock] by way of consent order and it is not a precedent as such.
            It does not create a legal principle. On the evidence before me
           I do not consider that the Malaysian High  Court's  decision  in
           the case of the Lee is an authority or  a  precedent.   I  agree
           with the submission in the case of the second  appellant,  whose
           passport has been retained by the Malaysian High Commission that
           he would be left in state of  limbo.  I  find  on  the  evidence
           before me that this will give rise to a violation of his Article
           3 rights in that he is in a position that he cannot travel  back
           to Malaysia. In the case of the first appellant, the  respondent
           has  set  removal  directions  without  actually  deciding   the
           appellant's BOC status. He has been refused indefinite leave  to
           remain on a discretionary basis as the other two  appellants.  I
           find on the evidence that the first  appellant  has  established
           family and private life in the United Kingdom with his  partner.
            The fact that he has not been issued with BOC status has little
           bearing on my decision.  The third appellant has his passport in
           his possession.  Again I accept that the  Malaysian  authorities
           will take this away from him whilst they discover  that  he  has
           been issued with a British overseas citizen status. I  hold  all
           three appellants to be in a state of limbo in relation to  their
           return ability to Malaysia.  For these reasons I find that there
           will be a  violation  of  all  three  appellant's  rights  under
           Article 3 as a result of the  respondent's  decision  to  remove
           them."

15.   The Immigration Judge went on find that the first Appellant  had  also
    established rights under Art 8.  He rejected arguments based on Art 14,
    but gave no reason for doing so  other  than  that  Art  14  cannot  be
    considered in isolation from other articles.

    Grounds for reconsideration and reply

16.   The Respondent's grounds  for  reconsideration,  in  so  far  as  they
    affect all three Appellants, are that the Immigration Judge "has failed
    to give reasons for finding that the Appellants would  find  themselves
    in such a situation that would  violate  their  Art  3  rights.  It  is
    submitted that the IJ has employed too  low  a  test  in  allowing  the
    appeals under Art 3". As Mr Palmer argued before us, the submission has
    two limbs: the first is that the Immigration Judge failed  to  identify
    what risk of ill treatment resulted from the Respondent's decision; the
    second is that the Immigration Judge failed to explain how the risk  so
    identified reached the high standard required by Art 3.

17.   There are replies submitted by the Appellants. They  assert  that  the
    Respondent's grounds do not demonstrate any material error of law,  but
    that in the alternative the Appellants' appeals fall to be  allowed  in
    any event for the reasons set out in the Appellants' skeleton argument.
    In the further alternative, it is submitted on behalf of the Appellants
    that the decisions to refuse leave to remain  were  not  in  accordance
    with the law because of failure to apply a known or  published  policy,
    and failure to invite the Appellants to submit  representations  as  to
    whether or not they fell within that policy.

    The Appellants' arguments summarised

18.   It is clear that that the reply  incorporates  the  original  skeleton
    argument. That is a document to which we shall make a fuller  reference
    below.  But it is also clear that  the  skeleton  argument  raises  two
    particular issues that appear to  have  been  largely  ignored  by  the
    Immigration Judge. One is the argument relating to  discrimination  and
    Art 14, which he summarily rejected. The other is an argument based  on
    the history of the relationship between successive British  governments
    and those who eventually came to be denominated as BOCs. That  argument
    is  partially  based  on  international  law,  partly  on  concepts  of
    fairness, partly on anecdotal evidence  on  the  treatment  of  others,
    partly on government statements and  partly  on  a  general  notion  of
    discrimination. We think we have identified the  main  strands.  It  is
    this argument which occupies most of the skeleton and to which Mr  Gill
    returned frequently in his oral submissions at the hearing.

19.   In order to see the way in which  the  submissions  were  put  to  the
    immigration judge and to us, it may be helpful  to  set  out  paragraph
    3(a)-(e) and  (g)  of  Mr  Gill's  skeleton  argument,  which  aims  to
    summarise the Appellants' case.


            "a)  The Appellants are BOCs from Malaysia, members of a  class
        of British nationals who have been historically deprived  of  their
        rights of residence in this country in  a  racially  discriminatory
        and degrading manner.


        Their status as BOCs arises as a matter of  law.  In  other  words,
        there is no discretion to hold that such persons are  not  BOCs  if
        the facts  establish  that  they  are  BOCs.  Whether  or  not  the
        Respondent therefore grants a passport to any particular person  in
        recognition of that legal status is therefore not the issue.  Where
        no inquiries  have  been  completed  as  to  whether  or  not  that
        Appellant is a BOC, it would not be in accordance with the  law  to
        proceed to a removal  decision  prior  to  the  resolution  of  the
        question  of  BOC  status  which  is  clearly  a  highly  important
        consideration in deciding whether or not to remove.  No such  issue
        arises in LT or ST's cases as their BOC status  is  undisputed  and
        they have been granted BOC passports.   In LM's case, the Secretary
        of State has  been  guilty  of  much  delay  in  deciding  the  BOC
        application.  As such, it  must  be  submitted  in  LM's  case  the
        removal decision is premature.


            c)   As British nationals, who  are  already  in  the  UK,  the
        Appellant are entitled not to be removed from  the  UK.  To  remove
        them would violate the UK obligations in international law to their
        own nationals [see under heading of Further Submissions below.]


            d)    Furthermore, the  Respondent  cannot  establish  that  the
        Appellants can be  removed  to  Malaysia,  at  least  not  for  the
        purposes of settlement (and, of course, everybody  is  entitled  to
        the right to settle in their  country  of  nationality,  see  under
        heading of  Further  Submissions  below).   It  is  true  that  the
        Appellants each also held a Malaysian passport  but  that  has  now
        been taken back by the Malaysian High Commission. However, Malaysia
        does not permit persons who assert or apply for or  recognise  some
        other nationality to continue to remain  Malaysian  nationals.  The
        Appellants therefore either already have or  inevitably  will  lose
        their Malaysian nationality and will not be re-admitted to Malaysia
        for the purposes of settlement. This is because they  have  claimed
        and/or asserted their rights as  BOCs:  art  24  of  the  Malaysian
        Constitution as currently interpreted and applied by the  Malaysian
        Govt.  In  each  such  case  the  Malaysian  High  Commission   has
        repeatedly adopted this position and has sought the return  of  the
        Malaysian passports. Nothing has therefore changed in the  practice
        of Malaysian authorities.


      e)    The Secretary of State is required to demonstrate that he is in
        a position to carry out a removal to Malaysia. It is not lawful for
        him to seek to do so in circumstances where he has made  no  effort
        at all to resolve this question. The Appellants have tried long and
        hard to obtain information from the Malaysian  High  Commission  to
        the effect that the Appellants can be  re-admitted  for  settlement
        purposes to Malaysia. The Malaysian High Commission has refused  or
        failed to indicate that readmission  is  a  possibility.   All  the
        indications are that it is not possible.


      ... [para 3(f) is set out at para 81 below]


      g)    Removal  would  breach  art  3  in  that  it  would  place  the
        Appellants in a position similar to the East  African  Asians  who,
        like the Appellants, were also British nationals denied  the  right
        of abode in the UK and who could not remain or re-enter East Africa
        and  to  whom  the  UK  denied  rights  of  residence  on  racially
        discriminatory grounds (which led ECmHR to hold the denial  of  the
        right of residence amounted to a breach or art 3).  The  Appellants
        would be left  in  the  degrading  and  inhuman  "Flying  Dutchman"
        situation with no country in which they could settle.


        h) Further or alternatively, the removal would also  breach  art  8
        and also art 8 read with art  14  for  obvious  reasons  which  are
        amplified later below. In brief terms, the argument is as  follows.
        The Appellants each have at least a private life, if not  a  family
        life, in the UK. The decision  to  refuse  discretionary  leave  to
        remain was not taken in accordance with the law, and  the  decision
        to remove would not now be in  accordance  with  the  law  for  the
        reasons briefly set out above i.e. BOCs are entitled in law not  to
        be removed;  this is all the more so where  the  Respondent  cannot
        establish that the Appellants are to be removed to  a  place  where
        they would be entitled to be settle; further or  alternatively  the
        decision is unlawful because the Respondent  has  failed  to  treat
        like cases in a like manner and acted arbitrarily and  irrationally
        and,  in  the  further  alternative,  has  unlawfully  defeated   a
        legitimate expectation that the Secretary of State would  apply  to
        the Appellant his policy and/or practice of granting some  form  of
        leave to remain to BOCs; in the further  alternative  the  decision
        has been made prematurely as a lawful removal  decision  cannot  be
        made until their has been proper consideration given  to  questions
        such as: is the applicant a BOC? Has the applicant's position  been
        lawfully considered by taking all  relevant  factors  into  account
        under any relevant policy and has he been given full opportunity to
        make representations by  reference  to  those  policies?  Have  all
        relevant inquiries which the UK ought to make been made? etc.   And
        even if the decision is in accordance with the law and does  pursue
        a legitimate aim,  is  it  proportionate?  The  AIT  will  have  to
        consider the position as to the date of the hearing when  assessing
        the human rights arguments. "



    We summarise the Appellants'  arguments  as  follows.   We  have  added
    references to the relevant paragraphs of Mr  Gill's  skeleton  argument
    and to the remainder of this determination.

      Argument               Para No of                  Para No of
                                  Skeleton Argument           Determination

      The burden of proving       2(ii), 3(d), 3(e),3(h),17         52-56
      that the Appellants can be        29(b),29(c)
      returned to Malaysia is on
      the Respondent.

      By obtaining a BOC          3(d),3(g),14,16,19,21,      59-72
      passport the Appellants have      25,26,29(b)
      lost their Malaysian
      nationality.  Refusing to allow
      them to be in the UK is a
      breach of Art 3 because they
      have nowhere else to go.

      The Appellants have                       _             73-75
      renounced their Malaysian
      nationality, with similar
      results.

      The Appellants as BOCs are  2(i),7-12,20,21,26,28(b),   44-51
      nationals of the UK and,          28(c),29(a),29(b),29(h)
      independently of immunity
      from removal,  have a right
      as such nationals to be in
      the UK.

      The Appellants have a       2(iii)(1),2(iii)(2),3(f),3(h),5,  81-87
      legitimate expectation of being,  16(b),18-19,22-25,26(c),29(d),
      or a human right to be, granted   29(i),29(j)
      indefinite leave to remain in
      accordance with the Secretary
      of State's uniform practice
      in similar cases.

      The Government's declared   15,16(e),26(c)              37-41,80
      view is that the Appellants
      are the victims of a historic
      wrong that needs to be put
      right.

      The Secretary of State's IDIs     2(iii)(3),4,6,22,24         88-92
      give the Appellants an
      entitlement to leave to remain
      or an expectation of it.

       If  the  Appellants  are   thought       3(a),3(c),3(g),7,12,15,26(c)
94-99
      not to have a right to be in      26(e),29(e),31
      the UK that is because they
      have been deprived of it on
      a racially discriminatory
      basis; and refusal to allow
      them to be in the UK
      perpetuate that discrimination
      and so is illegal.

      The Appellants have rights  2(iii)(5),3(h),20,25        102
      under Arts 3 and 8 of the
      ECHR overriding the
      provisions of UK law because
      refusing them what they seek
      is unlawful.

      Refusing the Appellants           26,28(a),29                 100-101
      what they seek is a
      disproportionate interference
      with their private and/or
      family life and so is
      contrary to Art 8.

      Refusing the first Appellant      2(iv)                       103-106
      what he seeks is a breach of
      Art 8 if he is returned to
      Malaysia because of the
      Malaysian Government's
      view of homosexuals.

20.   We prefer to look at the  issues  in  an  order  different  from  that
    adopted by the Immigration Judge, because  our  starting-point  is  his
    determination.  We shall begin with Art 3.  If no error is shown in his
    conclusion relating to Art 3, that is the end of the  matter.   But  if
    the Appellant's claims do not succeed under Art 3, we must see  whether
    there is or may be some other basis upon which it can be said that  the
    decisions against which they appeal are "otherwise  not  in  accordance
    with the law."

    The Historical Context

21.   Before we can consider the consequences of the  immigration  decisions
    against which the appellants appeal, however,  we  must  consider  what
    their position actually is.  Each of the Appellants is a BOC.  How they
    come to be BOCs is of some importance  to  these  appeals,  as  is  the
    difference between Malaysian BOCs and some other BOCs, as well  as  the
    difference between Malaysian BOCs and Malaysian non-BOCs.  We  need  to
    set out some of the history of Malaysia and some of the history of  the
    development of the status of BOC.

    British Overseas Citizens

22.   The delineation of any status of citizenship relating  to  the  United
    Kingdom, and the  identification  of  those  to  whom  it  applies  are
    relatively recent phenomena.  Historically, those who  owed  allegiance
    to the British crown following  the  Act  of  Union  1707  were  simply
    British subjects.   That category extended  not  only  to  those  owing
    allegiance because  of  their  origins  or  residence  in  the  British
    Islands, but, as time went on, to people all over the world who  became
    subject to the rule of the United Kingdom as  a  colonial  power.   Any
    person who  was  not  a  British  subject  was  an  alien.   (The  only
    modification of that dichotomy was that some aliens had the  protection
    of the British crown without their countries  being  colonies.    These
    people were called 'British Protected Persons': they were  not  British
    subjects.)  The rights and duties of  British  subjects  were  governed
    solely by common law.  The acquisition  and  loss  of  British  subject
    status came to be governed partly by statute, most recently the British
    Nationality and Status of Aliens Act 1914 as amended.

23.   The British Nationality Act of 1948 (the 1948 Act) was the first  move
    to create a statutory status of  citizenship  relating  to  the  United
    Kingdom.  The need for it arose from  the  developing  independence  of
    countries which had been part of the British Empire.  The  purpose  was
    to restructure the relevant law so  that  newly  independent  countries
    could make, then and subsequently, statutory provisions for  their  own
    citizenship.  As part of the scheme, the UK created by the 1948 Act   a
    new status, Citizen of the United Kingdom  and  Colonies  (CUKC)  which
    would apply to all those British  subjects  who  did  not  acquire  the
    citizenship of a former Imperial possession that  now  had  citizenship
    laws of its own.

24.   For most practical purposes, when the 1948 Act came into  force  on  1
    January 1949 all British subjects became (or thereafter became)  either
    CUKCs or the citizens of an independent Commonwealth country.  The only
    exceptions were a number of individuals connected with  countries  that
    were already independent Commonwealth countries on becoming into  force
    of the 1948 Act, who neither became citizens of that country  nor  were
    made CUKCs by the default provisions  of  the  1948  Act.    They  were
    mostly connected with India  and  have  no  relevance  to  the  present
    appeals.

25.   The 1948 Act was not concerned with identification or  delineation  of
    the rights and duties of citizenship, but merely with the  creation  of
    the statutory citizenship categories  in  order  to  allow  independent
    Commonwealth countries to develop  their  own  citizenship  laws.   The
    liberty to enter the United Kingdom or to reside  here  continued,  not
    only for CUKCs  but  also  for  citizens  of  independent  Commonwealth
    countries who were not CUKCs.  It arose not from citizenship, but  from
    the status of  being  a  British  subject,  which  United  Kingdom  law
    recognised as continuing despite the acquisition of  citizenship  of  a
    Commonwealth country.  In the period after 1948, more countries  became
    independent, and, in addition, the development of  immigration  control
    had a considerable impact on the  ability  of  individual  Commonwealth
    citizens to enter and remain in the United Kingdom.  But  it  is  worth
    emphasising that the starting point for those developments  was  not  a
    right derived from any citizenship but a right  derived  from  being  a
    British subject.  As well as  being  an  obvious  conclusion  from  the
    common treatment of all Commonwealth citizens, that view is endorsed by
    the speech of Lord Diplock  in  DPP  v  Bhagwan  [1972]  AC  60  at  80
    (emphasis added):

           "Prior to the passing of the Commonwealth Immigrants  Act  1962,
           the respondent as a British subject had the right of common  law
           to enter the United Kingdom without let or  hindrance  when  and
           where he pleased and to remain here as long as he liked."

26.   The two developments to which we have referred  took  place  alongside
    one another.   Countries newly  becoming  independent  developed  their
    initial  citizenship  laws  in   consultation   with   United   Kingdom
    governments, and provisions for citizenship of  the  new  country  were
    associated with  the  United  Kingdom  statute  granting  independence.
    Typically, those belonging to new countries ceased to be CUKCs  on  the
    countries'  independence,   thus  giving  a  new   country   a   proper
    independent  citizenship  base.   As  British  subjects,  citizens   of
    Commonwealth countries continued to be entitled to enter and remain  in
    the United Kingdom, and so could, if they chose,  live  in  the  United
    Kingdom instead of living in their own country.   The  restrictions  on
    that right began, as the short passage cited from DPP v  Bhagwan  above
    shows, in 1962.  We do not need to treat the provisions  in  any  great
    detail,  save to say that the liberty to enter and remain in the United
    Kingdom,  historically  attributable  to  all  British  subjects,   was
    gradually restricted to those with a real connection to  the  territory
    of the United Kingdom.  After a decade of increasing restrictions,  the
    lasting position was that laid down by s.2 of the Immigration Act 1971.
     That provided that only "patrials" were to be  free  from  immigration
    control.   Broadly  speaking,  patrials  were  CUKCs  and  Commonwealth
    citizens who were born, adopted,  registered  or  naturalised  as  such
    citizens in the United Kingdom, CUKCs who had a parent  or  grandparent
    with that characteristic, and Commonwealth citizens with a CUKC  parent
    born in the United Kingdom.  Again it is to  be  seen  that  these  new
    provisions cut across the statutory citizenship classes.  Being a  CUKC
    was neither a necessary nor a sufficient  condition  for  freedom  from
    immigration control.  Some CUKCs were patrials and some were not;  some
    non-CUKCs were patrials and some were not.

27.   The British Nationality Act 1981  (the  1981  Act),  which  came  into
    force on 1 January  1983,  was  the  first  to  treat  citizenship  and
    immigration status together.  It provided (again in the broadest terms,
    but in sufficient detail for present  purposes)  that  CUKCs  who  were
    patrials were to be "British Citizens"  and  to  have  an  unrestricted
    right of entry and abode to the United Kingdom.   CUKCs  who  were  not
    patrials fell into two classes.  First, those who were CUKCs by  reason
    of their connection with a country which at  the  commencement  of  the
    1981  Act  was  still  a  British  colony,  became  British   Dependent
    Territories  Citizens.   (This  classification  was   renamed   British
    Overseas Territories Citizens by the British Overseas  Territories  Act
    2002.)  All other CUKCs became BOCs.  The 1981 Act did not  change  the
    entitlement of any CUKCs to enter or be in the United Kingdom: to  this
    extent, it merely changed the vocabulary.    Citizens  of  Commonwealth
    countries did not become British Citizens, even if under the  1971  Act
    they were patrials.  But, despite that,  they  retained  any  right  of
    abode that they had before 1 January 1983.  The 1981 Act also abolished
    the  status  of  "British  subject"  and  replaced  it  with  that   of
    "Commonwealth citizen".

28.   For completeness we need to add that the status of  British  Protected
    Person had acquired statutory recognition in the 1948 Act and continues
    under the 1981 Act, but refers now to very few individuals.

29.   For the  purposes  of  this  appeal  we  do  not  need  to  treat  the
    provisions by which a person became a CUKC or becomes a British Citizen
    in any detail.  We need  only  say  this.    The  status  of  CUKC  was
    acquired by birth within the United Kingdom or any  colony  (with  very
    few unimportant exceptions).  It was also acquired by birth outside the
    UK and Colonies if the child's father was a CUKC other than by descent:
    in other words,  the  status  could  also  descend  by  one  generation
    regardless of the place of birth.    As  colonies  became  independent,
    births within the territories concerned ceased to be births within  the
    United Kingdom  and  Colonies,  and  in  any  event  most  independence
    statutes contained provisions terminating the status of CUKC for  those
    with  connections  to  the  new  country.   Where  there  was  no  such
    provision, however, the status  of  CUKC  continued,  and  could  still
    descend by one generation.  So the children of  those  who  were  CUKCs
    other than by descent (fathers) became CUKCs not because they were born
    in a colony but because of the status of their father at  the  time  of
    their birth, and, if not patrials, became BOCs on 1 January 1983.   For
    reasons we are about to explain, certain Malaysians  fell  within  that
    category, and indeed the vast majority of those who became  BOCs  on  1
    January 1983 were Malaysian citizens.   Under  the  1981  Act,  British
    citizenship  is  transmissible  by  descent,   but   British   Overseas
    Citizenship is not.  BOCs are therefore a class which, over the  years,
    declines in numbers.

    The colonial history of the Malayan Peninsula

30.    The  Straits  Settlements  consisted  originally  of  three   widely-
    separated areas on and adjacent to the western and southern  coasts  of
    the Malayan Peninsula.  They were  trading  posts  of  the  East  India
    Company and with the other territories belonging to that  company  were
    surrendered to the Crown on  2  September  1858.   The  territories  in
    question were Penang, an island off the west coast  of  the  Peninsula,
    but including for these purposes a small part of  the  mainland  called
    Province Wellesley; Malacca, a territory on the southwest coast of  the
    Peninsula, and Singapore, an island  off  the  southern  coast  of  the
    Peninsula.  Various other territories in due course became part of  the
    Straits Settlements colony, but they do not concern us.

31.   The border of the Kingdom  of  Siam,  at  the  north  of  the  Malayan
    Peninsula, was finally established by the Treaty of  Bangkok  in  1909.
    South of that border, the whole of the Peninsula apart from the Straits
    Settlements colony consisted of a number of  separate  states.   During
    the period of 50 years beginning  in  1870,  all  those  states  became
    British Protected States. Four of them,  Pahang,  Perak,  Negrisembilam
    and Selangor, joined to become the "Federated Malay  States"  in  1896.
    The other states remained unfederated.

32.   In 1946 the states making up the  peninsula,  with  the  exception  of
    Singapore, joined to form the Malayan Union.  The  Straits  Settlements
    colony ceased to exist.  Singapore  became  a  colony  by  itself,  and
    Penang  and  Malacca  became  part  of  the  Union.   So  far  as   the
    relationship of  the  Union  with  the  United  Kingdom  is  concerned,
    however, Penang and Malacca remained  part  of  the  dominions  of  the
    Crown, whereas the other states remained British Protected States.  The
    Malayan Union was dissolved in 1948 and was replaced in  that  year  by
    the  Federation  of  Malaya.   The  Federation  of  Malaya  became   an
    independent state within the British Commonwealth in  1957.   Singapore
    became an independent Commonwealth  country  in  1959.   Singapore  and
    certain other territories away from the Peninsula joined the Federation
    of Malaya in 1963 to form Malaysia,  but  Singapore  left  Malaysia  in
    1965, becoming a separate sovereign State.

    Malaysians and British Nationality


33.   As we indicated above, the position  by  1920  was  that  the  Malayan
    Peninsula consisted of territories that were British Protected  States,
    together with three small areas, Penang, Malacca  and  Singapore,  that
    were part of a British Colony.  The formation of the Malayan Union  and
    the Federation of Malaya in 1946 and 1948 respectively did  not  affect
    that  position.   The  Federation  of  Malaya  itself,   however,   had
    provisions for citizenship of the Federation, granted to  the  subjects
    of the rulers of the various Malay States, and to those born in  Penang
    and Malacca (it will be remembered that Singapore was not part  of  the
    Federation).

34.   On the coming into force of the British Nationality  Act  1948  Penang
    and Malacca (but not the rest of the Federation) counted as part of the
    "United Kingdom and Colonies".  Those in these territories who had been
    British subjects became CUKCs; and  the  provisions  of  the  1948  Act
    relating to the acquisition of that citizenship applied to  Penang  and
    Malacca as to other colonies.  The Malay States were Protectorates  and
    the subjects of their rulers became British Protected Persons under  an
    Order in Council, 1949/140, made under s 30(1) of the 1948 Act.

35.   In 1959, on the constitution of the  new  nation  of  Malaysia  as  an
    independent  country  within  the  Commonwealth,  it  might  have  been
    expected that, in accordance with the arrangements for the independence
    of other colonies, the population  of  the  newly  independent  country
    would cease to have a citizenship status linking it to the old colonial
    power.  During the negotiations leading up  to  independence,  however,
    representations were made on behalf of the CUKCs in Penang and  Malacca
    that  they  should  retain  their  link  with  the  United  Kingdom  in
    distinction  to  the  other  citizens   of   the   Federation.    Those
    representations were accepted and the result was that  the  legislation
    for the independence of  Malaysia  and  the  constitution  of  Malaysia
    itself allowed dual nationality  and  allowed  those  citizens  of  the
    Federation who were CUKCs to retain their status as CUKCs  in  addition
    to their nationality of Malaysia.  We have not been told  whether  this
    arrangement was unique in provisions for  the  independence  of  former
    British Colonies,  but  it  was  certainly  very  unusual.   Routinely,
    citizens of a new independent country lose  their  nationality  of  and
    hence their  loyalty  to  the  old  colonial  power.   Without  such  a
    provision, it would be impossible for  the  new  country  to  be  truly
    independent of its old master.

36.   Thus, the CUKCs in Penang and Malacca retained  an  additional  status
    which their fellow citizens of Malaysia had never had,  and  which  the
    citizens of other new independent countries were required to  give  up.
    We were not told the precise reasons for  these  arrangements,  but  it
    must be remembered that the Federation of  Malaya  before  independence
    was perhaps somewhat unusual in that it contained both territories that
    formed part of a British colony and states that  did  not.   One  could
    understand that there may have been  a  feeling  that  that  historical
    distinction should be preserved in some way.  We were shown part of the
    speech of the Secretary of State for the Colonies, Mr  Lennox-Boyd,  in
    the debate on the Independence Bill in the House of Commons on 12  July
    1957 (we were not given the Hansard reference).  He dealt with a number
    of issues, including the provisions for Penang and Malacca to enter the
    Federation  as  equal  partners  with  the  other  states  in  the  new
    independent country  and  for  the  British  Crown  to  relinquish  its
    sovereignty over Penang and Malacca for that purpose.  By the  wish  of
    the Federation, however, judicial  appeals  were  to  be  in  the  last
    instance to the Privy Council.  There had been negotiations relating to
    the protection of interests both of Malayan and Chinese people  in  the
    territories of the Federation.  That was what Mr Lennox-Boyd  described
    as "solid guarantees of fundamental liberties to meet Chinese fears  of
    discrimination, with reasonable arrangements to safeguard  the  special
    position of the Malayans without injustice to other races".  So far  as
    citizenship is concerned, the Secretary of State noted that this was  a
    "very difficult problem" but urged that the compromise  that  had  been
    reached on the acquisition of citizenship of Malaysia  on  independence
    was a fair one.  He went on to speak about those who  were  CUKCs.   He
    said this:

      "Many of the present citizens of the Federation have that  citizenship
           of the Federation  because  they  are  citizens  of  the  United
           Kingdom and Colonies by birth.  They are mostly people from  the
           Settlements of  Penang  and  Malacca.   These  people,  who  are
           British subjects by birth, and value it  very  much  indeed,  as
           well as having Malayan citizenship which they value  also,  have
           been most anxious that they should not be required  to  give  up
           their status as citizens of the United Kingdom and  Colonies  in
           order to continue to be Malayan citizens after independence.  On
           the other hand, Malayans have been opposed to the  retention  by
           any of their citizens of a second  citizenship  on  the  grounds
           that dual nationality of this kind might mean a divided loyalty.




      The problem has been met  in  the  following  way.   The  Constitution
           recognises that all  citizens  of  the  Federation  will,  after
           independence, be Commonwealth citizens.  That is, they will have
           the common status enjoyed by all persons who are citizens of any
           Commonwealth country.  Secondly, no one is required to give up a
           second citizenship in order to continue to be a citizen  of  the
           Federation.  Thirdly, they  can,  however,  lose  their  federal
           citizenship if of their own will they adopt another  citizenship
           or if they exercise rights in a foreign country which could only
           be exercised by citizens of that country, or  if  they  exercise
           rights in a Commonwealth country  which  are  not  available  to
           Commonwealth citizens as a whole.


      The effect of this last provision is wholly to preserve the rights  of
           those who are citizens of the United Kingdom  and  Colonies,  as
           well as  federal  citizens,  since  in  the  United  Kingdom  no
           distinction is drawn between citizens of the United Kingdom  and
           the Colonies and citizens of other Commonwealth countries.  Such
           distinctions as are drawn here are between Commonwealth citizens
           and aliens.


      At the same time, these arrangements, we have agreed,  make  it  clear
           that the retention of their citizenship of  the  United  Kingdom
           and the Colonies for certain citizens of the Federation does not
           give  them  any  special  privileges  vis-�-vis  other   Malayan
           citizens, since the latter, as Commonwealth citizens, enjoy  the
           same rights in the United Kingdom as do citizens of  the  United
           Kingdom and Colonies.  Thus, the interests of the inhabitants of
           the Settlements have been preserved in a  way  fully  compatible
           with the desire of the Federation Government that one section of
           the population should not have any special privileges  vis-�-vis
           the remainder."


    BOCs with no nationality


37.   On the coming into force of the British Nationality  Act  1981,  those
    citizens of Malaysia who were CUKCs and who were not  patrials  became,
    like all other CUKCs who were not patrials and who derived their status
    as CUKCs from a country  that  was  not  still  a  colony,  BOCs.   The
    Malaysians who became BOCs on that date formed the  great  majority  of
    BOCs, and also the great majority of those 1.3  million  BOCs  who  had
    some other citizenship.

38.   Although the vast majority of those who became BOCs  were  Malaysians,
    a substantial minority, probably about 200,000, were people who did not
    have citizenship of any other country.   The  largest  group  of  these
    people was again apparently that connected with Malaysia: about 130,000
    individuals who,  for  one  reason  or  another,  were  CUKCs  but  not
    Malaysian citizens.   There were also 100,000 or so  other  individuals
    connected with various countries around  the  world.    This  group  of
    people as a whole, although individually  they  had  been  settled  and
    lawfully resident in other countries, had, no right  of  abode  in  the
    United Kingdom or anywhere else.  This was not a result of the creation
    of the  status  of  BOC.   It  was  a  result  of  the  development  of
    immigration control in the United  Kingdom  from  1962  to  1971.   The
    people affected were non-patrial CUKCs who had  no  other  citizenship.
    On the coming into force of the 1981 Act those people are called  BOCs.
    They are BOCs with no other citizenship.  We make that  point  because,
    in referring to them as BOCs it can otherwise be  thought  that  it  is
    because they are "only BOCs" that they have the difficulty that they do
    have.  That is to misunderstand the position.   The  difficulty  arises
    not from the nationality statute but from the immigration provisions.
39.   In any event, the fact that the development  of  immigration  law  had
    led to a group of British subjects being left with nowhere  where  they
    had a right to live, was the subject of representations to the  British
    government on a number of occasions during and after the development of
    the lasting provisions on  immigration  control.    Two  incidents  are
    particularly notable.   The first relates to East African Asians,  that
    is to say CUKCs with origins in India or Pakistan who  had  made  their
    home in the British dependencies in East Africa.   Their  migration  to
    the United Kingdom in the 1960s in the exercise of a right to do so  as
    British subjects  (and  despite  the  provisions  of  the  Commonwealth
    Immigrants Act 1962) led to the passing of the Commonwealth  Immigrants
    Act 1968 which had  the  deliberate  effect  of  preventing  such  East
    African Asians from having a right to enter  and  live  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  Those  provisions  were  successfully  challenged  under  the
    European Convention on Human Rights:  this was the East African  Asians
    case (1981) 3 EHRR 76.  The Special Voucher Scheme, to which  reference
    is made in Mr Gill's skeleton argument  in  the  present  appeals,  was
    designed to provide some amelioration of the effects of the  1968  Act.
    For present purposes, however, we need only note  the  developments  of
    immigration law having the effect of removing the right to  be  in  the
    United Kingdom even from CUKCs who had no right to be anywhere else.

40.   The group of people with that characteristic, although now  very  much
    smaller, was the  subject  of  representations  to  the  Government  in
    connection with the passing of the Nationality,  Immigration  &  Asylum
    Act 2002.  On 4 July 2002 (Hansard Volume  188)  Home  Office  Minister
    Beverley Hughes made the following statement:

           "At present, some citizens of our former colonies in East Africa
           have a British passport but not the right to live  and  work  in
           the UK.  Now, if they do not have any other nationality and have
           never given up another nationality, they will be able to acquire
           these rights.


           We are righting a historical wrong which has left  a  number  of
           overseas citizens without any right of abode either in the UK or
           elsewhere.


           BOC status is a legacy of  decolonisation,  when  some  overseas
           citizens were treated unfairly, which was then compounded by the
           1968 Immigration Act and the 1981 British Nationality Act.   The
           Government is acting to put that right.


           We have a moral obligation to these people  going  back  a  long
           way.  We are now meeting that obligation  and  doing  the  right
           thing by those citizens of former  British  colonies  who  would
           otherwise have no right of abode in any country.


           The number who would want to live in the  UK  is  likely  to  be
           small, less than 500 BOCs a year have applied to live in the  UK
           in recent times.  They are likely to view  it  as  an  insurance
           policy in case those circumstances change in the future.   I  am
           pleased to be able to offer them that added security.


           BOCs that have come to the UK recently have done so because they
           want to work.  We are developing routes for people to  come  and
           work here legally in ways which boost our economy,  and  welcome
           those BOCs who want to be productive members of our society  and
           add to the wealth and prosperity of the nation. "

41.   The resulting legislation was s.12 of the 2002 Act, which  inserted  a
    new s.4B into the 1981 Act, reading as follows:-

           "4B.  Acquisition by registration: certain persons without other
           citizenship
           (1)  This section applies to a person who has the status of -
                    (a) British Overseas Citizen,
                    (b) British Subject under this Act, or
                    (c) British Protected Person.
           (2) A person to whom this section applies shall be  entitled  to
              be registered as a British Citizen if -
                    (a) he applies for registration under this section,
                    (b) the Secretary of State is satisfied that the  person
                       does not have, apart from  the  status  mentioned  in
                       subsection 1, any citizenship or nationality, and
                    (c) the Secretary of State is satisfied that the  person
                       has not after  4  July  2002  renounced,  voluntarily
                       relinquished or lost through action or  inaction  any
                       citizenship or nationality."


    General observation on Malaysian BOCs and the Appellants


42.   It is important to remember that  if  the  Appellants  are  BOCs  (and
    nobody doubts that they are) they  became  BOCs  automatically  on  the
    coming into force of the 1981 Act, because  they  were  CUKCs  with  no
    right of abode in the United Kingdom.  Their  status  as  BOCs  is  not
    created or indeed affected by their applying for  or  receiving  a  BOC
    passport (although it is said on their behalf  that  those  events  may
    affect their status as  Malaysian  citizens.)   The  Immigration  Judge
    appears to have been under the misapprehension that the Appellants, and
    others similarly circumstanced, became BOCs  on  the  grant  of  a  BOC
    passport. That is evident from the determination, both in  the  passage
    we have already cited and in paragraph  44,  which  begins  "The  first
    Appellant has not  yet  been  granted  the  British  Overseas  Citizens
    status." It looks as if Mr Gill sometimes shares some elements of  that
    misapprehension, because, although the position is stated correctly  at
    para 8 of his skeleton argument, in  the  Appellants'  replies  to  the
    grounds for reconsideration, signed by him, there is a reference to the
    letter from the Malaysian High Commission which,  it  is  said,  "makes
    clear that the BOC status leads to a loss  of  Malaysian  Citizenship."
    That cannot be an assertion that the Appellants  lost  their  Malaysian
    citizenship on the coming into force of the 1981 Act: they have claimed
    to be entitled to use their Malaysian passports to travel to the United
    Kingdom, and to make applications based on their lawful use of them. It
    must therefore be an assertion that some subsequent event  is  properly
    described as the "BOC Status" leading to the asserted loss of Malaysian
    citizenship. Whatever that subsequent event was, it  cannot  have  been
    the grant of BOC Status. The Nationality Acts contain no provision  for
    the grant of BOC  status,  save  in  relation  to  a  small  number  of
    individuals formerly connected with Hong  Kong.  With  that  exception,
    BOCs are a closed group,  consisting  of  those  who  became  BOCs,  by
    operation of law, on the coming into force of the 1981 Act.


    Discussion


    Malaysian BOCs as "British Nationals"

43.   Having set out the background we now turn to  the  arguments  made  on
    the Appellants' behalf.

44.    It  may  be  regarded  as  an   established   principle   of   public
    international law that,  although  it  is  for  independent  states  to
    regulate the acquisition and loss of their own nationality, it  is  not
    open to states to formulate nationality or citizenship laws which  have
    the effect of depriving individuals of the right to  live  anywhere  in
    the world.   Article 15 (1)  of  the  Universal  Declaration  of  Human
    Rights provides that "everyone has the right to a nationality", and Art
    3.2 of the fourth protocol to the European Convention on  Human  Rights
    (which has not been ratified by the United Kingdom) provides that:

           "No one shall be deprived of the right to enter the territory of
           the State of which he is a national".

45.   Mr Gill made reference  to  the  latter  provision  in  particular  as
    exemplifying international law and sought to erect upon it an  argument
    that because BOCs are so called, they are to be treated as  "nationals"
    of the United Kingdom and as such nationals have in  international  law
    the right to enter and live in the  United  Kingdom.   We  regard  that
    argument as entirely misconceived in any application to the Appellants.

46.   First, as we have explained, the Appellants are members of  the  large
    category of BOCs who have nationality of another country.  We have  not
    been referred to any principle of international law entitling a  person
    to exercise the  minimum  rights  protected  by  international  law  in
    respect of more than one State.  Both  the  provisions  we  have  cited
    above use the singular.  The latter, in particular,  says  "the  State"
    not "any State".  It may be that, in relation to BOCs who have no other
    right of abode, Mr Gill's argument might have had some force before the
    coming into force of s.4B of the 1981 Act.   But this is not that case,
    and that time has past.


47.   In any event, the argument that BOCs are to be treated as  a  sort  of
    citizen, which in turn is to cause them to be  treated  as  a  sort  of
    national, which in turn is to be regarded as giving them rights despite
    what is laid down in the very statutes formulating their status, is  an
    argument which we think is doomed to failure.   It ignores the  context
    of the statutory provisions, history, authority and reality.  So far as
    the context of the statutory provisions is  concerned,  we  have  shown
    that BOCs were identified in the 1981 Act by reference  to  their  then
    present status as individuals who had no right to reside in the  United
    Kingdom and by contrast with those who had such  a  right.   To  regard
    BOCs as having in that context acquired, simply by being called a  sort
    of citizen, a right, the very absence  of  which  is  the  key  to  the
    definition of their status is, with  respect,  absurd.    Besides,  the
    very statutory  wording  of  the  1981  Act  prevents  the  classes  of
    citizenship that it establishes from being regarded  as  nationalities.
    The principal category is that of "British Citizen", but  there  is  no
    country called "Britain".  The  phrase  "British  Citizenship"  cannot,
    therefore,  be  interpreted  as  intended  to  create  nationality  and
    residence rights in such a country.  The  same  applies  to  the  other
    major category created by the 1981 Act, that of "Commonwealth Citizen".
     There is no country called "the Commonwealth"  of  which  Commonwealth
    citizens are to be treated as nationals with rights of residence.  This
    shows, we think, that it is impossible to treat the use of  words  like
    "citizen"  and  "citizenship"  in  the  1981  Act   as   referring   to
    international law nationality rights.

48.   The reason for  that  is  historical.   Whatever  may  be  the  modern
    terminology, the right to enter and be in the United  Kingdom  derived,
    as  we  have  explained,  not  from  anything  called  citizenship   or
    nationality but from being a British subject.  The provisions  of  both
    the British Nationality Acts and the various immigration  statues  have
    the effect that certain people who would previously have been  regarded
    as British subjects with that  right,  lost  the  right,  generally  in
    exchange for the right to live in some part of what had previously been
    colonial territory.  That was the scheme.  Although there were cases in
    which the right to be in  the  United  Kingdom  was  lost  without  the
    acquisition of a corresponding right to be anywhere else,  the  history
    of the provisions, as we have set it  out  above,  is  clearly  of  the
    breakup and final abolition of the class of British subjects,  and  its
    replacement  by  recognition  of  specific  attachment   to   different
    countries all over the world.

49.   That view is supported by authority at the highest level:  see  DPP  v
    Bhagwan above.  Before 1962 and, equally, before the coming into  force
    of the 1981 Act, any rights to enter and reside in the  United  Kingdom
    derived from the status of being a  British  subject.    They  did  not
    derive from any conception of citizenship before the 1981 Act; and that
    Act, based as it is so clearly on the status and rights existing at the
    time it was passed, it cannot be thought of in the  way  that  Mr  Gill
    suggests.  As we have explained,  in  the  development  of  immigration
    control, being a CUKC was neither necessary nor sufficient  to  entitle
    one to reside in the United Kingdom.   But everyone who had that  right
    was a British subject.

50.   Finally, it seems to us that the argument raised  by  Mr  Gill  simply
    lacks  any  real  basis.   It  has  to  be  founded  on  a  reading  of
    international law  not  clearly  supported  by  any  international  law
    authority, on the basis of which it is  suggested  that  the  1981  Act
    should be given  a  meaning  entirely  different  from  that  obviously
    intended by the legislature.

51.   In support of the arguments he made, Mr Gill  cited  Beverley  Hughes'
    statement of 4 July 2002, but he did so only in  an  abbreviated  form,
    and without its context.  He asked us to treat it as  applying  to  all
    BOCs.   It is clear beyond the  slightest  shadow  of  doubt  that  the
    Minister was referring not to all BOCs, but to those BOCs  who  had  no
    right to live anywhere in the  world.   As  we  have  explained,  their
    difficulty arose not from their being BOCs, but from the development of
    immigration  control.   That  her  reference  was  limited   to   those
    individuals is clear both from the words of her statement  when  it  is
    read in full and from the statutory provision that was made in order to
    carry the policy indicated in the statement into effect.  We know of no
    basis upon which it can  properly  be  said  that  any  government  has
    regarded the grant of  BOC  status  to  individuals  who  have  another
    nationality as in any way disadvantaging them.   We deprecate Mr Gill's
    attempt to cause us to think differently by referring to parts  of  the
    statement out of context.

    Burden of proof

52.   Mr Gill submits at a number of points that it is  the  Respondent  who
    has the burden of proof in these  appeals,  either  to  show  that  the
    Appellants are returnable to Malaysia or that removing  them  from  the
    United Kingdom would not breach Art 3.  We  reject  those  submissions.
    It is for the Appellants to establish their case.

53.   Mr Gill's submissions rely on R v SSHD ex  parte  Yassine  and  others
    [1990] Imm AR 354.  That was a case in  which  Lebanese  nationals  had
    visitors' visas for Brazil.  They had obtained those visas  in  Beirut,
    not because they intended to go to Brazil but in order to be allowed to
    board a plane to the UK as if in transit to Brazil.  When they  arrived
    in the UK they claimed asylum.  Under the regime then in force for such
    claims  the  Secretary  of   State   declined   to   give   substantive
    consideration to them  and  issued  directions  for  their  removal  to
    Brazil.  The claimants sought judicial review of that decision  on  the
    ground that the only basis upon which any of  them  could  lawfully  be
    removed to Brazil was that it was "a  country  or  territory  to  which
    there is reason to believe that he will be admitted" in  the  words  of
    para 8 (1)(c)(iv) of Schedule 2 to the Immigration Act 1971.  Schiemann
    J held that, in the circumstances of the case, the Secretary  of  State
    had no basis for thinking that  the  claimants  would  be  admitted  to
    Brazil on the basis of their fraudulently  obtained  visas.    He  thus
    granted the application.

54.   This is not a decision  that  there  is  a  burden  of  proof  on  the
    Respondent in an immigration appeal.  Indeed the issue before the Court
    in Yassine was not whether the claimants were removable to  Brazil  but
    whether the Secretary of State was entitled to conclude that they  were
    - a question unlikely to be relevant in an immigration appeal.  Yassine
    is authority solely on the process to be adopted by  the  Secretary  of
    State before making a decision to give removal  directions  under  para
    8(iv).

55.   The present appeals are not, and under the present  regime  could  not
    be, appeals  against  removal  directions.   Even  if  they  were,  any
    directions for removal to Malaysia would not be given under para  8(iv)
    but under sub paras (i),(ii) or (iii) of  para  8.    Those  provisions
    allow removal of persons such as the Appellants to

            "any country being
           (i)  a country of which he is a national or citizen; or
           (ii) a country or territory in which he has obtained a  passport
              or other document        of identity; or
           (iii) a country or territory in which he embarked for the United
           Kingdom".

56.   There can be no doubt that in  the  Appellants'  case  Malaysia  is  a
    county within (ii) and (iii), whether or not it also falls within  (i).
    So far as concerns the Secretary of State's decision-making process,  a
    decision to issue removal directions to Malaysia would  (provided  that
    the Appellants are liable to removal at all) be unimpeachable.  And the
    question whether the  appellants  would  be  in  fact  be  admitted  to
    Malaysia is for them to deal with, on the evidence, unaffected  by  the
    decision on the entirely different issue in Yassine.  There is  nothing
    in this case that causes the burden of proof to be reversed.

    Article 3

57.   We quote again from Mr Gill's skeleton argument:-

            "28) As to art 3, the Appellants contend as follows:-
            (a)   Any decision which forms the basis of refusal of leave and
                 the consequential exposure to an expulsion and which is  in
                 itself challenged on the basis that it violates art 3  must
                 be made in accordance with the domestic law.   An  unlawful
                 decision cannot be relied by the respondent to  support  an
                 art 3 deportation.  For the various reasons set out in this
                 skeleton  argument,  the  challenged  decision  is  not  in
                 accordance with  the  law  and  therefore  violates  art  3
                 (including the procedural protection giving by art 3).
           (b)   Further or alternatively, as stated above,  the  appellant
                 is within the class of British nationals known  as  British
                 Overseas Citizens.  The appellant's father was a  CUKC  (as
                 was  he)  and  remained  as  such  until  that  status  was
                 converted to BOC status by the BNA in 1991 as  from  1.1.83
                 the progressive development of immigration control  in  the
                 1960s leading to the conversion of status in the  1981  act
                 has, taken together, deprived such CUKCs of the full rights
                 of residence in the UK.
           (c)    In  particular,  the   Commonwealth   Secretary,   George
                 Thompson, is minuted on 15th February 1968, as saying:-
                 "although he recognised the problems that will  be  created
                 by continued influx of a large number of Asians from Kenya,
                 to pass such  legislation  would  be  wrong  in  principle,
                 clearly discriminatory on grounds of colour and contrary to
                 every thing we  stood  for  ....    We  should  effectively
                 deprive large numbers of people of any citizenship  at  all
                 or, at best, turn them into second class citizens".
                 Despite  these  concerns,   the   Home   Secretary,   James
                 Callaghan, wrote in a memo dated 21st February, ends:
                 "we must bear in mind that the problem is potentially  much
                 wider than East  Africa.   There  are  another  one  and  a
                 quarter million  people  not  subject  to  our  immigration
                 control .... At some future time we may be  faced  with  an
                 influx from Aden or Malaysia".
                 On the following day he said:-
                 "We shall legislate so as to deprive citizens of the UK and
                 colonies who did not belong to this country, not  of  their
                 citizenship but  of  the  automatic  right  to  enter  this
                 country ...."
                 These  were  shameful  statements,  which  the   Govt   now
                 recognises has given rise "to  a  historical  wrong"  which
                 needs to be "righted": (see Beverley Hughes' statement when
                 announcing the changes to  be  made  by  s.12  Nationality,
                 Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.
           (d)   At the  time  of  Malaysian  independence,  it  was  never
                 intended that persons such as the appellant or  his  father
                 should lose their  rights  as  CUKCs:  see  the  government
                 statement during the Hansard debate on the issue  in  1957.
                 This was a unique pledge given to those CUKCs  from  Penang
                 and Malacca.  The CIA68 represented a going-back  on  those
                 promises designed to protect the "unique" situation of  the
                 Penang and Malacca CUKCs.
           (e)   Each of the appellants submits that at the very least  the
                 continuation  of  such  a  deprivation  of  the  rights  of
                 citizenship in the present circumstances where  he  has  no
                 right to settle in Malaysia will mean that he will be  left
                 in the flying Dutchman situation of not having any  country
                 in the world which will take  him  on  a  permanent  basis.
                 This is degrading treatment which violates art 3  (see  the
                 East African Asians case [1973] where the EComnHR held that
                 refusal of entry to East African Asians who  had  not  been
                 allowed to remain in East Africa and who had no where  else
                 to go violated art 3 as the reason for  taking  away  their
                 rights to full residence in the  UK  were  simply  racially
                 discriminatory).  Indeed, the violation  is  all  the  more
                 gross in that it  subjects  the  appellant  to  the  flying
                 Dutchman scenario on a racially discriminatory  basis  (the
                 deprivation of full resident's  rights  having  been  on  a
                 racially discriminatory basis).  At the same time the  Govt
                 has continued to make exception for persons  of  a  "white"
                 background eg Falkland islanders.


58.   The principal argument  based  on  Art  3  is  that  the  Respondent's
    decision to direct the Appellants' removal is in each case contrary  to
    Art 3 because it is an act which subjects them to the risk  of  inhuman
    or degrading treatment or punishment.  The risk, it is said, will arise
    from the refusal of Malaysia to allow them the  benefits  of  Malaysian
    citizenship following their acquisition of BOC passports. In  order  to
    evaluate this claim, it is therefore necessary to consider  what  their
    position in Malaysia will be.

    Loss of Malaysian citizenship: the law

59.   The claim that the Appellants  have  effectively  already  lost  their
    Malaysian citizenship and will not be able to return to their homes  in
    Malaysia is based on the Malaysian Constitution and correspondence with
    Malaysian government officials. Other than a  passing  comparison  with
    the decision of the European Commission on Human  Rights  in  the  East
    African Asians  (application  number  4403/70-419/70  and  others),  no
    authorities are cited.

60.   The material available to the Immigration Judge, and  to  us,  amounts
    to the Constitution of the Republic of Malaysia, a number  of  letters,
    and inadequately- reported proceedings in an inconclusive case  in  the
    Malaysian High Court.

61.   As the extract from Mr Gill's skeleton suggests, the  Appellants  base
    this part of their claim on Art 24 of the  Malaysian  Constitution.  In
    their dealings with the Home Office, the  Appellants'  solicitors  have
    cited only that Article and, furthermore, only an  out-of-date  version
    of it, taking no account of amendments and repeals in  1963,  1964  and
    1976. The document giving Art 24 only and in  that  out  of  date  form
    appears in a number of places in the bundles relied  upon  by  Mr  Gill
    before the Immigration  Judge  and  before  us.  A  correct  up-to-date
    version of Arts 24 and 25 is at pages 208-9 of the main appeal  bundle.
     (There are also extracts from the constitution at pages 262ff  of  the
    bundle of "general supporting materials".) But, again the extract stops
    short of Art 27. There are, however, important  provisions  of  crucial
    relevance to these cases in Art 27. It does not look as though Mr  Gill
    drew those provisions to the attention of the Immigration Judge, for he
    makes no mention of  them.  The  same  appears  to  be  true  of  other
    proceedings in which  Mr  Gill  appeared  for  the  Appellants,  appeal
    numbers HR/00665/2005 and others, heard in October 2005.  We have  read
    the determination in that case, because it is one of those  cases  upon
    which Mr Gill sought to rely to establish the principle that like cases
    should be treated like. In those appeals the Appellants were successful
    following arguments by Mr Gill which, judging from  the  determination,
    appear to have been word  for  word  the  same  as  those  put  to  the
    Immigration Judge in these appeals. Whether the result would have  been
    the same if Mr Gill had referred to all the relevant provisions of  the
    Malaysian Constitution it is impossible to say.

62.   The relevant provisions are as  follows  (for  ease  of  reference  we
    include also the Article on renunciation to which we shall  also  refer
    in the course of this determination):


        "Renunciation of Citizenship


        Article 23


        1. Any citizen of or over the age of twenty-one years and of  sound
        mind who is also or is about to become a citizen of another country
        may renounce his  citizenship  of  the  Federation  by  declaration
        registered by the Federal Government, and shall thereupon cease  to
        be a citizen.


        2. A declaration made under this Article during any  war  in  which
        the Federation is engaged shall not be registered except  with  the
        approval of the Federal Government.


        3. This Article applies to a woman  under  the  age  of  twenty-one
        years who has been married as it applies to a  person  of  or  over
        that age.


        Article 24


        1. If the Federal Government is  satisfied  that  any  citizen  has
        acquired by registration, naturalization  or  other  voluntary  and
        formal act (other than marriage) the  citizenship  of  any  country
        outside the Federation, the Federal Government may by order deprive
        that person of his citizenship.


        2. If the Federal Government is  satisfied  that  any  citizen  has
        voluntarily claimed and exercised rights in any country outside the
        Federation any rights available  to  him  under  the  law  of  that
        country, being rights accorded exclusively  to  its  citizens,  the
        Federal  Government  may  by  order  deprive  that  person  of  his
        citizenship.


        3. (Repealed)

        3A. Without prejudice to the generality of Clause (2), the exercise
        of a vote  in  any  political  election  in  a  place  outside  the
        Federation shall be deemed to be the voluntary claim  and  exercise
        of a right available under the law  of  that  place;  and  for  the
        purposes of Clause (2), a person who, after such date as  the  Yang
        di-Pertuan Agong may by order appoint  for  the  purposes  of  this
        Clause-

              (a) applies to the authorities of a place outside the
              Federation for the issue or renewal of a passport; or


              (b) uses a passport issued by such authorities  as  a  travel
           document


        shall be deemed voluntarily to claim and exercise a right available
        under the law of that place, being a right accorded exclusively  to
        the citizens of that place.


        4. If the Federal Government is satisfied that any woman who  is  a
        citizen by registration under Clause (1) of Art 15 has acquired the
        citizenship of any country outside the Federation by virtue of  her
        marriage to a person who is not a citizen, the  Federal  Government
        may by order deprive her of her citizenship."


    [Arts 25 and 26  contain  provisions  for  deprivation  of  citizenship
    obtained  by  registration  in  certain  cases,  and  other  provisions
    relating to deprivation of citizenship, none of which  is  relevant  to
    these appeals.]




      Procedure for Deprivation


        "Article 27


        1. Before making an order under Arts 24,  25  or  26,  the  Federal
        Government shall give to the  person  against  whom  the  order  is
        proposed to be made notice in writing informing him of  the  ground
        on which the order is proposed to be made and of his right to  have
        the case referred to a committee of inquiry under this Article.


        2. If any person to whom such notice is given applies to  have  the
        case referred as aforesaid the Federal Government  may,  refer  the
        case to a committee of inquiry consisting of a  chairman  (being  a
        person  possessing  judicial  experience)  and  two  other  members
        appointed by that Government for the purpose.


        3. In the case of any such reference, the committee shall  hold  an
        inquiry in such manner as the Federal Government  may  direct,  and
        submit its report to that Government: and  the  Federal  Government
        shall have regard to the report in determining whether to make  the
        order."


63.   The skeleton argument refers to frequent  correspondence  and  in  the
    proceedings before us there were a number of written statements made by
    staff at the Malaysian High Commission in London. We  assume  from  the
    vague terms in which the reference in the  skeleton  argument  is  made
    that nothing is to be gained by citing them individually.  As  we  have
    said, specific enquiries were made on behalf of the  second  Appellant.
    The response from the immigration attach� in the High Commission, dated
    14 September 2006, reads, so far as is relevant, as follows:

        "We would like to inform that the  Malaysian  Government  does  not
        recognise "dual nationality". In Mr Leong's case, if he has already
        been issued with a British Overseas Citizen passport and  has  been
        enjoying the facilities as a British Overseas citizen, Mr Leong has
        automatically loses his Malaysian  nationality.  He  is  no  longer
        entitle to get any privilege or facilities as is given to Malaysian
        citizens.   Mr  Leong  is  advised  to   renounce   his   Malaysian
        citizenship at our Office.


        However, though Mr Leong is a British Overseas Citizen, he is still
        allowed to enter Malaysia as a tourist for a  certain  duration  of
        stay in the country. British Overseas Citizen does not  require  to
        apply for a visa to Malaysia for stay not longer than  (1)  month."




64.   That letter  is  dated  a  few  days  after  the  hearing  before  the
    Immigration Judge. It cannot have very much bearing on whether he  made
    any error of law, but it is said that  it  does  have  bearing  on  the
    issues to be decided; and  it is said it indicates  a  view  which  has
    been repeatedly expressed by the Malaysian High Commission  in  London.
    We see no difficulty in taking account of  it.  We  have  also  seen  a
    letter dated 24 September 2007 from the Malaysian  High  Commission  to
    another firm of solicitors who had apparently raised similar issues and
    sought advice on renunciation.


        "Re: Holding Dual Nationality


        I wish to refer to your letter of 20th September 2007 with  regards
        to two of  your  clients  who  has  applied  for  renunciation  and
        pertaining to the above matter.


        For your information under Constitution of Malaysia  -  Article  24
        Termination of Citizenship; (3)(a) "uses a passport issued by  such
        authorities as a travel document, shall be  deemed  voluntarily  to
        claim and exercise a right available under the law of  that  place,
        being a right accorded exclusively to citizens of that place."


        Upon  your  client  acquiring  the  British  Overseas  Citizen  and
        enjoying the facilities given by us to the British Government,  the
        Government of Malaysia considers that your client is  holding  dual
        nationality. As such they are required to renounce their  Malaysian
        Citizenship as per the above law. British Overseas Citizen is  only
        allowed to the enter Malaysia as a visitor and up to a maximum stay
        of 30 days. They are subjected to immigration control.


        Our National Registration Department  is  the  competent  authority
        with regards to nationality. For  further  advice,  kindly  contact
        them directly."

65.   The solicitors did write to the National Registration Department,  and
    received a reply dated 11 October 2007 as follows:-

        "APPLICATION FOR RESTORATION OF MALAYSIAN CITIZENSHIP


        1. I respectfully refer to your  letter  ...  regarding  the  above
       matter.


        2. For your information the procedures for refusal or  renunciation
        and deprivation of citizenship are subject to the  Constitution  of
        the  Federation  of  Malaysia.  (Here  after  referred  to  as  the
        Constitution), as provided under Articles 23, 24, 25, 26,  26A  and
        27 of the Constitution.


        3. In this connection this Ministry is pleased  to  inform  you  as
        follows  concerning  the  questions  submitted  relating   to   the
        citizenship matters of your clients.


             [i]  Whether  British  Overseas  Citizens  (BOC)  citizens  are
             considered as British nationals?


             BOC is a citizenship category given by the  British  government
             to foreign nationals and  they  are  considered  to  hold  dual
             nationalities. So the  Federal  Government  (referring  to  the
             Government of Malaysia) will take action  to  deprive  them  of
             their citizenship if they hold  BOC  citizenship  at  the  same
             time.


             [ii] Whether requests for restoration of Malaysian  citizenship
             are allowed for BOC citizens?


             For your information, the Federal  Government  can,  under  the
             relevant provisions, issue an  order  for  deprivation  of  the
             Malaysian  citizenship  of  any   citizen   of   Malaysia   who
             contravenes the conditions for citizenship provided for in  the
             Constitution of Malaysia.


             In this case, Article 24 (1) of the Constitution provides  that
             the Federal Government can take away  the  citizenship  of  any
             citizen of Malaysia who acquires  the  citizenship  of  another
             state.


             Any citizen of Malaysia who is found to claim and exercise  any
             right given only to citizens  of  any  other  country,  can  be
             deprived of citizenship by order of the Malaysian Government as
             provided under Art 24 (2) of the Constitution.


             Thus also, as provided under para  3  (a)  of  Art  24  of  the
             Constitution, any citizen of Malaysia who acquires and  uses  a
             passport issued by another country  can  also  be  deprived  of
             citizenship by order of the Federal Government.


             Nevertheless, before an order for deprivation is issued by  the
             Federal Government, based on Art  27  of  the  Constitution,  a
             notice of deprivation shall be given  to  the  person  who  has
             contravened  the  applicable  conditions  of   citizenship   as
             provided in the Federal Constitution.  If an appeal  is  to  be
             lodged against  the  notice  of  deprivation,  a  Committee  of
             Inquiry (CI) will be formed to conduct an  investigation  based
             on the appeal made. After the appeal has been referred  to  the
             CI and an investigation carried out, a report will be submitted
             by the CI to the Federal Government to decide whether an  order
             of deprivation should be issued to that person or not.  The  CI
             report will  not  bind  the  Federal  Government  in  giving  a
             decision concerning the said appeal.


             Provided that, based on Art 18 (2) of the Constitution, no  one
             who has renounced or been deprived of his citizenship under the
             Constitution, will be  registered  as  a  citizen  of  Malaysia
             except where permitted by the Federal Government.


             [iii] If request [ii] above is approved,  what  procedures  and
             types  of  documents  are  needed  to  reapply  for   Malaysian
             citizenship?


             Those who have already renounced and  been  deprived  of  their
             Malaysian citizenship will be considered as foreign  nationals,
             and to reapply for Malaysian citizenship they are  required  to
             first acquire the status of Permanent Residents of Malaysia and
             to fulfil  the conditions for citizenship applications.


             To  apply  for  citizenship  in  writing  those  born  in   the
             Federation before Independence Day (i.e. 31 August 1957) should
             have had, under Art 16  of  the  Constitution,  the  status  of
             Permanent Resident of Malaysia for a period of seven (7)  years
             before the date of the application, and  there  should  be  not
             less than five years in total  in  the  said  period  and  with
             intention to permanently reside in the Federation, and of  good
             behaviour  and  having  a  basic  knowledge  of  the  Malaysian
             Language.


             Where as those who are applying for citizenship by entry  under
             Art 19 (1) of the Constitution should not be less than  twenty-
             one (21) years of age and have  had  the  status  of  permanent
             resident for not less than twelve (12) years prior to the  date
             of the application and with the intention to permanently reside
             in  the  Federation  and  of  good  behaviour  and   having   a
             satisfactory knowledge of the Malaysian Language.


             Applications are, nevertheless,  subject  to  approval  by  the
             Federal Government under Art 18 (2) of the Constitution.


             [iv] If they [your  clients]  wish  to  reapply  for  Malaysian
             citizenship,  are  they  required  to  first   relinquish   BOC
             citizenship before an appeal is submitted to this Ministry?


             In  the  case  of  your  clients,  if  their  application   for
             citizenship has been approved by the Federal  Government  based
             on the provisions of the Constitution,  they  are  required  to
             renounce their BOC Citizenship again.


        4. In this  connection,  it  is  advised  that  anyone  wishing  to
        renounce their citizenship should think carefully so that there  is
        no implication for them in the future as regards the special rights
        relinquished. For your information  also,  the  Federal  Government
        will no longer consider applications for citizenship from those who
        have renounced their Malaysian citizenship. The award of  Malaysian
        citizenship to foreign nationals is the  Government  of  Malaysia's
        highest award and it is necessary to remind Malaysian  citizens  of
        this  so  that  they  will  take  care  before   renouncing   their
        citizenship."

66.   The press report is a web version of a report in  the  Daily  Express,
    describing  itself  as  an  "independent  national  newspaper  of  East
    Malaysia".  It is undated and we do not know the basis  upon  which  in
    the index to the bundle it is described as "circa July 2007".  It reads
    as follows:

        "The government will not reinstate the  citizenship  of  Malaysians
        who have given up their citizenship of this country, Prime Minister
        Datuk Seri Abdullah Ahmad Badawi said Tuesday.  He said Malaysians,
        who have surrendered their citizenship,  also  cannot  reapply  for
        citizen-hood.  All  those  who  had  opted   to   surrender   their
        citizenship officially wrote into the  authorities  informing  that
        they are giving up citizenship of this country.  (Acting  on  their
        letters), the Home Affairs Ministry has granted permission  to  the
        applicants to surrender their citizenships. Surely, there  must  be
        specific reasons for the Ministry to approve  their  requests.  But
        one thing that I want to stress and explain is that Malaysians  who
        have surrendered their citizenships to the Government  cannot  have
        their citizenships reinstated later, suddenly they want to become a
        Malaysian citizen again,  he  said  after  attending  the  Internal
        Security Monthly Assembly."

67.   The case is that of Lee Thean Hock, Judicial Review No  25-64-2004  in
    the Malaysia High Court. We understand that the claimant in  that  case
    is a person who had renounced his Malaysian citizenship on acquiring  a
    BOC passport and who sought Judicial Review of  the  decision  allowing
    him to do so. It appears that  amongst  the  arguments  raised  on  the
    claimant's behalf was an assertion that BOC status did  not  amount  to
    citizenship and that the acquisition or use of a BOC passport could not
    be regarded as exercising the rights of a citizen of  another  country.
    The proceedings were concluded by consent in February 2005,  the  order
    of the court being for the annulment of the renunciation, a declaration
    that the claimant is a citizen of Malaysia, and costs to be paid by the
    Respondent. We have no other details, and as the Immigration  Judge  in
    the present appeals must have meant, the case  is  clearly  not  to  be
    regarded as a precedent.  Nevertheless, it may be regarded as  throwing
    doubt upon the claims made on the Appellants' behalf.





    Discussion and conclusions on loss of Malaysian Citizenship

68.   There is no expert evidence on the effect of the  relevant  provisions
    in the Malaysian Constitution. It is sometimes said that  it  is  wrong
    for a Tribunal to rely on its understanding of foreign legal provisions
    without expert help, but we are being asked to rely on Art 24, which is
    written  in  English,  as  one  of  the  official  languages   of   the
    Constitution, and is,  as  it  seems  to  us  entirely  clear.  In  the
    circumstances there can little objection to our treating Art 27 in  the
    same way.  Neither of those articles gives reasons for concluding  that
    a BOC loses Malaysian nationality by acquiring or using a BOC passport,
    as is claimed on the Appellants' behalf. Arts 24 and 27 on the contrary
    make it clear first, that the loss of citizenship is by  order  of  the
    government,  not  an  automatic  result  of  an  individual's  actions;
    secondly, that it is discretionary; thirdly, that  no  order  can  take
    effect until a notice of intended deprivation of citizenship  has  been
    served on the person affected; fourthly, that that person has  a  right
    (not strictly of appeal but) of reference to a  committee  of  enquiry,
    the report of which is be received by the government  before  it  makes
    the order.

69.   It is no doubt extremely surprising that  officers  of  the  Malaysian
    High Commission in  London  write  letters  that  seem  to  ignore  the
    provisions of the Constitution but support the Appellants' claim. Those
    letters refer to automatic loss of citizenship, and to a requirement of
    renunciation:  neither  bears  any  relation  to   the   constitutional
    provisions upon which is purportedly  based.  No  explanation  for  the
    differences has been offered. We prefer to read the Constitution as  it
    stands, and are fortified in that preference by reading the letter from
    the National Registration Department in  Malaysia  itself.   (We  note,
    however, that at para 3 (i) that letter appears to make the same  error
    about the acquisition of BOC status that we have  identified  above  at
    para 42 above).

70.   None of the Appellants claimed to have received  a  notice  under  Art
    27.  It therefore follows that none of them can show that he has  been,
    or is even in danger  of  being,  deprived  of  Malaysian  citizenship,
    however much it may be the case that his acquisition or use  of  a  BOC
    passport might have  made  that  a  possibility.  The  Appellants  have
    accordingly entirely failed to show by evidence  that  they  could  not
    return to Malaysia as Malaysian citizens, entering the country of their
    nationality in exercise of their continuing rights as citizens  of  it.
    There is no evidential ground for supposing that notices under  Art  27
    of the Constitution will be issued, but, if they are, the subjects  can
    have their cases referred,  and  it  would  be  quite  wrong  for  this
    Tribunal to speculate on the outcome of any  enquiry  and  the  Federal
    Government's decision following it,  if  indeed  such  enquiry  becomes
    necessary.

71.   The evidence before us  is  essentially  that  which  was  before  the
    Immigration Judge. The  subsequent  letters  from  the  Malaysian  High
    Commission in London do no more than serve to  assist  the  Appellants'
    claim that letters  from  that  source,  obtained  by  the  Appellant's
    solicitors, have  consistently  had  approximately  such  content;  the
    subsequent letter from the National Registration Department simply sets
    out the terms of the constitutional provisions.

72.   The Immigration Judge appears, as we say, to have taken no account  of
    Art 27. We doubt if he can be blamed, given the way in which the matter
    was presented to him. Nevertheless, the provisions  of  Art  27  should
    have caused enquiry and it is our view that the evidence before him was
    wholly  insufficient  to  enable  him  to  reach  a  finding  that  the
    Appellants had been deprived of Malaysian citizenship. Although we have
    also have considerable sympathy with the Respondent's  submission  that
    the Immigration Judge failed to consider whether,  in  the  Appellants'
    case, the treatment which they risked as a result of  the  deprival  of
    citizenship would be such as to sustain an Art 3  claim,  it  is  clear
    that the Immigration Judge's conclusion was based on a finding of  fact
    which itself was based on wholly insufficient  evidence  and  was  made
    without taking into account all the  relevant  evidence.  That  was  an
    error of law. So far as this  part  of  the  claim  is  concerned,  the
    finding on the evidence is inevitably not that the  Appellants  succeed
    under Art 3 but that they do not, the basis of their claim  under  that
    head having proved illusory.

    Renunciation?

73.   At the hearing Mr Gill told us that  all  three  Appellants  have  now
    executed what they consider to  be  renunciations  of  their  Malaysian
    nationality. After some discussion we decided that this is not a matter
    to take into account in these reconsiderations.  In  the  first  place,
    voluntary acts of the Appellants long  after  the  hearing  before  the
    Immigration Judge  cannot  show  that  his  determination  contained  a
    material  error  of  law.   Even  where  we  are  satisfied  that   the
    Immigration Judge erred in law,  we  cannot  proceed  to  substitute  a
    determination of our own unless we are also satisfied  that  the  error
    was material. If the claimed renunciation went to  reduce  further  the
    returnability of the Appellants, it would tend to demonstrate that  any
    error was not material.  It  is  therefore  a  matter  which  it  could
    probably be expected that Mr Gill would be able to argue in full on the
    Appellants' behalf at the hearing before us.  He was,  however,  unable
    to do so. As a result, he has failed to show on the Appellants'  behalf
    what the effect  of  any  attempted  renunciation  would  be  in  their
    circumstances. Two points in particular come to mind.


74.   First, there is no material upon which we could reach a  view  of  the
    effectiveness in Malaysian law of whatever it is  the  Appellants  have
    now done.  The provisions  for  renunciation  are  in  Art  23  of  the
    constitution which we have set out above.  Only the first paragraph  of
    Art 23 is relevant.  Renunciation is only possible if it is by a person
    who "is or is about to become a citizen of another country".   Although
    Malaysia is not a  party  to  the  United  Nations  Convention  on  the
    Reduction of Statelessness, it is clear that the intention  is  that  a
    Malaysian cannot renounce his citizenship if by  doing  so  he  becomes
    stateless.  We do not know the basis upon  which  Malaysian  law  would
    decide whether a person who has  only  Malaysian  citizenship  and  BOC
    status would be regarded as a person who "is ... a citizen  of  another
    country". If BOC status is not that of  being  "a  citizen  of  another
    country" the Malaysian citizen cannot renounce his citizenship.  It  is
    not for us to make any decision on the effect of that provision, but we
    may be permitted to remind  ourselves  that  Malaysian  BOCs  are  BOCs
    either from their birth or from the coming into force of the 1981  Act,
    not by obtaining a BOC passport; and it follows that if Art  23  allows
    renunciation by the appellants (who are now in the  UK)  it  must  also
    allow renunciation by Malaysian BOCs whilst they  remain  on  Malaysian
    territory.  In addition, Art 23 requires registration  by  the  Federal
    Government before any renunciation can take effect.   We have not  seen
    any registrations.  We have to add that if registration took  place  by
    mistake (as it might if letters from the appellants were  supported  by
    submissions of the calibre that have been made to us) it might well  be
    regarded as of no effect even in Malaysian law.  We do not know.

75.   Secondly, there must be a question as to the extent to which  any  act
    of renunciation by the Appellants is entitled to any recognition in  UK
    law if its effect (we say nothing of its purpose)  is  to  prevent  the
    Appellants' return to a  country  to  which  they  would  otherwise  be
    returnable.   If  the   Appellants   can,   by   renouncing   Malaysian
    citizenship, prevent their return to Malaysia, the same is likely to be
    true of nationals of any other country (save perhaps of States Party to
    the United Nations Convention on the Reduction  of  Statelessness)  who
    come to the United Kingdom and, while here, renounce their nationality.
     We think it very unlikely that this is right. It follows that we think
    that it  is  unlikely  that  the  Appellants'  acts  in  renouncing  or
    attempting to renounce their Malaysian citizenship have any  effect  in
    these appeals and, in any event, it is clear that the  Appellants  have
    entirely failed to show us any such effect.

76.   For the foregoing reasons it appears to us that  the  evidence  before
    the Immigration Judge, and before  us,  does  not  establish  that  the
    appellants have lost their Malaysian citizenship either by seeking  BOC
    passports or by renunciation.  In so far as the Appellants' Art 3 claim
    is based on their non-returnability to Malaysia, the country  of  which
    they are nationals, it therefore fails.

    The claim arising from history and policy

77.   We turn now to the other principal aspect of  the  Appellants'  claim.
    Despite the  running  together  of  the  two  issues  in  the  skeleton
    argument, the second aspect of the claim has to be firmly distinguished
    from the first. The first aspect of the claim  is  based,  as  we  have
    seen, on apprehension of ill-treatment  in  the  future  on  return  to
    Malaysia. The other aspect of the claim depends on the past.  It  is  a
    claim that, so far from being  subject  to  decisions  directing  their
    removal, the Appellants were entitled to  decisions  allowing  them  to
    live in the United Kingdom either indefinitely or  for  a  considerable
    period. That claim looks to the past, because it is based variously  on
    allegations that to do otherwise than grant them leave would perpetuate
    an injustice (with or  without  overtones  of  colonial  exploitation);
    would amount to discrimination against them; would amount to failing to
    treat identical cases in the same  way;  would  amount  to  failure  to
    follow policy; would amount to defeating a legitimate expectation;  and
    possibly other factors, singly or in combination. Because this part  of
    the claim looks to the past rather than  the  future,  it  is  properly
    independent of the part of the claim that depends purely on the risk of
    ill-treatment in the future.

     Government practice and policy

    (a) The position in 1957


78.   We have set out above the  reasons  why  Malaysian  citizens  remained
    CUKCs after Malaysian independence, and we have noted that they did  so
    despite becoming citizens of Malaysia.   We have also noted above  that
    some people  connected  with  Malaysia  were  and  remained  CUKCs  who
    acquired no other nationality, but we are not concerned  with  them  in
    this appeal.  In our view the 1957 materials are of historical interest
    only.  They cannot be regarded as creating any existing rights for  the
    Appellants.   In 1957, all CUKCs had an unfettered right to  enter  and
    reside in the United Kingdom.  The Malaysian CUKCs shared  that  right,
    as British subjects, with all other British  subjects.   We  have  been
    shown no material which suggests  that  there  was  at  any  stage  any
    undertaking that in the development of immigration  restrictions  CUKCs
    from  Malaysia  should  be  treated  differently  from  other   British
    subjects.  Even if there had been any undertaking, either  in  1957  or
    later, it could have had no lasting legal effect, because no parliament
    can bind its successors.  The fact that in 1959  some  individuals  who
    became Malaysian citizens retained rights to enter and  reside  in  the
    United Kingdom in common with many millions of other individuals,  does
    not give them any lasting right to  enter  and  reside  in  the  United
    Kingdom in contrast to the many  millions  of  others  with  whom  they
    shared that right in 1959.

79.   In case it should be thought that this reasoning,  if  right  in  law,
    lacks any moral authority, it must be remembered  that  the  Appellants
    are not, and could not be, individuals  to  whom  any  undertaking  was
    given in 1957.  They were not then born.   When  they  were  born,  the
    immigration  restrictions  introduced  by   earlier   legislation   and
    consolidated in the Immigration Act 1971 were already  in  force.   The
    Appellants have not had a right to reside in the United  Kingdom  taken
    away from them: they never had it.  They were CUKCs only because  their
    fathers were CUKCs: but they were never patrials.

    (b) The Statement of 4 July 2002


80.   As has been seen, Mr Gill relied  in  his  submissions  to  us  on  an
    assumption that the Appellants were among those to whom  reference  was
    made  by  Beverley  Hughes  in  the  statement  of  4  July  2002.   On
    examination of the  whole  of  that  statement  we  have  rejected  the
    submissions.  There is accordingly no basis for Mr Gill's consequential
    submission that there is a government policy incorporating a view  that
    the Appellants have been treated badly by being granted status as BOCs.



    (c) The Government's practice

81.   A considerable  proportion  of  the  bulk  of  the  papers  before  us
    consists of correspondence between those  representing  the  Appellants
    and the Respondent relating to other individuals.    We think there  is
    no doubt that the intention was to persuade us that the Government  had
    or has a general practice of granting indefinite  leave  to  remain  to
    persons in the same position as the Appellants.  It is put in this  way
    in the grounds:

           "3)   Further or alternatively, the Secretary of State has in  a
           large number of cases accepted that Malaysian BOCs who recognise
           or assert their BOC status (which is their right  under  English
           law) should be granted leave to remain, usually indefinite leave
           to remain.  This appears to be on the basis that he accepts that
           they are not deportable as they are not going to be admitted  to
           Malaysia.  In this way, many have been granted indefinite  leave
           to remain:  See Fransman's British Nationality Law [LT p.69] for
           a  summary  of  the  Secretary  of  State's  practice;  numerous
           examples are cited of the Secretary of State's practice in  this
           regard [see Bundle A in LM's case pp. 139-153 and the  whole  of
           Bundle B in LM's case].  The Appellants seeks like treatment  on
           a non-discriminatory  basis.   Further  or  alternatively,  they
           assert that they have a legitimate expectation to be treated  in
           accordance with the  policy  or  practice  that  was  apparently
           applied to those others."


           "The established policy and practice of the UK to grant leave to
           remain to such persons; the obligation to treat like case alike;
           legitimate expectation


           In any event, the  Secretary  of  State  operates  a  policy  or
           practice where by he has himself granted leave to remain on this
           basis on  many  occasions:  see  Fransman.    This  is  in  fact
           confirmed by the Secretary of State' own IDIs  and  letters  and
           the limbo policy.


           There is also the voluminous evidence of similar  cases  in  the
           bundle.  The Secretary of State may assert that each case has to
           be treated on its own merits.   That  is  no  answer  where  the
           appellant has provided detailed evidence which demands an answer
           as to why the other cases are different in any legally  relevant
           way.  No answer has been provided.


           It is clear from the  Secretary  of  State's  constant  practice
           [(footnote  (in original) Note the evidence that he has  granted
           leave to remain to large numbers of persons who are in a similar
           position to the appellant [13-99])] that he is pursuing a policy
           [footnote (in original) this  is  probably  the  "limbo"  policy
           referred to in Ooi v SSHD at para 23] to the effect that he will
           not remove such persons and will give them some form of leave to
           remain.   The officially articulated policy says that  leave  to
           remain should normally be refused  unless  there  is  compelling
           evidence of non-returnability.   This also refers to the  "limbo
           policy".   The manner in which this is applied is  displayed  by
           the practice.    The  reality  is  that  the  practice  actually
           pursued shows that the respondent  grants  leave  to  remain  in
           cases such as the present.


           The appellants therefore submit that denial of indefinite  leave
           to remain and consequential removal would not be  in  accordance
           with the domestic law  and  practice  on  this  matter.   It  is
           unlawful in that it is arbitrary, it fails to  treat  like  case
           alike, and it goes against established practice as  set  out  in
           Fransman  and  is  therefore  irrational,  and  furthermore,  it
           unlawfully   fails   to   honour   a   legitimate   expectation,
           particularly where all the indications are that the  appellant's
           will not be readmitted to Malaysia (certainly not for settlement
           purposes) and/or the Secretary of State has failed to  establish
           that he can lawfully remove them there and that he  has  carried
           out all relevant inquiries to enable him to do so."

82.   The reference to  Fransman  is  to  page  694  of  Fransman's  British
    Nationality Law (1998 edition):

             "Currently,  any  BOC  who  recognises  [BOC]  citizenship   by
        obtaining a British passport will not be a  Malaysian  citizen  and
        will be relieved of his Malaysian passport.    In  this  way,  such
        persons situated in the UK have been granted  indefinite  leave  to
        remain for the reason that  they  are  British  nationals  and  not
        deportable to any place.   In  1981  there  were  estimated  to  be
        1,300,000 CUKCs in Malaysia with Malaysian citizenship and  130,000
        without any other citizenship."

83.   No authority is cited for the  practice  alleged  by  Fransman  to  be
    current in 1998.   As stated, it appears to be based on a conclusion as
    to the "nationality" of BOCs as such, and a conclusion as to  Malaysian
    law, both of which we have rejected.  In any event, Fransman's book  is
    not authoritative on the Secretary of  State's  practice,  and  is  ten
    years old.

84.   So far as present practice is concerned, we are very surprised  indeed
    by the tone of the paragraphs from Mr Gill's skeleton argument which we
    have quoted.  As we have said, it is the same as the skeleton  argument
    that was before the Immigration Judge in the present cases,  and  there
    are signs that  it  has  been  used  elsewhere  (there  are  occasional
    references to the appellants as though there were only one of them, and
    in  at  least  one  place  the  skeleton  refers  to  a  single  female
    appellant).  A person reading the skeleton argument without the benefit
    of the other information we have might think on the face  of  it  that,
    indeed, the Secretary of State has a regular and  uniform  practice  of
    granting indefinite leave to remain to persons like the appellants.


85.   As Mr Gill and those instructing him  know  perfectly  well,  however,
    that is not the case.  They may have been able to identify  individuals
    to whom leave to remain has been granted, but they are also aware of  a
    host of individuals to whom leave to remain has not been granted,  many
    of whom they represent in appeals such as these.   It  is  therefore  a
    matter of considerable concern that the submissions were  put  in  this
    way.  The clear position is  that  the  Secretary  of  State's  current
    practice is not one of regularly or constantly granting leave to remain
    to people in the Appellants' position.

86.   We simply do not know enough  about  those  to  whom  leave  has  been
    granted, and the large number of those  to  whom  leave  has  not  been
    granted,  to  be  able  to  deduce  any  regular  practice.    We   are
    particularly and obviously unable to do  so  when  in  this  calculated
    fashion we have been shown only part of the evidence.


87.   What the material before us does show, and this is a point upon  which
    Mr Gill also relies, is that the Secretary of State has, in some  cases
    at least, responded to  an  application  for  a  BOC  passport  from  a
    Malaysian  citizen  with  a  letter  setting  out  the  view  that  the
    acquisition of a BOC passport  will  ipso  facto  deprive  a  Malaysian
    national of his Malaysian nationality.  We accept Mr Gill's  submission
    that those letters are evidence of the Secretary of State's view at the
    time the letters were written.    But, as we have said, it  is  a  view
    that does not appear to be correct.  In that context, the  letters  are
    also evidence that the grant of leave may have been on the basis  of  a
    misapprehension.  Even if the appellants were able to  show  a  general
    practice such as they allege, they would not have  any  entitlement  in
    public law to rely on it and demand a similar decision in their  cases,
    if it depended on a misapprehension or mistake.   A misapprehension  or
    mistake creates no legitimate expectation.

    (d) Present published policy

88.   We turn then to the Secretary of State's declared policy, as  set  out
    in the IDIs.  For present purposes we need only refer to the  following
    passage from chapter 9:


      "9.  DISCRETIONARY LEAVE AND "LIMBO"

        In some cases a BOC will claim that his nationality obliges the UK
        to allow him to remain.  In considering such cases we must be aware
        that no country routinely accepts non-citizens and that we cannot
        force a BOC to go somewhere else.   There is a balance between
        those who genuinely find themselves with nowhere to go and those
        seeking to circumvent the Immigration Rules.


        UKPH applicants who make an application for exceptional LTR/ILR and
        have no claim to remain under the Rules are to be refused unless
        there are compelling compassionate circumstances present or there
        is clear evidence of non-returnability.  (See paragraph 9.1).


        Applications made for a purpose not covered by the Rules should be
        refused under paragraph 322 (1).  This will attract the right of
        appeal if the application is in time:


        Granting discretionary leave


        Discretionary leave for a period of 6 years (3 years followed by 3
        years) may be granted to British Overseas citizens and other UKPHs
        only if one of the following factors are present:-

        There is clear evidence of compassionate circumstances.  This
        should be assessed according to the individual merits of the case
        but direction would normally only be granted in wholly exceptional
        circumstances.  Cases should not be agreed below Senior Caseworker
        level.


        or


        There is clear evidence of the persons non-returnability.  This
        should take the form of a letter from the appropriate authorities
        of the country of normal residence confirming the person's non-
        returnability, e.g. a refusal to issue a re-entry visa.  The
        applicant should also be asked for a copy of his/her application to
        those authorities if available.  Cases should not be agreed below
        Senior Caseworker level.


        Subsequent grants, of exceptional leave, including the grant of
        ILR, may be approved at EO level if the circumstances remain the
        same.


        In all cases the onus is on the applicant to provide the necessary
        evidence.  Prolonged enquiries are to be avoided.  All relevant
        questions should be asked in a single letter of enquiry.  Failure
        to reply to such a letter within 4 weeks should trigger the usual
        reminder followed by a refusal if there is still no reply after a
        further 28 days.

        A person who refuses to apply for a re-entry visa to the country in
        which he is normally resident should not be given discretionary
        leave.  The expectation must be that UKPHs will apply for the
        equivalent of returning resident or settlement visas and those who
        manage to obtain these should not be granted discretionary leave.


        There will be cases where a visit visa is issued to enable a
        compassionate or other visit to take place.  In these circumstances
        it would be wrong to withhold discretionary leave, providing they
        are able to produce evidence as set out above to satisfactorily
        demonstrate that they are not returnable to their country of origin
        for the purpose of settlement.  This applies equally to first time
        applicants and those who have already had XLTR for a number of
        years, and have since been issued with a visit visa.  Where a
        person has held XLTR for a number of years the evidence of the
        refused settlement visa should be recent.  All cases where a visit
        visa has been issued should be referred to at least Senior
        Caseworker level.


        ILR may be granted after 6 years have been spent in this category
        assuming the circumstances remain the same.  The initial grant of
        discretionary leave should be for 3 years, followed by a further 3
        years and, after 6 years, ILR.


        No right of appeal and dismissed appeals


        In cases where UKPHs fail to embark after refusal where there is no
        right of appeal or where there is a right of appeal and the appeal
        has been dismissed, the usual warning letter should be sent and the
        file should be passed speedily to EPU for deportation
        consideration.

        Applying the limbo policy


        The so-called limbo policy is applicable only after the exhaustion
        of all the usual administrative processes, including deportation.
        Only after EPU have decided that further deportation action is not
        appropriate or feasible, or illegal entry action has been
        abandoned, should consideration be given to applying the limbo
        policy.


        If it is decided that the status of the UKPH should not be
        regularised, the applicant should be notified in writing of their
        position under the limbo policy.  ANNEX C provides a copy of a
        stock letter which may be used for this purpose.  The applicant has
        no right of appeal against the decision not to regularise their
        stay.


89.   As in many other immigration cases at present, there was a  difficulty
    relating to the IDIs and their application.   In  previous  litigation,
    relating to other Malaysia BOCs who had been refused leave  to  remain,
    it transpired that as well as the published parts of the IDIs there are
    unpublished instructions.  A discontinuity between  the  published  and
    the unpublished parts had the effect that applicants who  thought  they
    were providing the evidence sought by the Secretary of  State  (as  set
    out in the published part of the IDIs) were met with a refusal  because
    the evidence was not of a particular  character  (as  set  out  in  the
    unpublished part).  This difficulty only came properly  to  light  when
    the unpublished part was,  apparently  accidentally,  disclosed  to  Mr
    Gill.  But whether or not as the result of revision, and certainly  for
    the purposes of the present cases, the Secretary of State's policy  is,
    we were assured by Mr Palmer, that contained in the passage we have set
    out above.

90.   There are two features of the Secretary of State's policy to which  we
    need to draw attention.  The first is that it does  not  indicate  that
    indefinite leave to remain will be granted in the first  instance  even
    to a person who has nowhere else to go.   The initial grant is to be of
    limited leave.   Secondly, it is clear that in order  for  the  "limbo"
    policy to apply, a claimant must demonstrate that he is in limbo:  that
    is to say, that he in fact has nowhere else to go.    That  has  to  be
    done, on an individual  basis,  by  evidence  demonstrating  that  that
    individual has been refused re-entry to his country of  nationality  or
    former nationality for residence or settlement.


91.   In the present  cases,  the  Appellants'  applications  were  all  for
    indefinite leave to remain.   Those are applications  which  could  not
    succeed under the Secretary of State's published policy.  And they  are
    by individuals none of whom has demonstrated an individual inability to
    return to Malaysia.  Each of them relies instead on general material of
    dubious accuracy.


92.   Even the retention of a passport by the Malaysian High  Commission  in
    the United Kingdom does  not  in  our  view  amount  to  an  individual
    indication that an appellant cannot return to Malaysia.   We  say  that
    because, given that the taking of a BOC passport does not in  Malaysian
    law lead to the loss of citizenship, we are unaware of the legal  basis
    upon which any passport can have been retained other than the principle
    that any passport belongs formally to the government that issued it.


93.   For the foregoing reasons we consider  that  the  claimants  have  not
    established,  from  expressed  or  unexpressed  policy,  a   legitimate
    expectation that they should be granted indefinite leave or  any  leave
    to remain in the United Kingdom.

    Colonial history and discrimination

94.   The aspects of the case relating to colonial history are  those  which
    appear to concern Mr Gill most centrally. Indeed, he reverted  to  them
    incessantly during the hearing before us, as a result of which we  were
    deprived of submissions that he might have made on other aspects of the
    Appellants' case and the evidence. Some flavour of  the  case  and  the
    manner in which he puts it may be obtained from  the  following  sample
    extracts from his skeleton argument:

        "7. There are many classes of British nationals. The Appellants are
        not "full" British citizens. Accordingly they do not currently have
        a right of abode, (this  has  historically  been  taken  away  from
        persons like the Appellants on a  racially  discriminatory  basis.)
        But they are nonetheless British nationals and are of course within
        the class of British nationals known as British Overseas  Citizens.
        The fact that in domestic law the UK chooses to call its  nationals
        by a range of different names and to discriminate against  some  of
        them (often on racial lines) does not affect  the  point  that  the
        Appellants are and are accepted by the  Respondent  to  be  British
        nationals to whom (as to any other British national)  the  UK  owes
        obligations including obligations of protection.


        12. The Appellants are British nationals and as such  are  entitled
        in international law to enter the UK. The  fact  that  the  UK  has
        passed domestic laws which, on  a  racially  discriminatory  basis,
        have stripped a category of persons (who are now labelled BOCs)  of
        the right to  enter  or  remain  in  the  UK  does  not  make  that
        legislation effective in international law.  Domestic  laws  cannot
        be used to deny international responsibilities.


        14. Not all states permit dual nationality. They are not obliged to
        do so. The UK does; Malaysia  does  not.  The  effect  is  that  if
        Malaysian  and  British  dual  nationals   assert   their   British
        nationality they will lose their Malaysian nationality. The  UK  is
        then obliged to take them in.


        15. That is the price to be  paid  for  a  colonial  past  and  the
        shameful deprivation of rights  of  abode  to  certain  classes  of
        British nationals on racial grounds.   This  historical  wrong  has
        been belatedly recognised  by  the  British  Govt  (only  when  the
        cabinet papers relating to the  Commonwealth  Immigrants  Act  1968
        were going to be released under the 30 years rule  and  because  of
        the Manjit Kaur case.)   Thus, the Govt now  recognises  that  this
        deprivation was 'wrong' and should  never  have  happened  and  the
        limited attempt to 'right this historical wrong' was made  in  s.12
        of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. But that  only
        provides persons with a right to register as full British  citizens
        if they  have  not  renounced,  voluntarily  relinquished  or  lost
        through action or inaction another nationality after 4.7.02.
        ...
        20.  The question therefore arises whether denial to the Appellants
        of the right to remain in this country (a  country  of  which  they
        remain nationals for international law  purposes  although  without
        the right of abode) violates human rights and has been made not  in
        accordance with the law.


        21.   It should be noted that the Appellants are not  even  seeking
        the right to enter this country; they have already entered lawfully
        and are seeking the right not to be expelled. The Appellants submit
        that as British  nationals,  they  are  entitled  to  freedom  from
        expulsion from the country of which they are nationals. This  right
        arises irrespective of whether or not the Appellant has  rights  of
        settlement in any another country. However,  it  is  in  this  case
        reinforced by the fact that the  Appellants  are  already  in  this
        country and there appears to be no other country to which there  is
        reason to  believe  that  they  can  be  admitted  for  settlements
        purposes (at most Malaysia may admit  them  occasionally  as  short
        term visitors but it seems inevitable that it will not permit  them
        to settle  there.)  Thus,  the  Appellants  can  not  therefore  be
        lawfully required to leave or  be  removed  from  the  UK  and  are
        entitled to the grant of indefinite leave to remain."

95.   It is somewhat difficult to grasp Mr Gill's discrimination  arguments.
      They  pervade  the  skeleton  argument  as  they  pervaded  his  oral
    submissions, but they are curiously unspecific.  We think that  he  was
    trying to submit that the grant of BOC status  to  anybody  was  itself
    discriminatory.  If that was his submission, there is no  substance  in
    it.  As we have shown, the naming of a particular group of  individuals
    as "British Overseas Citizens" changed nothing  except  the  name.   Of
    those who became BOCs, the Appellants formed part of a group that  were
    and had been treated rather generously in that they were BOCs  as  well
    as (and, it might be said, despite)  having  effective  nationality  of
    another country.  The criticisms of UK policies in reducing  the  right
    of all British subjects to live in the territory of the United Kingdom,
    whether in  the  East  African  Asian  cases  or  in  Beverley  Hughes'
    statement or elsewhere has been directed at those BOCs who had no other
    nationality.  The class of which the Appellants  form  a  part  has  an
    advantage not possessed by all  BOCs,  and  an  additional  status  not
    possessed by all Malaysian citizens.

96.   It is very difficult to see that in  or  by  having  status  as  BOCs,
    Malaysian BOCs suffer any disadvantage by comparison with BOCs who  are
    not Malaysian, Malaysians who are not BOCs, or the inhabitants  or  the
    descendants of inhabitants of any other  former  colony.  Some  BOCs  -
    probably nearly all non-Malaysian BOCs - have, or had  from  1  January
    1983, the right to reside in no country in the world.   Malaysian  BOCs
    do not have that disadvantage. Compared with other  Malaysians,  it  is
    difficult to see that being a BOC as well as being  a  Malaysian  is  a
    disadvantage, or that the statutory allocation of BOC  status  to  some
    Malaysians was discrimination against those to whom the allocation  was
    made. Similarly, in comparison with other former colonies,  the  former
    inhabitants of Penang and Malacca were clearly unusual in retaining, on
    independence, a citizenship link with the former colonial  power.   The
    link appears to have been retained at the request  of  those  parts  of
    what became the Federation, and again it is difficult to see  that  the
    provisions of the 1981 Act, in assigning to them a status  in  addition
    to their citizenship of the independent  State,  discriminated  against
    them in  so  doing.   By  comparison  with  other  Malaysia  nationals,
    Malaysian BOCs have an advantage rather than a disadvantage.

97.   In any event, these appellants  have  undergone  no  change  in  their
    immigration status.  At the time that they were born  they  were  CUKCs
    without a right of abode in the United Kingdom.    The  legal  position
    was perfectly clear and has not changed.   They  belonged  to  Malaysia
    and they are, legally and naturally if we may so put  it,  citizens  of
    Malaysia.  They do not have a right to reside in a country  other  than
    that to which they naturally belong, but that is the position  of  most
    of the world's people.  Failing to grant them a benefit to  which  they
    have never had any right is not discrimination, and giving them a right
    which others do not have is not actionable discrimination.

98.   We can do little more to respond  to  the  repetitions  in  Mr  Gill's
    arguments than by repetition of our conclusions.   The  Appellants  are
    not "British nationals" with a right in international law to enter  the
    UK.  They are not amongst those individuals  who  were  deprived  of  a
    right to live in the UK either by immigration  legislation  or  by  the
    1981 Act.  They are not in the class of individuals  to  whom  Beverley
    Hughes  was  referring.    They  are  probably  not  in  the  class  of
    individuals to whom either  George  Thompson  or  James  Callaghan  was
    referring: as we have indicated, as well as the  East  African  Asians,
    there were other CUKCs, particularly in  Malaysia,  as  well  as  other
    countries like Aden, who had no right to live in  the  countries  where
    they were living, or  anywhere  else  in  the  world.   The  Appellants
    themselves have neither been deprived of a right to live in the UK  nor
    given any right to suppose that they would be allowed to  live  in  the
    UK.  Their fathers became CUKCs on Malaysian  independence,  but  there
    was no assurance that their fathers  would  be  able   indefinitely  to
    exercise a right to live in the UK, when they had a right  to  live  in
    Malaysia; there was  no  assurance  that  any  rights  the  Appellants'
    fathers had on Malaysian independence would remain unchanged  or  would
    be transmissible by descent; and, in any event, the British  government
    of 1957 could not in law bind its successors and, probably,  could  not
    be sensibly regarded as not being entitled to  make  decisions  on  the
    basis of world conditions at  the  present  time,  fifty  years  later.
    Finally, if it were to be said that governmental statements in 1957 had
    force today, there would have to be full attention  paid  to  the  last
    part of the  extract  from  Mr  Lennox-Boyd's  speech  set  out  above.
    Malaysian CUKC's were  to  have  no  privileges  that  other  Malaysian
    citizens did not have.

99.   It is difficult to have sympathy with a single sentence of  Mr  Gill's
    argument on discrimination.   The Appellants are nationals of  Malaysia
    and are being treated as nationals of Malaysia.   The  government  does
    not have a policy of granting of indefinite  leave  to  remain  in  the
    United  Kingdom  to  nationals  of   Malaysia   save   in   exceptional
    circumstances, and it is not required to have such a policy.   To treat
    nationals of Malaysia as nationals of  Malaysia  is  not  degrading  to
    them.

    Article 8


    General arguments

100.  With the exception of the specific arguments  raised  in  relation  to
    the first Appellant's homosexuality, the arguments based on Art  8  are
    entirely general in nature.  They are not  adapted  to  the  individual
    circumstances of the Appellants.  Indeed it is in  Mr  Gill's  skeleton
    argument summarising his  submissions  on  Art  8  that  we  found  the
    references to a female Appellant and to the Appellants in this case  in
    the singular.  Those are of course small and insignificant errors, save
    that they indicate that the submissions made in this case are the  same
    as those made in other BOC cases where the  same  representatives  have
    acted.  Save in the case of the first Appellant, it is not  said  that,
    therefore, that there is anything in the individual's circumstances  of
    these Appellants that raises a claim under Art 8.   The  claim  arises,
    it is said, generally from their circumstances as BOCs  in  the  United
    Kingdom with the history set out above.

101.  The question then is whether there is anything in those  circumstances
    that gives the Appellants, and others similarly circumstanced, a  right
    under Art 8 that transcends immigration law.  We cannot see that  there
    is.  The Appellants' case is put, throughout, on the  basis  that  they
    cannot return to Malaysia, or, alternatively, that  they  ought  to  be
    granted indefinite leave to remain for the historical reasons  we  have
    discussed.  We have  decided  that  both  those  arguments  fail.   The
    Appellants can be returned to Malaysia, and are not entitled to  remain
    in the United Kingdom on the basis suggested.  In  those  circumstances
    there is no proper ground upon  which  it  could  be  said  that  their
    removal from this country, in which they have no immigration law  right
    to be, to the country of which they are nationals,  where  their  roots
    are, and where there is no reason to suppose that they will suffer  any
    difficulties, breaches Art 8.  It might have been that on an individual
    basis the appellants were able to show that they had made such contacts
    in the United Kingdom that their removal would now  be  unlawful  as  a
    breach  of  Art  8.   But  the  evidence  before  us,  and  before  the
    immigration judge, is not  of  relationships  of  that  nature,  or  of
    contacts which are of such depth and importance that  they  generate  a
    right beside which the rules of immigration law  have  to  take  second
    place.


102   In the context of the conclusions we have reached, Mr Gill's  argument
    that the decisions against which the appellants appeal are contrary  to
    Arts 3 and 8 as  lacking  any  legal  authority  requires  no  separate
    detailed consideration.  The decisions are not prohibited by  law  and,
    in addition, are not shown to be incorrect.

    The first Appellant's Art 8 claim

103.  The first Appellant's evidence before the Immigration Judge  was  that
    he had been a practising  homosexual  before  he  came  to  the  United
    Kingdom in 1999. He met his  present  partner  in  July  1999  however,
    evidently very shortly before he left the United Kingdom,  because  his
    leave ran out on the 25th of that month. He returned to  Malaysia.  His
    partner visited him there, staying with him for a period of  about  two
    months. They have lived  together  in  this  country  since  the  first
    Appellant's return here in December 2000.

104.   The  first  Appellant's  partner  also  gave  evidence   before   the
    Immigration Judge. He is a national of the United  States  of  America,
    whose immigration status in the country is entirely unclear.  He  first
    entered the United Kingdom as a visitor and then applied to stay  as  a
    partner of anther man. He was granted leave for two years from November
    1999 to November 2001. Before his commencement of that leave,  granted,
    as we say, on the basis of  an  application  made  by  reference  to  a
    different relationship, he had met the Appellant. It  appears  that  he
    made  no  modification  of  his  application  based  on  the   previous
    relationship but on the expiry of leave  then  (presumably  mistakenly)
    granted he applied for indefinite leave  to  remain  in  2001.  He  was
    granted leave for two years from  2002  to  2004.  In  August  2003  he
    returned to the USA to find work, he remained there for  eight  months,
    returning within the currency of his leave. There was no evidence  that
    any application has been made for its extension following its expiry in
    November 2004.

105.  The  first  Appellant's  partner  said  that  he  had  experienced  no
    difficulty from the authorities when he was with the first Appellant in
    Malaysia in 2000, but that they had kept their relationship private and
    he "felt suppressed." Both the first  Appellant/and  his  partner  said
    that he had made three applications for visas to visit the  USA  whilst
    the partner was there in 2003  to  2004,  but  had  been  refused.  The
    partner's evidence is that there is  no  basis  upon  which  the  first
    Appellant   could live with him in the USA. We do not know  whether  or
    not that is in fact the position in US law. It is difficult to see that
    the unsuccessful applications are evidence  of  that.   First,  because
    they were made by the  first  Appellant  towards  the  end  of  "indeed
    perhaps after the end of" a period of temporary leave in this  country,
    and because, secondly, they were not made on the strength of a  lasting
    relationship with a US citizen, but  were  applications  for  temporary
    visits.

106.   The  Immigration  Judge  appears  to  have  assumed  that  the  first
    Appellant   and his partner could not have pursued their  relationships
    in the United  States.  We  regard  the  evidence  of  that  as  wholly
    insufficient to support such an assumption.  There  was  some  evidence
    before him relating to the attitude to homosexuals in Malaysia, but  it
    is difficult to see, taking into consideration the account of the first
    Appellant's history as a practising homosexual before he left Malaysia,
    and his partner's evidence about the visit. In seeking  reconsideration
    of the Immigration Judge's decision  to  allow  the  first  Appellant's
    appeal under Art 8 as well as under on other grounds, the Secretary  of
    State submits that there is no reason why the  first  Appellant  should
    not return to Malaysia and make an application for entry clearance from
    there. That submission must, we suppose, have been made  on  the  basis
    that the first Appellant's partner is "settled" in the  United  Kingdom
    within the meaning of the Immigration Acts. As we have said,  there  is
    no evidence of that. But  if  the  first  Appellant's  partner  is  not
    settled here the Art 8 argument is an argument that Art 8 gives a right
    to two men to pursue a relationship in  the  United  Kingdom,  although
    neither of them has otherwise the right to be here. That, we think,  is
    a matter which needs careful analysis in the light of more  substantial
    evidence  and  more  detailed  argument  than  was  available  to   the
    Immigration Judge or to us.

      Conclusions

107.  For the reasons we have given, we  find  that  the  Immigration  Judge
    made a material error of law.  In the first Appellant's case we adjourn
    this reconsideration for a further hearing directed solely to his claim
    under Art 8.   In the  case  of  the  second  and  third  Appellant  we
    substitute determinations dismissing their appeals.




                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT






