
FS (domestic violence -SN and HM - OGN) Pakistan CG [2006] UKAIT 00023



Asylum and Immigration Tribunal


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Hatton Cross                   Determination Promulgated
On            30 November 2005                        On            13
March 2006


                                   Before

                             Mrs J A J C Gleeson
                         (Senior Immigration Judge)
                                 Ms A Dhanji
                             (Immigration Judge)


                                   Between


                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:           Mr D Chirico of Counsel
                       Instructed by Rahman & Co, solicitors

For the Respondent:          Mr K Norton
                       Home Office Presenting Officer


 (1)  Operational Guidance Notes (OGNs) provided by the Secretary  of  State
for the Home Department for the guidance of his caseworkers are a  statement
of the position taken by him at the  date  they  were  issued  but  must  be
considered in the context of subsequent evidence   about  the  situation  in
the country of origin, including the information  summarised  in  subsequent
COI Reports; and

(2)    The background evidence on the position of women at risk of  domestic
violence in Pakistan and  the  availability  to  them  of  State  protection
remains as set out in SN & HM (Divorced women- risk on return)  Pakistan  CG
[2004]  UKIAT  00283.  It  appears  that  the  current  intention   of   the
authorities  is  to  improve  State  protection  for  such  women,  although
progress is slow. Every case will still turn on  its  particular  facts  and
should be analysed according to  the  step  by  step  approach  set  out  at
paragraph 48 of SN & HM, with particular regard to  the   support  on  which
the appellant can call if she is returned.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. The Tribunal has decided that  there  was  a  material  error  of  law
      entitling the Secretary of State to reconsideration of the decision of
      an  Immigration  Judge  (Mr  Kulatilake)  allowing  her  appeal.   The
      decision to proceed to full reconsideration was taken by  a  panel  of
      two Senior Immigration Judges at a hearing  which  dealt  specifically
      with the error of law stage and the reasons  for  that  decision  were
      recorded by the panel.  We  adopt  and  insert  the  reasons  in  this
      determination unaltered, save that, for ease of reference, we refer to
      Mr Campbell as 'the first Immigration Judge' and Mr Kulatilake as 'the
      second Immigration Judge' throughout -

           "The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan. She arrived in the
           United Kingdom on 18 May 2003, with her children, and claimed
           asylum on 22 May 2003.  Her application was refused on 2 July
           2003 on both refugee and human rights grounds in a notice of
           intention to give directions for removal from the United
           Kingdom, for the reasons set out in a letter dated 30 June 2003.
            Her appeal against that decision was dismissed by [the first
           Immigration Judge], in a determination issued on 29 September
           2003.

           The appellant was granted permission to appeal to the
           Immigration Appeal Tribunal (IAT) and in a determination issued
           on 25 January 2005, the IAT allowed the appellant's appeal in
           the following terms:

                 "9.   Accordingly this appeal is allowed to the limited
                 extent that the Immigration Judge's determination is set
                 aside and the appeal remitted for hearing afresh by any
                 Adjudicator other than [the first Immigration Judge]."

           The appeal came before [the second Immigration Judge], on 14
           March 2005.  He decided that the IAT had remitted the matter to
           him to decide only a limited issue.  That issue was as to 'the
           reasonableness of the appellant's relocation/internal flight
           outside her home area.' (Paragraph 2).  He noted that the
           Presenting Officer agreed with him, whilst Counsel for the
           appellant disagreed, submitting that it was a hearing of all the
           issues.  He allowed all aspects of the appeal in a determination
           issued on 1 April 2005.

           Despite the submission to the second Immigration Judge by the
           Presenting Officer that the IAT had limited the ambit of the
           hearing, the respondent appealed on the ground that the IAT had
           remitted the matter to be heard completely afresh and had not
           limited the ambit of the appeal.  There were also challenges to
           the assessment of credibility and the findings of fact.  It was
           submitted that he reached conclusions that were speculative, not
           based on the evidence, and perverse.  An order for
           reconsideration was made on 21 April 2005, in respect of all the
           Grounds of Appeal.  It is in this way that the matter comes
           before us now.

           Mr Johnson, Presenting Officer, relied on the grounds of appeal
           and did not consider that he needed to add anything further,
           save that he had been unable to trace any minute that showed
           that the Presenting Officer had agreed that the scope of the
           appeal was limited in the way set out in the determination.  We
           pointed out to Mr Johnson that there was no challenge on that
           point in the grounds of appeal.

           Mr Lemer, Counsel for the appellant, submitted that there had
           been no material error of law by [the second Immigration Judge].
            In relation to the assessment of the evidence and the findings
           of fact, [the second Immigration Judge] had relied upon the
           findings of [the first Immigration Judge], including at
           paragraph 56 of the first determination, and had based his
           findings in the evidence, including the background evidence, for
           example the CIPU October 2004 and the expert report of Wenonah
           Lyon.  Mr Lemer took us to various extracts from the first
           determination and the background evidence.

           Mr Lemer referred us to the case of AB (Algeria - scope of
           remittals) Algeria [2004] UKIAT 00323.  He accepted that [the
           second Immigration Judge] had erred in law in that he had
           incorrectly interpreted the decision of the IAT.  He accepted
           that it was clear that there was to be a full fresh hearing.  He
           submitted that this error was not material, and that paragraphs
           24 and 25 of the decision of the President in AB were authority
           for the proposition that in the circumstances of the case that
           was before us, given that the IAT had not identified any error
           of law in the findings of fact of the first [Immigration Judge],
           then there could be no error on the part of the second
           [Immigration Judge] in simply following the findings of the IAT
           in that regard.

           For completeness, we set out paragraphs 23-24 of AB:

                 "23.  Fifth, it does not follow at all from that, that upon
                 a remittal the Tribunal should not express what issue has
                 caused the remittal and what the [Immigration Judge] needs
                 to focus on.  Quite the contrary.  There may be no fresh
                 evidence or argument on other issues.  Even where there is,
                 it should assist the conclusions of the Immigration Judge
                 to avoid error or at least its repetition.

                 24.   Sixth, when an [Immigration Judge] is dealing with a
                 remittal on such a basis, it is an error of law for him to
                 ignore what the Tribunal has said about the issues which
                 have not occasioned the remittal and upon which it has
                 expressed its clear conclusion.  He is expected to follow
                 those conclusions, rather than to reopen them, unless there
                 are good reasons for doing so.  The mere fact that more
                 evidence has been heard is not by itself sufficient; it is
                 necessary to explain why that new evidence justifies
                 differing from the Tribunal's conclusion on those issues.
                 It will also be necessary to look with considerable care,
                 even scepticism, at evidence which could and should have
                 been before the first [Immigration Judge] or before the
                 Tribunal."

           Taking first the issue of the scope of the remittal by the IAT.
           We find that Mr Lemer is correct to accept that there was an
           error of law on the part of [the second Immigration Judge] in
           limiting the scope of the appeal that was before him. We are not
           with him, however, in his submission that it was not a material
           error of law.  That is because it is absolutely clear from the
           words used by the IAT when allowing the appeal, at paragraph 9
           of their determination, that not only are they deciding that
           there must be a completely fresh hearing before another
           [Immigration Judge], but in so doing, they also, in terms, set
           aside the determination of [the first Immigration Judge].  We
           find that it is not arguable that it was open to [the second
           Immigration Judge], through reliance on paragraphs 23 and 24 of
           AB, to himself rely upon the findings of the first [Immigration
           Judge].  We do not agree that there is support for Mr Lemer's
           contention to be found there.  In their determination in the
           appeal that is before us, the IAT did not more than to highlight
           agreed areas of concern, and therefore areas of focus, as was
           mentioned in AB,  but in no way can it be said that the IAT
           limited the issues that were to be considered by the second
           [Immigration Judge].

           Whilst it was certainly the case that the IAT agreed with the
           parties that they had identified the issue of internal
           relocation as being key, and agreed with the parties that [the
           second] Immigration Judge had failed to give any, or any
           adequate, reasons to support certain findings of fact (paragraph
           8 of their determination), it is simply not arguable that the
           IAT made any finding themselves or accepted that any findings of
           either of the Immigration Judges should stand.  The IAT noted
           that it was not in a position to make good the deficits. Having
           set aside [the first Immigration Judge's] determination, in
           terms, and having not specified that any aspect of the
           determination was to stand, for our part we cannot see how it
           can be argued that any part of it can subsequently be relied
           upon.  We are satisfied that, had the IAT considered it safe to
           remit the appeal upon a limited basis of any kind, then it would
           have done so, and would have set out in the clearest possible
           terms what the precise ambit of the further hearing was to be.

           Given that Mr Lemer based his argument in relation to the other
           aspects of the appeal, at least in part, upon the submissions
           that [the second Immigration Judge] had been entitled to rely
           upon the findings of [the first Immigration Judge], we find that
           his argument cannot safely be regarded as sustainable, and we
           are satisfied that [the second Immigration Judge] further fell
           into material error of law insofar as the grounds at paragraphs
           1, 2 and 3 are concerned.

           Had [the second] Immigration Judge not so erred, then he may
           have reached a different decision.  We are not in a position
           today to conduct a full rehearing of this appeal.  We have no
           alternative but to direct that the matter be re-listed for a
           full, fresh reconsideration hearing when all matters will be at
           large for the AIT to consider and decide completely afresh,
           without reliance in any way upon the determinations of either Mr
           Campbell or Mr Kulatilake.

           It is directed that this matter be transferred to Hatton Cross
           Hearing Centre."

   2. We therefore reconsidered the determination of the second  Immigration
      Judge completely afresh, hearing oral evidence from the appellant  and
      not seeking to rely on findings of fact made by either  the  first  or
      second  Immigration  Judge.   No  reliance  was   placed   by   either
      representative on the earlier  accounts  recorded  by  the  first  and
      second Immigration  Judges  in  their  determinations.   The  Tribunal
      explained the procedure to the  appellant  at  the  beginning  of  the
      hearing and ensured that she was able to understand  the  interpreter.
      We reminded ourselves that the burden of proof is upon  the  appellant
      to the lower standard appropriate for refugee and human rights matters
      (real risk or reasonable degree of likelihood).

   3. The appellant's account is a common one, unfortunately;  her  marriage
      was not a success and   involved domestic violence, which she says  is
      why she fled to the United Kingdom.  The Secretary  of  State  accepts
      that the appellant suffered domestic violence during her marriage,  as
      the objective evidence shows that one in two  women  in  Pakistan  do.
      Some of the difficulties in the marriage were caused by  the  gambling
      habits of the appellant's husband, who although a wealthy  man  and  a
      generous provider was an habitual gambler.  He was also suspicious  of
      the appellant's  fidelity  and  never  accepted  any  of  their  three
      children as his own.  He thought she was having an affair with one  of
      his relatives, and the worst incident  of  violence  in  the  marriage
      occurred just before the birth of their third child.  He resented  the
      appellant not having brought him a big dowry.  Towards the end of  the
      marriage, the husband had an affair with a childminder brought  in  to
      care for the three children.

   4. The appellant was born in 1969 and is a woman of reasonable education:
       she is a Sunni Muslim who speaks both Urdu and Punjabi, and  who  was
      able to complete her SSC School Examination with the help  of  private
      tuition, after leaving school at 14.  She passed the exam when she was
      16 years old and her parents, who were middle class but not rich, then
      arranged her marriage.  Her husband, whom the  appellant  met  on  her
      wedding day, had been married before  and,  unusually,  permitted  his
      first wife to be the divorcing party.  During the marriage, a relative
      of the husband told the appellant that the husband was also physically
      abusive to his first wife because she was unable to bear children  for
      him.  The first wife obtained a  court  divorce.  After  the  divorce,
      there is no evidence that he has troubled her again.

   5. The appellant's parents were delighted with the match.  They  did  not
      investigate the  details  of  the  divorce  before  the  wedding;  the
      appellant's husband was a 'catch' for the family;  two  older  sisters
      had married badly and all three of the appellant's other  sisters  are
      in marriages where they live in just one  room  with  their  husbands,
      children, and in-laws.

   6. The appellant's new husband was good to her financially,  despite  his
      gambling habit.  He gave her sufficient housekeeping money  to  enable
      her to save the enormous sum of 4 Lakh rupees (about �4000)  in  cash,
      or in cash and jewellery (there is some variance in  her  accounts  on
      this point).  He also bought her jewellery himself.  However,  he  was
      jealous; he suspected her of having a relationship with a relative  of
      his, and he never believed her denials.  He never trusted her and used
      abusive language to her all the  time.   Sometimes  he  beat  her;  he
      resented her not bringing a  big  dowry,  although  he  was  well  off
      himself.

   7. The appellant complained to her parents, who told her  that  she  must
      stay with her husband; for her to  leave  would  bring  shame  on  the
      family.  The appellant then found out about the  first  marriage,  and
      told her parents about the first wife; she was frightened  now.   They
      disbelieved her and said that the husband's relative was  mischievous,
      seeking to upset the second  marriage.   Two  sons  came  along.   The
      husband's behaviour worsened.  He threatened 'to divorce me  and  kill
      my children'.

   8. On 2 January 2001, matters came to a head.  The appellant was 8 months
      pregnant and during a bout of jealousy, her husband hit  her  with  an
      iron bar.  He took her to hospital  and  told  her  to  say  she  fell
      downstairs, as if she told the truth 'he would kill me'.  He took  the
      appellant home to her parents  and  told  them  that  she  had  fallen
      downstairs.

   9. Overnight, the pain and swelling increased in the broken arm  and  the
      appellant found it  unbearable.   Her  parents  took  her  to  another
      hospital, where x-rays revealed the broken arm.  At the hearing before
      this panel, the appellant says that the arm  was  bleeding  profusely.
      This was the first mention of profuse bleeding;  we  treat  it  as  an
      embellishment of her account.  The appellant's parents borrowed  money
      and were able to pay for some treatment  for  the  arm,  but  the  arm
      remains painful and will not bend,  perhaps  because  they  could  not
      afford to pay very much.

  10. The appellant now told her parents the truth; they saw  the  scars  on
      her body and arm, and this time, they believed  her.   Accompanied  by
      her parents and many of her neighbours,  the  appellant  went  to  the
      police on 3 January 2001, and filed a First Information Report against
      her husband.  It was registered, but not pursued, due to her husband's
      'close contacts with local  MNA  [Member  of  National  Assembly]  and
      higher police officers'.  She believes the police took  a  bribe.   We
      note, that although the appellant  told  the  police  the  truth,  her
      husband  did  not  carry  out  his  threat  to  kill   her;   instead,
      apologetically, he negotiated a resumption of the marriage,  with  the
      help of her parents, and promised not to beat her again.

  11. The child was born on 2 April 2001.   The appellant  went  home.   Her
      evidence today is that her husband never asked  her  to  withdraw  the
      First Information Report; he had 'sorted it out' himself.  After a few
      days, the relationship deteriorated again.  The appellant's father was
      so distressed that he had a heart attack,  and  died  on  18  December
      2001.  Her husband's  behaviour  worsened.   On  15  March  2002,  the
      appellant's mother died, also of a heart attack induced by  her  worry
      about her daughter.  The appellant's husband continued to beat her. He
      did not treat her children as his; he  continued  to  suspect  her  of
      infidelity. With her injured arm, she could not care for the new baby,
      a daughter, so a child minder, a woman from the village, came to  live
      with the family and look after it.

  12. After a year, in March 2003, it became apparent to the appellant  that
      this woman was also attending to  the  husband's  sexual  needs.   She
      questioned him and he became angry.  He beat her and said that if  she
      told anyone about the child minder, he would 'kill me and divorce me'.
       That is an intemperate expression; if  the  husband  had  killed  his
      wife, there would be no need for him also to divorce her.

  13. The appellant telephoned  a  friend  from  school,  A,  whom  she  had
      continued to see at her mother's house from time to time, but who  was
      not known to her husband.  A advised her to leave.  When  the  husband
      went to Sialkot on business, the appellant took her chance,  and  left
      home with her jewellery and cash (her husband had  left  cash  in  the
      house that day); she went straight to A's  house  which  was  also  in
      Lahore.  A's brother arranged an agent for the appellant  to  come  to
      the United Kingdom.  The appellant did  not  pay  the  agent  for  her
      journey and travelled on a false passport. She had never had a genuine
      passport.  She claims not to have known how to claim asylum until  she
      got here, but she did see solicitors promptly and claimed asylum after
      four days.

  14. She had not divorced her husband whilst in  the  United  Kingdom;  her
      oral evidence was that, after three months, he would have the right to
      divorce her under  religious  law,  and  therefore,  if  she  remained
      married, it would be in name only.  The  appellant  did  not  seek  to
      discover whether her husband had divorced her since she  came  to  the
      United Kingdom.

  15. The appellant lived with friends of A's here in  the  United  Kingdom.
      About a year after she arrived, she became pregnant by another  friend
      of A's who visited the house where she was living.  She never knew his
      family name, and was unsure of his first name as  he  used  two.   The
      appellant had not seen him since she learned of the pregnancy, had not
      named him on the birth certificate (which we have not seen)  and  when
      she telephoned him to say she was pregnant,  he  was  not  interested.
      She does not want her younger daughter to have  anything  to  do  with
      such a scoundrel.  The fourth child was born in January 2005.

  16. The  appellant  kept  in  contact  with  A  (who  obtained  the  death
      certificates, medical letter and copy  First  Information  Report  for
      her), and received news of her sisters through A,  but  they  none  of
      them had telephones so that access was limited.  The appellant had  no
      news at all of her husband since she spoke to A in  2003  to  get  the
      documents organised.  At that time he was said to be looking for  her.
      She was not aware of his filing any First Information Report about her
      theft of the money and jewellery.

  17. When asked why she could  not  return  and  seek  internal  relocation
      outside Lahore, the appellant said that she did  not  know  where  she
      would live, that she  would  have  financial  problems  and  would  be
      worried about the children's education.  (Presumably, when she came to
      the United Kingdom, she would have had the same concerns.)   Then,  as
      an afterthought, the appellant said she  was  afraid  of  her  husband
      tracing and killing her.  There was no news of any  pursuit;  for  all
      she knew, her husband might have divorced her and married again.   The
      appellant maintained her assertion that her husband would try to  kill
      her on return.

      Submissions

  18. For the respondent, who was  the  applicant  for  reconsideration,  Mr
      Norton argued as follows.  He relied upon the letter  of  refusal  and
      accepted both that domestic violence was a problem  in  Pakistan,  and
      that this appellant may in the past have suffered it.   He argued that
      certain aspects of the appellant's oral  evidence  (for  example,  the
      level of examination of the injury to her upper arm)  were  unreliable
      and mutually contradictory.  Having regard to his acceptance that  the
      appellant may have  suffered  domestic  violence  in  the  past,  that
      element of his argument is not material to the decision  the  Tribunal
      has to make.

  19. Mr Norton also argued that  the  appellant's  evidence  could  not  be
      treated as entirely credible, following  s.8  Asylum  and  Immigration
      (Treatment of Claimants etc.) Act  2004.   She  had  been  content  to
      travel on someone else's passport which she knew was not her own,  and
      thus had entered the United Kingdom illegally.  She had also failed to
      claim asylum for four days after her arrival.

  20. Mr Norton contended that on Tanveer  Ahmed  principles,  the  Tribunal
      should be slow to accept as a reliable document the First  Information
      Report which the appellant had obtained.  It was not at all clear  how
      her friend A had managed to obtain from the Police Station a  document
      which did not concern A but only the appellant and her family; if  the
      answer was, by bribery, then even if the document  was  on  a  genuine
      form and signed by a real police officer,  that  raised  the  question
      whether it was a true record of a First Information as it appeared  to
      be.

  21. The husband was a powerful man, on the appellant's  account,  and  had
      been aware of the First Information Report  almost  immediately.   She
      said he had arranged for  the  First  Information  Report  not  to  be
      proceeded with; if that were the case, it  was  indeed  strange  that,
      rather than it being removed from  the  police  files,  it  was  still
      available to copy and send to England some two and a half years later.
       Further, given that it was a stain on his character, it was difficult
      to see why this allegedly violent man had not put any pressure on  the
      appellant to withdraw her complaint, especially  after  the  death  of
      both her parents removed her family support.

  22. The political influence obtained from the husband's connection with  a
      Member of the National  Association  appeared,  on  the  evidence,  to
      amount only to the giving of contributions,  and  attending  meetings.
      The husband was a generous constituent, but Mr Norton argued that  the
      Tribunal should  not  find  his  influence  greater  than  that.   The
      appellant's  worries  about  living  outside  Lahore  were  revealing:
      accommodation, financial difficulty and  education  for  the  children
      came first in her thinking, only later followed by a claimed  fear  of
      her husband tracing and killing her.  She  would  have  difficulty  in
      caring for these children, economically, but there was  a  network  of
      shelters and at  least  one  Non-Governmental  Organisation  providing
      legal assistance to women in her circumstances.  The  appellant  could
      divorce her husband and begin to rebuild her life:   she  had  friends
      and relatives here and in Pakistan who could support her in that.

  23. Mr Norton asked the Tribunal to treat Dr Wenonah Lyon's expert  report
      with caution; it was plainly well-intentioned but was not  sourced  to
      contemporaneous primary materials or much in  the  way  of  supporting
      evidence.  The effect of the Operational Guidance Note was not to  say
      that nobody  with  limited  education  and  young  children  could  be
      returned; there were  millions  of  women  surviving  in  Pakistan  in
      similar conditions.  The United Kingdom's obligations in  humanitarian
      protection did not extend to protect those living  under  the  benefit
      threshold in foreign countries.

  24. Mr Norton asked the Tribunal to dismiss  the  Refugee  Convention  and
      Article 3 claims.  There was, as he understood it, no live  Article  8
      claim.  We were therefore  not  required  to  consider  MG  (assessing
      interference with private life) Serbia  and  Montenegro  [2005]  UKAIT
      2005, although it was among the documents filed by  the  Secretary  of
      State.

  25. For the appellant, Mr Chirico confirmed that  the  Tribunal  was  only
      required to deal with the Refugee Convention and article 3.  There was
      no article 8 claim before us.  He relied upon  his  skeleton  argument
      and in addition, made oral submissions. We begin with the  appellant's
      skeleton argument.  The  first  three  pages  summarise  the  evidence
      already referred to above.  The appellant then set out the  background
      evidence on Pakistan in relation to domestic  violence  and  impunity,
      and the bribery and corruption in the police and judiciary.   None  of
      these matters were in dispute, either in SN and  HM  or  this  appeal.
      Similarly, the shortage of shelters for  women  at  risk  of  domestic
      violence,  and  the  legal  discrimination  against  women  were   not
      disputed.  There were, however, some shelters.

  26. The skeleton argument reminded the Tribunal  of  the  evidence  of  Dr
      Wenonah Lyon that domestic violence remained prevalent, was increasing
      rather than decreasing, and that there were limits  to  the  practical
      effectiveness of women's shelters.  The next  pages  (up  to  page  9)
      summarise  well  established  concepts  in  this   jurisdiction.    At
      paragraph 9, the  appellant  makes  submissions  in  relation  to  the
      Respondent's letter of refusal.    She  argues  that  her  account  is
      internally consistent and wholly credible (despite her having  arrived
      on false documents and failed to claim asylum on arrival:   section  8
      Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants etc.) Act  2004).   The
      Tribunal cannot find her wholly credible on  that  basis,  but  we  do
      accept that the core of this appellant's account is  credible  against
      the background evidence.

  27. The appellant argued that she could  not  seek  the  protection  of  a
      women's refuge; many were short-term, and there  remained  a  risk  of
      attack even in a refuge.   It  was  not  a  long-term  solution,  and,
      crucially -

           "Women  are  only  placed  in  Government  refuges  following  a
           magistrates'  order;  there  is  nothing  to  suggest  that  the
           appellant would receive such  an  order,  absent  a  renewal  of
           violence against her."

  28. The appellant argued that her husband would locate  her  wherever  she
      was in Pakistan, if she registered with local authorities or sent  her
      children to school, or used a public hospital.  Further, she contended
      that internal relocation would be unduly harsh for her with four young
      children.  She relied upon Dr Lyon's evidence that to do so, she would
      need to be able to depend on male family members.

  29. In oral submissions, Mr Chirico said that if appellant's evidence  was
      largely true, she was one of an unusual subclass of women victims  who
      escaped, and to allow her to remain would  not  open  the  floodgates.
      The Secretary of State had not sought  to  resile  from  the  position
      taken in his OGN; domestic violence was a serious problem in Pakistan,
      and  there  was  no  sufficiency  of  protection  from  the  Pakistani
      authorities.  If a person had the resources to set up on their own, he
      accepted that they might be able to relocate, but there  should  be  a
      presumption that it was  that  unduly  harsh  to  expect  a  woman  to
      relocate unless you she was an educated professional woman.

  30. In relation to  credibility  and  to  section  8  of  the  Asylum  and
      Immigration (Treatment of Claimants etc.) Act 2004, any diminution  in
      credibility on these facts should be very small; refugees arriving  in
      the United Kingdom should not be expected to be familiar with official
      procedures.    The delay in claiming was not over a long period (about
      4 days) and the appellant had explained that the solicitors  had  sent
      her to the Home Office.  She  had  made  no  attempt  to  conceal  her
      whereabouts or to disappear.    A victim of domestic  violence  trying
      to leave the country without  being  seen  would  not  go  and  get  a
      passport to leave the country.  The section 8 point had not  been  put
      to the appellant.  It would be contrary to the thrust of  the  Refugee
      Convention to require the appellant to put herself at risk by  seeking
      a passport, which might even require her husband's permission.

  31. Section 8 should not be the starting point for consideration of
      credibility, and in relation to the apparently conflicting evidence
      about her arm injury, the Tribunal should be slow to infer that the
      appellant was trying to mislead.  Her behaviour next day was
      reasonable; she had been in pain overnight, leading to a decision by
      the appellant, family and neighbours to go to police station.  The
      whole street had mobilised to back her up and the First Information
      Report  indicated that she had attended with a bandaged arm.  The
      medical evidence recorded an appearance of her upper arm which was
      'consistent with' what she described.  He asked the Tribunal to find
      that the appellant had suffered ongoing violence from her husband as
      described.

  32. Mr Chirico accepted that the First Information Report was not entirely
      satisfactory, especially as to where exactly she was injured, but the
      appellant had not written it herself.  There was no challenge in the
      letter of refusal to the medical report and death certificates, only
      to the First Information Report. The Tribunal should place very little
      weight on the perceived discrepancy regarding the 'open wound'.

  33. Marital violence had escalated to such a point that the appellant had
      the nerve to go to police and with her parents and neighbours.  He
      asked the Tribunal to accept the veracity of the First Information
      Report. The appellant had given evidence of attempts by her husband to
      persuade her to withdraw the First Information Report while she was
      still living at her parents' house during period of childbirth and
      immediately after. After her return, the incident was mentioned during
      episodes of violence, but not otherwise.  Dr Wenonah Lyons' evidence
      had not previously been challenged and had given a thorough and
      concise account of the difficulties; she was plainly aware of her duty
      to the Court and her opinion on effectiveness of protection was based
      on her own experience as to what a person in the appellant's situation
      might, plausibly, do.  Her conclusions were in line with the
      Operational Guidance Note.

  34. Mr Chirico accepted that the appellant's evidence of risk was now over
      two years old, but there was no evidence of any divorce and nothing to
      suggest that her husband would be less angry with her than immediately
      before she left. He had, historically, wanted to keep her under his
      thumb in his house and had negotiated her return through her parents.
      She now had a child by another man.  If returned to Pakistan, she
      would show up with a child whose origin was inexplicable and that
      would put her at very serious risk under the Hudood ordinance, as it
      would constitute further perceived dishonour to her husband in the
      context of the background evidence.

  35. He invited the Tribunal to find that there was an ongoing risk and a
      reasonable likelihood that the appellant's husband was still
      interested in her.  His political connections were not exaggerated,
      and would affect the available domestic protection in her home area,
      as well as during internal relocation; anywhere which passed the undue
      harshness test was the kind of place where her husband could track her
      down.  The appellant was a single woman with 4 young children, who had
      never worked and would have to make arrangements for her children,
      which would make her visible to her husband if he was still looking
      for her.

  36. The Tribunal asked about the birth certificate for the latest child.
      It was not before us; Mr Chirico observed that it had never previously
      been asked for.  He sought instructions and the appellant, who was now
      present, said that the birth certificate was with NASS.  She had not
      inserted the father's name but could do so, in future if she ever
      wanted to give the father's name.  She did not say that she was unable
      to do so although earlier, her case had been that she did not know his
      second name and was unsure of his first name.  There is a mystery
      about this child.  Mr Chirico submitted that the changes in Pakistan
      since time of Shah and Islam did not amount to domestic protection and
      do not require you to differ from the Operational Guidance Note view.
      He asked us to substitute a decision allowing the appeal

  37. There was no reply on behalf of the Secretary of State.

      Determination and reasons

  38.  The Tribunal reserved its determination, which we now give.  We  have
      considered the oral and written evidence on  the  appellant's  behalf,
      the death certificates, medical evidence and First Information  Report
      and the bundles of documents submitted by both parties, together  with
      the current Country of  Origin  Information  Service  Report  (October
      2005) and Operational Guidance  Note  relating  to  married  women  in
      Pakistan.  We approach this decision on the basis that  the  appellant
      has given a broadly credible account of a difficult marriage in  which
      suspicions about her fidelity on the husband's side, and  frustrations
      about the husband's gambling habit on the  wife's  side,  resulted  in
      rows and regular domestic violence, though not  causing  lasting  harm
      except in relation to the event in January 2001.

  39. We also accept the appellant's account of filing a  First  Information
      Report about that incident, supported by her parents  and  neighbours;
      we do not  regard  as  reliable  the  document  produced  as  a  First
      Information Report now as we do not accept  that  local  police  would
      give it to the appellant's friend  A,  who  is  not  a  party  to  the
      document.  We accept the argument that if the document was obtained by
      a bribe, that makes it even less reliable.  However, we accept to  the
      lower standard appropriate  for  these  Conventions  that  the  Lahore
      police may well have a record of the 2001  incident  on  their  files,
      which would show a broken upper arm.  We  also  accept  that  hospital
      treatment was required for that injury, and that after  the  birth  of
      their third child the  appellant  returned  to  her  husband,  finally
      leaving him in his absence and taking with her a substantial amount of
      cash and jewellery.  There is no evidence at all that he  has  pursued
      her; we recall that he does not regard her children as his,  and  that
      he does not appear to have pursued his  first  wife.   We  accept  the
      appellant's assumption that he may  well  have  divorced  her  in  her
      absence, and that if she is still married, it is in name only.

  40. We note that the usual risk of forced return at the  hands  of  senior
      family members is no longer a risk in this case.  The appellant has no
      surviving parents, uncles or aunts.  Her three sisters are  living  in
      the one-room compounds  of  their  in-laws.  Nobody,  other  than  her
      husband, is in a position to attempt to force her  to  return  to  him
      now.  There would be an extant record of his past abuse at  the  local
      police station.  The appellant had a supportive friend in Lahore.  The
      appellant has lived with friends here in the United Kingdom,  and  has
      also received NASS support.  She did not spend her 4  Lakh  rupees  in
      coming here.  She may  still  possess  jewellery  and  some  financial
      resources to use if she were to be returned.

  41. We considered Dr Lyon's report on country conditions.  The  criticisms
      of it are well-founded; it is an  honest  attempt  to  deal  with  the
      appellant's pleaded case, but it lacks rigour and sources.   The  only
      point of interest relates to refuge availability on return.   Dr  Lyon
      accepted that there would be short-term support in  a  refuge  if  the
      appellant were  returned  and  her  husband  pursued  her.   She  gave
      examples of women  killed  in  those  refuges  by  'determined  family
      members' but we remind ourselves  that  the  appellant's  parents  are
      dead, and when alive, were sympathetic.  We consider later whether the
      husband is  likely  to  be  sufficiently  determined  to  pursue  this
      appellant, even if he knew she had returned.

  42. We also remind ourselves that the husband's threats were that he would
      'divorce and kill her' or 'divorce her and kill the children'.  He was
      previously divorced by his first wife.  He had not harmed  that  woman
      and we consider it much more likely than not that in the  years  since
      2003, he has divorced this apparently unsatisfactory second wife,  and
      married a suitable third wife; he  can  certainly  afford  to  do  so,
      subject to his gambling habit.

  43. Having regard to the lower standard appropriate in refugee  and  human
      rights claims, we accept that the evidence of  this  appellant  has  a
      core  of  credibility,  but  in  our  view,  has  been   substantially
      embellished to her advantage since her arrival in the United  Kingdom.
      We accept that there was an incident of some sort  which  resulted  in
      estrangement during her third pregnancy, but we do not accept that the
      First Information Report is an accurate record of that incident.   The
      appellant may well have filed a  First  Information  Report,  but  the
      document  produced  simply  does  not  match  her   account   of   the
      circumstances; we consider that document to be an embellishment of the
      original account.

  44. We accept that the situation for women at risk of domestic violence in
      Pakistan remains very difficult; the question for us is  whether  this
      woman remains a member of  that  group.   We  considered  the  country
      guidance decision in SN& HM (Divorced women - risk on return) Pakistan
      CG [2004] UKIAT 00283 at paragraph 48 -

           "48. The same CIPU Country Report accepts that  internal  flight
           options are limited for women, but it does not state that  there
           are no internal flight possibilities and each case  will  depend
           on its own particular factual matrix. We find that some  support
           is  available  in  the  cities,  and  we   also   consider   the
           geographical scale  of  Pakistan  (covering  an  area  of  about
           307,374 square miles, with a  population  of  140,470,000);  the
           question of internal flight will require  careful  consideration
           in each case. The general questions  which  Adjudicators  should
           ask themselves in cases of this kind are as follows -

           (a) Has the claimant shown a real risk or reasonable  likelihood
           of continuing hostility from her husband (or former husband)  or
           his family members, such as to raise a real risk of serious harm
           in her former home area?

           (b) If yes, has she shown  that  she  would  have  no  effective
           protection in her home  area  against  such  a  risk,  including
           protection available from the  Pakistani  state,  from  her  own
           family members, or from a current partner or his family?

           (c) If yes, would such a risk and lack of protection  extend  to
           any other part of Pakistan to  which  she  could  reasonably  be
           expected to go (Robinson [1997] EWCA Civ 2089, AE and FE  [2002]
           UKIAT 036361), having regard to  the  available  state  support,
           shelters, crisis centres, and family members or friends in other
           parts of Pakistan?

           49. The appeal should be allowed under the Refugee Convention or
           Article 3 ECHR only if, on the facts as at  the  Adjudicator  or
           Tribunal hearing, having regard to the background  evidence  and
           jurisprudence, a positive answer can be given to each  of  these
           questions."

  45. We considered first whether the appellant had shown  a  real  risk  or
      reasonable likelihood of continuing hostility  from  her  husband  (or
      former husband) or his family members, such as to raise a real risk of
      serious harm in her former  home  area.   The  appellant  produced  no
      evidence which satisfies  this  Tribunal  that  her  husband  has  any
      continuing interest in her, or is even still married to her. We do not
      find that the evidence of present risk is satisfactory,  even  to  the
      lower standard appropriate for these Conventions.   Her  case,  on  SN
      and HM principles, would accordingly fall at the first hurdle.

  46. Even if we are wrong about that factual aspect  of  this  appeal,  the
      appellant must still show that she would have no effective  protection
      in her home area against such a risk, including  protection  available
      from the Pakistani state, from her  own  family  members,  or  from  a
      current partner or his family, and  that  such  a  risk  and  lack  of
      protection extends to any other part of Pakistan to  which  she  could
      reasonably be expected to go (Robinson [1997] EWCA Civ 2089, AE and FE
      [2002] UKIAT 036361), having regard to the  available  state  support,
      shelters, crisis centres, and family members or friends in other parts
      of Pakistan.

  47. In this case, the appellant  is  a  middle-class  woman,  educated  to
      secondary school level, with good friends here and in Pakistan as well
      as three sisters.  Lahore is the second largest city in  Pakistan  and
      the capital of the Punjab.  The last population census in 1998  showed
      a population of over 5 million people, of whom 2.4 million were women.
       Pakistan has a population of over 161 million people and a land  mass
      of  over  300,000  square  miles  (excluding  the  disputed  areas  of
      Kashmir).  It is not disputed that there are  shelters  available  for
      victims of domestic violence in Pakistan, albeit (as always with  such
      resources) limited, and in some respects unsatisfactory. Nevertheless,
      there is some protection available, should the risk to her remain.  If
      SN and HM is the test, this appellant's appeal cannot succeed.

  48. Mr Chirico's challenge is to the SN and HM approach  overall,  and  we
      therefore considered whether he is correct in his contention that  the
      information which underlay that decision is  out  of  date.   In  this
      respect, Mr Chirico relied upon the respondent's Operational  Guidance
      Note as an admission by the respondent that  a  person  such  as  this
      appellant is at risk, from which, he argues, the respondent cannot now
      resile.

  49. We reminded ourselves of the purpose of an Operational  Guidance  Note
      as set out at paragraph 1 of the Note -

           "1.1 This document summarises the general, political  and  human
           rights situation in Pakistan and  provides  information  on  the
           nature  and  handling  of  claims   frequently   received   from
           nationals/residents  of  that  province.  It  must  be  read  in
           conjunction with the CIPU Pakistan Country Report April 2005 and
           any CIPU or COI Service Pakistan bulletins[1].

           1.2 This document is  intended  to  provide  clear  guidance  on
           whether the main types of claim are or are not likely to justify
           the granting of asylum, Humanitarian Protection or Discretionary
           Leave"

  50. The first point to be taken from that preamble is that the OGN cannot,
      as Mr Chirico argued that it could, be treated as a document  separate
      from the current COI Service report; however, where it  concedes  that
      there is a risk to a particular class  of  person,  then  it  must  be
      considered as a statement of his views of the country in  question  on
      the date of the OGN.  Of course, information received subsequently may
      affect that statement.

  51. We considered the wording of the domestic violence part of the OGN, in
      paragraph 3.8.  The OGN records the Secretary of State's  view  as  at
      July 2005; it notes the prevalence of domestic violence, affecting one
      out of every two women, with the National Commission on the Status  of
      Women calling for specific  domestic  violence  legislation.   Abusers
      could be charged with assault but (paragraph 3.8.3) cases were  rarely
      filed.  Police and judges were reluctant to take  action,  women  were
      usually returned to their abusive family members, and  were  reluctant
      to pursue charges because of the stigma attached to divorce and  their
      economic and psychological dependence  on  relatives.  Relatives  were
      reluctant  to  report  abuse  for  fear  of  dishonouring  the  family
      reputation.

  52. At paragraph 3.8.4, the Operational Guidance Note records criticism of
      the shelters available to women, but that the Pakistani Government had
      criticised violence against women.  However, it is clear that NGOs and
      the  Government  provide  some  shelters  for   abused   women.    The
      Operational Guidance Note then considers  sufficiency  of  protection,
      recording the discriminatory legal code in Pakistan.  Police failed to
      register or investigate cases  (however,  we  note  that  on  her  own
      account, this appellant's case is registered). Comments on the  Hudood
      system are not relevant here; there is  no  First  Information  Report
      against the appellant, either for adultery or for the  admitted  theft
      of jewellery and cash (paragraph 3.8.7). The Operational Guidance Note
      further records that -

           "3.8.8  The  Pakistani  authorities  have  not  demonstrated   a
           willingness or ability to punish or deter those who abuse  their
           wives, and therefore cannot be considered to provide  sufficient
           protection to wives in fear of domestic violence."

  53.  Mr  Chirico  relied  particularly  on  the  commentary  on   internal
      relocation in the Operational Guidance Note -

           "3.8.9 Internal  relocation.  The  Pakistani  law  provides  for
           freedom of movement, foreign travel, emigration and repatriation
           however, the Government limited this in  practice.  Taking  into
           account the general position of women in Pakistani society where
           they are subordinate  to  men,  may  not  be  educated  or  even
           literate, and may have  to  depend  on  relatives  for  economic
           support internal relocation may be unduly harsh  for  women  who
           are  genuinely  fleeing  a  serious  risk  of  serious  domestic
           violence. Factors such as the social and professional background
           of the individual claimant should be considered when determining
           relocation as an option. Educated  and  professional  women  may
           however find it possible to support  themselves  in  alternative
           locations...

           3.8.11 Conclusion. As noted above, case law has  confirmed  that
           Pakistani women are members of a social group within  the  terms
           of 1951 Refugee Convention. Asylum claims from  Pakistani  women
           who have demonstrated that they face a serious risk of  domestic
           violence which will amount to persecution or torture or  inhuman
           or degrading treatment must be  considered  in  the  context  of
           individual circumstances of each claim. In  individual  cases  a
           sufficiency of protection by the state authorities  may  not  be
           available, and although internal relocation may be  possible  in
           some circumstances, where it is not, a grant of asylum  will  be
           appropriate."

  54. The Pakistan COI Report for October 2005 post-dates the OGN  by  three
      months.  The relevant passages are at 6.143-6.145 and 6.158 -

      "Domestic violence


      6.143       The US State Department Report 2004 (USSD),  published  on
           28 February 2005 recorded that:


           "Domestic violence was a widespread and serious problem.
           Husbands frequently beat, and occasionally killed, their wives,
           and often newly married women were abused and harassed by their
           in-laws. Dowry and family-related disputes often resulted in
           death or disfigurement through burning or acid...During the
           year, there were 193 cases of stove deaths, many of these
           related to disputes with in-laws.


           According to the HRCP [Human Rights Commission of Pakistan], one
           out of every two women was the victim of mental or physical
           violence. The National Commission on the Status of Women has
           called for specific domestic violence legislation. In its
           absence, abusers may be charged with assault, but cases rarely
           were filed. Police and judges were reluctant to take action in
           domestic violence cases, viewing it as a family problem.
           Battered women were usually returned to their abusive family
           members. Women were reluctant to pursue charges because of the
           stigma attached to divorce and their economic and psychological
           dependence on relatives. Relatives were reluctant to report
           abuse for fear of dishonoring the family reputation."


      6.144       Following allegations of abuse at  a  woman's  shelter  in
           Hyderabad,  the   Integrated   Regional   Information   Networks
           (IRINNEWS.ORG) reported on 16 August  2004  that  "Human  rights
           activists have  called  for  drastic  reforms  in  the  existing
           structure of the state-run women's shelters across the country."
           The article further reported that:


           "In a conservative society like Pakistan, where 70 to 80 percent
           of women, according to HRW [Human Rights Watch], face domestic
           violence in the form of physical, sexual and verbal abuse, such
           centres were established to give women support in their hour of
           need. But such essential services need proper support, activists
           maintain.


           "Existing state-run women's refuge centres are like 'dumping
           places' and sub-prisons. Once a woman enters, she can't leave
           without obtaining a court order," Khalida Saleemi, director of
           Struggle for Change (SACH), an NGO working for the
           rehabilitation of violence victims, told IRIN in the Pakistani
           capital, Islamabad.


           "Counselling is one of the most critical needs of women in
           refuge centres as all of them live under stress, but, none of
           these abodes have in-house councillors," Saleemi said, adding
           that the government should arrange proper medical and
           psychiatric services for physically injured and emotionally
           disturbed women."


      6.145       The IRIN report also noted that:


           "The protection and safety of women in refuges has always been a
           critical issue. Religious conservatives have often raised
           concerns over the security situation in these centres and have
           accused those running such facilities several times of
           exploiting female residents. Allegations that stem from cultural
           norms that define a woman's place as being in a male-dominated
           household.


           Additionally, rights activists observe that the rules for
           visitors are also often violated. In some cases, people are
           allowed to go inside the shelters without formal permission from
           the designated authority. While on the other hand, human rights
           workers are denied access."


      Assistance available to women


      6.158       The US State Department Report 2004 (USSD),  published  on
           28 February 2005, stated that:


           "The Government has criticized violence against women. Its
           Crisis Center for Women in Distress refers abused women to NGOs
           for assistance. During the year, the NGO Struggle for Change,
           which operated a shelter for abused women, provided
           rehabilitation assistance (shelter, employment counseling, and
           legal aid) to 67 women. An additional 157 women received legal
           or financial assistance. Provincial governments operated
           shelters for women in distress at the district level. In some
           cases, managers of such shelters have abused women in their
           care."

      General conclusions

  55. Having considered the Country of  Origin  Information  Service  Report
      (COI Report) and the OGN, which is designed to assist  caseworkers  in
      making initial decisions, we find that, unsurprisingly, the OGN  takes
      matters little further than does the COI Report.  In most  cases,  the
      evidence is that families will not  support  a  woman  in  a  domestic
      violence situation, and police may  be  reluctant  to  register  FIRs.
      However, where there is family support, there is the power for abusers
      to  be  charged  with  assault  and  although  domestic  violence   is
      prevalent, the National Commission on the Status of Women  is  calling
      for specific domestic violence legislation.

  56. It will be noted that  whilst  the  COI  report  establishes  credible
      evidence of domestic abuse (one in two women) the  risk  to  women  is
      from their husbands, in-laws,  or  birth  families,  both  within  and
      without the shelters.  Where, unusually, a  woman  has  been  able  to
      register a FIR and to access family and local support  the  risks  set
      out in the COI are not relevant.

  57. We do not, having considered the objective evidence, find that the  SN
      and HM step by step approach is out of  date,  nor  that  the  country
      evidence indicates any worsening in the position of women at  risk  of
      domestic violence in Pakistan:  rather, it appears that the  intention
      of the authorities is to improve State protection,  although  progress
      is slow. Every case will still turn on its particular facts and should
      be analysed according to the test set out at paragraph 48 of SN  &  HM
      (Divorced women- risk on return) Pakistan CG [2004] UKIAT 00283.

      FS's case

  58. We return therefore to the facts of the present appeal.  We  note  the
      previous credibility finding, but this is a rehearing on all  grounds.
      Having seen and heard the appellant give evidence, and considered  all
      the documentary materials as well as her account over time, we  accept
      the evidence of some domestic abuse, the worst incident being that  in
      January 2001,  when,  on  the  appellant's  case,  her  entire  street
      supported her, and her family took her to the Police Station with  all
      the neighbours to register a FIR.  It follows that this  appellant  is
      one of  the  fortunate  few  who  have  no  fear  of  accessing  State
      protection and have done so successfully.  Her parents did  not  force
      her to return to her husband; they took her back, with  her  children,
      for the rest of her pregnancy.  They sheltered her, borrowed money  to
      pay for treatment to help her recover, and (with  the  help  of  local
      elders) renegotiated her marriage before  returning  her.   The  First
      Information Report remains on record.   The  appellant's  parents  are
      dead and could not now force a return to her husband or pursue her  to
      any shelter.  Her sisters live with their in-laws.

  59. There is no evidence which satisfies us that the  appellant's  husband
      wishes to see her, or the children, or to do her harm now.  We do know
      that he permitted his first wife to divorce him and apparently did her
      no harm  thereafter.   There  is  no  evidence  that  the  appellant's
      remaining family in Pakistan would reject her,  and  her  friends  are
      supportive.  The risk of any difficulty on return is  well  below  the
      low standard required to engage these Conventions.

  60. As regards the child born  in  the  United  Kingdom,  the  appellant's
      evidence as to his parentage is curious; we  have  not  seen  a  birth
      certificate and her evidence that his father is a person with whom she
      had a casual affair in her friend's home, of whose first name  she  is
      unsure, and whose second name the appellant never knew, sits ill  with
      her respectable  middleclass  upbringing  and  the  continuing  social
      support from friends of her  school  friend  A,  here  in  the  United
      Kingdom.  We cannot exclude from  our  consideration  the  possibility
      that this child is her husband's and that the breach  in  family  life
      which lies at the heart of this appeal  is  a  fabrication.    If  the
      appellant returns, she returns with four  children  whom  her  husband
      does not accept as his own, rather than three.   She may  well  suffer
      some hardship, returning to Pakistan with a family of  four  children,
      but she does have both social and financial resources to  sustain  her
      and we do not consider that the risk  on  return  engages  either  the
      Refugee Convention or  the  ECHR  at  the  high  and  demanding  level
      appropriate for foreign cases.

  61. The Tribunal has already found that there was a material error of  law
      in the second Immigration Judge's determination.  We are  required  to
      substitute our own decision.  Our decision is that the  refugee  claim
      fails and the Article 3 ECHR  claim  fails  with  it.   The  appellant
      indicated  at  the  hearing  that  there  is  no  Article   8   claim.
      Accordingly, the entire appeal is dismissed.

      DECISION


      The original Tribunal made a material error of law.

      The following decision is accordingly substituted:

        1. The appeal is dismissed on asylum grounds
        2. The appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds.




      Signed
        Dated: 19 February 2006






      Mrs J A J C Gleeson
      Senior Immigration Judge




                          DOCUMENTS BEFORE TRIBUNAL

   Authorities considered -
   1.  SN and HM (Divorced women - risk on return) Pakistan CG [2004] UKIAT
      00283
   2. MG (assessing interference with private life) Serbia and Montenegro
      [2005] UKAIT 2005


   Personal documents relating to this Appellant -


   3. Medical report of Dr J Taghipour, [ 27 June 2003]
   4. Doctor's letter from Dr Mansoor Ahmed of Jamil Hospital, Lahore,
      confirming that he treated the appellant in January-February 2001
   5. First Information Report dated 3/1/2001 recording appellant's
      complaint to police about attack on her on 2/1/2001
   6. Death certificates for appellant's father [died 18 December 2001] and
      mother [died 15 March 2002], both obtained 5 August 2003.
   7. Skeleton argument of Mr Chirico [13 March 2005]
   8. Chronology of events
   9. Appellant's statement [25 February 2005]
  10. Expert report of Dr Wenonah Lyon [September 2003]

   Country background documents-
   For Secretary of State -

  11. Pakistan Country of Origin Information Service Report (October 2005)
  12. Statement by Mrs Nilofar Bakhtiar (Advisor to the Prime Minister and
      In-Charge, Ministry of Women Development) on behalf of Pakistan
      Permanent Mission to United Nations, March 2 2005, on "Women 2000:
      Gender Equality, Development and Peace for the 21st Century" given at
      the High-Level Plenary Meeting of the 49th session of the Commission
      on the Status of Women.
  13. Pages downloaded from website of Soc for Human Rights and Prisoners'
      Aid (SHARP) a Non-Governmental Organisation registered with its
      headquarters in Islamabad, Pakistan.
  14. Home Office Operational Guidance Note Pakistan 01/07/2005

   For Appellant

  15. U S State Department Report for Pakistan, 2004 [published 28 February
      2005]
  16. Amnesty International Annual Report 2005
  17. Amnesty International article "Pakistan Insufficient Protection of
      Women" [2002]
  18. Human Rights Watch annual report 2005
  19. Human Rights Watch articles:  "Pakistan's moderates are beaten in
      public" [2004], "Forms of Violence against Women in Pakistan" [2004]
      and "Letter to Colin Powell on Women's Rights and Democracy" [2002]
  20. Human Rights Commission of Pakistan Article "Women Leaders'
      Manhandling Shameful" [2005]
  21. Crescent Life article "Is domestic violence endemic in Pakistan?"
  22. Tel Med Pak article on domestic violence [2000]
  23. Articles on acid attacks and violence against women in Pakistan
      [various]
  24. Human Development Foundation article on domestic violence
  25. EPIC Project Information on parties and candidates [2004]
-----------------------
[1] Emphasis added

