










R (on  the  application  of  Asare)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
Department IJR [2016] UKUT 00029 (IAC)


                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber


                       Judicial Review Decision Notice







                       The Queen on the application of
                            Kwame Anyemedu Asare
                                                                   Applicant
                                      v


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent




                     Before Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede



            Application for judicial review: substantive decision


Having considered  all  documents  lodged  and  having  heard  the  parties'
respective representatives, Ms N  Bustani  of  Counsel,  on  behalf  of  the
Applicant, instructed by Paul John & Co Solicitors  and  Mr  J  Jolliffe  of
Counsel, on behalf of the Respondent, instructed  by  the  Government  Legal
Department, at a hearing at Field House, London on 3 December 2015


Decision: the application for judicial review is refused



                                  JUDGMENT

    1) This is an application for judicial review of  the  decision  of  the
       Secretary of State for the Home  Department  ("SSHD")  dated  2  June
       2015, to refuse to treat submissions made on behalf of the  applicant
       on 5 February 2015 as a fresh human rights claim. Permission to apply
       for judicial review was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Freeman on  3
       September 2015.


  Immigration History


    2) The applicant has a lengthy immigration history which is set  out  in
       detail in the summary grounds  of  defence.  Essentially,  it  is  as
       follows.


    3)  The applicant, a national of Ghana, was born on 18 February 1979. He
       entered the United Kingdom on 14 September 2004  on  a  student  visa
       valid until 31 October 2006 and was subsequently  granted  successive
       periods of leave to remain until  11  November  2010.  Thereafter  he
       remained in the United Kingdom as an overstayer. On 21  January  2011
       he was encountered during  a  joint  police/UKBA  operation  and  was
       served with an IS.151A as an overstayer.

    4)  On 7 April 2011 the applicant  was  admitted  to  Homerton  Hospital
       Mental Health Unit. He was discharged at the end of September 2011.

    5)  In the meantime,  on  22  July  2011,  the  applicant  submitted  an
       application for leave to remain outside the  immigration  rules.  His
       application was refused on 4 January 2012 with a right of appeal. His
       appeal was heard before the First-tier Tribunal on 2 March  2012  and
       was dismissed on 30 March 2012, following which permission to  appeal
       to the Upper  Tribunal  was  refused  and  he  became  appeal  rights
       exhausted on 2 May 2012.

    6)  On 28 September 2012 the applicant made a  further  application  for
       leave on human rights grounds. That  application  was  refused  on  7
       August 2013 without a right of  appeal.  The  applicant  then  sought
       permission to apply for  judicial  review  but  his  application  was
       refused on 3 April 2014.

    7)  On 5 February 2015 the applicant made another application for  leave
       outside the immigration rules. An extension of time was given to  the
       applicant's solicitors to produce medical evidence in support of  the
       application, but a further application for an extension was  refused,
       although the applicant submitted further evidence, in any  event,  in
       the form of a letter from  a  Dr  Fisher,  after  the  deadline.  The
       application was treated as further submissions and was refused  on  2
       June 2015, although the decision was stated as 9  May  2015,  on  the
       basis that it did not amount to a fresh human rights claim.

    8) On 14 July 2015 the applicant was again  detained  under  the  Mental
       Health Act at Homerton Hospital. He was  discharged  on  8  September
       2015.

    9) The applicant lodged his judicial review claim on 7 August 2015.

  Determination of the applicant's appeal

   10)  It is relevant to  consider  the  determination  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge promulgated on 30 March 2012. The  applicant  appeared
       before the Tribunal and gave oral evidence, as  did  his  father  and
       mother. The judge set out at some length the applicant's  history  of
       mental health problems, recording the applicant's  evidence  that  he
       fell ill in or around March 2010 when he started experiencing visions
       and hearing voices in his head. It is recorded that the applicant was
       arrested on an allegation of actual bodily harm on 4 April  2011  and
       was assessed and detained under section 2 of the  Mental  Health  Act
       1983 and admitted to the City & Hackney Centre for Mental  Health  at
       Homerton Hospital. He was diagnosed with paranoid schizophrenia by Dr
       Fisher, a Consultant Psychiatrist. He was discharged at  the  end  of
       September 2011. The judge recorded the applicant's evidence  that  he
       came to the United Kingdom in 2004 and went to live with his  parents
       who were already  here.  He  studied  and  worked  until  his  health
       deteriorated and was  currently  living  in  his  own  accommodation,
       receiving  treatment  from  a  Consultant  Psychiatrist  at  Homerton
       Hospital.


   11) The judge, having considered the various medical reports  before  him
       and having  also  heard  from  the  applicant's  mother  and  father,
       concluded that he did not meet the  threshold  to  establish  a  case
       under Article 3 of the ECHR. As regards Article 8, the judge accepted
       that there was an established family life between the  applicant  and
       his parents based on his level of dependence upon them  and  that  he
       had also established a private  life  in  the  United  Kingdom.  When
       assessing proportionality, the judge  noted  the  applicant's  severe
       diagnosis, paranoid schizophrenia, but also his improved  and  stable
       condition since his discharge from hospital. He took account  of  the
       fact that there was immediate family in the  United  Kingdom  but  no
       identifiable relatives remaining in Ghana. He concluded that  removal
       would not be in breach of the applicant's Article 8 rights.

  Application/ submissions of 5 February 2015


   12) The  submissions  made  on  5  February  2015,  at  page  13  of  the
       applicant's  first  bundle,  are  relatively  brief  and  assert,  in
       essence, that the applicant has established a private life in the  UK
       and cannot be returned to Ghana because of his condition for which he
       receives medication and because the quality  of  his  life  would  be
       drastically reduced in Ghana.


   13) In a letter dated 27 April 2015 the applicant's solicitors  requested
       further  time  to  obtain  a  medical  report  from  the   Consultant
       Psychiatrist, Dr Fisher, who was unable to prepare  a  report  within
       the respondent's deadline.

   14)  In a short  covering  letter  dated  20  May  2015  the  applicant's
       solicitors informed the respondent that they were producing a  report
       from Dr Fisher, which was enclosed. That report was dated 13 May 2015
       and is to be found at page 24 of the applicant's second bundle.

  Respondent's decision of 2 June 2015

   15)  The respondent, in her decision of 2  June  2015,  referred  to  the
       letter from Dr Fisher included with the applicant's submissions of 20
       May 2015 and concluded that the submissions  were  not  significantly
       different from the material  previously  considered.  The  respondent
       referred to her previous decision of 4 January 2012, the decision  of
       the First-tier Tribunal of 30 March 2012, her decision  of  7  August
       2013 and the decision of 3 April 2014  in  the  applicant's  judicial
       review application in which all relevant matters were considered. The
       respondent  concluded  that  the  applicant's  submissions  were  not
       significantly different and did not amount to a fresh claim.  It  was
       also concluded that there were no exceptional  circumstances  in  the
       applicant's  case  which  were  sufficiently  compelling  to  justify
       allowing him to remain in the United Kingdom.


   16)  In the grounds seeking  permission  to  apply  for  judicial  review
       reference was made  to  the  applicant  having  been  detained  under
       section 3 of the Mental Health Act 1983 on 14 July 2015. The  grounds
       asserted that his condition had deteriorated and that the  respondent
       had unlawfully failed to consider his submissions as  a  fresh  claim
       giving rise to an in-country right of appeal.

   17)  The respondent's response, in the summary grounds  of  defence,  was
       that all relevant matters had already been considered  and  that  the
       further submissions did not amount to a fresh claim.

   18)  Permission to  apply  for  judicial  review  was  granted  by  Upper
       Tribunal Judge Freeman on 3 September 2015, on the following basis:

           "This applicant is presently detained under  the  Mental  Health
           Act and arguably should not be removed while that remains so."

   19)  Subsequent to the grant of permission, further submissions were made
       on behalf of the applicant in the form of a  discharge  summary  from
       City & Hackney Centre for Mental Health at Homerton  Hospital,  which
       was then considered by the respondent, in a decision dated 9 November
       2015,  as  being  not  significantly  different  to  the  information
       previously considered and therefore not amounting to a  fresh  claim.
       Once the permission application was listed for an  oral  hearing  the
       applicant requested an adjournment  in  order  to  obtain  a  further
       report from Dr Fisher, but the request was refused.

   The Parties' Submissions


   20)  At the hearing before me, Ms Bustani agreed that the basis  for  the
       grant of permission had gone, with  the  applicant  no  longer  being
       detained. She nevertheless  wished  to  pursue  the  grounds  of  the
       application. She confirmed that Article 3 was not being pursued as  a
       ground of appeal. It was also accepted that, whilst  the  applicant's
       case appeared to have evolved since the commencement of  proceedings,
       with further evidence being produced and requests for further time to
       produce additional evidence, the relevant decision under challenge in
       fact remained that of 2 June 2015 and  the  further  submissions  and
       decision were therefore not of direct relevance to this hearing.


   21)  Ms Bustani confirmed that the applicant was pursuing his grounds  in
       relation to Article 8 and submitted that  the  respondent  had  never
       undertaken a holistic consideration of  the  applicant's  family  and
       private life. The decision of 7  August  2013  had  only  dealt  with
       medical grounds under Article 3 and  the  applicant's  private  life,
       whilst the decision of 4 January 2012 had concluded that family  life
       had not been established between the applicant and his  parents.  The
       decision of the First-tier Tribunal was the only decision where  full
       consideration had been given to the applicant's family life  as  well
       as his private life and the judge had accepted that family  life  had
       been established, contrary to the view taken by the respondent. Since
       that time circumstances had changed in two  respects.  Firstly  there
       was the passage of time, as three and a  half  years  had  passed  in
       which the applicant had strengthened ties with  his  family  and  the
       mental health team who assisted him and furthermore his ties to Ghana
       had weakened, the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  having  already  found
       there to be no identifiable relatives remaining in  Ghana.  Secondly,
       the applicant's medical condition had deteriorated.  When  the  judge
       determined the applicant's appeal, he observed that  the  applicant's
       condition had been much improved and stable and was competent to take
       his own medication, whereas that was no longer the case. Dr  Fisher's
       report referred  to  the  applicant  having  a  reduced  ability  and
       capacity to make decisions for  himself  and  also  referred  to  him
       receiving talking therapy. The discharge notes from Dr Davis from the
       City & Hackney Centre for Mental Health showed that  the  seriousness
       of the applicant's condition fluctuated. Dr Fisher's  view  was  that
       adequate treatment was not available in Ghana. None of that had  been
       considered by the respondent.


   22)  Mr Jolliffe submitted that the applicant's  grounds  were  not  even
       arguable. The applicant  had  properly  conceded  the  grounds  under
       Article 3 and clearly could not meet the high threshold in N  v  SSHD
       [2005] UKHL 31. Baroness Hale had stated in that  case  that  it  was
       difficult to conceive of a medical  case  that  could  succeed  under
       Article 8 where it could not succeed under Article  3.  The  Tribunal
       could not be satisfied that the SSHD's view was one that no  rational
       decision-maker could take. The point made about the passage  of  time
       did not meet the arguability threshold. As to the  medical  evidence,
       the respondent considered Dr Fisher's  report  and  was  entitled  to
       conclude that it did not materially add to the applicant's case.  The
       respondent was not required to take a holistic view, but was required
       to make a decision on the evidence before her.  The  applicant  could
       not meet the criteria under the  immigration  rules  for  family  and
       private life. There was no material evidence before the respondent to
       show that the applicant could succeed on family life grounds  outside
       the immigration rules.

   23)  In response Mr Bustani accepted that the applicant could not succeed
       on medical grounds alone, or on family life alone, but she  submitted
       that he had a strong case when considering all the  relevant  factors
       as a whole.

  Discussion


   24)  Upper Tribunal Judge Freeman granted permission on the sole basis of
       the applicant having been detained under the Mental  Health  Act  and
       thus not removable whilst so detained. However, the applicant is  not
       now detained and accordingly the basis for the grant of permission no
       longer remains.


   25)  I have, nevertheless, gone on to consider the other grounds,  but  I
       find no merit in them. The  respondent's  decision  of  2  June  2015
       clearly took account of all previous decisions and considered in some
       detail the judge's findings on the applicant's family and  life  ties
       and the limited ties to Ghana. The submissions made since  that  time
       add little to the decision already made by the judge. As Mr  Jolliffe
       submitted, the  passage  of  time  does  not  materially  assist  the
       applicant, since the immigration rules appertaining to  private  life
       encompass the question of length of residence in the  United  Kingdom
       and it remains the case that  the  applicant  cannot  meet  the  long
       residence requirements or any of  the  other  criteria  in  paragraph
       276ADE(1). As regards family life, whilst it may be the case that the
       First-tier Tribunal Judge accepted that family life  was  established
       at that time, in March 2012, the question of family life has now been
       encapsulated within the immigration rules and it is  not  in  dispute
       that the applicant cannot meet the requirements  of  Appendix  FM  in
       that regard. Whether there exist  exceptional  circumstances  outside
       the rules is, as Mr Jolliffe submitted, a matter for consideration on
       the basis of the evidence produced  by  the  applicant.  However  the
       evidence in that  regard  is  extremely  limited.  There  is  no  new
       evidence  as  to  the  applicant's  dependency,  or  the  extent   of
       dependency, upon his parents.


   26) The only new evidence since the judge's determination consists of  Dr
       Fisher's letter of 13 May 2015 which was considered by the respondent
       in her letter of 2 June 2015. The matters referred to in that  letter
       do not raise any  materially  new  circumstances  since  the  judge's
       decision. There was no evidence before the respondent to suggest that
       Dr Fisher had the expertise to express an opinion  about  a  lack  of
       relevant treatment in Ghana and neither  was  there  any  independent
       evidence  provided  to  the  respondent  to  suggest  that   relevant
       treatment would not be available to the applicant on  return  to  his
       home country. As Mr Jolliffe submitted, both in his analysis  of  the
       medical evidence in his detailed  grounds  of  defence,  and  in  his
       submissions before me, there is no basis  upon  which  the  applicant
       could, in reliance upon the limited medical evidence produced to  the
       respondent, hope to succeed on an Article 8 claim on medical grounds.



   27)  The respondent considered, in her letter of  2  June  2015,  whether
       there existed any exceptional circumstances  justifying  a  grant  of
       leave outside the immigration rules and took account of all  relevant
       factors, including, as she was entitled to do, the  applicant's  past
       conduct and criminal and immigration history, as well as  his  length
       of residence in the United Kingdom and his immigration status  during
       that residence.  For  the  reasons  cogently  given,  the  respondent
       concluded that the applicant's circumstances, considered as a  whole,
       were not sufficiently compelling to justify allowing him to remain in
       the United Kingdom and that was a conclusion she was  fully  entitled
       to reach.

   28)  Accordingly, the respondent, having plainly applied anxious scrutiny
       to all  the  evidence  and  to  the  applicant's  circumstances,  was
       entitled to conclude that the  submissions  made  on  behalf  of  the
       applicant did not create  a  realistic  prospect  of  success  before
       another Tribunal, and thus did not amount to a fresh claim.

  Decision

   29)  For all of these reasons, the claim must fail  and  the  applicant's
       application for judicial review is refused.

  Permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal

   30)  No application has been made for permission to appeal to  the  Court
       of Appeal. I  have  nevertheless  considered  whether  permission  to
       appeal should be granted but find there is no arguable point  of  law
       capable of affecting the outcome of  the  application  and  I  refuse
       permission accordingly.


  Costs


   31)  After the hearing I was handed the respondent's  schedule  of  costs
       which amount to �1,973.60 in total. The applicant, being  the  losing
       party, bears the burden of meeting the respondent's costs. The amount
       claimed appears reasonable to me in the circumstances and  there  has
       been no objection by  the  applicant.  I  therefore  order  that  the
       applicant meets the respondent's costs to that amount.


                       [pic]
      Signed:

                             Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede



        Dated:         10 December 2015







Applicant's solicitors:
Respondent's solicitors:
Home Office Ref:
Decision(s) sent to above parties on:
----------------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------------
 Notification of appeal rights

A decision by the Upper Tribunal on an application for judicial review is  a
decision that disposes of proceedings.

 A party may appeal against such a decision to the  Court  of  Appeal  on  a
question of law only. Any party who wishes to appeal  should  apply  to  the
Upper Tribunal for permission, at the  hearing  at  which  the  decision  is
given. If no application is made, the Tribunal must nonetheless consider  at
the hearing whether to give or refuse permission to appeal (rule  44(4B)  of
the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

If the Tribunal refuses permission, either in response to an application  or
by virtue of rule 44(4B), then the party wishing to  appeal  can  apply  for
permission from the Court of Appeal itself. This must be done by  filing  an
appellant's notice with the Civil Appeals Office  of  the  Court  of  Appeal
within 28 days of the date the Tribunal's decision on permission  to  appeal
was given (Civil Procedure Rules Practice Direction 52D 3.3(2)).

