
SP and Others (Tibetan - Nepalese departure - illegal - risk) People's
Republic of China CG [2007] UKAiT 00021


Asylum and Immigration Tribunal


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 18th August 2006                           |On 09th February 2007        |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                       SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE STOREY
                      SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE McGEACHY
                                MR D C WALKER


                                   Between



                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr M Mullins of Counsel instructed by Messrs Gillman-
                    Smith Lee Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Payne of Counsel instructed by the Treasury
Solicitors

  This determination varied so as to remove paragraph 119(g) in accordance
         with Consent Order in the Court of Appeal, 5 October 2007.

Removal to People's Republic of China of Tibetans who left  China  illegally
on the Tibet/Nepal route would give rise to  a  real  risk  of  persecution,
serious harm and treatment contrary to Article 3 of the ECHR.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS
 1. The appellants, to whom we shall refer as SP, WD and TL  are  nationals
    of the People's Republic of China.  They were all  born  in  the  Tibet
    region, and are of Tibetans ethnicity.

 2. Although much of the objective material still refers to  that  area  as
    'Tibet' it is more correctly described  as  the  Tibet  region  of  the
    People's Republic of China (hereafter Tibet region).  Those born in the
    Tibet  region  and  of  Tibetan  ethnicity  are  referred  to  in  this
    determination as 'Tibetans'.  The People's Republic  of  China  is  the
    relevant state:  we have referred to it hereafter as 'China'.

 3. The Tibet region is a located in western China, formerly an independent
    state.  It was occupied in October 1950 by  Chinese  Communist  forces.
    It consists of three areas known collectively in the Tibetan as "Cholka-
    Sum". These are  formed  of  three  distinct  geographic  and  cultural
    regions - U-Tsang (home of the  capital  Lhasa  in  central  Tibet  and
    roughly contiguous with the Tibetan Autonomous Region - TAR), a  region
    which despite its name is no safer than the rest of Tibet  region,  and
    perhaps less safe because of heightened intelligence interest  in  that
    particular area.  To the East, there are Amdo and Kham,  bordering  the
    Chinese regions of Ganzou and Sichuan respectively.

 4.  All  the  appellants  claim  to  have  left  China  illegally  on  the
    Tibet/Nepal route and  that  this  is  the  risk  factor  for  them  if
    returned, since they will be perceived as supporters of the Dalai Lama,
    the Tibetan spiritual leader (who lives in exile in  India)  and/or  as
    'splittists', that is, Tibetan separatists who seek to restore  Tibetan
    independence.

 5. All the appellants appealed against decisions of the Secretary of State
    to refuse to grant asylum and to issue directions for their removal  to
    China.  They are aged 24, 29 and 32 respectively. The appeals of SP and
    TL were dismissed and that of WD was allowed. Their appeals come to  us
    as second stage reconsiderations, errors of law having  been  found  in
    the determinations of the Immigration Judges who heard their appeals.

      The Issues
 6. Although the facts of their  individual  claims  are  different,  these
    appeals were joined together to be  heard  as  country  guidance  cases
    focussed on the issues of whether or not  Tibetans,  merely  by  having
    left the China and having spent some  time  in  the  West,  would  face
    persecution, on the basis of  their  imputed  political  opinion,  when
    returned to China. As there are no direct routes  of  return  to  Tibet
    region, it was accepted that they would be returned to the airports  of
    Beijing or Shanghai and therefore  we  have  considered  the  treatment
    which they would receive on return at the airport as well as the  issue
    of whether or not they would face persecution in China.

 7. On the basis that the appellants might face persecution  in  China  but
    not at the airport we heard argument  on  whether  internal  relocation
    within China would be  open  to  them,  with  particular  reference  to
    whether or not they could join the "floating" population  there.  China
    has a large 'floating population' (100-150  million  economic  migrants
    without  official  residence  status  in  cities,  according   to   the
    respondent's latest OGN). Many  of  these,  like  the  appellants,  are
    uneducated and often move to the cities from rural areas. The 'floating
    population' would not necessary  speak  a  Chinese  national  language;
    there are  seven  major  dialects  and  many  sub-dialects  within  the
    People's Republic of China.
    SP's claim
 8.  SP is the son of a Tibetan monk, whose monastery in Lhasa  was  bombed
    and who then moved to Phuntsoling. SP's father  was arrested, detained,
    and tortured in 1997  before  being  released  in  February  1998;  the
    treatment which he received caused him to be paralysed and he died  six
    months later.

 9. SP's claim was that between March 1999 and March 2002  he  had  put  up
    posters in the streets and on a bridge in Phuntsoling.  On 9 March 2002
    he had been arrested, questioned and tortured for  a  number  of  hours
    before being detained for five days.  Thereafter  he  was  detained  in
    prison, for six months, before being released unconditionally.  He  had
    not been charged with any offence.

10. In 2004 SP, along with a number of Tibetans and  Western  tourists  who
    had gathered for the blessing of Zhe Tratant Rinpoche, saw two Buddhist
    nuns being assaulted by  the  Chinese  police.   He  claimed  that  the
    Western tourists had taken photographs of the incident.  A protest  had
    followed  by  all  of  the  people  present.   The  police  had   taken
    photographs of that  demonstration.   SP  believed  that  he  would  be
    arrested.  He did not know whether or not his photograph had been taken
    but, in any event, went to hide in a friend's house.  Two days later he
    heard that the police were looking for  him  and  he  decided  to  flee
    China.

11. In September 2004 SP left China on the Tibet/Nepal  route,  unlawfully,
    and from there made his way to Britain, arriving on  2  November  2004.
    He claimed asylum on 9 November 2004.  The decision to refuse to  grant
    asylum was made on 5 January 2005 and two days later he was served with
    a decision refusing him leave to enter  the  United  Kingdom.   Removal
    directions were set for China.

12. The Immigration Judge accepted that SP's father had  been  tortured  in
    1997 and had died the following year.   He  did  not  accept  that  the
    appellant had been detained in 2002 or that he had thereafter  been  of
    interest to the authorities.  With regard to  the  incident  in  August
    2004 he stated that "allowing the appellant the benefit of  the  doubt,
    it is possible and  credible  that  he  feared  arrest,  detention  and
    possible torture". However, he did not accept that SP's fear was  well-
    founded, saying that SP could have no way of knowing  that  the  police
    had taken his photograph or been aware of his participation, if any, in
    the demonstration to "a degree sufficient to  allow  them  to  identify
    him".  He did not accept that the police had looked for  the  appellant
    as he had claimed.  He therefore found that the core of the appellant's
    account of persecution was not credible and  dismissed  the  appeal  on
    both asylum and human rights grounds.

13. Reconsideration was ordered on 16  May  2005  on  the  basis  that  the
    Immigration Judge might  have  erred  in  law  by  giving  insufficient
    consideration  to  the  country  material   before   him.   The   first
    reconsideration hearing took place on 13 October 2005.  An error of law
    was found.  Senior Immigration Judge Jordan stating that:-

        "We consider the Adjudicator made a material  error  of  law.   The
        parties agreed that the Adjudicator made a material error  of  law.
        In paragraph 50 of his determination,  the  Adjudicator  considered
        the risk on return but confined his consideration  to  whether  the
        criminal punishments  were  unjust  or  disproportionate.   We  are
        satisfied that Mr Braid's submissions on the risk on  return  faced
        by Tibetans  were  much  more  far-ranging  as  appeared  from  his
        skeleton argument prepared for the  Adjudicator.   The  Adjudicator
        did not deal with these issues."

    WD's claim
14. WD was a farmer and construction worker, who was educated by  an  uncle
    who was a monk and never went to school.  His  family  had  never  been
    involved in any political activities but were  Buddhists  and  regarded
    the Dalai Lama as their spiritual leader.

15. On 4 November 2004, WD and two of his friends, decided to celebrate the
    Tibetan Buddhist festival, Lhabab Duechen.  They held a prayer  session
    in their house.  Four neighbours were invited.  The appellant  and  his
    two friends set up an altar in his friend's house and put a picture  of
    the Dalai Lama on it.  Later that morning the  appellant  went  to  the
    market to buy fruit and vegetables.  On his return he was  met  by  his
    sister who told him that the police  had  raided  his  friend's  house,
    discovered the picture of the Dalai Lama and had arrested his  friends.
    He left his village immediately and went to Lhasa where he stayed  with
    one of his father's friends for a week.  An agent was  found  who  took
    him to Nepal. He arrived in Kathmandu on 17 December 2004.  He  had  no
    legal documentation and therefore decided that it would not be possible
    or safe to stay in Nepal as he believed that the  Nepalese  authorities
    would send him back to China.  He therefore made arrangements  with  an
    agent to take him out of Nepal to a safe country (the Respondent's  PF1
    incorrectly states that he flew from  Tibet  region).   He  arrived  in
    Britain on 10 February 2005, claiming asylum  eight  days  later.   His
    application was refused on 11 April 2005 and his appeal  was  heard  by
    Immigration Judge Blandy on May 2005.  Shortly before  the  hearing  he
    had attended a rally on 12 March 2005 organised  by  the  'Free  Tibet'
    movement.

16. The Immigration Judge stated  that  this  was  not  a  case  where  the
    appellant had alleged a long history of oppression for his beliefs  and
    observed that it was well-known that in the Tibet images of  the  Dalai
    Lama were frowned upon by the Chinese authorities.   He  therefore  did
    not find it credible that the appellant had  told  anyone  (other  than
    people whom he could trust) that an image of the Dalai  Lama  would  be
    displayed at  the  meeting  at  his  house.   He  considered  that  the
    appellant described a very small meeting consisting  only  of  himself,
    two friends and four neighbours and that, given that  the  festival  of
    Lhabab Duechen was a large and important festival, he did not  find  it
    credible that the police would be particularly interested in this small
    meeting.  He considered that  the  objective  evidence  indicated  that
    difficulties were caused by display of such images  in  public  places,
    not in people's homes.

17. The Immigration Judge went on to consider whether or not the  appellant
    would be at risk simply by virtue of being a failed asylum seeker or by
    virtue merely of his having left China, as he accepted, unlawfully.  He
    followed the country guidance case of DS (Persecution - Risk -  Return)
    China CG [2002] 02340 (this case was subsequently removed from  the  CG
    list on 27 July 2005) and that  the  appellant  would  be  at  risk  of
    persecution on return  to  China.   He  considered  that  it  would  be
    unreasonably harsh for WD to relocate to  any  area  of  China  outside
    Tibet region and allowed the appeal on both  asylum  and  human  rights
    grounds.

18. The Secretary of State  applied  for  reconsideration  of  the  appeal.
    Reconsideration was ordered on 17 June 2005  and  on  13  October  2005
    Senior Immigration Judge Jordan found that there was an error of law in
    the determination.  The error of law reasons were as follows:-

        "We consider the Adjudicator (sic) made a material  error  of  law.
        The appellant failed to give a credible account of what happened to
        him in the Tibet.  Nevertheless the  Immigration  Judge  recognised
        the appellant as a refugee and one who is at risk of a violation of
        his  human  rights  as  a  returnee.   In  paragraph  6.7  of   his
        determination, the Adjudicator found the appellant was at  risk  by
        reason of his having visited, and then  departed  from,  Nepal  but
        fails to give reasons why the Chinese authorities know of  this  or
        will discover it.  He will be returned to China  as  there  are  no
        direct flights to [Tibet region].  He will be provided  with  valid
        travel documents.  The  Adjudicator  distinguished  PW  (Tibetan  -
        Failed asylum seeker - risk) China [2005] UKIAT  00051.   In  doing
        so, it is conceded that  he  made  an  error  of  law  in  that  he
        construed PW as  merely  considering  the  position  of  a  Tibetan
        returning to China itself and thereby treated it as inapplicable.


        The appellant relies upon the failure of the Secretary of State  to
        give an undertaking not to return the appellant to Tibet  as  fatal
        to the Home Office claim.  See skeleton argument.  In doing so, the
        appellant places significant if not fundamental reliance  upon  the
        removal directions, expressed to China (Peoples Republic of  China)
        (Tibet).  Yet it is common ground that the Secretary of  State  has
        no ability to return him to [Tibet region] and that,  as  a  simple
        matter of fact, he will not be returned there.  Once he is returned
        to China, the Secretary of State has no power  to  direct  that  he
        returns to [Tibet region]; it is a matter for the appellant  and/or
        the Chinese authorities to determine where he settles.  The grounds
        state:


             'In the absence of any undertaking that removal would not be to
             [Tibet region] the Immigration Judge was correct to conclude as
             he did.'


        The inference from this submission is that if the  undertaking  had
        been given, the Immigration Judge would have been wrong.  We do not
        consider that  there  is  a  difference  in  substance  between  an
        undertaking not to return the appellant to [Tibet region]  and  the
        undisputed fact that the appellant cannot be returned to Tibet.  As
        far as we are aware, the Secretary of State was not asked  to  give
        an undertaking not to return him to [Tibet region].  In particular,
        we do not know that the issue was canvassed and  the  Secretary  of
        State made the conscious decision to refuse the undertaking'".


    Ms TL's claim

19. TL was the daughter of a village leader, who was very religious and was
    interested in politics.  He had held prayers in the village every week.
     On 3 August 2003 during the prayer meeting her  father  had  told  the
    villagers that they would be holding a prayer meeting for the long life
    of the Dalai Lama the following day.  That prayer meeting took place on
    4 August. on 5 August two police officers came to the family  home  and
    arrested TL's father,  charging  him  with  carrying  out  anti-Chinese
    activity and being a supporter of  the  Dalai  Lama.   Her  father  was
    detained for thirteen months, during which he was brutally  beaten  and
    tortured.  He was released on medical grounds and died  a  month  later
    due to ill health.

20. On 31 December 2004 a friend of  TL,  who  shared  her  views,  put  up
    posters critical of the Chinese  authorities.   Ten  posters  had  been
    printed with the words "We want human rights", "Tibet Independence" and
    "Long live His Holiness,  Dalai  Lama."   On  1  January  2005,  around
    midnight, the appellant and her friend put  up  posters  on  electrical
    poles in the village and  on  the  walls  of  the  local  school.   The
    appellant and her friend were seen putting  up  the  posters;  although
    they ran away their faces were recognised, under the  street  lighting,
    by the school's night watchman.  When  the  appellant  went  home,  her
    family advised her to go into  hiding,  which  she  did.   Her  brother
    visited her in the jungle where she was hiding, and told the  appellant
    that the night watchman had  reported  her,  and  her  friend,  to  the
    police.

21. The police had gone to the appellant's home.  The  appellant's  brother
    gave her some jewellery and the appellant  left,  travelling  to  Lhasa
    where she lived with her husband's relatives.  An agent  was  found  to
    take her to Nepal and from there the appellant found, with the help  of
    a nun, an agent who would take her to Britain.  The  appellant  arrived
    in Britain on 15 March 2005 using  a  forged  Nepalese  passport.   She
    claimed asylum on 24 March 2005 and on 20 May 2005 a decision was  made
    to refuse to grant asylum under paragraph 336 of HC 395 and  to  remove
    her as an illegal entrant from the United Kingdom by way of  directions
    to  China.   The  appellant  appealed  and  her  appeal  was  heard  by
    Immigration Judge MA Khan on 11 July 2005.

22. The Immigration Judge did not find the appellant  to  be  credible  and
    therefore dismissed her appeal on both asylum and human rights grounds.
     Reconsideration was ordered on 2 August 2005 and on  13  October  2005
    the Tribunal found that there was an error of law in the determination.
     Senior Immigration Judge Jordan giving as the reasons:-

        "We consider the Adjudicator made a material  error  of  law.   The
        Presenting Officer agreed the Immigration  Judge  made  a  material
        error of law in failing to consider the expert evidence."

    Documents before Tribunal

23. Annexed to this determination is a list  of  the  documentary  evidence
    provided to  us,  including  the  reports  of  Ms  Kate  Saunders,  the
    Communications Director of the International  Campaign  for  Tibet  and
    that of Mr Jeffrey Bowe, a researcher who  specialises  in  the  Tibet,
    East Turkestan and  Communist  China  and  who  had  prepared  separate
    reports for each appellant. Both had been  expected  to  give  evidence
    before us.  However neither could attend:  Ms Saunders stated that  she
    was preparing for a visit of the Dalai Lama and Mr Bowe, by  email  the
    night before the hearing, indicated  that  he  could  not  testify  for
    personal reasons.

24. At the hearing Mr Mullins lodged a further document from "Times Online"
    (http://www.timesonline.co.uk) being an article dated  August  14  2006
    headed "Beijing Pledges a 'Fight to the Death' with  Dalai  Lama."   Mr
    Payne did not object, and we admitted it.

25. Mr Mullins also produced a letter from the  appellants'  solicitor,  Ms
    Siew See Lee a non-practising barrister  employed  by  Messrs  Gillman-
    Smith Lee. Writing in her capacity as chairman  of  a  Tibetan  refugee
    group, she stated, over the last five years, she was not aware  of  any
    Tibetan being returned  to  China,  whether  to  the  Tibet  region  or
    elsewhere.

26. A letter dated 16 August 2006, addressed to  the  Treasury  Solicitors'
    Department from a senior research officer  at  the  Home  Office,  gave
    details of removals to  China averaging 40 per quarter  in  2004,  2005
    and the first quarter of 2006, the total for 2005 being 330.  Voluntary
    departures to China averaged 35 per quarter, the total for  2005  being
    210.  40 people had left under the Assisted Voluntary Return  Programme
    in 2005 and the first quarter of 2006.  Mr Payne informed us that there
    was no breakdown of those who were removed so as to distinguish between
    Tibetan and those who were Han Chinese.

    Preliminary matters
27. At the beginning of the second stage reconsideration of these  appeals,
    Mr Mullins indicated that the appellants wished  to  give  evidence  of
    their  attendance  at  demonstrations  in  London  which  showed  that,
    independent of their claims to fear persecution  because  of  what  had
    happened before they left Tibet, they were refugees sur place, as their
    political activities here would be known to the Chinese authorities  on
    return.  He stated there was an item on Sky News which  showed  one  of
    the appellants demonstrating but he said there was no copy of that news
    item before  us.   Mr  Mullins  argued  that  the  Tribunal  should  be
    considering the situation of the appellants as of the date of  hearing.



28. The Tribunal considered that application; none of the applications  for
    reconsideration had raised any sur place matters and none of the first-
    stage reconsiderations had called into question the  soundness  of  the
    immigration judge's findings of fact personal to each  appellant.  None
    of the three appellants had been found to give a  credible  account  of
    their own past experiences. The only basis on  which  legal  error  had
    been identified related to the inferences  drawn  by  each  immigration
    judge as to the risk on return  for  persons  who  were  failed  asylum
    seekers of Tibetans origin. Furthermore, there had been no  Rule  32(2)
    notice served by  any  of  the  appellants  prior  to  the  first-stage
    reconsideration and (in respect of the second appellant, WD)  no  reply
    under Rule 30.

29. Thus reconsideration had not been based on the issue of any  activities
    which had taken place in the United Kingdom and we could see no  proper
    basis for considering further evidence from the appellants  as  regards
    their recent activities in the United Kingdom: if they wished to  raise
    such matters now, they would have to do so by way  of  making  a  fresh
    claim to the Secretary of State.  We  ruled  that  there  would  be  no
    evidence taken on the sur place aspects of their claims.  That approach
    now has the authority of DK (Serbia) & Ors v Secretary of State for the
    Home Department [2006] EWCA Civ 1747, per Latham LJ  -

        "30... If a party has not filed a rule 32 (2) notice, the  Tribunal
        is entitled to assume that there is no further evidence or material
        it wishes to put before  the  Tribunal  for  the  purposes  of  the
        reconsideration. And if he has not filed a reply, the  Tribunal  is
        entitled to assume that the party  other  than  the  one  on  whose
        application the reconsideration was ordered does not wish  to  rely
        on any arguments or  material  other  than  those  upon  which  the
        original decision was based."

    The issues
30. For the appellants, Mr Mullins  referred  to  the  risk  on  return  to
    Beijing and Shanghai for Tibetan, emphasising that there were no direct
    routes to Tibet region.  If it were the case that the appellants  would
    not face persecution at the  point  of  return  to  China  (Beijing  or
    Shanghai) but would face persecution in the Tibet region, then internal
    flight was a relevant question which the Tribunal  must  determine.  In
    his skeleton argument he set  out  criteria  which  he  considered  the
    Tribunal  should  follow  when  considering  the  issue   of   internal
    relocation from presumed safety in Beijing or Shanghai towards the risk
    area, Tibet region.

31. Mr Mullins asked us to consider whether or not in those  circumstances,
    these  appellants  would  have  to  become  members  of  the  'floating
    population', and, if so, whether that was likely to be an  infringement
    of their Article 3 rights.

32. For the Secretary of State, Mr Payne argued  that,  while  he  accepted
    that risk on arrival  was  an  issue,  the  reality  was  that  if  the
    appellants had no well-founded fear of persecution in their  home  area
    or on arrival then they were not outside China by  reason  of  a  well-
    founded fear of persecution and therefore would not  be  refugees,  nor
    could it be claimed that their Article 3 rights would be infringed.  He
    argued that GH [2005] EWCA  Civ  1182  was  directly  relevant  to  the
    situation of Tibetans who were  returned  to  China.   Difficulties  in
    internal travel were not an issue in  assessing  whether  or  not  they
    would qualify for asylum.

33. The documentation which would be provided to the appellants  on  return
    was then discussed.  Mr Payne confirmed that formal  documents,  issued
    by People's Republic of China authorities, would be obtained  from  the
    Chinese Embassy in London and that it was on these that the  appellants
    would travel.  He stated that if the appellants' solicitors  considered
    that it was not appropriate that the appellants should travel on  those
    documents, that was an issue for judicial review rather than  for  this
    Tribunal

34. We put to Mr Mullins and Mr Payne that the issues with  which  we  were
    concerned were


     i) the position of the appellants,  as  Tibetan,  on  return  after  a
        lengthy absence to mainland China (as they could not be returned to
        Tibet region); and


    ii) The relevance to that risk of the authorities' view as  to  whether
        they had left Tibet region by travelling through Nepal.

    Mr. Mullins' submissions
35. Mr Mullins and Mr Payne both referred to the same  documents  in  their
    submissions.  Mr Mullins submitted that no Western  countries  appeared
    to have returned any Tibetan to China, either to  the  mainland  or  to
    Tibet region.  He referred to a witness statement from Ms Siew See  Lee
    dated 5 December 2004 (at (f)(1) of the bundle).  Ms  Lee  stated  that
    she had represented a Ms D at an asylum appeal.   After  being  granted
    leave to appeal to the Tribunal  she  had  written  to  UNHCR,  Amnesty
    International, The Tibet Justice Centre, The  Tibet  Centre  for  Human
    Rights, Human Rights Watch and Immigration Agency Canada as well as  to
    the governments of Canada, America, Japan and  Australia.   Only  UNHCR
    had replied.  UNHCR had stated that they had no information relating to
    returns.

36. Ms Lee had also written to Ms Saunders who, in a note dated 7 May  2004
    had stated as far as she knew no Tibetan had  been  returned  to  China
    (mainland or Tibet region) or to Nepal from Britain but  that  she  was
    aware of eighteen Tibetan, returned to Tibet region via Nepal, who  had
    been beaten and severely tortured; some of them were still  in  prison.
    She also referred to  a  Uighur  refugee,  returned  from  Katmandu  to
    Xinjiang region in China in 2003, who  was  executed  on  return.   She
    stated Xinjiang region, like Tibet region, was  a  "national  minority"
    region in China with similar ethnic and political sensitivity.

37. Mr Mullins then referred us to PW, in which the Tribunal had found that
    the  appellant,  a  Tibetan,  did  not  have  a  well-founded  fear  of
    persecution.  Nevertheless, the Secretary of State  had  conceded  that
    the appellant PW should  be  granted  leave  to  remain.   Mr.  Mullins
    stated, effectively, he was left in the position of trying to  prove  a
    negative - there was no evidence of persecution on  return  because  no
    one was returned from Western countries.

38. Mr Mullins next took us to the report of Ms Saunders ((E)  (1)  of  the
    bundle).  Ms Saunders considered that there was a  very  real  risk  of
    detention and therefore of torture for Tibetans returning to China from
    exile, whether from India, Nepal or the West.   She  asserted  that  if
    Tibetan were  returned  to  China  (mainland  or  Tibet  region)  after
    claiming asylum in the West, there was a significant risk of  detention
    and serious mistreatment, particularly for those who were known to have
    taken part in political activities in the Tibet region prior  to  their
    departure.  The fact that they had claimed asylum in the West , even if
    they had not been involved in any political  activity  here,  would  be
    considered by the Chinese authorities to  indicate  that  such  persons
    were "splittist" that is, Tibetans who were seeking a return to Tibetan
    independence from China.

39. To illustrate the suspicion of those who had  been  to  the  West,  she
    referred to the Tibetan Musicologist, Ngawang Choephel, a former  music
    student at a college in Vermont, USA. Despite the fact that he had been
    travelling with valid travel documentation, he was  imprisoned  on  his
    return to Tibet region in 1995, sentenced to 18  years  in  prison  and
    released in 2002.

40. Mr Mullins argued that the emergency travel documents  on  which  these
    appellants would be travelling would be an identifying  badge,  showing
    that they had sought asylum in the West.  He  stated  there  was  clear
    Tribunal authority that they could not be expected to  lie  on  return.
    They would have to say that they came from Tibet region, that they were
    failed asylum seekers and that they had not been believed.

41. Mr Mullins referred to the  "Times  Online"  article  which  he  argued
    showed  that  Chinese  authorities'  attitude  towards   Tibetans   had
    hardened; the appellants' claims should be looked at within the context
    of what was happening in the Tibet region.  He referred to his skeleton
    argument in  which  he  had  argued  that  the  appellants,  when  they
    returned, would be considered "splittist".  He referred to the relevant
    section of Ms Saunders' report.  He emphasised that, despite  the  fact
    that Ms Saunders worked for the  international  campaign  for  a  'Free
    Tibet', she was also advised  the  Foreign  Office  and  was  therefore
    respected by them. What she said should therefore carry great weight.

42. Albeit he accepted that the Tribunal might not be prepared to  consider
    sur place  activities,  Mr  Mullins  argued  that  attendance  at  pro-
    independence rallies in Britain would increase the risk of the  Chinese
    authorities regarding these appellants as "splittist".  He referred  to
    the case of a nun who had attended a peace  march  from  Dharamsala  to
    Delhi in India and had been photographed by the Public Security Bureau;
    when returned to Tibet region, she had been  detained  and  beaten  for
    three months, released and then re-arrested and tortured.

43. Mr Mullins referred us next to evidence of torture in the Tibet region;
    on the Phayul.com website there was an account  of  51  asylum  seekers
    being prevented from leaving Tibet  on  26  August  2005;  the  Country
    Information and Policy Unit report 2004 also  contained  references  to
    torture.

44. Mr Mullins asked us to consider the report from Mr Jeffrey  Bowe  which
    again set out instances of Tibetans who had  fled  to  Nepal  and  been
    returned.  He claimed there was considerable evidence  of  poor  prison
    conditions  in  the  Tibet  region  (overcrowding,  "education  through
    labour" and torture).  Mr Mullins reminded the Tribunal of the lack  of
    evidence from the respondent to explain why the appellants would not be
    sent to Tibet region on return.

    Mr. Payne's submissions
45. In reply Mr Payne first stated the appellants were not  being  returned
    to Tibet region because there were no direct flights  to  that  region.
    He argued that there was a lack of evidence of persecution of Tibetans.
    He did not accept that it was safe to conclude  that  no  Tibetans  had
    been returned and he referred to the British statistics which indicated
    that Chinese nationals had been returned to  China.   He  asked  us  to
    accept that some of these were likely to have been Tibetan.  He  stated
    that there was nothing to show that other Member States of the European
    Union or America had not returned Tibetans to China.   He  referred  to
    statistics which show that  in  2003/2004  between  24,000  and  26,000
    Chinese  nationals  had  returned  from  Taiwan,  having   gone   there
    unlawfully.  It was likely that some of these would have been  Tibetan.




46. Mr Payne then asked us to consider the  evidence  regarding  those  who
    returned to Tibet region from Nepal; the reality was that the  Nepalese
    Government had links with the Dalai Lama and that it was through  Nepal
    and to northern India that those who wished to  visit  the  Dalai  Lama
    would go.  He was prepared to accept,  therefore,  that  returnees  via
    Nepal and Northern India would be perceived as being  "splittist",  and
    therefore at risk, as the reason for their departure from Tibet  region
    had been to visit the Dalai Lama.

47. That was very different, he argued, from the position of those who went
    to Britain - their position would be much more likely to  be  perceived
    in the same light as returnees from Taiwan.  They would be perceived as
    having left the country for  economic  reasons.   He  argued  that  the
    instances of ill-treatment cited by the experts had  taken  place  some
    time ago - going back to 2001.  Ms Saunders' examples related to  2003.
    That did not indicate a general risk in 2006.  In particular, Mr Bowe's
    report was speculative and proceeded on the basis that those  who  were
    returned would not be given travel  documents  upon  which  to  return.
    That was incorrect. Travel Documents would be obtained.

48. If the appellants did not wish to return to live in the  Tibet  region,
    it would not be unduly harsh for them to live  in  China  outside  that
    region; that would not amount to treatment  contrary  to  their  rights
    under Article 3 of the ECHR.  Millions of Chinese lived  outside  Tibet
    region and it was clear that the Chinese  authorities  in  those  areas
    were less restrictive in their treatment of Chinese Tibetans than those
    within the Tibet region.  He argued that China had  a  large  'floating
    population', many of whom, like the  appellants,  were  uneducated  and
    moved to the cities from rural areas. The 'floating  population',  like
    the appellants,  would  not  necessarily  speak  a  mainstream  Chinese
    dialect; there are seven major dialects and  many  sub-dialects  within
    China.  China was  taking  steps  to  improve  the  conditions  of  the
    'floating  population'  although  this  was  hampered  by  a  lack   of
    resources.

49. Mr Payne contended that there was no evidence that  Tibetans  would  be
    targeted; their situation within the 'floating population'  should  not
    be considered in terms of a difference between their  circumstances  in
    the United Kingdom and as part of the 'floating population'  of  China.
    What was relevant were the circumstances which they had left  in  their
    home area or, possibly, the circumstances in the country as a whole.

50. Mr Payne contended that there was no evidence of any  Chinese  national
    (Tibetan or otherwise) returned to  China  from  Britain  having  being
    tortured.  The evidence in relation to those returned from  Taiwan  was
    to the  contrary;  no  instances  of  alleged  ill-treatment  had  been
    detailed.  There was clearly Western pressure on China to  ensure  that
    those returned were not ill-treated.

51. Mr Payne asked the Tribunal to accept that Tibetans could and did leave
    lawfully, and that there was no evidence  of  their  being  ill-treated
    when returning.  The musicologist mentioned by  Ms  Saunders  had  been
    studying folk music, which could have been seen as antagonistic to  the
    Chinese r�gime.  He argued that the positive evidence  regarding  those
    actually returned to China filled the vacuum of the evidence  regarding
    the return of Tibetans and indicated that there was  no  risk  engaging
    either the 1950 or 1951 Convention evidenced among those who  had  been
    returned.

52. In relation to the report by Mr Jeffrey  Bowe,  that  expert  had  last
    visited Tibet region in 1995 - eleven years ago.  His attitude  to  the
    stories told him by the Tibetans whom he had met was to treat  them  as
    credible; in contrast, the Immigration Judges in these three cases  had
    not believed these  particular  Chinese  Tibetan  appellants.   The  US
    Congressional report on which Mr Bowe relied was not cited correctly by
    Radio Free Asia - and Mr Bowe had drawn his  evidence  from  the  radio
    report. He argued that  Mr  Bowe's  assertions  were  not  balanced  or
    objective - there was not one positive comment in  the  report  despite
    the changes reflected in the Country of Origin Information and  the  US
    State Department reports.  Moreover, Mr Bowe had erroneously approached
    the appellants' situation on the basis that they would be  undocumented
    on return.

53. Mr. Payne asked us to note  that  the  instances  of  ill-treatment  on
    return to which our attention had been drawn related  very  largely  to
    monks and nuns. Even considering only  that  category,  the  number  of
    monks who had been detained and tortured  was  35;  there  are  150,000
    monks outside Tibet  region,  and  46,360  within  it.   This  did  not
    indicate a reasonable likelihood of persecution  on  return  for  these
    appellants within the context of the overall figures - of  5-6  million
    Tibetan,  the  reports  indicated  that  only  120/150  were  political
    prisoners.  Further, he  argued,  the  number  of  political  prisoners
    recorded had declined over the years.

54. Even if there were some degree of under-reporting  (which  he  did  not
    accept), the risk to  these  appellants  must  be  very  small  indeed.
    Looking at the individual circumstances of these  appellants  they  had
    lived for approximately 30 years,  on  average,  in  the  Tibet  region
    without persecution.

55. Mr Payne then turned to the  risk  for  the  appellants  outside  Tibet
    region.  He referred again to the extracts from Radio  Free  Asia.   He
    repeated his contention that Mr Bowe  was  inconsistent  regarding  the
    objective evidence and biased regarding the 'floating  population',  as
    he had made no  reference  in  his  report  to  the  real  evidence  of
    progress.  Again, he argued that there was no  evidence  that  Tibetans
    within the 'floating population' were targeted.

56. He argued that Ms Saunders' report  was  unsourced  and  was  based  on
    personal interviews without  proper  details  of  those  that  she  had
    interviewed and that in no way had she set out her duty to  the  court.
    Hers was not an unbiased report.  She had  accepted  that  she  had  no
    information about any Tibetan being returned to China;  as  Mr  Mullins
    had observed, there was simply no evidence at all with which to  'prove
    a negative'.


57. He reminded the Tribunal that the issue before us was  solely  that  of
    the risk to the appellants on return to China (the  removal  directions
    of WD to Tibet were changed to removal directions to China).  Mr  Payne
    argued that following GH the proposed route of return within  China  to
    the Tibet region was irrelevant.

58. Both parties relied upon the previous Tribunal  jurisprudence  on  this
    issue; In DS [2002] UKIAT 02340  the  appeal  of  a  Tibetan  had  been
    allowed.  The Tribunal in that case had considered that  the  treatment
    of those returning from the West to China (Tibet  region)  amounted  to
    persecution.  Mr Payne argued that that was  a  case  which  should  be
    considered solely on its own facts.  In PW [2005] UKIAT  00051  it  was
    found that imprisonment of not more than one year, on return  to  China
    for secretly crossing national boundaries did not amount to persecution
    - the Tribunal relied on a Canadian  report  which  stated  that  their
    researchers had been told that the policy of imprisoning those who  had
    crossed borders illegally  was  "not  implemented".   The  case  of  LJ
    (Prison Conditions - no risk)  China  [2005]  UKIAT  00099  is  also  a
    relevant case although it should be noted  that  that  relates  to  the
    return of a Chinese national.

    Expert evidence

    Mr Jeffrey Bowe
59. We were able to place only limited weight on Mr  Bowe's  evidence.   He
    had  prepared  separate  reports  for  each  appellant,  in   virtually
    identical terms.  However, for personal reasons he did not  attend  the
    hearing and therefore it was not possible for his account to be  tested
    in cross-examination by Mr Payne  or  any  difficulties  in  it  to  be
    resolved.  It is not always clear when the instances of ill  treatment,
    to which Mr Bowe refers, took place. Mr Payne highlighted Mr Bowe's use
    of emotive language  -  for  example,  his  reference  to  the  Chinese
    authorities in China as acting "like the Gestapo" - and the  fact  that
    he claimed that he had never met a Tibetan whose story of ill-treatment
    he did not believe.  We do not know what would be Mr Bowe's view of the
    risk to a Tibetan whom he did  not  believe,  which  is  a  difficulty,
    since, (in almost all respects) the stories of these  three  appellants
    of what had happened to them in the Tibet region  were  disbelieved  by
    the Immigration Judges who had heard their evidence.  Further, much  of
    Mr  Bowe's  report  is  premised  on  the  appellants  being   returned
    undocumented, which, as Mr Payne assured the Tribunal, would not be the
    case for these appellants.

60. With these reservations, we considered his evidence;  In his section on
    the consequences of the appellants returning to Tibet  region  Mr  Bowe
    cited reports of arbitrary detention of  persons,  particularly  monks,
    returning to China from Nepal as set out in  the  US  State  Department
    Report of February 2005 (dealing with the events in 2004):

        "Detention generally lasted for several months,  although  in  most
        cases no formal charges were brought.   In  January  and  again  in
        September, there were reports  that  the  Nepalese  Government  co-
        operated  with  Chinese  authorities  to  repatriate  Tibetans  who
        crossed the border.   NGOs  reported  that  some  individuals  were
        detained and mistreated upon their return to China".


    The Report then stated:


        "Tibetans were repatriated to China from Nepal in May 2003 and were
        forced to perform heavy physical labour.  Their family members also
        were pressurised for a bribe to secure  their  release.   Prisoners
        were subjected routinely to 'political investigation' sessions  and
        were punished if deemed to be insufficiently loyal to the State."


61. Mr. Bowe then referred to the ill-treatment of three monks who had been
    arrested in the South of Tibet region and imprisoned in  the  detention
    centre in Shigatse in the Tibet region in 2005.  They  had  claimed  to
    have been ill-treated, deprived of food  and  detained  in  the  Public
    Security Bureau detention centre, being interrogated for sixteen  days,
    three times a day, during which time they were beaten, and one  claimed
    that he was electrocuted until he became unconscious.  He cited another
    instance of a group of seven Tibetan and a guide who had been  detained
    and tortured, money being taken from them.  The guide was detained  for
    longer than the other seven.


62. He cited the Tibetan Centre for Human  Rights  and  Democracy  December
    2001 report stating that Tibetans returned from India  were  invariably
    seen as "splittist" and "politically suspect"  and  that  such  persons
    were  threatened  with  punitive  measures  including   sanctions   and
    expulsion from jobs.  Again he says that  those  returned  often  faced
    heavy fines. He cited the case of four nuns who were  imprisoned  after
    their return from India in 2004.

63. Mr. Bowe finally referred to a report on Radio  Free  Asia  about  four
    young Tibetans, one of whom was 15,  who  were  sent  to  the  Shigatse
    detention centre where they had remained detained.

64. In the section headed "Prison Conditions and Torture" Mr Bowe  referred
    to a visit by Canadian officials to the "Number Two detention centre of
    Public Security" of Fuzhou in Mawei.  He noted the  Canadian  team  had
    been impressed by the detention centre but stated that this was  likely
    to be because it was show centre, likening the visit to the  visits  of
    Westerners who had gone to Soviet Russia in the Stalin era  and  looked
    at the prisons there.

65. He then referred again to the US State Department report on China where
    it was stated prolonged use of electric shocks and  use  of  "rack-like
    disciplinary beds" were reported in  Inner  Mongolia's  Chifeng  prison
    where a cultural activist had been tortured.  That report  also  stated
    Chinese prison management relied on the labour of prisoners both as  an
    element of punishment and to fund prison operations and  stated  sexual
    and physical abuse  and  extortion  were  reported  in  some  detention
    centres and that re-education through labour was also common.  Mr  Bowe
    asked us to consider the "'Strike Hard'  campaign",  mentioned  in  the
    2004 Report of the  Tibetan Centre for Human Rights and Democracy:

        "Refugees who are caught  coming  back  from  India  or  Nepal  are
        reportedly treated much more harshly and  receive  longer  sentence
        than those who are caught trying to leave Tibet."


66. Finally Mr Bowe referred to  the  February  2005  US  State  Department
    report which  stated:


        "Overall the level of repression in the Tibetan areas remained high
        and the  government's  record  of  respect  for  religious  freedom
        remained poor  during  the  year........the  government  maintained
        tight controls on religious practices and places of worship in  the
        Tibetan areas.  Although the authorities permitted many traditional
        practices and public manifestations of belief,  they  promptly  and
        forcibly  suppressed  activities  they  viewed  as   vehicles   for
        political dissent or advocacy of  Tibetans  independence,  such  as
        religious activities venerating the Dalai Lama".

67. Mr Bowe stated that much of the statement evidence of Tibetans  related
    to protests which were not always well-arranged and this  was  in  part
    due to the extensive Chinese intelligence networks and lack of  freedom
    of  communication.     Without   State-authorised   documentation,   he
    considered it would  be  extremely  difficult  for  the  appellants  to
    operate within China in  terms  of  employment,  housing  registration,
    education and health care.  In his report  for  SP  he   stated  he  is
    convinced that:

        "On the basis of available documentation  on  individual  Communist
        Chinese sources SP would be arrested  and  charged  with  political
        activity against the State and would therefore be a  victim  of  an
        unfair judicial system and imprisoned  under  conditions  in  which
        systematic torture and abuse was commonly documented for  political
        prisoners."

68. He reached the same  conclusion  for  the  other  appellants.   In  his
    supplementary report Mr Bowe details the  demography  of  Tibet  region
    stating that the  population  was  between  4.59  and  6  million.   He
    indicated that there  was  a  clear  attempt  to  "swamp"  the  Tibetan
    population  with  migrants  from  China.   He   also   cited   the   US
    Congressional - Executive Commission on China stating that the "Sichuan
    region authorities detained more than three times as many  Tibetan  for
    political reasons than either the Tibet or Qinghai region".  He  stated
    there was no reasonable basis to conclude that the regions  which  were
    not encompassed in the  Tibet  Region  were  less  oppressive  or  that
    Tibetans there enjoyed greater freedoms and less  political  and  State
    interference.

    Ms Kate Saunders

69. Ms Saunders, who is the Communications Director  of  the  International
    Campaign for Tibet  describes  herself  as  a  writer  and  independent
    Tibetan specialist.  She considered that there was a very real risk  of
    detention or torture for Tibetans returning to China from exile.   This
    applied whether Tibetan were returning from India, Nepal or the West to
    Tibet region or being sent back to anywhere else in China.  She  stated
    there was a sophisticated and comprehensive security network  in  place
    throughout China which meant that citizens of China could be  monitored
    virtually wherever they are in China.  She claimed there was  also  the
    capacity for monitoring  Tibetans  in  the  West  by  Chinese  security
    personnel overseas.  Those who demonstrated outside  Chinese  Embassies
    or  who  participated  in  political  activism  in  the  West  were  of
    particular interest to the authorities.  Ms Saunders knew of  at  least
    one case in which viewed footage of  Tibetans  in  exile  demonstrating
    outside a Chinese Embassy  in  a  European  capital  was  available  to
    security forces inside Tibet region.

70. Ms Saunders' evidence was  that  the  risk  of  detention,  arrest  and
    torture in China was not always instantaneous or directly following the
    political action which caused it.  The Chinese authorities could  spend
    many years building up files against an individual, these  files  being
    known as "Danwei".  Her evidence was that in  general,  prisoners  were
    detained first  in  a  Public  Security  Bureau  detention  centre  for
    questioning  and  interrogation  before  either   being   released   or
    sentenced.   Prisoners could be sentenced to up  to  three  years'  re-
    education through labour:  sentences were likely to  be  administrative
    punishment, with no judicial process involved.

71. There was a clear programme to undermine the loyalty of Tibetans to the
    Dalai Lama which was inextricably linked  with  the  Tibetan  sense  of
    identity as a distinct nation, and this was reflected  in  the  Chinese
    authorities' determination to undermine religious practice in the Tibet
    region.

72. Ms Saunders' opinion was that official travel papers would not serve as
    protection for Tibetans who were returned to Tibet region; since  2003,
    the Chinese People's Armed Police had  tightened  border  security  and
    access to remote mountain routes. Ms Saunders described  the  treatment
    of the Tibetan musicologist, Ngawang Chouphel.  Chouphel  was  carrying
    out research into Tibetan folk music as  part  of  his  studies  for  a
    Fulbright scholarship at a college in Vermont USA when he was  arrested
    in 1995 and sentenced to  eighteen  years  in  prison  for  "espionage"
    despite the fact that he had travelled with valid travel documentation.



73. Tibetans caught attempting to escape to, or return from Nepal or India,
    could be sent to the new "Snowland" reception centre, a special  prison
    opened outside Shigatse in  2003.   Those  caught  returning  to  Tibet
    region was commonly held  either  there  or  in  the  Nyari  prison  in
    Shigatse.
       Other documentary evidence

    The Tibetan Centre for Human Rights Report 2000
74. This report referred to political repression in the  Tibet  region  and
    detailed the ill-treatment of prisoners there.  It mentioned the  focus
    being placed by  the  Chinese  Government  on  purifying  "unpatriotic"
    elements among  Tibetan  cadre  contingents  through  various  coercive
    methods and that Tibetans with a history of visiting India were treated
    with suspicion.   References  were  made  to  the  detention  of  those
    returning from exile.   The  section  on  prison  abuses  detailed  the
    prevalence of torture and stated that "extortion of  confessions  is  a
    common malpractice although Chinese Criminal Law prohibits this  method
    of interrogation".  Reports of deaths in detention were  stated  to  be
    indicative of the severity of torture methods.

75. The TCHR report for 2001 referred to a former inmate of the Trisan "for
    education through labour" camp, ten kilometres west of Lhasa as stating
    that when he was first imprisoned in 1999 there had been  approximately
    300 prisoners in the facility but  the  number  had  doubled  by  2001.
    Prison conditions there were said to be horrific, prisoners being  half
    starved and falling sick due to contaminated water and unclean food.

    Amnesty International of July 2002
76. Amnesty International's press release of 23 July 2002 stated that since
    8 July that year 50 people had been sentenced to death and 25  executed
    in an anti-crime campaign in China.

    Tibetan Justice Centre, December 2002 Report
77. The Tibetan Justice Centre detailed the difficulties of Tibet  region's
    stateless nationals who are refugees in Nepal.

    The US State Department report for 2002
78. In the section of this report dealing with Tibet region  it  is  stated
    that the human rights record of the authorities  in  the  Tibet  region
    remained poor although in that  year  some  Chinese  Tibetan  political
    prisoners had been released early, before serving their full sentences.
     There were reports of mistreatment of  prisoners  and  it  was  stated
    that:

        "There were numerous reports of  arbitrary  detention  of  persons,
        particularly monks, returning to China  (Tibet  region)  travelling
        from Nepal.  Detention generally lasted for several months although
        in most cases no charges were brought formally".


    The Report indicated that forced labour had been used in  some  prisons
    with 're-education through labour' facilities and at work  sites  where
    prisoners were used as workers.  A reference in the report stated that:




        "The number of Tibetans who entered Nepal seeking refugee status to
        escape conditions in the Tibet decreased from  approximately  3,000
        in 2000 to 1,268 during the year according to  the  UNHCR.   It  is
        difficult for Tibetans to travel to India for  religious  purposes.
        Nevertheless, many Tibetans, including monks and nuns visited India
        via third countries and returned to Tibet  after  temporary  stays.
        In May TIN reported that the  Chinese  Government  appeared  to  be
        making greater efforts to encourage  exiles  to  return  to  Tibet.
        While some exiled Tibetans  have  returned,  the  approval  process
        remains cumbersome."


    Human Rights Watch - News -  Asia:  "Tibetans  Lost  in  Chinese  Legal
    System"
79. This article, dated 15 July 2003, referred  to  a  Human  Rights  Watch
    statement which called for  the  Chinese  authorities  to  stop  secret
    trials of Tibetans.  It stated that:

        "Human Rights Watch said that China's failure to  acknowledge  long
        prison  sentences  against  Tibetans  demonstrates  yet  again  the
        government's determination to prevent the  international  community
        from learning the full extent  of  its  ongoing  crackdown  against
        Tibetan activists."


80. Brad Adams, the Executive Director of the Asia division of Human Rights
    Watch, is cited as saying,


        "Tibetans continue to fall into the black hole of the Chinese legal
        system ... secret trials and secret sentences  make  a  mockery  of
        Chinese pretence that its legal system acts according to  the  rule
        of law."

81. He claimed that for Tibetans in detention little  is  known  about  the
    charges against them, where  they  were  held,  the  lengths  of  their
    sentences,  the  conditions  of  their  confinement  or  their  health.
    Thereafter the report sets out reports of a  number of  Tibetans  cases
    which had not been acknowledged including one who was believed to be in
    custody and others who had  been  released,  as  well  as  those  whose
    whereabouts were unknown.

    Phayul.com - Feb. 2004
82. This is a campaigning  website  (http://phayul.com),  focusing  on  the
    rights of Tibetans.  Its report dated 24 February 2004 referred to  the
    detention of a number of Tibetans returned by the Nepalese  authorities
    including those who were caught attempting to flee as well as  Tibetans
    who were returning to Tibet region after going to  school  or  visiting
    family in Nepal and India.  It stated that they spent eleven days in  a
    prison near the Tibet/Nepal border before being transferred to the  new
    reception centre in Shigatse in June 2003.  They had been badly  beaten
    and tortured  with  electric  batons.   The  report  also  stated  that
    approximately  2,500  Tibetan  refugees  escape  into  exile   annually
    travelling through Nepal en route to India.  It then states:

        "Human rights organisations and the United Nations High  Commission
        for Refugees often only learn of arrests by Chinese border patrols,
        or of deportations of Tibetans refugees by Nepalese officials, when
        refugees make a successful re-attempt at escape.  Refugees who  are
        caught coming back from India or Nepal are reportedly treated  much
        more severely and receive  longer  sentences  than  those  who  are
        caught trying to leave Tibet, according to former inmates."


83. It then stated that Tibetans who have served  sentences  in  the  Tibet
    region's new reception centre, or at Nyari prison in Shigatse;

        "Report that most individuals caught at the borders  serve  between
        three - five months prison sentence, receive beatings  and  torture
        regularly (most commonly being hit with an electric baton) and must
        perform hard labour, usually road building in and around  Shigatse.
        Tibetans detained for trying  to  flee  Tibet  without  papers  are
        rarely provided with any judicial hearing or proceeding."

84. A second report from Phayul.com referred to other groups  of  deportees
    being taken to a prison in Shigatse after spending  eleven  days  in  a
    prison in Nyalam at the Border between Chinese Tibet  and  Nepal.   The
    report goes on to detail the torture suffered by deportees.

    Phayul.com - Oct. 2005

85. A further report from phayul.com  dated  19  October  2005  reports  on
    Chinese forces  firing  on  fifty  one    Tibetan  asylum  seekers  who
    attempted to flee into Nepal.

    Country Information and Policy Unit Report 2004
86. The Country Information Policy  Unit  report  states,  with  regard  to
    Chinese Tibetan returnees, that a new punishment block (Detention  Area
    9) was constructed at Jtipchi prison late in the summer of 2000 and  is
    used to house  political  prisoners  who  refuse  to  cooperate  during
    questioning.  At paragraph 6.180, it records that on 31 May 2003  Nepal
    deported eighteen Chinese Tibetan refugees back to China and that:

        "This is the first such deportation in recent years.  The move  had
        been criticised  by  Amnesty  International.   A  report  from  the
        Australian Tibetan Council stated that  these  detainees  had  been
        released after others had paid a fine but it alleged that they  had
        been badly beaten and tortured  with  electric  batons  and  sewing
        needles".

    Operational Guidance Note issued on 22 June 2006
87. The respondent's most recent OGN states:-

        "The Government's human rights record in the Tibetan areas of China
        remained poor during 2005, and the level of repression of religious
        freedom remained high.  The Government continued to view the  Dalai
        Lama with  suspicion  and  tended  to  associate  Tibetan  Buddhist
        religious  activity  with   separatist   sympathies.    Authorities
        continued to commit serious human rights abuses, including torture,
        arbitrary arrest and detention, house arrest and other non-judicial
        surveillance  of  dissidents,  detention  without   public   trial,
        repression of religious freedom and arbitrary restrictions on  free
        movement."

      At paragraph 3.7.10 the Note concluded:-

        "It is clear that the Chinese authorities may take  serious  action
        against Tibetans expressing political or religious views  and  that
        this treatment will amount to persecution.  Where an individual  is
        able to demonstrate that they are at serious risk  of  facing  such
        persecution on account of their activities a grant of  asylum  will
        be appropriate.  However a grant of asylum will not be  appropriate
        solely on the basis of being an ethnic Tibetan."

      At paragraph 3.7.8 the Note reads:-

      "Internal Relocation.  As this category of claimants' fear is of  ill-
        treatment/persecution by the State  authorities,  relocation  to  a
        different area  of  the  country  to  escape  this  threat  is  not
        feasible."

      When considering relocation within China the Note reads at 3.12.12:


        "Internal Relocation.  Hukous (residence permits)  are  issued  for
        all Chinese citizens and are inscribed to identify the carrier as a
        rural or urban resident.  Each urban administrative entity  (towns,
        cities, etc) issues its own Hukou, which entitles  only  registered
        inhabitants of that entity full access  to  social  services,  like
        education.  However not all citizens were officially registered and
        there remained a 'floating  population'  of  between  100  and  150
        million economic migrants who lacked official residence  status  in
        cities."


    At paragraph 6.295 the note referred to the USSD report of  2005  which
    stated as follows:

        "The Government's human rights record in the Tibetan areas of China
        remained poor, and the level of repression  and  religious  freedom
        remained high.  The Government continued to  view  the  Dalai  Lama
        with suspicion and tended to associate Tibetan  Buddhist  religious
        activity with  separatist  sympathies.   Authorities  continued  to
        commit serious human rights abuses,  including  torture,  arbitrary
        arrest  and  detention,  house  arrest   and   other   non-judicial
        surveillance  of  dissidents,  detention  without   public   trial,
        repression of religious freedom, and arbitrary restrictions on free
        movement.  Positive developments in the Tibetan  areas  included  a
        fourth round of dialogue between the Government and envoys  of  the
        Dalai Lama."


    At paragraph 6.297 the USSD report was cited as saying:


        "Human rights situation in the  Tibet  did  not  improve  in  2004.
        There was no let-up on many unpopular measures of control that went
        to describe the anxious nature of the  political  atmosphere.   The
        resumption of the 'Strike Hard' campaign, the renewed  emphasis  on
        the Patriotic Re-education campaign and the establishment of a  Re-
        education  Through  Labour  camp  in  Ngari  County  in  the  Tibet
        Autonomous Region to check the refugee flow, are clear  indications
        of continued suppression of the Tibetan people."

    Finally, the note referred to the USSD Religious Freedom report 2005 as
    stating:


        "In 2003 Tibetans forcibly returned to China from Nepal  reportedly
        suffered severe torture, and their family  members  pressurised  by
        officials for bribes to secure their release.   Nevertheless,  many
        Tibetans,  including  monks  and  nuns,  visited  India  via  third
        countries and  returned  to  China  after  temporary  stays.   Some
        returnees reported the authorities pressured them  not  to  discuss
        sensitive political issues."


    The US State Department report for 2004
88. This referred to the security apparatus employing torture and degrading
    treatment including electric shocks, periods in  solitary  confinement,
    incommunicado detention, beatings and other forms of abuse.

    The United States Congressional - Executive Commission on China  Annual
    Report 2005
89. This stated that there was no improvement overall in  human  rights  in
    China over the past year (2004) and set out the problems of enforcement
    of the Hukou (the internal registration) system.  The  Dalai  Lama  had
    stated he did not seek independence for Tibet now; he  was  aiming  for
    Tibetan autonomy within China but this was not recognised as a  benefit
    by  Chinese  leaders.   Chinese  laws  on  regional   ethnic   autonomy
    containing provisions that could benefit Tibetan and their culture  but
    there was poor government implementation of  those  laws.   The  report
    emphasises that economic  developments  in  the  Tibet  region  largely
    benefit Han Chinese who continue to migrate  westwards  and  that  this
    migration will be assisted by the Qinghai-Tibet railway.

90. The report referred to a number of instances of detention  of  Tibetans
    for political and religious reasons but does say:


        "The CECC Political Prisoner Database (PPD) lists approximately 120
        current cases of Tibetans political imprisonment in June 2005  less
        than one fifth of the number in late 1995.  The number of  Tibetans
        political prisoners continues to decline as Tibetans imprisoned for
        protests during late 1980s to mid-1990s  complete  their  sentences
        and are released".

    UN Commission for Human Rights Mission to China - Report by UN  Special
    Rapporteur on Torture, Manfred Nowak.

91. The long-awaited report of Manfred  Nowak,  UN  Special  Rapporteur  on
    Torture and a leading international human rights  expert,  based  on  a
    mission carried out during 2005, was published on 10 March 2006.  After
    visiting detention centre in Beijing, Urumqi in Xinjiang and  Lhasa  in
    the Tibet Nowak concluded "that the practice of torture, though on  the
    decline - particularly in urban areas - remains  widespread  in  China"
    His report then stated that while he noted:

        "Areas of improvement in the Chinese legal system"


    there remained:


        "significant and serious concerns as to the  actual  implementation
        of the rule of law, the use of the death penalty  for  wide-ranging
        and vaguely defined  offences,  and  the  continued  targeting  and
        mistreatment of Tibetans".

    He  stated  that  he  and  his  predecessors  had   received   "serious
    allegations" of a:

        "Consistent and systematic pattern of  torture  related  to  ethnic
        minorities particularly Tibetans and Uighurs".

    Discussion

    Risk on return to Tibetan failed asylum seekers

92. In what follows we use the expression  "risk on return" as a  shorthand
    for describing well-founded fear of persecution, real risk  of  serious
    harm within the meaning of paragraph 339C of the Immigration Rules  (as
    amended by Cm. 6918) and treatment  contrary  to  Article  3  ECHR.  In
    reaching our conclusions we have considered the evidence in the  round,
    including taking into account the background materials listed above and
    in our Appendix.   We first consider those who use, and return by,  the
    Tibet/Nepal route out of China, and then the risk to those  who  return
    via Shanghai or Beijing and relocate internally, either as a member  of
    the 'floating population' or by returning to Tibet region  by  internal
    relocation.

93. Although we lacked clear evidence on the matter,  it  would  seem  that
    very few Tibetans who have made their way  to  Western  countries  have
    left China via another route than through Nepal.  That in our  view  is
    an important consideration since the evidence strongly  indicates  that
    the Chinese authorities perceive as supporters of the  Dalai  Lama  any
    Tibetans who have left Tibet region via Nepal - particularly those  who
    have left without authority. This too is a matter we  shall  return  to
    below.

94. Mr Payne sought to argue that in deciding whether Tibetans would be  at
    risk on return to China we should  attach  significant  weight  to  the
    evidence regarding the large numbers of Chinese  who  are  returned  to
    China from Taiwan and the fact that there is no evidence that they have
    faced detention on  return.  However,  we  do  not  consider  that  any
    inferences can safely be drawn from the experiences of  returnees  from
    Taiwan. We have no evidence before us to suggest that any of them  were
    Tibetan and what evidence we do have about Tibetans is that they are an
    ethnic  minority  against  whom   the   Chinese   in   mainland   China
    discriminate.

95. Mr Payne also referred to the statistics  relating  to  those  who  are
    returned from Britain to China. As we have seen these statistics do not
    show how many, if any, were Tibetan, as the figures are not broken down
    by ethnicity. Nevertheless, he argued, we should regard it as  implicit
    in the figures of returnees that they would include Tibetans. We do not
    consider that we can  make  that  assumption.  It  is  only  relatively
    recently that the United Kingdom has adopted a  policy  of  involuntary
    returns to China. Yet not only do we have no evidence that  the  United
    Kingdom return figures (including of  involuntary  returnees)   include
    Tibetans, but  there  are  no  statistics  relating  to  other  Western
    countries returning Tibetans to China.  Given  this  lack  of  official
    figures, we do not think we can ignore Ms Lee's statement, based on the
    results of her approaches to a number of bodies that she did  not  know
    of any Tibetans who had been returned from the United Kingdom.

    The Tibet/Nepal route out of China
96. We have considered whether there is a risk on return  to  Tibetans  who
    leave China from Tibet region via Nepal,  without  authority,  and  are
    returned from the West by the same route. Our task  is  made  extremely
    difficult by the lack of any direct and specific evidence  as  to  what
    happens to Tibetan failed asylum seekers returned  to  China  from  the
    United Kingdom or from other Western countries: we shall return to this
    point below.

97. We first considered the weight to be placed on the reports of  Mr  Bowe
    and Ms Saunders. There is force in Mr Payne's submission that Mr Bowe's
    report does not show clear detachment from the issues. He considers all
    the appellants to be credible when they  have  been  found  not  to  be
    credible by the Immigration Judges who heard their appeals. His use  of
    language is from time to time emotive. However,  much  of  each  report
    focuses on the situation of Tibetans returnees irrespective of  whether
    or not they are genuine or failed asylum seekers.  Additionally,  there
    is nothing to suggest  that  the  views  which  he  expresses  are  not
    genuinely held or to suggest that his report  suppresses  or  fails  to
    mention evidence that does not support  his  main  conclusions  on  the
    situation of Tibetans returnees.   We  note  too  that  Mr  Bowe  cited
    extensively from independent sources, including the US State Department
    Report, and that his assessment is based heavily on those sources.

98. Similarly, while Ms Saunders is clearly not independent, as  she  works
    closely with the Dalai Lama and  is  a  campaigner  for  an  autonomous
    Tibet, there is nothing to suggest that she was in any  way  untruthful
    in her report, or that she  sets  out  the  facts  other  than  as  she
    believed them to be, or  that  she  failed  to  identify  any  evidence
    leading to a contrary viewpoint.  Whilst we have  concerns  about  some
    aspects of their reports, we do not  think  that  these  undermine  the
    force of their reasoning on risk to Tibetan returnees from  the  United
    Kingdom and accordingly we are prepared to attach  considerable  weight
    to what they have to say in this regard.


99. We have also noted the reports from the Tibetan Centre for Human Rights
    and Phayul.Com. Whilst both are, of course, not  disinterested  in  the
    plight of returnees to the Tibet region, we consider that what they say
    broadly corresponds with the preponderance of other background  country
    sources which touch on the situation of Tibetans in China.  Thus  these
    two sources reflect the background evidence as a  whole  in  making  it
    clear that those Tibetans detained  in  detention  centres  or  prisons
    within the Tibet region are likely to suffer torture in that they  will
    receive beatings, often with electric prods,  and  that  torture  is  a
    means of forcing confessions.  It appears that  there  is  no  judicial
    remedy or trial for  those  Tibetans  who  are  detained.   Periods  of
    detention may vary and it appears that payments  can  be  made  by  the
    detainees' families, often after  bribes  have  been  given  to  prison
    officials, to persuade them to accept payment for the  release  of  the
    detainees. It is clear, however, that the time spent in  detention  can
    be life-threatening: detainees are likely to suffer ill-treatment, lack
    of sufficient food, clean water and the likelihood of being of used for
    forced labour  in  the  "re-education  through  work  programme".   The
    treatment  of  detainees  is  sufficiently  harsh  as  to   amount   to
    persecution.


100. We place particular weight on the report of Manfred Nowak,  UN  Special
    Rapporteur on Torture based on his  visits  in  2005  to  some  Chinese
    detention centres including one in Lhasa, Tibet and  in  particular  on
    his express conclusion that  "... the practice of  torture,  though  on
    the decline - particularly in  urban  areas  -  remains  widespread  in
    China" and his references to :

        "significant and serious concerns as to the  actual  implementation
        of the rule of law, the use of the death penalty  for  wide-ranging
        and vaguely defined  offences,  and  the  continued  targeting  and
        mistreatment of Tibetans" (emphasis added)

    And to a:


        "Consistent and systematic pattern of  torture  related  to  ethnic
        minorities  particularly  Tibetans       and   Uighurs"   (emphasis
        added).

101. We also note the terms of the Respondent's OGN and the CIPU report.

102. Mr Mullins  has urged us to attach particular weight  to  the  body  of
    evidence relating to Tibetans who left China by travelling  from  Tibet
    region into Nepal and the evidence about Tibetan seeking to return,  or
    being forced to return, to China via the Nepal/Tibet route. We think he
    is right in arguing that this body of  evidence  is  pertinent  to  the
    issues we have to decide, since, as already noted,  there  is  much  to
    suggest that those Tibetans who have reached the West have  left  China
    on the Tibet/Nepal route and virtually none to suggest  that  any  have
    left via mainland China.


103. The Nepal connection has a further important implication for  assessing
    risk on return.  Despite the fact that there are age old travel  routes
    between Tibet region, Nepal and India, the evidence  does  not  suggest
    that it is at all easy to  travel,  legally,  from  Tibet  region  into
    Nepal.  Yet it is in respect of those who  left  China  illegally  from
    Tibet region that the evidence indicating that Tibetan  returnees  face
    ill treatment is strongest.

104. Nepal is, of course, a staging post on the journey of Tibetans  to  the
    home of the Dalai Lama in northern India.  Those who  are  seen  to  be
    travelling out of China on the Tibet/Nepal route, and on to India,  are
    therefore reasonably likely to  be  considered  to  be  travelling  for
    religious reasons and, of course, this is reflected in the emphasis  on
    the groups of nuns and monks who are detained on return.  It  is  clear
    from the reports of Ms Saunders, Mr Bowe, and the Tibetan Human  Rights
    Centre, that the worship of the Dalai Lama is inextricably  linked,  in
    the minds of the Chinese authorities, with Tibetan  nationalism.  Those
    who travel  along  that  route,  therefore,  are  not  only  considered
    opponents of the Chinese authorities for religious reasons but also  to
    supporters of a separate Tibet - they are seen to be "splittist".

105. Mr. Payne argued that the majority of those  detained  were  monks  and
    nuns and/or activists, and/or that the numbers detained were not large.
     However, on a closer  examination  of  the  documentary  evidence,  we
    consider it contains a significant number of  references  to  Tibetans,
    not specified to be nuns or monks,  who  appear  to  have  been  merely
    trying to flee the country and who are detained when  they  are  either
    leaving China via the Tibet/Nepal route or when they  are  returned  by
    the same route. We refer to the reports from the US  State  Department,
    Human Rights Watch, Playul.com and Amnesty International from which  we
    have cited above. The Radio Free Asia broadcast of May 2005 referred to
    the Chinese border forces opening fire in a bid to halt the  flight  of
    51 Tibetan asylum seekers into Nepal. Our conclusions are reinforced by
    a reading of the respondent's own OGN and CIPU reports.  There is  also
    a significant number of references to  a  risk  of  being  shot  at  or
    captured by border patrols for those who try  to  leave  China  on  the
    Tibet/Nepal route and also, of  a  real  risk  of  detention  and  ill-
    treatment if they are forcibly returned by the same route.

106. Ms Saunders' report sets  out  the  extensive  system  of  surveillance
    within the Tibet  region;  we  conclude  that  those  who  leave  China
    unlawfully on the Tibet/Nepal route and are not picked  up  immediately
    on return to Tibet region are  nevertheless  likely  to  be  picked  up
    eventually. It is also clear from passages  in  the  Respondent's  CIPU
    report and OGN, the US State Department Report  and  the  Human  Rights
    Watch report which are cited above  that  Tibetans  detained  in  those
    circumstances suffer ill-treatment which amounts  to  persecution.  The
    report of the UN Special  Rapporteur  on  Torture,  Manfred  Nowak,  is
    particularly persuasive.

107. There is evidence that the Chinese authorities'  attitude  to  Tibetans
    is deteriorating. The "Times Online" report which Mr. Mullins lodged at
    the hearing referred to the campaign to crush loyalty to the Dalai Lama
    and to  extinguish  beliefs  amongst  Government  officials  and  Zhang
    Qingli. The Communist Party Secretary  of  Tibet  region  is  cited  as
    referring to "a fight to the death against the Dalai Lama".  That  must
    impact on the  official  Chinese  attitude  to  all  Tibetans  who  are
    involuntarily returned from abroad by the Tibet/Nepal route.


108. With the exception of Ngawang Choephel, the  musicologist  to  whom  Ms
    Saunders referred who is likely to have entered mainland China  legally
    and then returned to Tibet region  internally,  the  evidence  of  ill-
    treatment which is before  us  all  relates  to  the  ill-treatment  of
    Tibetans who have travelled out of, or returned  to,  China  using  the
    Tibet/Nepal route. The evidence is clearly that  those  who  cross  the
    Tibet/Nepal border without authority and are caught returning  by  that
    route are likely to face ill-treatment which amounts to torture.

    Return via Beijing/Shanghai
109. It was common ground in these cases that all  Tibetans  facing  removal
    from the  United  Kingdom  would  be  returned  to  either  Beijing  or
    Shanghai. We are given to understand that removal directions in respect
    of nationals of China are not made to Nepal, even in respect  of  those
    who may have left China from Tibet region, travelling  via  Nepal.  How
    then are we to assess the likely treatment of those  Tibetans  who  are
    returned from the United Kingdom to  Beijing  or  Shanghai?  The  first
    matter to be considered here is whether or not the authorities  at  the
    airports would be aware that they were Tibetans who were being returned
    and not Han Chinese.


110. We consider it reasonably  likely  that  a  Tibetan  who  has  a  valid
    Chinese passport will not attract any specific or adverse interest,  on
    return. That is because possession of  such  a  passport  is  a  strong
    indication that the person  concerned  has  been  cleared  for  foreign
    travel. However, we take a different view in the case of  Tibetans  who
    do not hold a valid Chinese passport. In their case  it  is  reasonably
    likely, when the individuals concerned  (or  the  respondent  on  their
    behalf) approach the Chinese Embassy here to  obtain  travel  documents
    for them, that information about their ethnicity -and possibly the fact
    that they had sought asylum - would  be  recorded.  We  also  think  it
    reasonably likely that this information would be passed to the  Chinese
    authorities in China, even if the travel documents they carry  did  not
    themselves indicate that the bearers of the documents are Tibetan.   As
    bearers of travel documents, they would be questioned at  the  airport.
    Since they cannot be expected to lie about their history, we  think  it
    reasonably likely they will have to inform the authorities of how  they
    had left Tibet and on what basis they had been staying  or  seeking  to
    stay in the United Kingdom. If as a  result  of  these  inquiries,  the
    authorities consider that they had left Tibet illegally  through  Nepal
    that would suffice to place them at real risk of being detained and ill-
    treated.


111. In her report Ms  Saunders  pointed  out  that  Tibetans  who  violated
    border regulations by "secretly crossing  the  national  boundary"  are
    breaking Article 322 of the Chinese criminal law and would therefore be
    liable to imprisonment.  Having considered the clear  evidence  of  the
    repressive nature of the Chinese  regime  against  Tibetans  whom  they
    consider do not support the  incorporation  of  Tibet  into  China,  we
    consider that, on return to China (and, if it were possible, on  return
    to Tibet region itself), Tibetans who have left illegally through Nepal
    would be detained and would be subjected to treatment  far  worse  than
    that faced by the coastal Han Chinese who, for  example,  are  returned
    from Taiwan.


112. In relation to Tibetans  detained  in  a  prison  in  China,  there  is
    sufficient evidence to indicate that the prison conditions  they  would
    face there, at least for  those  who  are  thought  to  have  political
    opinions inimical to the Chinese  authorities,  would  be  sufficiently
    harsh as to amount to persecution. This is clear from the CIPU  report.
    As Tibetans who had left China illegally on the Tibet/Nepal route, they
    would not be considered to be  mere  economic  migrants  but  would  be
    considered to  have  left  China  because  they  were  opposed  to  the
    incorporation of Tibet  into  China.  We  find  that  they  would  face
    persecution because of their imputed political beliefs on return.

113.  Our  conclusions  are  based  on  the  evidence  from  not  only   the
    Respondent's CIPU report and OGN, but also that in the State Department
    Report, and Human Rights Watch and Report of the UN Special  Rapporteur
    on Torture.  We consider that they would fall into the "black hole"  of
    the Chinese legal system to which Brad Adams, the Executive Director of
    the Asia Division of Human Rights Watch, refers.

    Legal exit from China
114. We do not consider, however, that unsuccessful Tibetan  asylum  seekers
    who have left Tibet legally would be likely to  face  ill-treatment  on
    return. Their position will  be  analogous  to  that  of  other  failed
    Chinese asylum seekers.

    Internal travel for returnees within China
115. Mr Payne sought to argue that on the authority of  GH,  we  should  not
    consider the issue of internal  travel  for  Tibetan  returnees  within
    China. In the light of further clarification from the Court  of  Appeal
    in AG [2006] EWCA Civ 1342, we must accept that Mr Payne's argument  on
    this point is correct. However, we note  that  in  AG  Hooper  LJ  then
    stated at paragraph 123 that even so:


        "...it seems to me that in a Country Guidance case, it may well  be
        helpful for all concerned to know the dangers inherent in a  method
        of return that is likely to be used, if known.  Those  dangers  can
        then inform the SSHD when (or if) removal directions are made".

116. Given our finding that Tibetan returnees, who are  considered  to  have
    left China illegally via the Tibet/Nepal route, face  a  real  risk  on
    return at the airport in Beijing or Shanghai, no  further  issue  about
    the  method  of  return  arises.  Nevertheless,   for   the   sake   of
    completeness, we would add our view that


    (a)      in the unlikely event  of  Tibetans  without  valid  passports
       returned to China not being apprehended at the  airport  and  making
       their way back to Tibet region, they would be likely to be picked up
       there. We note the system of "Danwei" to which Ms Saunders  referred
       in her report: we consider that their unlawful departure from  China
       on the Tibet/Nepal route and their return via  Beijing  or  shanghai
       (and thence to Tibet region) would be noted and that they  would  be
       picked up, detained and ill-treated.


    (b)     Were such persons to attempt  relocation,  this  would  involve
       them joining the 'floating  population'  of  China.   We  would  re-
       emphasise here that the respondent's own OGN states that  relocation
       is not an option as persons fearing persecution by the State. We see
       no reason,  on  the  basis  of  the  evidence  before  us  in  these
       reconsiderations, to take a different view.


117. We do not consider it necessary to address any issue  relating  to  the
    fact that removal directions made against Chinese nationals who are  of
    Tibetans  origin  appear  to  sometimes  specify  "China"  per  se  and
    sometimes to  specify "China (Tibet)", since (following GH)  in  either
    case the removal directions are lawfully a matter for the Secretary  of
    State. In any event, it is common ground that all such removals are  to
    Beijing and Shanghai,  with  no  United  Kingdom  involvement  in  what
    happens from that point onwards.


    Existing and Previous Reported Cases
118. We note that since the removal of DS from the  AIT's  Country  Guidance
    list on 27 July 2005 there is no  existing  country  guidance  case  on
    Tibetan. Nevertheless on the basis of the fuller  and  more  up-to-date
    body of evidence before us, we think that the conclusions reached in DS
    were broadly correct, whereas the conclusions set out in  the  reported
    determination of PW are wrong.


    Summary of Conclusions
119. We summarise our conclusions as follows[1]:

    a) There are no figures for Tibetans who are returned from the West  to
       the only two points of removal to the People's Republic of  China  -
       Beijing and Shanghai -and we do not consider it safe to  infer  that
       the figures we have for those returned  to  China  in  recent  years
       include any Tibetans.


    b) The Chinese authorities are concerned with any activity by  Tibetans
       which they consider to be "splittist"- that is, any  activity  which
       indicates that a Tibetan might wish Tibet region to break away  from
       China. Any support for the Dalai Lama is seen as "splittist" and  as
       furthering the cause of  Tibetans  nationalism,  which  the  Chinese
       authorities continue to want to  crush.  Those  Tibetans  who  leave
       China  unlawfully  on  the  Tibet/Nepal  route  are  seen  as  being
       supporters of the Dalai Lama.


    c) Tibetans who having left China unlawfully on the  Tibet/Nepal  route
       now face removal by the United Kingdom, are reasonably likely to  be
       considered as "splittists".


    d) Accordingly, Tibetans who have made their way  to  the  West  having
       left China unlawfully on the Tibet/Nepal route face a real  risk  on
       return of detention and ill-treatment which amounts to persecution.


    e) Tibetans who left China legally, and who did not leave because  they
       had a well founded fear of persecution, would not be likely to  face
       persecution on return at the airports  in  Beijing  or  Shanghai  or
       subsequently upon re-entry to Tibet region.

    f) The Chinese regime  in  the  Tibet  region  is  repressive  and  the
       individual facts of each case must be considered carefully as it  is
       a society where there is a considerable amount  of  surveillance.  A
       Tibetan who is able to show he faces a real risk on  return  arising
       out of past adverse experiences in the Tibet region, should be  able
       to succeed in his or asylum claim, irrespective of what the position
       is as regards failed asylum seekers generally.

    g) ...

    h) However, even if the issue of internal relocation did  arise,  given
       the terms of the Respondent's OGN and CIPU reports and the  evidence
       pointing to likely state persecution of Tibetans who have left Tibet
       illegally  via  Nepal,  there  would  not  be  any  viable  internal
       relocation alternative.


120.   In  the  unusual  circumstances  of  these  three  appellants,  whose
    accounts are generally incredible,  we  are  prepared  to  accept  that
    nevertheless they should be treated as having left China unlawfully  on
    the Tibet/Nepal route.  We do  this  because,  as  noted  earlier,  the
    evidence before us is that virtually all Tibetans  do  leave  China  by
    that route and unlawfully.  However, there may be cases where a Tibetan
    who has left Tibet lawfully by some other route (e.g. as a businessman)
    subsequently destroys evidence of this fact and then claims  asylum  on
    the basis of risk on return via Nepal.

121.  Hence in future cases, it will be very important that  the  respondent
    states his position upon, and that clear findings are  made  regarding,
    the following issues in particular:

    (a) Whether or not an appellant had a well founded fear of  persecution
       before leaving China,

    (b) Whether or not he or she left China legally or  without  authority;
    and

    (c) The route by which they should be considered  to  have  left  China
       (that is, from the mainland or on the Tibet/Nepal route).

    The Appeals of WD, SP and TL

122. We now turn to the appeals of these three appellants.  The  Immigration
    Judge accepted that WD left Tibet unlawfully. SP and TL were not  found
    to be credible but no separate findings were made  by  the  Immigration
    Judges who heard their appeals that they had left lawfully. However, we
    note that that it is not the case of  the  respondent  that  they  left
    China lawfully and Mr Payne, possibly  because  of  the  state  of  the
    evidence concerning the appellants' use of false documentation, did not
    seek to argue that  they  should  be  seen  as  persons  who  had  left
    lawfully. In these unusual circumstances we are prepared to accept that
    all  three  left  China  unlawfully  on  the  Tibet/Nepal  route.   The
    background evidence in our view indicates that the majority of Tibetans
    who have come to the West have come via Nepal and  that  virtually  all
    who did so left China illegally by this route.

123. These appellants would, however, not be returned to Nepal  but  to  the
    airports in Beijing or Shanghai.   For  the  reasons  set  out  in  our
    conclusions on risk on return to Tibetan failed asylum  seekers  above,
    we consider that, as Tibetans who have left illegally through Nepal and
    who would be travelling on travel documents, they would be at real risk
    of being detained at the airport and  of  suffering  abusive  detention
    amounting to persecution.


124. It is our view that the persecution they would  face  would  be  for  a
    Convention reason, that of imputed political opinion. Merely by  having
    left  China  unlawfully  on  the  Tibet/Nepal  route,  they  would   be
    considered to be "splittist". Even if we are wrong about that  and  the
    fact of having left China unlawfully on the Tibet/Nepal route  did  not
    suffice for them to be perceived as "splittist", we  note  that  it  is
    reasonably likely that the Chinese authorities would come to learn that
    they had sought asylum in the United Kingdom. Although we consider that
    the Chinese authorities are normally well-aware that Chinese  nationals
    may claim asylum for non-asylum reasons (e.g. economic betterment),  we
    consider that  their  current  concerns  about  Tibetan  outside  China
    seeking to promote the cause of the Dalai Lama may outweigh such normal
    considerations.

125. For the same reasons, we find that they  would  face  a  real  risk  of
    serious harm within the meaning of paragraph 339C  of  the  Immigration
    Rules. However, because a person  cannot  be  eligible  for  subsidiary
    protection if he is a refugee, none of these appellants is entitled  to
    subsidiary protection.

126. For the same reasons as  we  have  found  they  face  a  real  risk  of
    persecution, we find that their rights under  Article  3  of  the  ECHR
    would be infringed by their removal.

127. Accordingly we substitute for the decision to dismiss the appeals  made
    by the Immigration Judges in the cases of the SP and  TL  our  decision
    that those appeals should be allowed on both asylum  and  human  rights
    grounds.  The decision we substitute for that of the Immigration  Judge
    in WD is to allow the appeal. (As we have found that the appellants are
    entitled to asylum here, none is entitled to humanitarian protection).


    Decisions

128. The appeals of SP, TL and WD are  allowed  on  both  asylum  and  human
    rights grounds. They are not entitled to humanitarian protection.






   Signed                    Date


   Senior Immigration Judge McGeachy

Annex   Documents considered and referred to in the determination.


1)     June   2000        Report  from  Tibetan  Justice  Centre  -  Tibet's
                        stateless Nationals.

2)    December 2000          Tibetan Centre for Human Rights  and  Democracy
                        Annual Report.

3)    October 2001           Tibetan Centre for Human Rights  and  Democracy
Newsletter.

4)    December 2001          Tibetan Centre for Human Rights  and  Democracy
                        Annual Report.

5)          March 2002            US State Department Report  on  Tibet  for
      2001.

6)          March 2002       Tibetan Centre for Human Rights  and  Democracy
      Newsletter.

7)          July 2002  Amnesty International report: China  "'Strike  Hard'"
                        anti crime report.

8)          2002             Various Tibetan Centre  for  Human  Rights  and
                        Democracy articles.

9)          December 2002         Tibetan Centre for Human Rights and
                        Democracy Annual Report.

10)         March 2003       US State Department Report on Tibet 2002.

11)         May 2003         Human Rights Watch Report.

12)         June 2003  Amnesty International - Nepal: forcible returns of
      Tibetans.

13)         July 2003  Human Rights Watch: Tibetans lost in Chinese legal
      system.

14)         December 2003    Tibetan Centre for Human Rights and Democracy
                        Annual Report.

15)         March 2004       US State Department Report on Tibet 2003.

16)         May 2004         Expert Report  from Ms Kate Saunders.

17)         April 2004       Country Information and Policy Unit Report -
      China.


18)   December 2004          Tibetan Centre for Human Rights and Democracy
                        Annual Report.

19)   March  2005            US State Department Report on Tibet 2004.

20)   September/             US Congressional Executive Commission on China
      October 2005           Reports  on registration (Hukuo) system.

21)   November 2005          Expert reports from Mr Jeffrey Bowe on each
appellant.

22)   December 2005          Tibetan Centre for Human Rights and Democracy
                        Annual Report.

23)         December 2005    Campaign or Tibet: UN Special Rapporteur on
Torture.

24)         January 2006     Campaign for Tibet report.

25)         January 2006          Email from Mr Jeffrey Bowe.

26)         February 2006         US State Department Report on Tibet.

27)         April 2006            Reports from Ms Kate Saunders for each
                    appellant.

28)         June 2006        Home Office Operation Guidance Note.

29)   16 August 2006   Letter to Treasury Solicitor Department from Home
                        Office Researcher.

30)         August 2006      Article from "Times Online" headed "Beijing
                        pledges a fight to the death".

31)         Playul.com - various articles.






-----------------------
[1] This determination varied so as to remove paragraph 119(g) in
accordance with Consent Order in the Court of Appeal, 5 October 2007

