











R (on the  application  of  Bhudia)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
Department (para 284(iv) and (ix)) IJR [2016] UKUT 00025 (IAC)




                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber


                       Judicial Review Decision Notice






           The Queen on the application of Jyotika Priyesh Bhudia
                                                                   Applicant
                                      v


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent






            Before The Honourable Mr Justice McCloskey, President
                        Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer


                                  Judgment

            Delivered orally on 20 November 2015 and  in writing
                             on 02 December 2015




            Application for judicial review: substantive decision

On  this  substantive  application  for  judicial   review   and   following
consideration of the documents lodged by the parties and having heard  Mr  M
Ahmed and Mr I Ali, both of Counsel, instructed by Equity Law Solicitors  on
behalf of the Applicant and Mr  S  Karim,  of  Counsel,  instructed  by  the
Government Legal Department on behalf of the Respondent,  at  a  hearing  at
Manchester Civil Justice Centre, on 20 November 2015.


   i) The correct construction of paragraph 284(iv) of the Immigration Rules
      is that the applicant has a period of 28 days within which to make  an
      extension of stay application,  measured  from  the  date  immediately
      following the last day of leave in the United Kingdom.


  ii) The purported requirement in  Form  FLR(M)  that  an  application  for
      further leave to remain in the United Kingdom as a spouse be supported
      by certain correspondence in specified terms is unlawful.

 iii) The requirement previously enshrined in paragraph  284(ix)(a)  of  the
      Immigration Rules that an applicant provide an English  Language  test
      certificate in specified terms is satisfied where  the  applicant  has
      already provided a certificate of this kind to the Secretary of  State
      which has been accepted  as valid.

  iv) The jurisdiction of the Upper Tribunal in judicial review  proceedings
      to determine any of the issues  raised  is  not  extinguished  by  the
      Secretary of State's withdrawal of the decision under challenge:  R  v
      Secretary of State for the Home Department, ex parte Salem  [1999]  AC
      450 applied.


                 Decision:  the application for judicial review is granted

McCloskey J

Introduction

   1. This judgment, to which both members of the  panel  have  contributed,
      determines  the  Applicant's  substantive  application  for   judicial
      review, permission having been granted by order of  His  Honour  Judge
      Raynor QC dated 13 February 2015.


   2. The material facts are uncontentious and we summarise them  thus.  The
      Applicant is a national of India, aged 24 years.  She and her  husband
      were married in India on 19 October 2011.  Her  husband  is  a  person
      present and settled in the United Kingdom.  On 05 February  2012,  the
      Applicant was granted entry clearance, valid until 15 May 2014, in her
      capacity of spouse of such a person.  On 30 May 2014  she  applied  to
      the Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department  (hereinafter  "the
      Respondent") for further leave to remain in the United Kingdom in  the
      same capacity.  By the Respondent's decision dated 02 July  2014  this
      application  was  refused.   This  refusal  is  the  subject  of   the
      Applicant's judicial review challenge.

The Impugned Decision

   3. The Respondent's decision maker gave three reasons  for  refusing  the
      application:

      (a)   The Applicant did not have leave to enter or remain at the  time
           of applying as her leave had expired on 15 May 2014.

      (b)   "You have failed to demonstrate that your marriage is subsisting
           by not providing six items of correspondence  addressed  to  you
           and your partner at the same address as evidence that  you  have
           been living together during the past two years".

      (c)   "You have  not  provided  evidence  that  you  have  achieved  a
           qualification in English to LEVEL  A1  of  the  Common  European
           Framework of Reference for Language".

      We shall consider each of these reasons in turn. We preface this  with
      the observation  that,  in  substance,  the  grounds  upon  which  the
      Respondent's decision is impugned are a mixture of  illegality  and  a
      breach of the Wednesbury principles consisting of irrationality and  a
      failure to take into account all material evidence.

The Paragraph 284(iv) Issue

   4. Paragraph 284 of the  Immigration  Rules  ("the  Rules")  enshrines  a
      series of requirements to be satisfied in the case of a person seeking
      "an extension of stay as the spouse  or  civil  partner  of  a  person
      present and settled in the United Kingdom".  In the context  of  these
      proceedings, the material requirement is the following:

           "The requirements for an extension of  stay  as  the  spouse  or
           civil partner of a person present  and  settled  in  the  United
           Kingdom are that ..........


           (iv)   The  applicant  has  not  remained  in  breach   of   the
                 immigration laws, disregarding any  period  of  overstaying
                 for a period of 28 days or less ...."

      This is one of a lengthy series of conjunctive requirements listed  in
      paragraph 284. Paragraph 285 is also significant:


           "An extension of stay as the spouse or civil partner of a person
           present and settled in the United Kingdom may be granted  for  a
           period  of  two  years  in  the  first  instance,  provided  the
           Secretary of State is satisfied that each of the requirements of
           paragraph 284 is met."

      [The underlining is ours,  for  reasons  which  will  become  apparent
infra]

   5. There are three particularly significant dates.  The first is  15  May
      2014, the date upon which the  Applicant's  leave  to  remain  in  the
      United Kingdom expired. The second is 30 May 2014, the date upon which
      she made her application to the Respondent. The third is 02 July 2014,
      the date of the Respondent's decision.  It is common ground  that  the
      Applicant became an overstayer on 16 May 2014. The simple question  is
      whether, given this status and having  regard  to  the  aforementioned
      dates, paragraph 284(iv) is to be construed and applied to her benefit
      or detriment.

   6. This issue, which requires  paragraph  284(iv)  of  the  Rules  to  be
      construed by the Tribunal, gives rise in our judgement to a relatively
      uncomplicated exercise and outcome.  The arguments on  behalf  of  the
      parties joined issue on the question of whether the "period of  grace"
      of 28 days is  to  be  measured  by  reference  to  the  date  of  the
      application made under paragraph 284 or the date of  the  Respondent's
      decision. The two competing interpretations in the  arguments  of  the
      parties' representatives are:

        a) The applicant has a period of 28 days within which to  make  the
           extension  of  stay  application,   measured   from   the   date
           immediately following the last day  of  lawful  sojourn  in  the
           United Kingdom.


        b) Irrespective of the  date  upon  which  the  extension  of  stay
           application  is  made,  the  applicant   becomes   an   unlawful
           overstayer upon the expiry of 28  days  beginning  on  the  date
           immediately following the last day  of  lawful  sojourn  in  the
           United Kingdom, with the result that if the Secretary  of  State
           has not determined the application within such 28 day period  it
           must be refused on account of non-compliance with paragraph  284
           (iv).

   7. In Mahad (And Others) v Entry Clearance Officer [2009] UKSC  16,  Lord
      Brown, collating and summarising dicta of  the  Court  of  Appeal  and
      recalling the words of Lord Hoffmann in Odelola v Secretary  of  State
      for the Home Department [2009] 1 WLR 1230, at [4], stated at [10]:

           "Essentially it  comes  to  this.   The  Rules  are  not  to  be
           construed with all the strictness applicable to the construction
           of a statue or a statutory  instrument  but,  instead,  sensibly
           according to the natural and ordinary meaning of the words used,
           recognising that they are statements of the Secretary of State's
           administrative policy ....


           [The intention of the Secretary of State]  is  to  be  discerned
           objectively from the language used, not divined by reference  to
           supposed policy considerations. Still less is the  Secretary  of
           State's intention to be discovered from Immigration Directorates
           Instructions (IDIs) issued intermittently to  guide  immigration
           officers in their application of the  Rules  ....   pursuant  to
           paragraph 1(3) of Schedule 2 to the 1971 Act ...."

      Further guidance is provided by Iqbal  (And  Others)  v  Secretary  of
      State for the Home Department [2015] EWCA  Civ  169,  at  [31],  which
      highlighted that the exercise of rewriting any provision of the  Rules
      under the guise of purposive construction is a forbidden one.  It  was
      further stated, at [33], that the court:


           "... cannot and should not construe  the  Secretary  of  State's
           rules to mean something different from what, on a fair objective
           reading, they actually say."

      Finally, we remind ourselves of  the  long  established  principle  of
      statutory  interpretation  that  the  Court  will   lean   against   a
      construction giving rise to an absurdity where the words  in  question
      are capable of bearing the suggested alternative meaning.

   8. Against this background of principle, we consider paragraph 284(iv) of
      the Rules in its full context.  Paragraph 284 belongs to Part 8 of the
      Rules, which is a free standing compartment dedicated  exclusively  to
      the topic of "Family Members".  In broad terms, it regulates the grant
      of leave to enter and remain in the United Kingdom to different  types
      of members of the family of a person who is  residing  lawfully  here.
      The family members who are  the  subject  of  regulation  within  this
      regime, which operates in tandem with Appendix FM, include spouses and
      civil partners.  It is clear from a reading of Part 8 as a whole  that
      the decision making process which it contemplates in every  case  will
      have three basic elements: an application by the  person  seeking  the
      benefit or status in question, the consideration of  such  application
      and the determination thereof by a final decision.

   9. The scheme of paragraph  284  of  Part  8  is  to  list  a  series  of
      requirements which must be satisfied by a person seeking an  extension
      of stay as the spouse or civil partner of a person present and settled
      in the United Kingdom. On behalf of the Respondent, Mr Karim submitted
      that paragraph 284(iv) is to  be  construed  as  meaning  that  if  an
      applicant's extension of stay  application  has  not  been  determined
      within a period of 28 days beginning on the date  when  the  applicant
      became an overstayer, the application is non-compliant with  paragraph
      284 and must be refused. We reject  this  submission.  We  prefer  the
      construction that the 28 day period specified in paragraph 284(iv)  is
      to be measured by reference to the date of the  application  made  and
      that the requirement  enshrined  in  this  subparagraph  is  satisfied
      provided that the application is made  within  a  period  of  28  days
      beginning on the date immediately  following  the  final  day  of  the
      applicant's lawful sojourn in the United Kingdom. We thus conclude for
      the following reasons.

  10. The Respondent's submission is not supported by  the  wording  of  the
      rule. Nor does it derive force from any of the surrounding provisions.
      It creates the spectre of a world of uncertainty and  unpredictability
      in which the question of whether an applicant's  permitted  period  of
      overstaying  28 days maximum is to be disregarded for the purposes  of
      284(iv) would hinge upon the unpredictable and uncertain event of  the
      determination of his application. We can find no  indications  in  the
      rule that this is the underlying intention. The construction which  we
      prefer is supported by the values and merits of  coherence,  certainty
      and predictability. It is further reinforced by the consideration that
      the one clear and certain  touchstone  throughout  the  paragraph  284
      regime is the date  upon  which  the  application  is  made.  We  take
      judicial notice of the reality that the determination of  applications
      made under the Immigration Rules is frequently delayed for many months
      and, indeed, longer still, sometimes several years.  The  Respondent's
      suggested construction  would  mean  that  a  person  who  lodged  his
      application many months, or indeed longer,  prior  to  expiry  of  his
      lawful status in the United Kingdom  and  which  application  complied
      with all of the other provisions of paragraph 284 would  abruptly  and
      without notice or  forewarning  suddenly  find  his  application  non-
      compliant solely on the ground of its heavily  delayed  determination.
      This would be both  capricious  and  manifestly  unfair.   We  further
      consider that this would give rise  to  an  aberrant,  capricious  and
      wholly unjustifiable outcome.

The Six Items of Correspondence issue

  11. As recorded in [3] above, the second refusal reason was based  on  the
      Applicant's failure to  provide  six  items  of  correspondence  of  a
      certain type.   The  provenance  of  this  "requirement"  is  of  some
      significance.  It is nowhere to  be  found  in  primary  or  secondary
      legislation.  Nor is it contained anywhere in the Rules.   Rather,  it
      is to be found in the pro-forma application form, described as  FLR(M)
      Application Form (E version 04/204).  This  document  consists  of  52
      relatively dense pages and is divided into 14  Sections.   In  Section
      12, under the rubric of "Documents", it is stated:

           "If you are applying as an unmarried or same-sex partner, or  if
           you answered  no  to  question  5.1  and  are  applying  for  an
           extension  of  stay  although  you  have  completed  or   nearly
           completed two years leave to enter or remain  in  the  UK  as  a
           partner, in addition to the relevant  documents  in  sub-section
           12(A) you must provide the following documents: ...


                 six items of correspondence  addressed  to  you  and  your
                 partner at the same address as evidence that you have  been
                 living together during the past two years.  See Note 9".

      Note 9 follows immediately, stating:

      "The items of correspondence should be addressed to you jointly or  in
           both your names.  If you do not have enough items in your  joint
           names, you may also provide  items  addressed  to  each  of  you
           individually if they show the same address for both of you ...

       Examples  of  acceptable  items  are  listed  below.   The  documents
           provided must be originals ...

           The dates of the items of correspondence  should  spread  evenly
           over the whole two years.  They should be from  at  least  three
           different sources ...

           Please give an explanation on a separate  sheet  if  you  cannot
           provide six items; if the items are not  addressed  to  both  of
           you; or if they do not cover the two year period".

      There  follows  a  list  of   "Examples   of   acceptable   items   of
      correspondence".  Most  of  the  illustrations  which  follow  do  not
      properly  attract   the   appellation   of   "correspondence":    bank
      statements,  building  society  savings  books,  council  tax   bills,
      electricity and/or gas bills  or  statements,  water  rates  bills  or
      statements,  mortgage  statements/agreement,  tenancy  agreement   and
      telephone bills or statements.

  12. The excerpts from Form FLR(M) reproduced above belong to  page  45  of
      the document.  Also of relevance is a short passage under the  heading
      "Final Checks", on page 52

           "If you are unable to send us any of the documents specified  in
           section 12, which are relevant to your application,  or  if  you
           are unable to provide originals, have you given  an  explanation
           and said when you will be able to send them?"


      In the case of this Applicant, the small box adjacent to this  passage
      was not ticked. We  find  this  unsurprising,  having  regard  to  the
      confusing and ambiguous nature of the language used in  the  question,
      which could reasonably be understood by many to convey that it applies
      only  if  a  requisite  document  is  (or  requisite  documents   are)
      unavailable  at  present  but  can  be  provided  at  a  later   date.
      Furthermore, there is  no  provision  within  the  52  page  form  for
      providing  an  explanation  for  non-inclusion  and/or  stating   when
      provision will become possible.  While, as appears above,  Section  12
      contemplates the use of "a separate sheet" in  certain  eventualities,
      the language used here does not accord with the "Final Checks" passage
      reproduced above.

  13. The sheet anchor in the submissions of  Mr  Ahmed  on  behalf  of  the
      Applicant is the  decision  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  Ishtiaq  v
      Secretary of State for the Home Department [2007] EWCA Civ  386.   The
      Appellant in this  case  made  an  application  under  the  Rules  for
      indefinite leave to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  qua  victim  of
      domestic violence. The requirements prescribed in the  Rules  did  not
      include the provision of  any  specified  documentary  evidence.   The
      application was refused on the basis of the Appellant's  inability  to
      provide evidence in the form of one or more of the documents specified
      in the  Secretary  of  State's  Immigration  Directorate  Instructions
      "(IDIs)".  We interpose the observation that an IDI is  an  instrument
      made by the Secretary of State pursuant to paragraph 1(3) of  Schedule
      2 to the Immigration Act 1971.

  14. The Secretary of State's defence included in  particular  reliance  on
      one of the four express requirements set out in the Rules, namely that
      the applicant:

           "(iv) is able to produce such evidence as may be required by the
           Secretary of State to establish that the relationship was caused
           to permanently break down before the end of  that  period  as  a
           result of domestic violence".

      Rejecting this argument and allowing the appeal, Dyson LJ,  delivering
      the judgment of the court, stated:

           "32.  If it had been intended that applicants could  only  prove
                 that they have been the victims  of  domestic  violence  by
                 producing documents of the kind specified in the IDI,  this
                 could have been achieved easily enough in the rule. One way
                 of doing it  would  have  been  to  specify  the  necessary
                 documents in the rule itself. This is  the  technique  that
                 was adopted in a different context in  section  88  of  the
                 2002 Act, which provides  that  a  person  may  not  appeal
                 against an immigration  decision  which  is  taken  on  the
                 grounds that he (or a person of whom  he  is  a  dependant)
                 does not have an  "immigration  document  of  a  particular
                 kind". Section 88(3) defines "immigration document".
           33.   Another way of doing it would have been to state in  terms
                 that an application  may  succeed  only  if  the  applicant
                 produces one or more of the documents specified in the IDIs
                 or similar instructions issued by the Secretary of State to
                 caseworkers. In that way, it would have been clear that the
                 decision as to what kind of evidence to require  was  taken
                 out of the hands of the caseworkers. If it had been done in
                 either  of  these  ways,  Parliament  would  have  had  the
                 opportunity to consider the  point  when  scrutinising  the
                 Rules. It might not have approved a rule  which  took  away
                 from  the  caseworker  the  discretion  to  decide  in  the
                 particular case what evidence to require for  the  purposes
                 of para 289A(iv), a  discretion  whose  exercise  would  be
                 susceptible to review on appeal: see  section  86(3)(b)  of
                 the 2002 Act. The exercise  of  discretion  in  formulating
                 policy in the shape of instructions such as the IDIs is not
                 susceptible to appeal, although I accept that it  could  be
                 the subject of challenge by way of judicial review.
           34.    In  view  of  the  purpose  of  para  289A,   and   since
                 subparagraph  (iv)  does  not  clearly  provide   that   an
                 applicant may only prove the necessary facts  by  producing
                 evidence of the kind prescribed by the Secretary  of  State
                 in instructions to caseworkers, I would hold that  it  does
                 not have that effect."

      The court further held that the relevant parts of  the  IDIs  did  not
      have the effect of inflexible  prescription.   On  the  contrary,  the
      provision of the Rules quoted above  conferred  a  discretion  on  the
      decision maker: see [39].

15.   Furthermore, we consider the  decision  of  the  Supreme  Court  in  R
      (Alvi) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2012] UKSC 33  to
      be in point.  This held that any requirement in  immigration  guidance
      or codes of practice which, if not satisfied  by  the  migrant,  would
      result in an application for leave to enter or remain  in  the  United
      Kingdom being refused is tantamount to a "rule" within the meaning  of
      Section 3(2) of the 1971 statute.  Accordingly,  if  not  laid  before
      Parliament, it does not have the quality of law.   See  in  particular
      per Lord Hope at [41]:

           "A contrast may be drawn between the rules and the  instructions
           (not inconsistent with the rules) which the Secretary  may  give
           to immigration officers under paragraph 1(3) of  Schedule  2  to
           the 1971 Act. As Sedley LJ said in ZH (Bangladesh)  v  Secretary
           of State for the Home Department [2009] Imm AR 450, para 32, the
           instructions do not have, and  cannot  be  treated  as  if  they
           possessed, the force of law. The  Act  does  not  require  those
           instructions or documents which give guidance of  various  kinds
           to caseworkers, of which there are very many, to be laid  before
           Parliament. But the rules must be. So everything which is in the
           nature of a rule as to  the  practice  to  be  followed  in  the
           administration of the Act is subject to this requirement. Resort
           to the technique of referring to outside  documents,  which  the
           Scrutiny Committee can ask to be produced if it  wishes  to  see
           them,  is  not  in  itself  objectionable.  But   it   will   be
           objectionable if it enables the Secretary of State to avoid  her
           statutory obligation to lay any  changes  in  the  rules  before
           Parliament."

      See also [62]. Lord Dyson, with whom Lord  Hope  agreed,  offered  the
      following formulation at [94]:

           "In my view, the solution which best achieves these  objects  is
           that a rule is any requirement which a migrant must satisfy as a
           condition of being given leave to enter or leave to  remain,  as
           well as any provision "as to the period for which leave is to be
           given  and  the  conditions  to   be   attached   in   different
           circumstances" (there can be no doubt about the latter since  it
           is expressly provided for in section 3(2)). I would exclude from
           the definition any procedural requirements which do not have  to
           be satisfied as a condition of the grant of leave  to  enter  or
           remain. But it seems to me that any requirement  which,  if  not
           satisfied by the migrant, will lead to an application for  leave
           to enter or remain being refused is a rule within the meaning of
           section 3(2). That is what Parliament was interested in when  it
           enacted section 3(2). It wanted to have a say in the rules which
           set out the  basis  on  which  these  applications  were  to  be
           determined"

      We consider that this decision applies a fortiori to a requirement  of
      this species introduced by the mechanism of an  application  form.  We
      note that the issue of the interplay between the Rules and  IDI's  has
      arisen again most recently in R (Ali and Bibi) v  Secretary  of  State
      for the Home Department  [2015]  UKSC  68,  where  an  incompatibility
      between the two regimes was identified.


  16. We construe the effect of the decisions in Ishtiaq and Alvi to be,  by
      logical extension, that the Secretary of State cannot lawfully augment
      or modify any particular regime or compartment within the  Immigration
      Rules by the purported introduction of a requirement of the  grant  of
      leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom via the mechanism of an
      application form.  The fundamental reason for this is  that  it  lacks
      the necessary parliamentary scrutiny required by section 3(2)  of  the
      1971 statute.  In short, as we stated in our ex tempore judgment,  the
      "six items of correspondence" stipulation does not have the quality of
      law or the character of an Immigration Rule in the sense  set  out  in
      Alvi at [62] and [94].


  17. Furthermore, the effect of both the Respondent's decision in this case
      and the submissions advanced by her counsel is that the stipulation is
      not treated by caseworkers as mere policy guidance.   It  is,  rather,
      applied as a rigid condition sine qua  non.  Our  primary  conclusion,
      expressed above, is that this is not a legally effective  requirement.
      If this conclusion is wrong, we consider, in the alternative, that the
      impugned decision is vitiated on the ground that, at its  height,  the
      "six items" requirement did not prescribe an inflexible condition  but
      was, rather, an expression of policy guidance to caseworkers. However,
      it was wrongly construed  by  the  decision  maker  as  an  inflexible
      condition sine qua non, thereby precluding the exercise of  discretion
      and importing a fetter  in  plain  contravention  of  the  well  known
      British  Oxygen  principle:  see  British  Oxygen  Company  Limited  v
      Minister of Technology [1971] AC 610.

The English Language Qualification Issue

  18. The third of  the  reasons  proffered  for  refusing  the  Applicant's
      application was  that  evidence  of  the  requisite  English  Language
      qualification had not been provided: see [3] above.  Paragraph 284  of
      the Rules, under the rubric of "Requirements for an extension of  stay
      as the spouse or civil partner of a person present and settled in  the
      United Kingdom", begins  with  the  words  reproduced  in  [4]  above,
      followed by 11 subparagraphs some of which are broken down  into  sub-
      subparagraphs.  We calculate that there are 18 requirements in  total,
      arranged in conjunctive terms.  In the context of  the  third  of  the
      refusal reasons the relevant provision is subparagraph (ix)(a),  which
      states:

           "the  applicant  provides  an  original  English  Language  test
           certificate in speaking and listening from an  English  Language
           test provider approved by  the  Secretary  of  State  for  these
           purposes, which clearly  shows  the  Applicant's  name  and  the
           qualification obtained (which must meet or exceed  level  A1  of
           the common European framework of reference) unless ...".

      This is followed by three specified exceptions, of no moment  in  this
      context.

  19. In Section 5 of the completed Form FLR(M) the  Applicant  stated  that
      she had been lawfully present in the United Kingdom from 13 March 2012
      (some two years previously) in accordance with a spousal visa.  It  is
      common ground that in order to secure this  visa  the  Applicant  must
      have provided evidence of the English Language  qualification  in  the
      terms specified in paragraph 284 (ix)(a) of the rules.   In  answering
      the relevant question in Section 8 of the Form the  Applicant  stated,
      in terms, that having been granted an  initial  period  of  two  years
      leave to remain in the United Kingdom she had  reached  the  stage  of
      applying for an extension, with a view to undertaking the knowledge of
      life in England test and  securing  this  further  qualification.   Mr
      Ahmed submitted, without challenge, that this is  the  normal  pattern
      and sequence in cases of this kind.  The  Applicant  did  not  provide
      details of her English language qualification or attach  the  relevant
      certificate.


20.    We  construe  paragraph  284  (ix)(a)  of  the  Rules,  applying  the
      principles rehearsed in [7] above in the following way.   We  note  in
      particular that there is no requirement in this provision of the Rules
      that the English language qualification be of any particular  vintage.
      In addition, the effect of E-LTRP 4.1  of  Appendix  FM  is  that  the
      specified evidence to be  provided  does  not  include  proof  of  the
      requisite English language test  in  any  case  where  this  has  been
      provided in the context of "a previous  application  for  leave  as  a
      partner or parent".  Furthermore, we highlight that the  Secretary  of
      State is indivisible.  There is no  suggestion  that  the  Applicant's
      English language certificate had expired or had been invalidated.   It
      had been accepted by the indivisible Secretary of State some two years
      previously.  In our judgment, on the particular facts  of  this  case,
      this  was  sufficient  to  satisfy  paragraph   284   (ix)(a).    This
      construction  is  supported  by  the  standards   of   common   sense,
      reasonableness and flexibility emphasised  by  Lord  Brown  in  Mahad.
      Given the material facts which we have identified, we  are  unable  to
      ascertain any intention underpinning this provision of the Rules  that
      this Applicant should suffer the draconian penalty of refusal  of  her
      application in these circumstances.

The Jurisdictional Issue

21.   The hearing of this substantive application for  judicial  review  was
      conducted on 20 November 2015.  At the conclusion of the  hearing,  we
      announced that we would adjourn for  several  minutes  and  then  give
      judgment ex tempore.  Upon returning to the  courtroom,  a  moment  of
      mild drama unfolded. Counsel for the Respondent,  Mr  Karim,  informed
      the panel that he had instructions  to  withdraw  the  decision  under
      challenge.  In the exchanges with the bench which followed,  Mr  Karim
      submitted that the Tribunal no longer possessed jurisdiction  to  give
      judgment. We rejected this  submission,  for  the  following  reasons.
      First, it is unsupported by authority or  principle.   Second,  it  is
      inconsistent  with  the  public  law  character  of  judicial   review
      proceedings.  Third, it finds no support in any of the  provisions  of
      the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008. On  the  contrary,
      it is confounded by Rule 17 which provides, in material part:

           "(1)  Subject to paragraph (2), a party may give notice  of  the
                 withdrawal of its case, or any part of it - ............


                    b) orally, at a hearing.

           (2)   Notice of withdrawal will not take effect unless the Upper
                 Tribunal consents to the withdrawal except in  relation  to
                 an application for permission to appeal."


22.   The coup de grace  to  Mr  Karim's  submission  is  delivered  by  the
      decision of the House of Lords in R v Secretary of State for the  Home
      Department, ex parte Salem [1999] AC 450. In that case, the issue  was
      whether the Appellant, an  unsuccessful  asylum  applicant,  had  been
      lawfully denied income support.  One  month  prior  to  the  scheduled
      hearing in the House of Lords, the  Treasury  Solicitor  informed  the
      Judicial Office that the Appellant's appeal to a  special  adjudicator
      had succeeded, with the result that he would receive back  payment  of
      the benefits in question. The question which  arose  was  whether  the
      appeal  was  thereby  rendered  academic.   The  House  provided   the
      following guidance, in the speech of Lord Slynn, at page 456g/457c:

           "My Lords, I accept, as both counsel  agree,  that  in  a  cause
           where there is an issue involving a public  authority  as  to  a
           question of public law, your Lordships have a discretion to hear
           the appeal, even if by the time the  appeal  reaches  the  House
           there is no longer a lis  to  be  decided  which  will  directly
           affect the rights and obligations of the parties inter  se.  The
           decisions in the Sun Life case and Ainsbury v.  Millington  (and
           the  reference  to  the  latter  in  Rule  42  of  the  Practice
           Directions Applicable to Civil Appeals (January  1996)  of  your
           Lordships'  House)  must  be  read  accordingly  as  limited  to
           disputes concerning private law rights between  the  parties  to
           the case.
           The discretion to hear disputes, even in the area of public law,
           must, however, be exercised with caution and appeals  which  are
           academic between the parties should not be heard unless there is
           a good reason in the  public  interest  for  doing  so,  as  for
           example (but only by way of example) when a  discrete  point  of
           statutory construction arises which does  not  involve  detailed
           consideration of facts and where a large number of similar cases
           exist or are anticipated so that the issue will most likely need
           to be resolved in the near future"

      The theme which shines brightly in this short passage is that  of  the
      public law arena.  In our ex tempore ruling at the conclusion  of  the
      substantive hearing, we rejected the Respondent's submission  on  this
      basis.

23.   For this combination of reasons we are  satisfied  that  the  Tribunal
      retains jurisdiction  to  adjudicate  on  the  issues  raised  by  the
      Applicant's  challenge,   notwithstanding  the  Respondent's   belated
      surrender.  Judicial review entails no lis  inter-partes  and  has  an
      important educative function. We consider that the  issues  ventilated
      in these proceedings are  of  sufficient  importance  to  warrant  the
      promulgation of a judgment which will be available  to  all.  For  the
      record, having considered Mr Karim's submission, we proceeded to  give
      judgment ex tempore.

Order


24.   The Applicant succeeds and we make an Order quashing the  Respondent's
      decision dated 02 July 2014.

25.    The effect of this quashing order is  that  the  Respondent  will  be
      obliged  to  undertake  a  full  reconsideration  of  the  Applicant's
      application, duly guided by this judgment.  This  exercise  will  also
      engage the public law obligation to take  into  account  all  material
      considerations and  evidence,  which  will  include  anything  new  or
      additional that may be provided  by  the  Applicant.   We  trust  that
      avoidable future litigation will not eventuate.

Costs

26.   The Applicant is entitled  to  her  costs,  which  will  be  summarily
      assessed in default of agreement. The Respondent has a  period  of  14
      days, running from  20  November  2015,  to  make  representations  in
      writing in response to the Applicant's costs schedule.


Permission to Appeal

27.   We identify no issue of sufficiently elevated  importance  to  warrant
      the grant of permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal.

                   Signed :
                       [pic]
                 The Honourable Mr Justice McCloskey
                  President  of  the   Upper   Tribunal,   Immigration   and
                 Asylum Chamber


            Dated:          26 November 2015















Applicant's solicitors:
Respondent's solicitors:
Home Office Ref:
Decision(s) sent to above parties on:
----------------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------
 Notification of appeal rights

A decision by the Upper Tribunal on an application for judicial review is  a
decision that disposes of proceedings.

 A party may appeal against such a decision to the  Court  of  Appeal  on  a
question of law only. Any party who wishes to appeal  should  apply  to  the
Upper Tribunal for permission, at the  hearing  at  which  the  decision  is
given. If no application is made, the Tribunal must nonetheless consider  at
the hearing whether to give or refuse permission to appeal (rule  44(4B)  of
the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

If the Tribunal refuses permission, either in response to an application  or
by virtue of rule 44(4B), then the party wishing to  appeal  can  apply  for
permission from the Court of Appeal itself. This must be done by  filing  an
appellant's notice with the Civil Appeals Office  of  the  Court  of  Appeal
within 28 days of the date the Tribunal's decision on permission  to  appeal
was given (Civil Procedure Rules Practice Direction 52D 3.3(2)).




