

Asylum and Immigration Tribunal

     IN (Domestic violence - IDI - policy) Pakistan [2007] UKAIT 00024



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 1 February 2007                            |On 05 March 2007             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE LANE
                      Senior Immigration Judge mCgEACHY

                                   Between


                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A. Mahmood, Solicitor, of Bedford Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms R Brown, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

               The IDI of March 2006 on Victims of  Domestic  Violence  does
    not contain any policy on the part of the Secretary  of  State  whereby
    persons may be granted indefinite  leave  to  remain  if  the  domestic
    violence that caused the marriage or other relationship to  break  down
    occurred after the end of the relevant probationary period mentioned in
    paragraph 289A of the Immigration Rules.



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant, a citizen of Pakistan born on 20 July 1982,  arrived  in
    the United Kingdom on 2 June 2002 with leave to enter as the spouse  of
    a person present and settled in this country.  The period of leave  was
    until 20 May 2003.  After the  expiry  of  that  leave,  the  appellant
    applied for leave to remain on the basis that she  was  the  victim  of
    domestic violence.  That application was refused on 22  February  2006,
    when the respondent decided that the appellant should be  removed  from
    the United Kingdom, by  way  of  directions.   The  appellant  appealed
    against that decision to the Tribunal  and  her  appeal  was  heard  at
    Hatton Cross on 6 April 2006 by Immigration Judge Burns.  He  dismissed
    the appellant's appeal, both  in  relation  to  the  Immigration  Rules
    (paragraph 289A of HC 395) and on human rights grounds.

2.   On 16 May 2006 reconsideration of the Immigration Judge's decision  was
    ordered under section 103A of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002.  The Senior Immigration Judge who ordered reconsideration was
    concerned that the second  of  the  appellant's  three  grounds,  which
    accompanied the application for  reconsideration,  suggested  that  the
    Immigration Judge should arguably have allowed the appeal, in the light
    of the facts found by him, to the extent of requiring the respondent to
    consider the appellant's application  in  the  light  of  a  particular
    published policy, said to be contained in the  Immigration  Directorate
    Instructions of March 2006 regarding the victims of domestic  violence.



3.   At paragraph 6 of the determination, the Immigration Judge set out  the
    nature of the appellant's assertions that she  had  been  subjected  to
    domestic violence at the hands of her husband.  The  Immigration  Judge
    referred to a letter of 2 April 2004  from  Luton  Women's  Aid,  which
    recorded that the appellant had been known to that  organisation  since
    the beginning of that year,  having  requested  its  support  following
    "severe physical  and  mental  abuse  by  her  husband,  who  was  also
    supported by his family".  On 2 June 2004 the  appellant  forwarded  to
    the respondent a letter from her GP, in which it was recorded that  the
    appellant had been seen in the practice

        "quite a few times with various  complaints  mostly  of  a  trivial
        nature but on 3 March 2004 when she saw one  of  the  partners  she
        alleged she was having a lot of family problems and not getting  on
        well with her husband.  She feels depressed and lonely."


 4.  On 20 May 2004, the appellant visited her doctor and "alleged that  she
    had been assaulted a few times by her husband in the past but could not
    report this to anyone because of the Asian culture."   On  examination,
    the doctor could not find any sign of assault or  injury,  although  he
    considered that the appellant appeared depressed, anxious and  worried.



5.   At paragraph 12, the Immigration Judge recorded the  appellant  in  her
    witness statement of 27 March 2006 as saying that "there  had  been  an
    incident in August 2002 when for the first time her husband had  abused
    her.  He had slapped her and sworn  at  her."   At  paragraph  13,  the
    Immigration Judge noted that a few months  before  the  expiry  of  her
    leave on 20 May 2003, the  appellant  informed  her  husband  "that  he
    should assist her in applying for indefinite stay.   He  said  that  he
    would not do that and that he would get her deported."  She  was  again
    beaten by her husband in March 2004 and told to get out of  the  house.
    Whilst walking along the street, a Mr SK, an "aid worker" who  happened
    to be driving past the appellant in his car, picked her up and took her
    to a refuge.  On 19 April 2004 Mr SK made an application on  behalf  of
    the appellant under the Domestic Violence Concession.  Having left  the
    matrimonial home, the appellant, however, then  "resumed  married  life
    with her husband but on September 2004  he  attacked  her."   Following
    this, she again left the matrimonial home and had not seen her  husband
    since September 2004.  A letter  from  her  doctor  of  30  March  2006
    described the appellant having "black eyelids, both upper and lower  of
    the left eye, a small superficial bruise on the left side of the  neck,
    generalised aches and pains."  Although these were consistent  with  an
    assault as alleged by the appellant,  the  doctor  "could  not  confirm
    whether they were caused in that manner."

6.   At paragraph 18 of the determination, the  Immigration  Judge  recorded
    the evidence of Ms SK, one of three witnesses who gave  evidence.   The
    witness stated that after the appellant had left the  matrimonial  home
    in March "she had gone back there and had resumed life there  with  her
    husband."  At paragraph 19, apparently recording the oral  evidence  of
    the appellant, the Immigration Judge wrote that  "she  wanted  to  give
    [her husband] another chance."

7.   At paragraph 33, the Immigration Judge  stated  that  he  regarded  the
    appellant as displaying "a tendency to exaggeration."  He found her  to
    be "unsatisfactory as a witness on a number of points."  She could  not
    say who had written certain letters in  English  on  her  behalf.   The
    Immigration Judge regarded her answers in respect of why  she  had  not
    reported the alleged abuse to the medical agencies  or  the  police  as
    lacking conviction; nor was he persuaded by the "very limited  evidence
    with regard to the process of divorce."  In  summary,  the  Immigration
    Judge did not believe that the appellant was telling  the  whole  truth
    and considered that both she and  her  witnesses  were  stretching  the
    facts of the case "in an effort to make  them  comply  with  what  they
    perceived and understood to be the relevant Immigration Rule."

8.   Nevertheless, the Immigration Judge found the  following  facts  to  be
    established.  First, the appellant's leave to enter expired on  20  May
    2003.  Although the appellant "had  difficulties  with  her  marriage",
    these remained "at a relatively  low  level  until  March  2004."   The
    Immigration Judge found that the appellant separated from  her  husband
    around March 2004 but:

        "of her own will resumed married life with  him  from  around  June
        that year until September.  I did not accept that she was forced to
        resume married life and instead concluded that she did so willingly
        in the hope  of  reconciliation  and  an  improved  marriage.   The
        reconciliation  did  not  work,  and  the   marriage   broke   down
        permanently following assault by her husband in September  of  that
        year.  I accept that she was assaulted in March  2004,  that  being
        confirmed by the bruising on her arm." (paragraph 33)

9.   At paragraph 34, the  Immigration  Judge  found  that  the  appellant's
    leave had expired on 20  May  2003  "well  before  the  first  reported
    indication of matters being awry in or about March 2004."  The earliest
    date for a permanent  breakdown  of  the  marriage,  according  to  the
    Immigration Judge's findings  "would  appear  to  be  around  September
    2004."

10.  On that basis, the Immigration Judge did not find that  the  provisions
    of paragraph 289A of HC 395 had been met in the appellant's case.  That
    paragraph reads as follows:-

         "289A.   The requirements to be met by a person who is  the  victim
               of domestic violence and who is seeking indefinite leave  to
               remain in the United Kingdom are that the applicant:-


              (i) was admitted to the United Kingdom or given  an  extension
                    of stay for a period of 12 months as the spouse or civil
                    partner of a person present and settled here; or


              (ii)     was admitted  to  the  United  Kingdom  or  given  an
                    extension of stay  for  a  period  of  2  years  as  the
                    unmarried or same-sex partner of a  person  present  and
                    settled here; or


              (iii)    the  relationship  with  their  spouse  or  unmarried
                    partner  or  same-sex  partner,  as   appropriate,   was
                    subsisting at the beginning of the  relevant  period  of
                    leave or extension of stay referred to in  (i)  or  (ii)
                    above; and


              (iv)     is able to produce such evidence as may  be  required
                    by  the  Secretary  of  State  to  establish  that   the
                    relationship was caused to permanently break down before
                    the  end  of  that  period  as  a  result  of   domestic
                    violence."

11.  The Immigration Judge observed the requirement in paragraph  289A  that
    the permanent breakdown of the marriage must have occurred  before  the
    end of the period of leave as a result of domestic  violence.   On  the
    basis of the Immigration Judge's clear findings of fact, that  was  not
    what had happened in the present case.

12.  Having found that the appellant could not succeed  in  her  application
    under the Immigration  Rules,  the  Immigration  Judge  considered  the
    Immigration Directorate Instructions to caseworkers under  the  heading
    "Victims of Domestic Violence".  Paragraph 3.1  of  these  instructions
    reads as follows:-

         "3.1.    Other Acceptable Proof of Domestic Violence

             It is often difficult for  victims  of  domestic  violence  to
             produce the documentary evidence of violence as set out at 1.2
             above [it would seem this is a reference to paragraph 3(i)  to
             (iii)  of  the  IDI,  which  refer  to  an  injunction,   non-
             molestation order or other protection order; a relevant  court
             conviction; or full  details  of  a  relevant  police  caution
             issued  against  the  sponsor],  and   there   is   often   an
             unwillingness or insufficient evidence to take the  matter  to
             court.  Although caseworkers should still try to obtain police
             or court evidence confirmation  of  domestic  violence,  where
             this is not possible, acceptable evidence may take the form of
             more than one of the following:-


             - a medical report from a hospital doctor confirming that  the
             applicant has injuries  consistent  with  being  a  victim  of
             domestic violence;


             - a letter from a GMC registered family practitioner  who  has
             examined the applicant and is satisfied that the applicant has
             injuries consistent with being a victim of domestic violence;


             - an undertaking given to a court that the perpetrator of  the
             violence will not approach the applicant who is the victim  of
             the violence;


             - a police report confirming attendance at  the  home  of  the
             applicant as a result of a domestic violence;


              - a letter from a social services department  confirming  its
              involvement in connection with domestic violence;


              - a letter of support or report from a refuge;


               - a letter of support or a report from a  domestic  violence
              support organisation which is identified at annex AB.


             This evidence may relate  to  one  incident  or  a  number  of
             incidents and should confirm that domestic violence has  taken
             place.  Witness statements from friends or family and  letters
             from official sources that simply relay unfounded  reports  by
             the applicant but do not confirm the incident  should  not  be
             accepted.  Where two pieces of evidence have been supplied but
             concerns remain caseworkers may contact the applicant  to  ask
             for further information."

13.  Paragraph 3.6 was also relied upon by the appellant at the hearing:-

              "3.6     Out of Time Applications

             Applications made 'out  of  time'  after  the  expiry  of  the
             applicant's limited leave, where all  the  other  requirements
             are met, should nevertheless  be  considered  sympathetically.
             However, ILR should be granted outside the rules.   Acceptable
             reasons for the delay in making an application could  be  that
             the sponsor's passport (sic) had been withheld by the  sponsor
             or that the stress of the situation had led the  applicant  to
             overlook the need to regularise their immigration status.


             Applications from long-term overstayers who claim to have been
             victims of domestic violence, but are unable  to  provide  the
             evidence required, should be refused."

13.  At paragraph 34 of the determination, the Immigration Judge noted  that
    paragraph 3.6 of the IDI:-

        "refers to applications being made out of time, that is  after  the
        expiry of the applicant's  limited  leave,  'where  all  the  other
        requirements are met'.  One of the 'other requirements' is that the
        'relationship was caused to permanently break down before  the  end
        of that period as a result of domestic violence.'  Accordingly,  in
        the present appeal, the appellant does not satisfy the requirements
        of 289A, and the appeal in respect of the Immigration Rules  in  my
        view must fall on that head."

14.  For the appellant, Mr Mahmood, at  the  reconsideration  hearing  on  2
    February, sought to rely upon paragraph 2.1 of the IDI:-



              "2.1     Key Points

              The main points on which a caseworker needs to  be  satisfied
              in cases of domestic violence are:-

              - the applicant has limited leave to enter or remain  in  the
              UK as a spouse, civil  partner  or  unmarried  partner  of  a
              person present and settled here; and

              - the applicant is no longer living with the sponsor; and

              - the applicant was the  victim  and  the  domestic  violence
              occurred during the probationary period while the marriage or
              relationship was subsisting; and

              - domestic violence was the reason for the breakdown  of  the
              marriage or  relationship; and

              - there is proof that domestic violence took place."

16.  According to Mr Mahmood, the IDI contains a  published  policy  on  the
    part of the respondent, whereby a  person  may  be  granted  indefinite
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom if:-

               (a)  he  or  she  suffered  domestic  violence   during   the
    probationary period; and

         (b)  the marriage broke down after  the  end  of  the  probationary
             period, whether or not as a result of  the  domestic  violence
             which occurred during that period.

17.  The Tribunal does not find that the IDI contains any such policy.   The
    introduction to the document stresses the purpose of paragraph 289A  as
    being to provide a means whereby a person  who  has  limited  leave  to
    enter or remain in the United Kingdom as a spouse, unmarried partner or
    registered civil partner of a British citizen  or  person  present  and
    settled in this country, whose marriage  or  relationship  breaks  down
    during the probationary period as a result of domestic violence, may be
    granted indefinite leave to remain in the United Kingdom:-

         "provided  that  the  domestic   violence   occurred   during   the
         probationary period while the relationship was subsisting  and  the
         applicant is able to provide satisfactory  evidence  that  domestic
         violence has taken place".


18. The IDI enables caseworkers to grant leave,  in  suitable  cases,  where
    the strict requirements of paragraph 289A are  not  met,  for  example,
    where the types of evidence  described  in  paragraph  3  (standard  of
    proof), as being required by the respondent  under  paragraph  289A(iv)
    are not available to the applicant.  There is, however, nothing in  the
    IDI to suggest that  caseworkers  are  to  grant  indefinite  leave  by
    reference to it in circumstances where a person has overstayed and  the
    relationship with his or her spouse or partner  has  broken  down  only
    whilst the person has been an overstayer.  In the  ordinary  course  of
    events, a person with limited  leave  to  remain  as,  for  example,  a
    spouse, who wishes to remain indefinitely in  the  United  Kingdom,  is
    expected  to  apply  for  such  indefinite  leave  under  the  relevant
    provisions of the Immigration Rules (paragraphs 287 to 289).  Paragraph
    3.6 of the IDI provides for relief to be granted where the  application
    under paragraph 289A is made after the expiry of the limited leave, not
    because the relationship has failed to break down  before  the  end  of
    that leave but, as paragraph 3.6 makes plain, because  there  has  been
    understandable  "delay  in  making  an  application,"   such   as   the
    withholding of the applicant's passport (the reference to the sponsor's
    passport being an obvious misprint)  or  because  the  "stress  of  the
    situation has led the applicant to  overlook  the  need  to  regularise
    their immigration status."  The very  reference  in  paragraph  3.6  to
    "delay" is significant.  On Mr Mahmood's  interpretation,  there  would
    not be any delay.


19.  The interpretation of the IDI contended for by Mr Mahmood also has  the
    frankly peculiar consequence of breaking the causal connection  between
    the incident of domestic violence, which Mr  Mahmood  accepted  had  to
    occur  during  the  probationary  period,  and  the  breakdown  of  the
    relationship.   If  Mr  Mahmood's  primary   submission   as   to   the
    construction of the IDI were correct, there would be no need to require
    any domestic violence to occur during the probationary period.  To take
    the facts of the present case,  the  incident  of  violence  which  the
    Immigration Judge found had occurred in August 2002 was followed  by  a
    reconciliation, which involved the appellant resuming cohabitation with
    her husband.  According to her  account,  it  was  the  violence  which
    occurred in the summer  of  2004  that  resulted  in  the  relationship
    permanently breaking down.

20.  It follows from our findings  that  the  Immigration  Judge  could  not
    properly have allowed the appeal,  even  to  the  extent  described  in
    paragraph 2 above.


21.  The determination of the Immigration Judge does not contain a  material
    error of law and the Tribunal accordingly orders that it shall stand.






Signed                                  Date: 20 February 2007


Senior Immigration Judge Lane
