
 [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

            Nasim and others (Article 8) [2014] UKUT 00025 (IAC)

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|19th December 2013                            |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PETER LANE

                                   Between

                            (1) Mr Muhammad Nasim
                            (2) Mr Tahir Mahmood
                             (4) Mr Ahsan Khalid
                             (5) Mr Ahsan Naeem
                            (6) Mr Rizwan Bashir
                         (7) Mr Muhammad Arif Mughal
                       (8) Mr Muhammad Zulgarnain Arif
                      (9) Miss Noor Ul Huda Arif Mughal
                            (10) Miss Maham Arif
                             (11) MrS Safia Arif
                         (12) Mr Muhammad Afif Arif
                        (13) Mr Danisha Ejaz Qureshi
                       (17) Mr Kazi MOsharrof HOssain
                         (18) Mr Androo Haji Rafeek
                             (19) Mr Qummer Aziz
                       (20) Mr Abhilash Mukundhakshan
                            (21) Ms Sandeep Kaur
                             (22) Mr Sajid Abdul
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

   (The numbers allocated above to each appellant are the numbers given to
 them respectively in the decision in Nasim and Others (Raju: reasons not to
                     follow?) [2013] UKUT 00610 (IAC)).

Representation:

Appellant (1):         No appearance and no representation
Appellants (2), (13), (17), (21) and (22):   Mr A Baddar, Representative,
                                 of Farani Javid Taylor Solicitors LLP
Appellant (4):         Mr A Mehta, Representative, of Malik & Malik
                                 Solicitors
Appellant (5):         Ms A Mohsin, Counsel, instructed by Primax
                                 Solicitors
Appellants (6) to (12):         Mrs J Heybroek, Counsel, instructed by
                                 Morgan Mark Solicitors
Appellant (18):        Mr A Sreevalsalan, Solicitor, of Legend Solicitors
Appellant (19):        In person
Appellant (20):        In person
Respondent:       Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

The judgments of the Supreme Court in Patel and Others v Secretary of  State
for the Home Department [2013] UKSC 72 serve to re-focus  attention  on  the
nature and purpose  of  Article  8  of  the  ECHR  and,  in  particular,  to
recognise that Article's limited utility in private life cases that are  far
removed  from  the  protection  of  an  individual's  moral   and   physical
integrity.

A person's  human  rights  are  not  enhanced  by  not  committing  criminal
offences or not relying on public  funds.  The  only  significance  of  such
matters in cases  concerning  proposed  or  hypothetical  removal  from  the
United Kingdom is to preclude the Secretary of State from  pointing  to  any
public interest justifying removal, over and above the basic  importance  of
maintaining a firm and coherent system of immigration control.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

A.   Introduction

1.   This determination completes the Upper  Tribunal's  decision-making  in
    the appeals of the appellants listed above.  In Nasim and Others (Raju:
    reasons not to follow?) [2013] UKUT 00610 (IAC)  we  made  findings  in
    respect of a number of issues advanced by the appellants, in support of
    their submissions that they should be entitled to  succeed  in  appeals
    brought against decisions of the respondent to  refuse  to  vary  their
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom, notwithstanding the judgment  of
    the Court of Appeal in Raju and Others v Secretary  of  State  for  the
    Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ 754.  At [115] to [118]  of  Nasim  and
    Others it was explained that, in certain  of  the  appeals,  the  Upper
    Tribunal would reconvene to complete  proceedings  by  reference  to  a
    single matter, which could  not  conveniently  be  dealt  with  at  the
    hearing on 8th  October  2013;  namely,  whether,  in  each  case,  the
    appellant was entitled to succeed in his or her appeal  on  the  ground
    that his or her hypothetical  removal,  pursuant  to  the  decision  to
    refuse to vary leave, would violate the  United  Kingdom's  obligations
    under Article 8 of the ECHR.

2.   On 19th December 2013 we reconvened in order to consider  any  evidence
    and  submissions   which   the   relevant   appellants   and/or   their
    representatives wished to put forward,  and  to  hear  Mr  Jarvis  make
    submissions on behalf of the respondent.


B.   Procedural matters

3.   Mr Nasim (appellant (1)) did not appear on 19th December;  nor  was  he
    represented.  On 16th December  2013  his  advisors,  Immigration  Aid,
    wrote to the Upper Tribunal to say that Mr Nasim wished

         "to withdraw his above appeal which  is  pending  with  the  Upper
        Tribunal ... our client's circumstances have changed and he intends
        to  submit  a  fresh  application  in  a  different  category.   We
        understand that the decision of the Court of Appeal in Raju is  not
        in our client's favour and as such he does not intend  to  continue
        with this appeal anymore (sic)."

4.   Pursuant to rule 17(2)  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules 2008, we consent to the withdrawal of Mr Nasim's case before  the
    Upper Tribunal.  That case comprises his appeal against the decision of
    the respondent, taken on 28th December 2012,  to  refuse  to  vary  his
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom.  That  appeal  is,  accordingly,
    hereby recorded as withdrawn.

5.   On behalf of Mr Naeem (appellant (5)), Primax Solicitors  had  on  12th
    December 2013 applied for an adjournment of the hearing of his case  on
    19th December, citing as a reason the fact that "Article 8 issues  need
    to be prepared in full".  It was also requested that the hearing of his
    case be transferred to Manchester.  At the hearing on 19th December, Ms
    Mohsin of Counsel appeared on behalf of Mr Naeem, who was also present.
     Ms Mohsin renewed her application for an adjournment, which  had  been
    refused in writing by the Upper Tribunal on 17th December.

6.   Having heard Ms Mohsin, we refused  the  adjournment  application.   Mr
    Naeem and his legal advisors had been aware since 8th October 2013 that
    there would be a further hearing concerning any Article 8 ground  which
    he wished to advance.  There  had,  accordingly,  been  ample  time  to
    prepare for this purpose.  Since the appellant and his Counsel had been
    present at the Field House hearing on 8th October, and since  Mr  Naeem
    was again present on 19th December, together  with  Counsel  (albeit  a
    different individual), we found no merit in the  application  that  the
    remaining proceedings should be transferred  to  a  hearing  centre  in
    Manchester.

7.   We gave Ms Mohsin an opportunity to take instructions from  her  client
    on the issue of  Article  8.   Following  refusal  of  her  adjournment
    request, at 12.30pm we offered Ms Mohsin the  opportunity  of  delaying
    her submissions to us until 2pm, if she needed further time.  Ms Mohsin
    indicated that she did not and that she  was  able  to  address  us  on
    Article 8 (as to which, see below).

8.   On 11th December  2013,  Farani  Javid  Taylor  Solicitors  applied  on
    behalf of Mr Hossein (appellant (17)), Ms Kaur (appellant (21)) and  Mr
    Abdul (appellant (22)) for an adjournment of their cases, citing "short
    notice" and the unavailability of  Counsel  who  had  attended  on  8th
    October. The Tribunal did not consider that, given the  limited  nature
    of the matters to be considered on 19th December, any proper  case  had
    been given for the adjournment, which was refused.  In  the  event,  Mr
    Baddar, a  legal  representative  with  that  firm,  attended  on  19th
    December and put forward the Article 8 case for each of the  appellants
    we have mentioned (as well as for appellants (4) and (13)).

9.   By agreement, Mr Jarvis  addressed  us  by  reference  to  his  written
    skeleton argument, following which we heard  from  the  representatives
    and those unrepresented appellants who wished to address us.  Mr Jarvis
    then replied, before the  appellants  and  their  representatives  were
    given the opportunity to make closing submissions.


C.   Article 8 in the context of work and studies

10.  Mr Jarvis's stance, on behalf of the  respondent,  was  uncompromising.
    In the respondent's view, none of the appellants could demonstrate that
    removal in pursuance of the decision to refuse to vary leave would have
    "consequences of such gravity" as to engage Article 8(1) of  the  ECHR;
    that is to say, none could demand a positive answer to  the  second  of
    the five questions posed by Lord Bingham in Razgar v Secretary of State
    for the Home Department [2004] UKHL 27, at  [17][1],  with  the  result
    that it was unnecessary to determine whether such removal constituted a
    disproportionate interference with Article 8 rights.

11.   In  this  regard,  Mr  Jarvis  placed  particular  emphasis  upon  the
    following part of the judgment of Lord Carnwath in Patel and  Others  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] UKSC 72:-

         "57. It is important to remember that article 8 is  not  a  general
             dispensing power. It is to be distinguished from the Secretary
             of State's discretion to allow leave  to  remain  outside  the
             rules, which may be unrelated to any  protected  human  right.
             The merits of a decision not to depart from the rules are  not
             reviewable on appeal: section 86(6). One may  sympathise  with
             Sedley  LJ's  call  in  Pankina  for  'common  sense'  in  the
             application of the rules to graduates who have  been  studying
             in the UK for some years ... However, such  considerations  do
             not by themselves provide grounds of appeal under  article  8,
             which is concerned with private or family life, not  education
             as such. The opportunity for a promising student  to  complete
             his course in  this  country,  however  desirable  in  general
             terms, is not in itself a right protected under article 8."

12.  In her submissions, Mrs Heybroek, upon whom the  other  representatives
    substantially relied as  regards  their  common  Article  8  arguments,
    contended that, in this passage, Lord Carnwath was doing no  more  than
    pointing out that a right to education is not per se covered by Article
    8.  We regard the passage,  however,  as  having  a  wider  import,  in
    seeking to re-focus attention upon the core purposes of Article 8.

13.  In order to explain why, the following passage from  Human  Rights  Law
    and Practice, 3rd Edition 2009  (Lester,  Pannick  and  Herberg,  Eds),
    under the heading "the scope of the right", is instructive:-

         "Of all of the Convention rights, art  8  has  by  far  the  widest
         scope.   Like  other  international  human  rights  guarantees,  it
         demands respect for  a  broad  range  of  loosely  allied  personal
         interests: physical or  bodily  integrity;  personal  identity  and
         lifestyle (at least in  some  respects),  including  sexuality  and
         sexual orientation; reputation; family  life;  the  home  and  home
         environment;   and   correspondence,   embracing   all   forms   of
         communication.  It is this breadth that has  led  to  art  8  being
         described as 'the least defined and most unruly' of the  Convention
         rights.  As regards private  life,  Lord  Rodger  observed  in  the
         Countryside  Alliance  case  that  'the   European   Human   Rights
         Commission long ago rejected any Anglo-Saxon notion that the  right
         to respect for private life was to be equated  with  the  right  to
         privacy'.  The  closest  to  a  unifying  theme  for  such  diverse
         subjects is the liberal presumption that individuals should have an
         area of autonomous development, interaction and liberty, a 'private
         sphere', with or without interaction with others  free  from  state
         intervention and free from excessive, unsolicited  intervention  by
         other uninvited individuals.  Thus, the  notion  of  privacy  is  a
         continuum, starting from an inviolable core of personal autonomy in
         a private context and radiating out (yet becoming more  subject  to
         qualification or justified interference) into personal  and  social
         relationships in the wider world."




14.  Whilst the concept of a "family life"  is  generally  speaking  readily
    identifiable, the concept of a  "private  life"  for  the  purposes  of
    Article 8 is inherently less clear.  At  one  end  of  the  "continuum"
    stands the concept of moral and physical  integrity  or  "physical  and
    psychological integrity" (as categorised by the ECtHR in  eg  Pretty  v
    United Kingdom (2002) 35 EHRR 1) as to  which,  in  extreme  instances,
    even the state's interest  in  removing  foreign  criminals  might  not
    constitute a proportionate response.  However, as one  moves  down  the
    continuum, one encounters  aspects  of  private  life  which,  even  if
    engaging Article 8(1) (if not alone, then  in  combination  with  other
    factors) are so far removed from the "core"  of  Article  8  as  to  be
    readily defeasible by  state  interests,  such  as  the  importance  of
    maintaining a credible and coherent system of immigration control.

15.  At this point on the continuum the essential elements  of  the  private
    life relied upon will normally be transposable, in the sense  of  being
    capable  of  replication  in  their  essential  respects,  following  a
    person's return to their home country.  Thus, in headnote 3 of MM (Tier
    1 PSW; Art 8; private life) Zimbabwe [2009] UKAIT 0037 we find that:-

         "3.  When determining the issue  of  proportionality  ...  it  will
             always be important to evaluate the extent of the individual's
             social ties and relationships in the UK.  However,  a  student
             here on a temporary basis has no expectation  of  a  right  to
             remain in order to further these ties and relationships if the
             criteria of the points-based system are not  met.   Also,  the
             character of an individual's "private  life"  relied  upon  is
             ordinarily by its very nature of a type which  can  be  formed
             elsewhere, albeit through different  social  ties,  after  the
             individual is removed from the UK."

16.  As was stated in the earlier case of MG  (assessing  interference  with
    private life) Serbia and Montenegro [2005] UKAIT 00113:-

         "A person's job and precise programme of studies may  be  different
         in the country to which he is to be returned  and  his  network  of
         friendships and other acquaintances is likely to be different  too,
         but his private life will continue in respect of all its  essential
         elements."

17.  The difference between these types of "private life" case  and  a  case
    founded on family life  is  instructive.   As  was  noted  in  MM,  the
    relationships involved in a family life are more likely to  be  unique,
    so as to be incapable of being replicated once an individual leaves the
    United Kingdom, leaving behind, for example, his or her spouse or minor
    child.

18.  In R (on the application of the Countryside Alliance) v AG  and  others
    [2007] UKHL 52, Lord Bingham, having described the concept  of  private
    life in Article 8 as "elusive", said that:

          "... the purpose of the article is in my  view  clear.  It  is  to
          protect the individual against intrusion by agents of  the  state,
          unless for good reason,  into  the  private  sphere  within  which
          individuals expect to be left  alone  to  conduct  their  personal
          affairs and live their personal lives as they choose" [10].


19.   It is important to bear in mind that  the  "good  reason",  which  the
    state  must  invoke  is  not  a  fixity.  British  citizens  may  enjoy
    friendships, employment and studies that are in all essential  respects
    the same as those enjoyed by persons  here  who  are  subject  to  such
    controls. The fact that the  government  cannot  arbitrarily  interfere
    with a British citizen's enjoyment of those things,  replicable  though
    they may be, and that,  in  practice,  interference  is  likely  to  be
    justified only by strong reasons, such as imprisonment for  a  criminal
    offence, cannot be used to restrict the government's ability to rely on
    the enforcement of immigration controls as  a  reason  for  interfering
    with friendships, employment and studies enjoyed by  a  person  who  is
    subject to immigration controls.

20.  We therefore agree with Mr Jarvis that [57] of Patel and  Others  is  a
    significant exhortation from the Supreme Court to re-focus attention on
    the nature and purpose of Article 8 and, in  particular,  to  recognise
    its limited utility to an individual where  one  has  moved  along  the
    continuum, from that Article's core  area  of  operation  towards  what
    might be described as its fuzzy penumbra. The limitation  arises,  both
    from what will at that point normally be the tangential effect  on  the
    individual of the proposed interference and from the fact that,  unless
    there are particular reasons to reduce the public interest of enforcing
    immigration  controls,  that  interest  will  consequently  prevail  in
    striking the proportionality  balance  (even  assuming  that  stage  is
    reached).

21.  In conclusion on this first general matter, we find that the nature  of
    the right asserted by each of the appellants, based on their desire, as
    former students, to undertake a period of post-study work in the United
    Kingdom, lies at the outer reaches of cases  requiring  an  affirmative
    answer to the second of the five "Razgar" questions and that,  even  if
    such  an  affirmative  answer  needs  to  be  given,   the   issue   of
    proportionality  is  to  be  resolved  decisively  in  favour  of   the
    respondent, by reference to her functions as the guardian of the system
    of immigration controls, entrusted to her by Parliament.


D.    Article 8 and the "near-miss" principle

22.  A second general matter arising from  Patel  and  Others  concerns  the
    relationship between the so-called "near-miss principle" and Article 8.
     Again, the focus of submissions was on Lord Carnwath's judgment:-

         "55.     Thus the balance drawn by the rules may be relevant to the
             consideration of proportionality. I  said  much  the  same  in
             Rudi.  Although  I  rejected  the  concept  of  a   'near-miss
             principle', I did  not  see  this  as  inconsistent  with  the
             Collins J's words in Lekstaka:


                  'Collins J's statement, on which the court relied [in SB],
                  seems unexceptionable. It is saying no more, as I read it,
                  than that the practical  or  compassionate  considerations
                  which underlie the policy are also likely to  be  relevant
                  to the cases of those who fall just  outside  it,  and  to
                  that  extent  may  add  weight  to  their   argument   for
                  exceptional treatment. He is not saying that there  arises
                  any presumption or expectation that  the  policy  will  be
                  extended to embrace them.' (para 31(ii))


             (My reference to 'exceptional treatment' needs to be read  now
             in the light of Huang para 20 in which Lord Bingham made clear
             that, contrary to previous Court of Appeal case-law, there was
             no separate 'test of exceptionality'.)


         56.  Although the context of the  rules  may  be  relevant  to  the
             consideration of proportionality, I agree with Burnton LJ that
             this cannot  be  equated  with  a  formalised  'near-miss'  or
             'sliding scale' principle, as argued for  by  Mr  Malik.  That
             approach is unsupported  by  Strasbourg  authority,  or  by  a
             proper reading of Lord Bingham's words. Mrs Huang's  case  for
             favourable treatment outside the rules did  not  turn  on  how
             close she had come to compliance with rule  317,  but  on  the
             application of the family values which underlie that rule  and
             are at the heart also of article 8.  Conversely,  a  near-miss
             under the rules cannot provide substance  to  a  human  rights
             case which is otherwise lacking in merit."

23.  We addressed the issue of "near-miss" at [42]  to  [46]  of  Nasim  and
    Others.  So  far  as  concerns  its  relevance  to  Article  8,  it  is
    unnecessary to say more than the following.  What Lord Carnwath held at
    [55] and  [56]  of  Patel  and  others  was  that  certain  "near-miss"
    arguments are, on analysis, appeals to core Article 8 elements, such as
    "family values", which underpin the criteria  of  the  particular  Rule
    that the appellant has narrowly failed to meet.  In  other  words,  the
    focus in such cases is not on  the  "near-miss"  but,  rather,  on  the
    significance of the relevant Article 8 element.

24.  It can therefore be seen that [55] and [56] of Patel and Others  cannot
    assist the present appellants.  The  relevant  Rules  with  which  they
    failed to comply were not in any way analogous to paragraph 317  (leave
    to enter as a parent etc of a person present and settled in the  United
    Kingdom), which was the rule being addressed  by  Lord  Carnwath.   The
    former Tier 1 (Post-Study Work) rules were not framed by the respondent
    by reference to Article 8.


E.    The effect on human rights of paying  one's  way  and  not  committing
    criminal offences

25.  A further seam running through the appellant's  submissions  was  that,
    during their time in the United Kingdom, they had been law-abiding, had
    not relied on public funds and had contributed to  the  United  Kingdom
    economy  by  paying  their  students'  fees.   Their  aim  was  now  to
    contribute to that economy by working.

26.  We do not consider that this set of submissions takes  the  appellants'
    cases anywhere.  It cannot rationally be contended that their Article 8
    rights have been made stronger merely because,  during  their  time  in
    this country, they have not sought public funds,  have  refrained  from
    committing criminal offences and have paid the fees required  in  order
    to undertake their courses.  Similarly,  a  desire  to  undertake  paid
    employment in the United Kingdom is not, as such,  a  matter  that  can
    enhance a person's right to remain here in reliance on Article 8.

27.  The only significance  of  not  having  criminal  convictions  and  not
    having relied on public  funds  is  to  preclude  the  respondent  from
    pointing to any public interest in respect of the appellants'  removal,
    over and above the basic importance of maintaining a firm and  coherent
    system of immigration control.  However, for reasons  we  have  already
    enunciated, as a general matter that public interest factor is, in  the
    circumstances of these cases, more  than  adequate  to  render  removal
    proportionate.


F.  Legitimate expectation revisited

28.   Several of the appellants contended that they had been  encouraged  to
    come to the United Kingdom instead of, say, Canada or the United States
    of the America, by the prospect, which then existed, of being  able  to
    undertake a period of two years' post-study work, following  completion
    of their studies.  Certain of the appellants' submissions went  so  far
    as to contend  that  they  had,  in  the  circumstances,  a  legitimate
    expectation to be able to undertake such work.

29.  In Nasim and Others legitimate expectation was amongst the  submissions
    deployed by the appellants and rejected by the Tribunal: [31] to  [37].
    We heard nothing on 19th December that might even begin to cause us  to
    resile from our findings on this issue.  What the  present  submissions
    amount to is a contention that  Article  8  entitles  an  immigrant  to
    compel  the  respondent  to  continue  to  apply  to  that  person  the
    Immigration Rules which were in force when the  immigrant  was  granted
    leave to enter the United Kingdom, or when he or she  was  subsequently
    granted leave to remain.  This submission is misconceived.  It finds no
    sanction in any case law to which our attention has been drawn.  As  Mr
    Jarvis pointed out in his oral submissions, a  number  of  the  present
    appellants arrived in  the  United  Kingdom  as  students,  before  the
    Immigration Rules even contained the provisions concerning Tier 1 (Post-
    Study Work).  Although the  present  appellants  did  not,  of  course,
    succeed by reference to those provisions, others  who  applied  earlier
    would have been  able  to  satisfy  the  requirements,  and  go  on  to
    undertake post-study work, even though the  Rules  in  force  on  their
    admission did not permit this.  In other  words,  absent  a  legitimate
    expectation, such as occurred in the case of highly  skilled  migrants,
    the fact that one must take the Immigration Rules  as  one  finds  them
    cuts both ways.  In any event, the essential point  is  that  the  ECHR
    does not have the effect for which the appellants contend.

G.  Inconsistent decision-making?

30.  The next generic matter, raised by Mr Baddar in respect of  Mr  Hossain
    (appellant (17)) and taken up by Mr  Mehta  in  respect  of  Mr  Khalid
    (appellant (4)) and Mrs Heybroek in respect  of  Mr  Bashir  (appellant
    (6))  and  Mr  Mughal  (appellant  (7))  was  the  assertion  that  the
    respondent had been guilty of  inconsistent  decision-making.   It  was
    asserted that in other cases applicants in the  same  position  as  the
    present appellants had, in fact, been granted variations  of  leave  to
    remain, either directly by the respondent or in consequence of  appeals
    being  allowed  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  which   decisions   the
    respondent did not seek to challenge.   Mr  Sreevalsalan  made  similar
    submissions on behalf of Mr Rafeek (appellant (18)).

31.  The appellants' representatives  acknowledged  that  the  assertion  of
    inconsistent decision-making by the respondent had not featured in  the
    submissions advanced before the Tribunal on 8th October  2013,  whether
    in the context of legitimate expectation, unfairness or otherwise.   Ms
    Heybroek, however, submitted that the issue  nevertheless  fell  to  be
    considered in the context of Article 8, presumably on the  basis  that,
    if established,  such  inconsistency  could  undermine  or,  at  least,
    diminish the importance to  be  given  to  the  system  of  immigration
    controls, even if it did not demonstrate that the proposed interference
    with Article 8 rights was not "in accordance with the law", in terms of
    the third of the "Razgar" questions: see [10] above.

32.  We do not consider that the appellants have begun  to  make  out  their
    case in this regard.  The bald assertion made by Mr  Hossein,  when  he
    gave evidence to the First-tier Tribunal, that  "95%  of  students  got
    their visas on the basis of the same evidence as he  had  adduced"  was
    rightly rejected by the First-tier judge at [24] of his  determination,
    on the basis that "I know nothing of those cases".   Evidence  of  what
    might have been an anomalous decision was  given  in  the  case  of  Mr
    Naeem, as recorded at [21] of the First-tier  Tribunal's  determination
    in his appeal.  A witness, Mr Khan, told the First-tier Tribunal  judge
    that he had received a degree confirmation letter on  16th  April  2012
    and a degree certificate in July of that year.  He  produced  a  letter
    from UKBA dated 16th August 2012, granting him leave  to  remain  under
    Tier 1.  But, as the judge noted, "no  explanation  was  given  in  the
    letter however as to why the leave had been granted", leading the First-
    tier judge to find there was "inadequate evidence as to why exactly  Mr
    Khan's application was allowed by the UKBA and why ... it would  amount
    to such an unfairness that I should nonetheless allow it": [34].

33.  In her closing submissions, Mrs Heybroek referred to a case within  her
    knowledge, where two brothers studied on the same course  at  the  same
    institution.  One was granted leave to remain under  Tier  1,  but  the
    other was not.  Mrs Heybroek contended that the only person  who  would
    know the extent of inconsistent decision-  making  was  the  respondent
    herself.  Mrs Heybroek suggested that "freedom of information" requests
    might have been made in this regard, but she acknowledged that, in  any
    event, the results of any such requests have not been provided.

34.   Even accepting the evidence submitted at the  hearing  of  Mr  Naeem's
    appeal and Mrs Heybroek's information regarding the applications of the
    two brothers, these instances do not begin to  demonstrate  a  systemic
    inconsistency in relevant decision making by the respondent, such as to
    require us to find that her  decisions  in  the  case  of  the  present
    appellants, and  of  the  many  hundreds  of  similar  cases,  must  be
    categorised for "Razgar" purposes as not in accordance with the law; or
    that, even if lawful, the weight to be afforded to  the  importance  of
    immigration controls falls to be diminished, to the  point  where  even
    weak Article 8 private life cases must succeed  by  reference  to  that
    article.  In so finding, we have also borne  in  mind  what  individual
    appellants have had to say on this issue (as noted  below).  Given  the
    scale of the respondent's decision-making  in  the  immigration  field,
    some inconsistencies or anomalies are almost bound to occur.   That  is
    particularly so at or around the point where - as  here  -  Immigration
    Rules and their attendant policies change.

35.  Whilst we accept Mrs Heybroek's submission that the respondent is  best
    placed to know the extent of any inconsistent decision-making,  freedom
    of information legislation provides a mechanism whereby one or more  of
    the appellants, and others in their position, could have requested  any
    information indicating a systemic failure of  decision-making  in  this
    area.  The appellants have had  ample  time  to  take  action  in  this
    regard.  We do not consider that the unsubstantiated  allegation  about
    95% of students receiving leave to remain, coupled  with  the  specific
    examples to which we have been referred, can rationally be said even to
    have placed a burden on the respondent to adduce evidence to show  that
    her decision-making has not been systematically inconsistent.

36.    Finally  on  this  issue,  the  appellants  can  derive  no  material
    assistance from the fact that the First-tier Tribunal may have  allowed
    appeals, which the respondent did  not  seek  to  challenge  by  onward
    appeal. We do not doubt that such instances exist; but no argument  has
    been advanced as to why they should affect our conclusions on Article 8
    or any other relevant matter.


H.  A "closed" class

37.  As part of their Article 8 submissions, the appellants relied upon  the
    proposition that, in determining their Article 8 rights, account should
    be taken of the fact that they were all members of what was, in effect,
    a "closed" class, comprising persons who had commenced relevant studies
    before the changes in the Immigration Rules, which took effect  on  6th
    April 2012.  As a result, allowing each of them to remain in  order  to
    undertake  two  years  of  post-study  work  would  not,   they   said,
    significantly  impair  the  respondent's  maintenance  of   immigration
    controls.  Thus,  applying  the  principle  of  "minimal  interference"
    inherent in the doctrine of proportionality, it could not be said  that
    any of the decisions refusing leave was proportionate.

38.  We reject these submissions. As can be  seen,  they  are  in  substance
    very similar to the submissions on  legitimate  expectation:  see  [28]
    above. They amount to an unwarranted attempt to invoke Article 8 so  as
    to make tribunals and courts, rather than Parliament,  the  decider  of
    whether and, if so, how transitional provisions should apply,  whenever
    changes are made to the Immigration Rules.   In  Nasim  and  Others  we
    found that the respondent was, according to principles of  public  law,
    entitled  to  end  the  Tier  1  (Post-Study  Work)  route.    Whenever
    Immigration Rules change in a restrictive way, there  will  be  persons
    disappointed and disadvantaged by that change.  Subject to  established
    public law principles, it is for the respondent, in the exercise of her
    statutory functions, to decide whether and, if so, how the  effects  of
    that change should be ameliorated by means of transitional  provisions.




I.  Scope of CDS (Brazil)

39.  Both here and elsewhere, the appellants relied upon obiter  remarks  of
    the Upper Tribunal in CDS (PBS "available"  Article  8)  Brazil  [2010]
    UKUT 305 (IAC), as authority for the following proposition (taken  from
    their headnote):-

         "2.  Article 8 does not give an Immigration Judge  a  free-standing
             liberty to depart  from  the  Immigration  Rules,  and  it  is
             unlikely that a person will be able to show an Article 8 right
             by coming to the UK for temporary purposes.  But a person  who
             is admitted to follow a course that  has  not  yet  ended  may
             build up a private life that deserves respect, and the  public
             interest in removal before  the  end  of  the  course  may  be
             reduced where there are ample financial resources available."

40.  So far as the present point is concerned, what was said in CDS  has  no
    material bearing.  That case involved the interpretation of Immigration
    Rules, rather than the effect of changes in such  Rules.   Furthermore,
    it is important to emphasise that the appellant in CDS was faced with a
    hypothetical removal, which would have prevented  her  from  completing
    the course of study for which she had been given leave.  In the present
    cases, each of the  appellants  has  finished  the  course  (or  latest
    course) to which their leave to remain as  a  student  related.   Their
    complaint is that they were not afforded the opportunity of undertaking
    two years of post-study work in the United Kingdom,  which  they  could
    have taken, had the Rules not changed.

41.  Mr Jarvis urged us to find that the obiter  remarks  in  CDS  regarding
    Article 8 were no longer good law, in the light of Patel and Others. We
    find that would go too far.  It is true that the Tribunal in  CDS  made
    reference to the particular passage of the judgment  of  Sedley  LJ  in
    Pankina regarding the need for the Home Office "to exercise some common
    sense", which drew comment from Lord Carnwath  at  [57]  of  Patel  and
    Others (see above).  The Tribunal did, however,  expressly  acknowledge
    that it was unlikely a person would be able to show an Article 8  right
    by coming to the United Kingdom for temporary purposes.  The chances of
    such a right carrying the day have, we consider, further diminished, in
    the light of the judgments in Patel and Others.  It would, however,  be
    wrong to  say  that  the  point  has  been  reached  where  an  adverse
    immigration decision in the case of a person who is here for  study  or
    other temporary purposes can never be  found  to  be  disproportionate.
    But what is clear is that, on the state of the present law, there is no
    justification for extending the obiter findings in CDS, so as to equate
    a person whose course of study has not yet ended  with  a  person  who,
    having finished their course, is precluded  by  the  Immigration  Rules
    from staying on to do something else.

42.   We  conclude  our  general  Article  8  findings  with  the  following
    observation.  Each of the appellants' representatives on 19th  December
    confirmed to us that the extent of their clients' Article  8  ambitions
    was to be granted two years' leave to remain, with permission  to  work
    (the case for the dependants of Mr Mughal being based on his desire  to
    obtain such leave).  Their cases are, accordingly, not put on the basis
    that the Article 8 rights upon which they rely are necessarily such  as
    to facilitate their indefinite presence in the United Kingdom.   Whilst
    not resiling from what we  have  said  about  the  case  of  CDS,  this
    confirmation serves  to  underline  the  general  problems  facing  the
    appellants in seeking to use human rights law to give effect  to  their
    short term socio-economic aspirations.


J.   The individual cases

43.  In the light of these general  findings  regarding  Article  8,  as  it
    bears on the present appellants,  we  proceed  to  make  the  following
    findings regarding the specific cases.

44.    As a general matter, with the exception of Mr Mughal and his  family,
    even bearing in mind the low threshold described in AG (Eritrea) [2007]
    EWCA Civ 801 as necessary for satisfying the second of the five  Razgar
    questions, we do not find that any of the appellants  has  demonstrated
    that the decision to refuse to vary leave to remain has consequences of
    such gravity as potentially to engage the operation of Article  8.   We
    have, however, also approached the appeals  on  the  alternative  basis
    that it is necessary to address the issue of proportionality.


(2)  Tahir Mahmood

45.  Mr Baddar said that his client, Mr  Mahmood,  had  entered  the  United
    Kingdom on 30th August 2002.  His application  form,  however,  records
    (as does the respondent's immigration record) that he was granted entry
    clearance on 25th August 2008.  In any event, he has  been  here  as  a
    student and asserts no Article 8 rights, otherwise than in relation  to
    his wish to engage in two years of post-study work, as a person who has
    studied here, paid  his  fees  etc,  and  not  committed  any  criminal
    offence.

46.  We do not find that removal of Mr Mahmood, pursuant to the decision  to
    refuse to vary leave, would potentially engage the operation of Article
    8. In any event, such removal would be proportionate to the  legitimate
    public end; namely, the operation of a  coherent  and  fair  system  of
    immigration control.  His appeal on human rights grounds is accordingly
    dismissed.


(4)  Ahsan Khalid

47.  Mr Mehta told us that Mr Khalid had been in the  United  Kingdom  as  a
    student since 2004.  In answer to question D10 of his application form,
    however, the appellant said that he arrived in the  United  Kingdom  on
    21st January 2011.  The appellant said that others of whom he knew  had
    been granted leave, who were in a similar position to  himself.   After
    his two years' work experience, he felt that he would be able to get  a
    good job.  The appellant had no criminal convictions and had not relied
    on public funds.  He wished to remain  in  this  country  in  order  to
    undertake work experience.

48.  In his witness statement of 19th  December  2013,  Mr  Khalid  said  he
    wished to rely on the case of CDS; that he had been "attracted  to  the
    UK study on the marketing (sic) that I  had  received  stating  that  I
    would receive the two years' post-study work upon the completion of  my
    studies here"; that  such  work  would  give  him  the  opportunity  to
    undertake employment/set up a business, which meant that he could  then
    avail himself of the opportunity to apply as an  Entrepreneur  Migrant;
    and  that  he  knew  of  a  person,  whose  appeal  had  been  allowed,
    notwithstanding his similar circumstances to Mr  Khalid.   The  written
    statement confirms that the appellant has been in  the  United  Kingdom
    "since January 2011" which was "indicative that I have made a new  life
    in this country".  He says that he has been "supporting myself  and  my
    family financially.  I make enough money to support myself and  I  like
    working for myself".  What work the appellant has been doing,  and  how
    he has been doing it, was unexplained.  No submissions were  made  with
    regard to the appellant having family members in the United Kingdom, as
    regards whom he was asserting any Article 8.

49.  We do not find that removal of Mr Khalid, pursuant to the  decision  to
    refuse to vary leave, would potentially engage the operation of Article
    8. In any event, such removal would be proportionate to the  legitimate
    public end; namely, the operation of a  coherent  and  fair  system  of
    immigration control.  His appeal on human rights grounds is accordingly
    dismissed.


(5)  Mr Ahsan Naeem

50.  Mr Naeem entered the United Kingdom on 27th July  2010  as  a  student.
    Having taken instructions from him, Ms Mohsin told  us  that  when  the
    appellant came to this country he thought he would have an  opportunity
    eventually to work.  He considered part of the value of coming  to  the
    United Kingdom as being that work opportunity.  Being able to  work  in
    the United Kingdom would have enhanced his job prospects at  home.   He
    had invested a considerable amount of money in order to come  here  and
    wanted to have relevant work experience.  That desire deserved  respect
    in Article 8 terms.

51.  We do not find that removal of Mr Naeem, pursuant to  the  decision  to
    refuse to vary leave, would potentially engage the operation of Article
    8. In any event, such removal would be proportionate to the  legitimate
    public end; namely, the operation of a  coherent  and  fair  system  of
    immigration control.  His appeal on human rights grounds is accordingly
    dismissed.



(6)  Mr Rizwan Bashir

52.  Mr Bashir arrived in the United  Kingdom  on  16th  October  2010  with
    leave as a student.  He said he expected after completion  of  his  MBA
    degree to get two years' leave to remain  to  work  in  order  to  gain
    "practical experience".  This would enable him "to secure a good job in
    my country of origin".  He considered that he had as  an  international
    student "contributed positively toward the  British  society.   I  have
    never been involved in any unlawful activity and always  abide  by  the
    terms and conditions of leave".

53.  We do not find that removal of Mr Bashir, pursuant to the  decision  to
    refuse to vary leave, would potentially engage the operation of Article
    8. In any event, such removal would be proportionate to the  legitimate
    public end; namely, the operation of a  coherent  and  fair  system  of
    immigration control.  His appeal on human rights grounds is accordingly
    dismissed.


(7) to (12) Mr Mughal and family

54.  Mr Mughal entered the United Kingdom on 3rd June  2011  as  a  student.
    Shortly after, he was joined by his wife, Mrs  Safia  Arif,  and  their
    three children, born on 23rd January 2004, 13th January 2007  and  20th
    October 2008.  During their time in the United Kingdom, a fourth  child
    has been born to the couple, on 28th December 2011.

55.  As with the other appellants, Mr Mughal wished to undertake two  years'
    post-study work, following completion of  his  studies  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  At [16] of the determination of the First-tier  Tribunal,  Mr
    Mughal "stressed that he was a businessman and had expected to be  able
    to work here and gain experience in export  and  import  and  logistics
    here before returning to Pakistan".  He also said "that  he  wanted  to
    get work experience  in  the  United  Kingdom  before  he  returned  to
    Pakistan".  The First-tier judge found that "the only evidence that  he
    adduced about any private life which he and the  other  appellants  may
    have established here was to say in oral  evidence  that  his  children
    liked the climate here and  were  at  school.   In  contrast,  in  oral
    evidence, he said that he had a house, office,  business  and  vehicles
    back in Pakistan.  In  addition  he  said  that  he  had  an  assistant
    managing his business and the net profit annually was 15 lakhs".

56.  On the basis of the evidence given  to  her,  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    judge, writing on 13th November 2012, found that there was no  evidence
    "to show that it would not be  in  his  children's  best  interests  to
    return to Pakistan".  It is, however, now a feature of the case for  Mr
    Mughal and his family that the best interests of two of  his  children,
    at least, lie in remaining in the United Kingdom.  This is on the basis
    that two of the children of Mr Mughal, a daughter born on 23rd  January
    2004 and a daughter born on 28th December 2011, suffer from deafness.

 57.  At the hearing on 19th December, the Tribunal had before it  a  bundle
    of documentary material relating  to  hospital  visits  made  by  these
    children in the United Kingdom, in connection with their  deafness,  as
    well as school reports relating to the school-age children.   According
    to an NHS letter dated 19th December 2011, the elder daughter

        "is a recent arrival to the UK and had hearing loss  diagnosed  and
        hearing aids fitted in Pakistan.  We  are  unable  to  support  the
        hearing aid she has been wearing as we do not have the  appropriate
        software.  The hearing aids were upgraded today ... [M] is  a  very
        bright and experienced hearing  aid  user.   She  looks  after  her
        hearing aids herself and was able  to  give  me  some  really  good
        feedback on how she found the sound of her new aids."


58.   So far as the younger daughter is concerned,  an  NHS  letter  of  2nd
    October 2013  refers  to  the  locum  consultant  at  East  London  NHS
    Foundation Trust wishing to refer "this little  girl  for  aetiological
    investigations into  the  cause  of  her  sensorineural  hearing  loss.
    Parents missed the original appointment a while ago".   Another  letter
    indicated that it was "more appropriate for [M] to be  investigated  at
    Great Ormond Street Hospital where her sister  was  investigated".   It
    seems that hearing aids for M have been provided  by  East  London  NHS
    Foundation Trust but that her referral to Great Ormond Street  did  not
    make progress as her "parents did not attend the appointment there  and
    were discharged".  At the hearing it was common ground that neither  of
    the  daughters  could  be  apparently  cured  of  deafness   but   that
    intervention was necessary in order to provide new ear molds  for  each
    girl, as their bodies grew.

59.  We approach the issue of the best interests of  Mr  Mughal's  children,
    as set out in [22] of the judgment of the Court of Appeal in JW (China)
    and Other v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] EWCA  Civ
    1526.

         "22. In my view, the correct approach is very  well  summarised  in
             the Upper Tribunal decision of MK (Best  interests  of  child)
             [2011] UKUT 00475 (IAC), where this was said at paragraphs  23
             and 24 of the determination:


             '23. There is in our view a fourth point of principle that can
                  be inferred from  the  Supreme  Court's  judgments  in  ZH
                  (Tanzania).  As the use by Baroness Hale and Lord Hope  of
                  the adjective 'overall' makes clear, the consideration  of
                  the best interests of the child involves a weighing up  of
                  various factors.  Although  the  conclusion  of  the  best
                  interests  of  the  child  consideration  must  of  course
                  provide a yes or no answer to the question, "Is it in  the
                  best interests of the  child  for  the  child  and/or  the
                  parents(s) facing expulsion/deportation to remain  in  the
                  United Kingdom?", the  assessment  cannot  be  reduced  to
                  that.  Key features of the best  interests  of  the  child
                  consideration  and  its  overall  balancing  of   factors,
                  especially those which count for and against an  expulsion
                  decision, must be kept in mind when turning to  the  wider
                  proportionality assessment of whether or not  the  factors
                  relating to  the  importance  of  maintaining  immigration
                  control etc. cumulatively reinforce or outweigh  the  best
                  interests of the child, depending on what they  have  been
                  found to be.


             24.  The need to keep in mind the overall  factors  making  up
                  the best interests of the child consideration must not  be
                  downplayed.  Failure to do so may give rise to an error of
                  law although, as AJ (India) makes clear, what  matters  is
                  not so much the form of the  inquiry  but  rather  whether
                  there has  been  substantive  consideration  of  the  best
                  interests of the child.  The consideration must always  be
                  fact-sensitive and  depending  on  its  workings-out  will
                  affect the  Article  8(2)  proportionality  assessment  in
                  different ways.  If, for example, all the factors weighing
                  in the best interests of  the  child  consideration  point
                  overwhelmingly in favour  of  the  child  and/or  relevant
                  parent(s) remaining in the UK, that is very likely to mean
                  that only very strong countervailing factors can  outweigh
                  it.   If,  at  the  other  extreme,  all  the  factors  of
                  relevance to the best interests of the child consideration
                  (save for the child's and/or parent(s) own claim that they
                  want  to  remain)  point  overwhelmingly  to  the  child's
                  interests being best served  by  him  returning  with  his
                  parent(s) to his country of  origin  (or  to  one  of  his
                  parents being expelled leaving him to remain living here),
                  then very little by way of  countervailing  considerations
                  to do with immigration control etc. may  be  necessary  in
                  order for the conclusion to be  drawn  that  the  decision
                  appealed against was and is proportionate.'


              Accepting of course that each case depends on  its  own  facts
             and circumstances, I would for myself  endorse  generally  not
             only these passages but  the  overall  approach  indicated  as
             appropriate in that decision."

60.  We also bear in mind this passage from the judgment of Laws  LJ  in  SS
    (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] EWCA  Civ
    550:-

          "43. I will next describe two characteristics, one  positive,  the
             other negative, which the learning shows  apply  in  Article  8
             cases involving children. The first is that  the  interests  of
             the child or children are a primary consideration.  The  second
             (which applies to all removal cases, whether or not  there  are
             children) is that there is no rule  of  "exceptionality":  that
             is, there is no class of case where the law stipulates that  an
             exceptional Article 8 case must be shown in some situations but
             need not be in others.

           44.    These two characteristics are vouchsafed by  authority  of
             the House of Lords and the Supreme Court. With  great  respect
             they are capable, if not carefully  understood,  of  investing
             child cases with a uniform prevailing force which yields no or
             little space  to  the  context  in  hand.  As  for  the  first
             characteristic,  the  key  phrase  is  of  course  'a  primary
             consideration'. It appears in  ZH  and  subsequently,  but  is
             taken from Article 3(1) of the UNCRC, so the choice  of  words
             may be regarded as having particular significance. What  sense
             is to be given to the adjective 'primary'? We know it does not
             mean  'paramount'  -  other  considerations   may   ultimately
             prevail. And the child's interests are not 'the' but only  'a'
             primary consideration - indicating there  may  be  other  such
             considerations which, presumably, may count for as much.  Thus
             the  term  'primary'  seems  problematic.  In  the  course  of
             argument Mr Auburn accepted  that  'a  primary  consideration'
             should  be  taken  to  mean  a  consideration  of  substantial
             importance. I think that is right."

61.  A useful summary of the learning on the "best  interests"  of  children
    in the context of immigration is to be found in  the  determination  of
    Azimi-Moayed and Others (decisions affecting children; onward  appeals)
    [2013] UKUT 197 (IAC):-

         "13.   It is not the case that the best interests  principle  means
             that it is automatically in the interests of any child  to  be
             permitted to remain in the  United  Kingdom,  irrespective  of
             age, length of stay, family background or other circumstances.
             The  case  law  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  has  identified  the
             following principles to assist in the determination of appeals
             where children are affected by the decisions:


             i)       As a starting point it is in the  best  interests  of
                  children to be with both their parents and if both parents
                  are  being  removed  from  the  United  Kingdom  then  the
                  starting point suggests that so should dependent  children
                  who form part of their household unless there are  reasons
                  to the contrary.


             ii)      It is generally in the interests of children to  have
                  both stability and continuity of  social  and  educational
                  provision and the benefit of growing up  in  the  cultural
                  norms of the society to which they belong.


             iii)     Lengthy residence in a country other than  the  state
                  of origin can lead to development of social, cultural  and
                  educational  ties  that  it  would  be  inappropriate   to
                  disrupt, in  the  absence  of  compelling  reason  to  the
                  contrary. What amounts to lengthy residence is  not  clear
                  cut but past and present policies  have  identified  seven
                  years as a relevant period.


             iv)      Apart from the terms of published policies and rules,
                  the Tribunal notes that  seven  years  from  age  four  is
                  likely to be more significant to a child  than  the  first
                  seven years of life. Very young children are  focussed  on
                  their parents rather than their peers and are adaptable.


             v)   Short periods of  residence,  particularly  ones  without
                  leave or the reasonable expectation of leave to  enter  or
                  remain, while claims are promptly considered, are unlikely
                  to give rise to private life deserving of respect  in  the
                  absence of exceptional factors. In any  event,  protection
                  of the economic well  being  of  society  amply  justifies
                  removal in such cases."

62.  Even more recently, the Supreme Court has held as follows in Zoumbas  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] UKSC 74:-

         "24. There is no irrationality in the conclusion that it was in the
             children's best interests to go  with  their  parents  to  the
             Republic of Congo. No doubt it would  have  been  possible  to
             have stated that, other things being equal, it was in the best
             interests of the children that they and their  parents  stayed
             in the United Kingdom so that they could obtain such  benefits
             as  health  care  and  education  which   the   decision-maker
             recognised might  be  of  a  higher  standard  than  would  be
             available in the Congo. But other things were not equal.  They
             were not  British  citizens.  They  had  no  right  to  future
             education and health care in this country. They were part of a
             close-knit family with highly educated parents and were of  an
             age when their emotional needs could only be fully met  within
             the immediate family unit. Such integration  as  had  occurred
             into United Kingdom society would have been  predominantly  in
             the context of  that  family  unit.  Most  significantly,  the
             decision-maker concluded that they could  be  removed  to  the
             Republic of Congo in the care of their parents without serious
             detriment to their well-being ..."

63.  Relying on this  case  law,  Mr  Jarvis  submitted  that  none  of  the
    children of Mr Mughal had anything approaching seven  years'  residence
    in the United Kingdom; their ages were such that, particularly  so  far
    as the younger ones were concerned, their  lives  "would  logically  be
    centred upon their parents rather than  any  extra-parental  activity";
    that three of the children had spent "as much of or more of their lives
    in Pakistan than in the UK and as with the youngest child, could easily
    adapt to life in Pakistan"; and that, until recently there had been  no
    suggestion that return to Pakistan would have any adverse effect on the
    children, as regards their health or education.  Mrs Heybroek, however,
    contended  that  the  children's  interests,  coupled  with  all  other
    relevant Article 8 factors,  must  be  such  as  to  render  removal  a
    disproportionate interference with the family's Article 8 rights.   The
    best interests of the children were, she contended, to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom.

64.  We accept Mr Jarvis's submissions and reject  those  of  Mrs  Heybroek.
    The application of authoritative case law to the  particular  facts  of
    this case admits of only one answer.  As in Zoumbas, other  things  are
    far from equal.  Mr Mughal  rests  his  Article  8  case,  not  on  any
    indefinite need for him and  the  children  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom, but on his wish to undertake two years post-study work,  which
    he regards as his due.  However, even if the family were contending for
    indefinite residence in the United Kingdom on the basis of  Article  8,
    it is  plain  that  the  respondent's  immigration  decisions  are  not
    disproportionate.  The family has been in the United Kingdom for only a
    relatively short period of time.  Those children who  were  already  in
    education  in  Pakistan  suffered  a  disruption  that  is   inevitably
    consequent upon a move by parents from one country to another,  whether
    to seek work  or  to  study.   There  is  no  evidence  to  compel  the
    conclusion that a return  home  would  have  significantly  deleterious
    effects on the children's continuing education.

65.  So far as concerns the two daughters who suffer from  deafness,  as  we
    can see, the daughter  born  in  Pakistan  received  medical  attention
    there, leading to the provision of  hearing  aids.   Given  the  socio-
    economic position of the family, as noted by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    judge (see [55] above), there is no reason whatsoever for assuming that
    those  daughters  could  not  continue  to  receive  necessary  medical
    attention for their deafness in Pakistan.  In particular,  it  has  not
    been shown that new hearing  aids  cannot  be  fashioned  for  them  in
    Pakistan, as the girls grow.  Mr Mughal has  obtained  the  educational
    qualifications for which he came to the United Kingdom.   As  with  the
    other appellants, no argument has been  advanced  to  the  effect  that
    their United Kingdom qualifications will  not  be  of  value  in  their
    future lives.

66.  We  do  not  find  that  removal  of  Mr  Mughal  and  his  family,  in
    consequence of the decision to refuse to vary leave,  would  constitute
    an interference with his Article 8 rights, that is disproportionate  to
    the legitimate public end; namely, the maintenance of  a  coherent  and
    fair system of immigration control.  His appeal on human rights grounds
    is accordingly dismissed.  So too are the appeals of his family.




(13) Mr Danisha Qureshi

67.  Mr Qureshi arrived in the United Kingdom on 11th April 2006 with  entry
    clearance as a student, in which capacity  he  was  granted  extensions
    until August 2012.   In  his  "statement  of  additional  grounds"  the
    appellant referred to, but did not  elaborate  upon,  his  "established
    private life" in the United Kingdom.  He contended that there  was  "no
    pressing social need to deny the appellant [a] right to remain  in  the
    United Kingdom"; that  human  rights  were  "designed  to  prevent  and
    control arbitrary discretion and abuse of power"; and that he was  "not
    a threat to the wider community".

68.  We do not find that removal of Mr Qureshi, pursuant to the decision  to
    refuse to vary leave, would potentially engage the operation of Article
    8. In any event, such removal would be proportionate to the  legitimate
    public end; namely, the operation of a  coherent  and  fair  system  of
    immigration control.  His appeal on human rights grounds is accordingly
    dismissed.


(17) Mr Kazi Hossain

69.  Mr Hossain entered the United Kingdom on 23rd July 2007 as  a  student.
    He was subsequently granted further periods of leave to remain in  that
    capacity.  In his grounds of appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  the
    appellant contended that he had "already established private life  here
    in the UK within the meaning of Article  8  of  the  ECHR  through  the
    course of his studies in the UK".  The studies for which he was granted
    leave to enter/remain are, however, now completed.

70.  We do not find that removal of Mr Hossain, pursuant to the decision  to
    refuse to vary leave, would potentially engage the operation of Article
    8. In any event, such removal would be proportionate to the  legitimate
    public end; namely, the operation of a  coherent  and  fair  system  of
    immigration control.  His appeal on human rights grounds is accordingly
    dismissed.


(18) Mr Androo Rafeek

71.  At [20] of the determination of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the  judge
    found this:-

         "[19]    I find that there  is  no  evidence  before  me  that  the
             appellant has established family life in the UK.


         [20] On the other hand, I find that he has established private life
             in the UK, in that he has lived in the UK since 16th  February
             2011, and has studied here.  However, I find that that private
             life is limited, in that his leave to enter as a  student  was
             for the relatively short period of February 2011 to May  2012,
             he has lived  here  for  less  than  two  years,  and  he  has
             established his private life here during a period when he knew
             that he had leave to stay here only for a limited  period  and
             for a limited purpose."

72.  In addition, at [22] the judge found that  "he  intends,  according  to
    his evidence, to return to India in any event, and  the  fact  that  he
    will be returning sooner than he had intended is not, as I find, in all
    the circumstances of this  case  a  sufficient  interference  with  his
    private life in the UK to amount to a breach of  Article  8".   At  the
    hearing before us, Mr Sreevalsalan submitted that the appellant came to
    the United Kingdom at a  time  when  the  Tier  1  PSW  Rules  were  in
    existence and that the opportunity to undertake post-study work was  an
    attraction to him in choosing the United Kingdom.  Were he to return to
    India without having undertaken such work the appellant would  find  it
    difficult to build up his career as he would have "a gap in his CV".

73.  We do not find those submissions  at  all  persuasive.   As  Mr  Jarvis
    submitted, the appellant would, in common with the other appellants, be
    able to explain why time had elapsed between the  ending  of  his  last
    course of studies in  the  United  Kingdom  and  his  return  home,  by
    reference to the legal proceedings with which we are concerned.  In any
    event, the contention that  disproportionate  interference  with  human
    rights arises because of speculative effects on a  person's  curriculum
    vitae is profoundly unattractive.

74.  We do not find that removal of Mr Rafeek, pursuant to the  decision  to
    refuse to vary leave, would potentially engage the operation of Article
    8. In any event, such removal would be proportionate to the  legitimate
    public end; namely, the operation of a  coherent  and  fair  system  of
    immigration control.  His appeal on human rights grounds is accordingly
    dismissed.


(19) Mr Qummer Aziz

75.  Mr Aziz arrived in the United Kingdom on  6  May  2004  as  a  student,
    subsequently being granted further periods of leave to remain  in  that
    capacity until 30th July  2012.   In  his  witness  statement  of  18th
    December 2013 he says:-

         "...     I have been residing in the UK for a significant period of
             time, during which I have developed strong  personal  ties  in
             the UK.  I have  always  tried  [my]  level  best  to  act  in
             accordance to the Immigration Rules and am a  hardworking  and
             committed individual which can be  demonstrated  by  the  fact
             that I never relied on public funds during my stay in the  UK.
             I wish to remain in  the  UK  because  I  have  established  a
             private life here.  I have now become very much accustomed and
             fully adopted [to] life in the UK.


         4.   My private life comprises of family, friends,  class  fellows,
             colleagues and career.   I  would  like  to  mention  that  my
             removal from the United Kingdom will cast  (sic)  sever  (sic)
             negative effects on my career ...  I  have  been  contributing
             toward the British society and  economy  very  positively.   I
             have never been involved in any unlawful activity  and  always
             abide by the terms and conditions of leave."

76.  Mr Aziz was not represented on 19th December and,  therefore,  was  not
    party to the submissions to the effect that what was being  sought  was
    two years' post-study work.  Mr Aziz's  statement  appears  to  contend
    that respecting his private life requires the respondent to permit  the
    appellant to remain in the United Kingdom, for as  long  as  he  wants.
    The appellant did not elaborate upon his "family" or indeed  the  other
    persons mentioned in his statement.  Nor  did  he  elaborate  upon  his
    career.

77.  We do not find that removal of Mr Aziz, pursuant  to  the  decision  to
    refuse to vary leave, would potentially engage the operation of Article
    8. In any event, such removal would be proportionate to the  legitimate
    public end; namely, the operation of a  coherent  and  fair  system  of
    immigration control.  His appeal on human rights grounds is accordingly
    dismissed.


(20) Mr Abhilash Mukundhakshan

78.  Mr Mukundhakshan arrived in the United Kingdom on 6th February 2010  as
    a student, subsequently being given leave to remain  in  that  capacity
    until 8th October 2012, subject to a condition  restricting  employment
    and prohibiting recourse to public funds.  In his submissions to us  Mr
    Mukundhakshan said that he had established a business,  Abas  Solutions
    Limited, which, if he were given permission to work, he intended to use
    in connection with the provision of IT services.   He  also  showed  us
    evidence of a job offer, dependent upon his being given  permission  to
    work.  In reply, Mr Jarvis said  that  (as  was  the  case  with  other
    appellants), Mr Mukundhakshan could make an application from abroad  in
    order to re-enter  pursuant  to  the  Rules.   It  had,  however,  been
    impermissible  since  December  2012  (when  the  relevant  Rules  were
    changed) for the appellant to "switch" whilst in the United Kingdom  to
    the Tier 2 (Entrepreneur) route.

79.  We do not find that  removal  of  Mr  Mukundhakshan,  pursuant  to  the
    decision  to  refuse  to  vary  leave,  would  potentially  engage  the
    operation  of  Article  8.  In  any  event,  such  removal   would   be
    proportionate to the legitimate public end; namely, the operation of  a
    coherent and fair system of immigration control.  His appeal  on  human
    rights grounds is accordingly dismissed.


(21) Ms Sandeep Kaur

80.  Ms Kaur entered the United Kingdom on 20th October 2010 as  a  student,
    with leave until 28th February 2012.  It was  clear  from  Mr  Baddar's
    submissions on her behalf that Ms Kaur's Article 8 claim rests  on  the
    propositions we have considered earlier.

81.  We do not find that removal of Ms Kaur, pursuant  to  the  decision  to
    refuse to vary leave, would potentially engage the operation of Article
    8. In any event, such removal would be proportionate to the  legitimate
    public end; namely, the operation of a  coherent  and  fair  system  of
    immigration control.  Her appeal on human rights grounds is accordingly
    dismissed.


(22) Mr Sajid Abdul

82.  Mr Abdul arrived in the United Kingdom as a student  on  29th  December
    2009, and was granted further leave in that capacity until 28th January
    2012.  As with Ms Kaur, it was apparent from  Mr  Baddar's  submissions
    that Mr Abdul's Article 8 case rested upon  the  general  propositions,
    which we have considered above.

83.  We do not find that removal of Mr Abdul, pursuant to  the  decision  to
    refuse to vary leave, would potentially engage the operation of Article
    8. In any event, such removal would be proportionate to the  legitimate
    public end; namely, the operation of a  coherent  and  fair  system  of
    immigration control.  His appeal on human rights grounds is accordingly
    dismissed.






                               Signed                                  Date




                               Upper Tribunal Judge Peter Lane


-----------------------
[1] The questions are:
(1) Will the proposed removal be an interference by a public authority  with
the exercise of the applicant's right to respect for his private or (as  the
case may be) family life?
(2) If so, will such interference  have  consequences  of  such  gravity  as
potentially to engage the operation of Article 8?
(3) If so, will such interference be in accordance with the law?
(4) If so, is such interference necessary in a  democratic  society  in  the
interests of national security, public safety or the economic well-being  of
the country, for the prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection  of
health or morals, or for the  protection  of  the  rights  and  freedoms  of
others?
(5) If so, is such interference proportionate to the legitimate  public  end
sought to be achieved?

