
TB (EEA national: leave to remain?) Nigeria [2007] UKAIT 00020

Asylum and Immigration Tribunal


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 24th October, 2006                         |On 07 February 2007          |
|Dictated 25th October, 2006                   |                             |
|Typed 30th October, 2006                      |                             |
|Signed ................................       |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

   Mr C M G Ockelton, Deputy President of Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
                      Senior Immigration Judge Chalkley

                                   Between



                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Olaogun, of BSO Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Blundell, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

A resident permit granted under the EEA Regulations is not  Leave  to  Enter
or Leave to  Remain.   A  person  who  has  a  Residence  Permit  does  not,
therefore, meet any requirements of  the  Immigration  Rules  that  he  have
Leave to Enter or Leave to Remain.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   This is the reconsideration of a  determination  by  Immigration  Judge
    Kulatilake, promulgated on 17th  May,  2006,  following  a  hearing  at
    Hatton Cross on 9th May, 2006, in which he dismissed the appeal of  the
    appellant against the decision of the respondent., taken on 24th April,
    2006, to refuse to vary leave to remain in  the  United  Kingdom  as  a
    "common-law spouse".

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria, who was born on  23rd  November,
    1970.  He was issued with a United Kingdom residence permit  which  was
    valid from 15th June, 2002, until 15th June, 2005.  The reason for  the
    issue of the residence permit was that the  appellant's  then  wife,  a
    Dutch national, was exercising treaty  rights  in  the  United  Kingdom
    under the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations, 2006.

3.   The marriage between the appellant and his  wife  was  dissolved  by  a
    decree absolute issued in the Principal Registry of the Family Division
    of the High Court on 2nd March, 2005.

4.   The appellant entered the United Kingdom  some  time  during  1998  and
    married his wife.  The date of his marriage is unclear but  it  is  not
    disputed that he was given right of residence as a family member of  an
    EEA national until 15th June, 2007.  By notice dated 20th March,  2006,
    the respondent revoked the appellant's residence document following the
    issue of the decree absolute on 2nd March, 2005.  By application  dated
    21st December, 2005, the appellant made application for  further  leave
    to remain in the United Kingdom as the common-law spouse  of  a  person
    with whom he started to live together  in  a  relationship  akin  to  a
    marriage in March, 2003.

5.   The Immigration Judge found  that  the  appellant  lost  his  residence
    rights on the pronouncement of his decree absolute on 2nd March,  2005.
    He also found that the appellant failed to  meet  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 295D(iv) and dismissed the appellant's appeal.  He went on to
    consider the appellant's human rights Article  8  claim  and  concluded
    that there was nothing in the evidence before him which could  properly
    be described as being "exceptional" in the sense held by the  Court  of
    Appeal in Huang and Others v Secretary of State for the Home Department
    [2005] EWCA Civ 105 and that interference with the appellant's  Article
    8 rights would be proportionate.

6.   The appellant sought reconsideration and asserted that:-

     "The Immigration Judge misdirected himself on the effect of the  notice
        of revocation and should have considered  whether  such  revocation
        was justified given that the appellant  had  made  application  for
        variation of his leave prior to the  revocation  of  the  residence
        permit

     - that the Immigration Judge further misdirected himself in  concluding
        that the appellant lost his residence rights on  the  pronouncement
        of the decree absolute on 2nd March, 2005.

     - that the Immigration Judge  misdirected  himself  as  to  the  proper
        interpretation of paragraph  295(D)  of  Statement  of  Changes  in
        Immigration Rules HC 395

     - that  the  Immigration  Judge  misdirected  himself  in  interpreting
        Article 8 when the appellant had established a private  and  family
        life and any interference would be disproportionate."

7.   Prior to the hearing a skeleton argument was submitted to the  Tribunal
    by those appearing on behalf of the appellant.  It was briefly referred
    to during the hearing and has been carefully considered  by  us  before
    reaching our conclusions.  In that skeleton argument,  it  is  asserted
    that:

     "5. It is not disputed that  the  appellant  was  granted  a  residence
             permit which for argument sake is akin to a  limited  leave  to
             enter or remain under the 1971 Immigration Act".

     Further arguments  in  the  skeleton  argument  were  developed  by  Mr
    Olaogun before us.  He submitted that the real issue was whether or not
    the appellant had leave at the time he made  his  application  on  21st
    December, 2005.  Before answering that question, Mr  Olaogun  suggested
    that it was  necessary  to  consider  first  whether  the  respondent's
    revocation  of  a  residence  document  on  20th   March,   2006,   had
    retrospective effect to cancel  the  appellant's  leave  prior  to  the
    making of his application on 21st December, 2005.

8.   The appellant had been in possession, Mr  Olaogun  reminded  us,  of  a
    residence permit.  People in possession of  residence  permits  do  not
    need to have leave to remain.   Effectively,  a  residence  permit  is,
    suggested Mr Olaogun, leave to remain in the United Kingdom.  With  the
    respondent's notice of refusal to vary leave was a "reasons for refusal
    letter" addressed to the appellant dated 24th April, 2006, which says:-

     "In making the decision to refuse your application,  consideration  has
        been given to the following:

        1.   On 15th June 2002 you were granted further leave to remain  in
           the United Kingdom as  the  spouse  of  ...,  a  Dutch  national
           exercising treaty rights in the United Kingdom until  15th  June
           2007."

9.    It  appeared,  therefore,  that  the  respondent  believed  that   the
    appellant had been granted leave to remain when, in actual fact, he had
    been granted a residence permit as the spouse of an EEA national.

10.  The appellant is not  married  but  relies  on  his  rights  under  the
    Immigration Rules.  Mr Olaogun confirmed  that  the  appellant  can  no
    longer rely on the Immigration (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations,
    2006 because he is no longer married and his current common-law partner
    is herself a British citizen.

11.  Mr Olaogun submitted that the appellant did meet  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 295D(i) which requires:-

     "(i)     the appellant has  limited  leave  to  remain  in  the  United
             Kingdom  which  was  given  in  accordance  with  any  of   the
             provisions of these Rules;"

     because although he did not have limited leave to remain he did have  a
    residence permit  which  is  akin  to  leave  and,  he  suggested,  the
    Immigration Rule  should  be  given  a  positive  interpretation.   The
    appellant's right of residence as the dependant of an EEA  national  is
    not, suggested Mr Olaogun, dependent upon the marriage subsisting.  The
    residence permit did not itself terminate  until  it  was  subsequently
    revoked and it  could  not  have  been  revoked  retrospectively.   The
    revocation was an act of bad faith by the Secretary  of  State  because
    the appellant was not an  overstayer  and  had  already  applied  under
    paragraph 295D.

12.  Mr Blundell submitted that the residence permit is not akin to  limited
    leave and that the Immigration (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations,
    2006, were clear.  Paragraph 295D of HC 395 cannot avail the  appellant
    because he did not meet the requirements of sub-paragraph (i)  in  that
    he did not have limited leave to remain in  the  United  Kingdom.   The
    reasons for refusal letter refers to a  grant  of  leave  but  that  is
    clearly  incorrect  and  the  appellant  and  those  representing   the
    appellant must have known that.  There was never any grant of any leave
    to the appellant and the stamp  in  the  appellant's  passport  clearly
    shows the grant of a right of residence as a family member  of  an  EEA
    national on 15th June, 2002 until 17th June, 2007.  He  invited  us  to
    dismiss the appeal.  We reserved our determination.

13.  Paragraph 295D of Statement of Changes in  Immigration  Rules,  HC  395
    requires, amongst other things, that a person seeking leave  to  remain
    as the unmarried partner of a person present and settled in the  United
    Kingdom are that:-

        "(i) the applicant has  limited  leave  to  remain  in  the  United
             Kingdom  which  was  given  in  accordance  with  any  of   the
             provisions of these Rules."

14.  It is clear from the copy of the  appellant's  passport  reproduced  in
    the bundle before us, that  on  15th  June,  2002,  the  appellant  was
    granted a right of residence in the United Kingdom as the family member
    of an EEA national, his wife, until 15th June, 2007.  We have not  been
    told when the appellant married his wife but we have been supplied with
    a copy of a decree absolute issued by the  Principal  Registry  of  the
    Family Division of the High  Court  of  Justice  on  2nd  March,  2005,
    dissolving that marriage.  At the  date  of  the  decree  absolute  the
    appellant ceased to be the family  member  of  an  EEA  national.   The
    appellant subsequently applied under paragraph 295D for leave to remain
    as the unmarried partner of a British subject and that  application  no
    doubt prompted the respondent to revoke the residence document.

15.  Mr Olaogun's challenge to  the  Immigration  Judge's  determination  is
    predicated on the basis that the grant of residence as the dependant of
    an EEA national, "is akin to a limited leave to enter or  remain  under
    the 1971 Immigration Act".

16.  It is not.  The grant of a right of residence to the spouse of  an  EEA
    national is dependent  on  that  spouse's  relationship  with  the  EEA
    national.   Once  that  relationship  terminates   then,   subject   to
    Regulation 10 of the Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations,
    2006, that person's right of residence  also  ceases  because  he  then
    ceases to be the spouse of a qualified person.

17.  The appellant could not qualify for the grant of  leave  to  remain  as
    the unmarried partner of a person present and  settled  in  the  United
    Kingdom under paragraph 295D of HC 395, because he  could  not  satisfy
    the requirements of sub-paragraph (i).

18.  We have concluded, therefore, that the Immigration Judge  did  not  err
    in law in dismissing the appellant's immigration appeal.

19.  So far as concerns the appellant's Article 8 claim,  the  challenge  is
    nothing  more  than  a  disagreement  with  the   determination.    The
    Immigration  Judge  noted  that  the  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer
    conceded that the appellant had established  a  family  life  with  his
    partner and that there were two children from  that  relationship.   He
    noted also that the appellant lives with his partner, a British citizen
    and their children and supports his family from  his  employment  as  a
    Safety Officer.  He noted that the  appellant  is  engaged  in  church-
    related welfare work and accepted that the appellant  had  no  criminal
    convictions.  The Immigration Judge reminded himself of the judgment of
    Laws LJ in Huang and found that there was no  evidence  before  him  to
    conclude that the appellant's circumstances were so  exceptional  "that
    the imperative of proportionality demands an outcome in the appellant's
    favour".  He properly found that family  life  existed  and  concluded,
    having assessed all the  evidence  before  him,  that  the  appellant's
    removal would be proportionate.  We similarly find that the Immigration
    Judge did not err in his dismissal of the appellant's Article 8 claim.

20.  Unless a material error of law  can  be  discerned  in  an  Immigration
    Judge's determination, it may not be interfered  with  (see  CA  [2004]
    EWCA Civ 1165). That is the case here.  There is no error of law in the
    Immigration Judge's determination and his decision shall stand.





Signed                                  Date


Senior Immigration Judge Chalkley



