
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Gheorghiu (reg 24AA EEA Regs - relevant factors) [2016] UKUT 00024 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 November 2015                           |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |


                                   Before
                          THE HON MR JUSTICE BLAKE
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GOLDSTEIN

                                   Between
               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MIRCEA GHEORGHIU
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mrs B Hamid counsel instructed by SBG Solicitors


When considering whether or not to  suspend  certification  of  EEA  appeals
pursuant to regulation 24AA of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
Regulations  2006,  the  decision-maker  should  take  into  account   inter
alia:(i) the status of the EEA national;  (ii)  the  impact  of  removal  on
family members; (iii) evidence of continuing risk to the  public;  and  (iv)
the role oral evidence may play.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal from a decision of  FtT  Judge
      Trevaskis promulgated on 27 April 2015. He  allowed  the  respondent's
      appeal from a decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State  to  deport  him
      pursuant to the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.


   2. Mr Gheorghiu is a citizen of Romania who was born on 9  December  1968
      and is now aged 46. He married Mihaela Gheorghiu on 14 February  1995.
      The couple have three children now aged 20, 19 and 15.

   3. Mrs Gheorghiu gave evidence before the  FtT  and  was  accepted  as  a
      reliable witness. She stated that her husband first came to the United
      Kingdom in August 2002. It is common ground that he entered  illegally
      and remained without leave. On 1st January 2007, Romania  became  part
      of the EU and transitional arrangements were made  for  workers.   Mrs
      Gheorghiu states that her husband was legally working as a builder for
      various contractors on a self employed basis since  January  2007  and
      supported the family back in Romania as the sole breadwinner.

   4. In her witness statement prepared for the appeal she states  that  she
      will do her best to  obtain  documentary  evidence  of  this,  in  her
      husband's absence. On the 18  April  2015  Mr  Gheorghiu's  solicitors
      submitted a bundle of self assessment tax returns for  the  Tax  Years
      from 4 April 2010 to 2014 and the provisional figures  for  2015.  The
      judge accepted the evidence that he was  working  and  supporting  his
      family,  although  we  observe  that  since  that  was  based  on  Mrs
      Gheorghiu's evidence this could only have  been  a  reference  to  the
      period from January 2007 onwards.

   5. Mrs Gheorghiu and the three children of the family came to the  United
      Kingdom to live with their husband/father between 2013  and  September
      2014. The family live in rented accommodation in the UK. Mrs Gheorghiu
      is in employment as is the eldest daughter; the younger  two  children
      are at college and school.


   6. In November 2007, Mr  Gheorghiu  was  convicted  of  driving  a  motor
      vehicle with excess alcohol, was fined and disqualified  from  driving
      for 20 months. There have been no subsequent convictions.

   7. It seems that in June 2014 the Secretary of State became aware that Mr
      Gheorghiu had a criminal record in Romania. In 1990 he  was  convicted
      of the offence of rape and sentenced to 6 years imprisonment.  Between
      2001 and March 2002 he was convicted on three  occasions  of  forestry
      offences, cutting timber without a  licence,  and  received  custodial
      sentences on the last two occasions.

   8. On 28 January 2015, the Secretary of State made the decision to deport
      Mr Gheorghiu,  essentially  because  of  the  serious  nature  of  his
      overseas  convictions,  notably  the  conviction  for  rape.   It  was
      assessed that he posed a present  threat  to  public  policy  and  his
      deportation was  proportionate  under  regulation  21.   It  was  also
      decided to certify his case under regulation 24AA of  the  Immigration
      (EEA)  Regulations  2006  (the  Regulations).  He  was  detained   and
      subsequently removed in March 2015.

   9. An  application  that  was  made  to  the  Secretary  of  State  under
      regulation  29AA  of  the  Regulations  to  attend  the   appeal   was
      unsuccessful. The appeal accordingly proceeded in his absence with Mrs
      Gheorghiu giving evidence.  The case for the Secretary  of  State  was
      that the rape conviction meant that the respondent's presence  in  the
      UK represented a genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat
      affecting one of the fundamental interests of society. The case for Mr
      Gheorghiu was that his presence in the UK did  not  represent  such  a
      threat; his criminal conduct was long ago; he had  since  married  and
      supported his family; he had led a law abiding life in  the  UK  since
      2002 with the exception of the drink drive conviction and that was not
      sufficiently serious in itself to engage  public  policy  grounds  for
      removal or suggest recidivism.

  10. The judge noted that he had no  information  from  Romania  about  the
      nature of the offence, or rehabilitation in prison. He concluded  that
      as the offence of rape was committed 25 years ago  and  there  was  no
      evidence of subsequent violent or sexual offending, he represented  at
      worst a very low risk of re-offending.  He was not satisfied that  the
      drink drive conviction was a persuasive indicator of a  propensity  to
      reoffend in a sexual or violent manner.

  11.   He  considered  the  requirements  of  regulation  21  and  made   a
      proportionality evaluation on the evidence before him. He concluded at
      [49] as follows:


         "The fact that the appellant has committed previous offences is not
         a matter which can solely justify deportation; there is no evidence
         which  leads  me  to  find  that  he  is  a  genuine,  present  and
         sufficiently serious threat to one of the fundamental interests  of
         society; his present conduct in the last seven years, has been that
         of a law abiding and working  member  of  United  Kingdom  society,
         exercising  treaty  rights  as  a  worker.  I  do  not  find   that
         deportation is justified on imperative grounds of public  security,
         because there is no evidence  which  shows  that  he  represents  a
         genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat   to   public
         security. The threshold of imperative grounds is a  high  level  of
         justification for deportation, and I find that the decision made by
         the respondent in this case has not reached that level".


                                    (emphasis supplied)


  12.  The Secretary of State appeals with leave of the  FtT  judge  on  the
      grounds that the judge fell  into  error  in  the  reference  made  to
      imperative grounds in the passage highlighted above.


  13. We agree that the judge fell into error in this respect. He  may  have
      been misled by reading the  words  of  regulation  21  (4)  (a)  ('has
      resided in the United Kingdom for a continuous period of at least  ten
      years prior to the  relevant  decision')  as  meaning  that  any  such
      residence counted regardless of its  quality.  The  skeleton  argument
      filed below for Mr Gheorghiu invited him to take such a  course.  That
      invitation was misconceived. Curiously his legal team had submitted  a
      bundle of legal materials including the decision of this  Tribunal  in
      Vassallo (Qualifying residence;  pre-UK  accession)  [2014]  UKUT  313
      (IAC) which would have demonstrated the falsity of the proposition.

  14. This authority recites the case law of the Court  of  Justice  to  the
      effect that residence in a host state prior to the coming  into  force
      of the Citizens Directive that the EEA Regulations  were  designed  to
      implement, can  count  as  residence  towards  the  ten  year  period,
      provided that it is legal residence for a purpose contemplated  by  EU
      law: see Case C-424/10 Ziolkowski [2011] ECR.  It also draws attention
      to the words of former Schedule 4 paragraph 6 (3) of  the  Regulations
      (inserted to deal with transitional provisions that have now  expired)
      reflecting this case law. It states that residence before  the  coming
      into force of these regulations counts where the claimant:

        '(a)   had leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
         (b)  would have been carrying out (the  relevant  EU)  activity  or
         residing  in  the  United  Kingdom   in   accordance   with   these
         Regulations  had the relevant state been an EEA State at that  time
         and had these Regulations at that time been in force.'


  15.  A period of ten years before the decision was taken  in  the  present
      case starts in January 2005. It was common ground  that  Mr  Gheorghiu
      entered the UK in breach of domestic immigration law in 2002, and  did
      not have leave to enter or remain. Romania was not then  a  member  of
      the EU and he could have had no Treaty rights to remain at that  time.
      There was no evidence before the judge that he had entered into lawful
      employment before January 2007.   He  could  not  have  been  lawfully
      resident for the purpose of EU law and  the  EEA  regulations  between
      January 2005 and January 2007.


  16. The position is different for the period from  January  2007  onwards.
      There was evidence accepted by the judge that Mr Gheorghiu had  worked
      continuously from the first date that he was entitled to do  so.   For
      most of the period in the five years before the  decision  in  January
      2015, there was documentary evidence of self-employed status  for  tax
      purposes, but in any event there was the evidence of the wife that she
      was supported by her husband's earnings that the  judge  accepted.  We
      pointed out to Ms Fijiwala that the implication of this was  that  the
      respondent  had  acquired  a  permanent  right  of   residence   under
      regulation 15 (1)(a) of the Regulations, as he had resided lawfully in
      the United Kingdom for a purpose (employment) that was  in  accordance
      with the Regulations.  Having considered the evidence she agreed.

  17. The consequence was  that  although  the  judge  fell  into  error  in
      referring to imperative grounds  of  public  policy,  he  should  have
      referred to 'serious grounds of public policy or public  security'  in
      accordance with regulation 21 (3).

Conclusions

  18.  Although there was an error by the judge in referring  to  imperative
      grounds, it made no difference to the outcome of the appeal. The first
      part of paragraph 49 of the decision quoted above, was  sufficient  to
      allow the appeal even at the basic level of protection from  expulsion
      for EU citizens. In fact Mr Gheorghiu could only have been removed  on
      the basis that a higher threshold of serious grounds was met.  In  the
      light of the judge's primary conclusions of fact there  were  no  such
      grounds.


  19. We accordingly dismiss the Secretary of State's appeal.

  20.  We are conscious that  Mr  Gheorghiu  was  removed  from  the  United
      Kingdom and his wife  and  family  in  March  2015,  pursuant  to  the
      Secretary of State's certification. We note  that  this  decision  may
      have been influenced by the fact that he failed to respond to the pre-
      decision inquiry into his personal circumstances. We further note that
      his legal team failed to apply to a judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal
      to suspend the certification pursuant to regulation 24AA  (4)  of  the
      Regulations.

  21. We are aware that the certification power is a novel one, and no  case
      law on its application in appeals under the  EEA  Regulations  exists.
      Since the hearing our attention has been drawn to the recent  decision
      of the Court of Appeal in R (ota Kiarie and others)  [2015]  EWCA  Civ
      1020 handed down on 13 October 2015 and concerned with the application
      of a similar power in Article 8  deportation  appeals.  That  decision
      upheld certification decisions made on the  facts  of  the  particular
      cases; and noted that in Article 8 cases, appeals from abroad  can  be
      an effective remedy,  but  much  depends  on  the  assessment  of  the
      requirements of justice in the particular case reached  by  specialist
      immigration judges (see per Richards LJ at [64] to [67] ).

  22. We have no doubt that if  an  application   to  suspend  certification
      enabling pre-appeal removal were made   in  an  EEA  case,  the  judge
      would take due account  of the following factors:-

         i) that the status  of  an EEA national exercising Treaty rights of
             employment and residence in the host state at the time  of  the
            expulsion decision are significantly  different  from  those  of
            aliens generally;  interference with the right of  residence  is
            not permitted in the  absence  of  a  sufficiently  serious  and
            present threat to   the  requirements  of  public  policy,  that
            cannot include in an EU case general deterrence or the  interest
            of maintaining purely domestic immigration control;


       ii) that the removal pending appeal from the communal  household  of
           the principal wage earner of the family who  (as here) is   both
           a spouse and a parent  of a minor child involved in the  child's
           daily life  is itself an interference with  both  the  right  to
           respect for  family life under Article 8 and the  EU Charter  of
           Fundamental rights and the EU right of residence afforded by the
           Citizens Directive;


      iii)  that in cases of  serious criminality, if there is no  evidence
           of  continuing risk to the public, the case  for  expulsion  may
           not be a strong one; where there is some evidence of risk   that
           is being  addressed  and   rehabilitation  of  the  offender  is
           promoted by the family and employment circumstances in the  host
           state, then,  at  least  in  the  case  of  people  entitled  to
           permanent residence  in that state, substantial  weight  may  be
           afforded to the duty to promote rehabilitation  (see  Essa  (EEA
           rehabilitation/integration) [2013]  UKUT 316 (IAC)  as corrected
           by the Court of Appeal in  SSHD v Dumliauskas and others  [2015]
           EWCA Civ 145 at  [46] and [54];  see also MC  (Portugal)  [2015]
           UKUT 00520 (IAC). Interference with  the  factors  that  promote
           such rehabilitation may not be readily justified.

       iv)  that in cases  where the central issue is whether the  offender
           has sufficiently been rehabilitated to diminish the risk to  the
           public from his behaviour, the experience of immigration  judges
           has been that hearing and seeing the offender give live evidence
            and the enhanced ability  to  assess   the  sincerity  of  that
           evidence is an important part of the fact-finding  process  (see
           for example the observations of this Tribunal as to the benefits
           of having heard the offender in  Masih (Pakistan) [2012] UKUT 46
           (IAC) at [18]; see also Lord Bingham in Huang [2007] 2 AC 167 at
           [15][1]).

  23.  In any event, we consider it is of importance that  Mr  Gheorghiu  is
      reunited with his family as quickly  as  possible  and  the  necessary
      arrangements are made to give effect to this decision within  28  days
      of its promulgation.  His enforced absence from  the  UK  since  March
      2015 was not voluntary; for reasons found by the judge as corrected by
      this Tribunal it was not justified,  and  should  not  be  treated  as
      breaking the continuity of any residence relevant for the  acquisition
      in due course of the right of permanent  residence  by  his  wife  and
      children. As noted above, it is accepted that Mr Gheorghiu himself  is
      entitled to a permanent residence on his return and the residence card
      issued to him will reflect that.


  24. The FtT judge directed anonymity. We can see no basis to  depart  from
      the principle of open justice in this case. The direction is revoked.

Notice of Decision

The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.
The decision of the FtT judge allowing  the  respondent's  appeal  from  the
decision to deport stands.
The Secretary of state  is  directed  to  arrange  for  the  return  of  the
respondent to the United Kingdom within 28 days of the promulgation of  this
decision

No anonymity direction is made.

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   [pic]
                                Date 20 November 2015


-----------------------
[1]  'The first task of the appellate immigration authority is to  establish
the relevant facts. These may well have changed since the original  decision
was made. In any event,  particularly  where  the  applicant  has  not  been
interviewed, the authority will be much better  placed  to  investigate  the
facts, test the evidence, assess the sincerity of the  applicant's  evidence
and the genuineness of his or her  concerns  and  evaluate  the  nature  and
strength of the family bond in the particular case.  It  is  important  that
the facts are explored, and summarised in the  decision,  with  care,  since
they will always be important and often decisive'.

