
      ZC & Others (Risk - illegal exit - loan sharks) China CG [2009] UKAIT
00028

Asylum and Immigration Tribunal


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |                           |
|On 27 February 2009                             |                           |
|                                                |                           |



                                   Before

                       Senior Immigration Judge Keki?

                                   Between

                                     ZC
                                     JW
                                     YW
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:           Mr B Bedford, Counsel instructed by Sultan
Lloyd                        Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Smart, Home Office Presenting Officer


(1) Individuals returning to China after  having  made  unsuccessful  claims
for asylum are not reasonably  likely  to  be  imprisoned  or  subjected  to
administrative detention for having  left  China  unlawfully;  LJ  (China  -
Prison Conditions) China [2005] UKIAT 00099 upheld. Those  able  to  provide
the authorities with information on loan sharks  or  snake  heads  are  even
less likely to be at risk of prosecution.

(2) The evidence does not establish that failed asylum seekers  indebted  to
loan sharks will come to harm on return to China; the  information  on  loan
sharks in HL (Risk - Return - Snakeheads) China CG  [2002]  UKIAT  03683  is
still applicable.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1.       This is the reconsideration of the appeals of the appellants,  a
      family unit of mother and twin children born on 11 August 1968  and  9
      October 1991 respectively. All are citizens of China.

   2.       The appellants claim to have left China via Beijing airport  for
      Holland in March 2008. They then arrived illegally in  the  UK  on  an
      unspecified date in April. They claimed asylum on 27 June 2008.  Their
      applications were refused on 17 July 2008 and  a  decision  to  remove
      them from the UK was made on the same date.

   3.       The appellants gave notice of  appeal  under  s.  82(1)  of  the
      Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 on 4 August 2008.

   4.       The appeals came before Immigration Judge Pacey at Birmingham on
      19 September 2008. She heard oral evidence from  the  first  appellant
      and in  a  determination  promulgated  on  29  September  allowed  the
      appeals.  The Immigration Judge found that the appellants were members
      of a particular social group, that they would be  at  risk  from  loan
      sharks in their home area due to gambling debts incurred by the  first
      appellant's husband, that they  could  internally  relocate  but  that
      because the  background  material  indicated  that  illegal  exit  was
      punishable by imprisonment, "this might happen to the first appellant"
      and the appeals therefore had to succeed on asylum grounds.

   5.       Reconsideration was sought by  the  respondent  and  ordered  by
      Senior Immigration Judge Chalkley on 8 October 2008.

   6.       On 9 January 2009 Senior Immigration Judge Ward heard the  first
      stage of the reconsideration. She found that  the  panel  had  made  a
      material  error  of   law   and   adjourned   for   a   second   stage
      reconsideration. Her reasons for so finding are set out below:


           REASONS FOR THE DECISION THAT THERE IS A MATERIAL ERROR OF LAW
           IN THE DETERMINATION

      1. The Appellant and her two dependent children sought asylum  in  the
United Kingdom by      an application dated 27 June  2008.   The  Respondent
refused the application on the basis    that  there  was  a  sufficiency  of
protection for the Appellants from  the  loan  sharks  they  feared       on
return to  China.   The  Appellants  appealed  to  the  Tribunal  and  by  a
determination dated    27 September 2008, Immigration  Judge  Pacey  allowed
their appeals. The Respondent     sought a reconsideration order  which  was
granted by a senior immigration judge on 8   October 2008.

      2. Representation
      At the hearing before me the Appellants were represented  by  Mr  Pipe
of Counsel and the     Respondent  was  represented  by  Miss  Karunatilake,
Home Office Presenting Officer.

      3. Submissions.
      Miss Karunatilake relied on all her grounds  in  the  application  for
reconsideration. I     summarise them briefly as follows.   The  immigration
judge had found in the course of his    determination  that  the  Appellants
could relocate internally in order to be free from risk of     harm  at  the
hands of the loan sharks.  Notwithstanding this clear  finding  of  internal
relocation, the judge went on to allow the appeal.  This was an error.   The
judge had then   gone on apparently to allow the appeal on the  basis  that,
as an illegal emigrant, the  Appellant would  be  at  risk  of  receiving  a
sentence of  about  three  months  and  therefore  the    appeal  should  be
allowed.  However the judge had failed  entirely  to  consider  whether  the
short period involved would amount to persecution for a  Convention  reason.
There was no     consideration of whether this would give rise to  treatment
which would cross the threshold    required  for  Article  3  of  the  Human
Rights  Convention  either.   The  grounds  also   submitted      that   the
immigration judge had failed to have regard to  the  principles  established
by the      Tribunal in the case of LJ China  but  this  was  not  an  issue
which Miss Karuntilake actively   pursued during her submissions.

      4. Mr Pipe, on behalf of the  Appellants,  referred  to  his  Rule  30
Reply.  There was no   challenge  to  the  immigration  judge's  credibility
findings.   The  findings  were  that  the    Appellant  came   within   the
definition of a particular social group, was  at  risk  and  there  was   an
absence of sufficient protection.  The only challenge  in  the  grounds  for
reconsideration  was in regard to the question of internal relocation.   The
immigration judge had made a      sustainable finding that, because  of  the
likelihood of the Appellant being imprisoned for   illegal  emigration  upon
return, relocation would not in the circumstances be a reasonable    option.
 The immigration judge had referred to the most  recent  objective  evidence
before      her.  The immigration judge did not find that such  imprisonment
would in itself constitute   persecutory  treatment  but  that  it  rendered
relocation unreasonable.  Looking at the heading   under which  this  matter
was  considered  in  the  determination,  it  was  clearly   part   of   her
consideration on internal relocation.

      5. At the end of the submissions I reserved my decision  which  I  now
give together with my  reasons.

      6. Material error of law
      I am satisfied that a material error  of  law  has  been  demonstrated
with regard to the     determination of the immigration judge.  While it  is
clear from the determination  that  the    immigration  judge  accepted  the
account of the First Appellant and found  her  to  be  credible,   she  also
found in paragraph 41 that there would not be a  sufficiency  of  protection
in her      home area. The immigration judge then went on, in paragraph  42,
to look at the question of    internal  relocation.   She  had  considerable
reservations regarding the credibility of  the       reasons  given  by  the
First Appellant for not being able to  relocate  elsewhere  in  China.   She
set out those reasons in paragraphs 42 to 46.  She  clearly  concluded  that
the evidence     pointed to the First Appellant being able  to  relocate  to
another part of the country. However     she  then  went  on  in  the  final
paragraph of the determination, paragraph 47 to state as      follows:


      "however, I note and accept, again from the objective evidence, namely
   the COI... that     illegal emigration is subject to a sentence of up  to
   one year in prison, with first offenders   probably receiving a  sentence
   of about three months.  It is reasonable to suppose,  therefore, that, on
   the balance of probabilities, this might happen to the  first  appellant.
   Since the appeals of the second and third appellant stand  or  fall  with
   that of the first   appellant, their appeals  must  be  allowed  on  this
   basis"

      7. While the submission made by Mr Pipe may be correct -  namely  that
paragraph 47     contained the reasoning of the judge  as  to  why  internal
relocation was not possible, (as  opposed to being  a  conclusion  that  the
risk of imprisonment as an illegal emigrant was    considered by  the  judge
to be treatment amounting to persecution for the purposes of the     Refugee
Convention)  nevertheless there is an absence of reasoning to  indicate  how
the   judge concluded that the internal relocation, which she  had  accepted
was reasonably   available in the preceding paragraphs, would   nevertheless
not be a reasonable option on     account  of  the  risk  of  a  three-month
prison sentence on return. There was no consideration     by  the  judge  at
all of   whether  there  was  a  real  risk  that  the  Appellant  would  be
imprisoned;      nor was there any consideration by the judge as to  whether
that course of events,  were      there to be a  real  risk  that  it  would
befall the Appellant,  would render internal  relocation   unreasonable  for
this Appellant.

      8.  The Tribunal must be slow to overturn a decision in favour  of  an
Appellant  without  good        reason.  Furthermore,  it  is  important  to
remember the guidance given by the Court of Appeal       in R (Iran)  [2005]
EWCA Civ 982. Although given  prior  to  the  commencement  of  the  current
reconsideration procedure, it is nevertheless  instructive.   Adjusting  the
terminology to meet    the current Tribunal  structure  and  reconsideration
process, the following principles  are    relevant.  The  Tribunal  must  be
satisfied that the correction of an  error  would  have  made  a    material
difference to the outcome or fairness of  the  proceedings.  Furthermore,  a
decision    should not be set aside for inadequacy  of  reasons  unless  the
judge failed to identify and      record the matters that were  critical  to
his decision on material issues in such a way  that  the    Tribunal,  on  a
reconsideration, is unable to  understand  why  he  reached  that  decision.
However, with this in mind, I am satisfied that the judge has  not  properly
considered the   matter of internal relocation and there is  an  absence  of
reasoning to show how she arrived       at her decision to  reject  internal
relocation and allow the appeal.

      9. I therefore set aside the decision of the immigration judge.

      10. Further conduct of this appeal
      The next matter for consideration is whether this appeal  that  should
be  sent  back  to  the     original  hearing  centre  for  a  second  stage
reconsideration. Miss Karunatilake submitted that  there  was  no  need  for
there  to  be  any  fresh  evidence  or  fresh  findings   of   fact,   and,
therefore, it was not appropriate to send  the  matter  back  for  a  second
stage        reconsideration.  She  submitted  that  I  should  review   the
evidence and substitute my own    decision.  Mr Pipe submitted that  it  was
necessary to send the matter back to  the  hearing    centre  for  a  second
stage reconsideration on the basis that further evidence would  be    needed
with regard to the issue of relocation.

      11.  I have concluded that it is not necessary for the  matter  to  be
remitted to the original     hearing centre but it is appropriate to  permit
the parties' representatives an opportunity to     make  submissions  to  me
on  the  matter  of   internal   relocation.    The   matter   of   internal
relocation was clearly  the  matter  of  evidence  and  submissions  at  the
original hearing and I       see no reason for  additional  evidence  to  be
called unless that evidence  is  new  evidence   which  was  not  reasonably
available at the hearing before Immigration Judge Pacey.

      12. I adjourn this matter to be listed here at Field House (before  me
if possible) for a     second stage reconsideration, limited to  submissions
on the existing  evidence  regarding       internal  relocation  and,  where
relevant, any new evidence not reasonably available at the     time  of  the
previous hearing. If any such fresh evidence is to be produced, it  must  be
filed       and served in line with the  directions  I  now  give,  together
with an  explanation/evidence       regarding  why  it  was  not  reasonably
available at the hearing before Immigration Judge  Pacey.

   7.       The appeals then came before this Tribunal on 27 February 2009.

Appellant's claim

   8.       The appellants' claims can be summarised in the  following  way.
      The appellants fear persecution from loan sharks referred  to  as  Big
      Ear Holes from whom their fisherman husband/father had borrowed  money
      to fund his gambling habit. In February 2008 strange  men  started  to
      call at their house and threatened to burn it down if the debt was not
      repaid. The police did not  offer  any  help  when  the  incident  was
      reported to them and although the appellants managed to evade the  men
      for some weeks by refusing to answer the door  to  them,  they  forced
      their way into the house in early March, smashed the  furniture,  beat
      the first appellant and placed a burning cigarette on her  son's  arm.
      The appellants initially took refuge with a relative in the same  town
      for three days and then with another relative  in  Guangzhou,  further
      away. During their absence their home was burnt down and  they  assume
      the loan sharks were responsible. The relative in Guangzhou then found
      an agent and paid for the appellants to travel to the UK.   They  left
      by air from Beijing. The agent took away their Chinese  passports  and
      they spent two weeks in Holland before travelling by lorry to the UK.

   9.       A faxed letter from the relative in Guangzhou has  been  adduced
      dated 20 August 2008 which seeks to corroborate  the  claim  that  the
      first appellant's  husband  borrowed  money  and  that  this  relative
      arranged for the appellants to travel to the UK (pp  4-7;  appellant's
      bundle).

Respondent's refusal

  10.       The Secretary  of  State  appeared  to  accept  that  the  first
      appellant's husband owed money to loan sharks but  she  found  that  a
      sufficiency of protection would be available on return to  China.  She
      also noted that the appellants had faced no problems when living  with
      relatives away from their home in Hainan (a small island in the  south
      of the country) and therefore concluded that internal relocation was a
      viable option.

  11.       The Secretary of State concluded that removal  would  not  place
      the UK in breach of its obligations under either Convention.

Reconsideration hearing

  12.       No oral evidence was called at the hearing  before  me  and  the
      appellants did not attend. The proceedings were  conducted  via  video
      link with the AIT centre in Birmingham. I asked the representatives to
      address me both on the issue highlighted by Senior  Immigration  Judge
      Ward in her 'pink form' (i.e. internal relocation) as well as  on  the
      issue of whether the appellants would face a real risk of imprisonment
      on their return, as Senior Immigration Judge Ward  raised  this  as  a
      matter of concern in paragraph 7 of her reasons for finding  that  the
      Immigration Judge had made an error of law.

Submissions

  13.       Mr Bedford opened the case for the appellants. He submitted that
      it would be unduly  harsh  for  the  appellants  to  return  and  face
      imprisonment for exiting China illegally. He  submitted  that  it  was
      irrelevant that the reason for imprisonment would  be  unconnected  to
      the asylum claim. He submitted that whilst it was for the Tribunal  to
      decide whether there was a risk of imprisonment, the Country of Origin
      Information Report (COIR) noted that most first time  offenders  would
      receive  prison  sentences  of  three  months  (paragraph  35.03).  He
      submitted that the prison conditions were harsh and  degrading  (COIR:
      paragraphs 12.01-12.05). Both the second  and  third  appellants  were
      currently under 18; their situation also  had  to  be  considered.  As
      their father's whereabouts were unknown, they would be  left  to  fend
      for themselves if only the first appellant were to  be  imprisoned  on
      return. Paragraphs 27.14-27.22 (COIR)  referred  to  the  position  of
      children.

  14.       Mr Smart in his submissions referred me to the Tribunal decision
      in LJ (China  -  Prison  Conditions)  China  [2005]  UKIAT  00099.  He
      submitted that according to  guidance  given  in  that  determination,
      there was no reasonable degree of likelihood that the appellants would
      be imprisoned for having left China unlawfully. He submitted that that
      determination was very pertinent to the case at hand. He  pointed  out
      that according to the extract from  the  US  State  Department  report
      cited in the COI report, imprisonment for  illegal  exit  was  not  an
      inevitable result and there  were  alternatives  such  as  fines.   He
      referred me to the case of TT (Risk - return -  snakeheads)  China  CG
      [2002] UKIAT 04937 and argued that although  this  case  mainly  dealt
      with snakeheads and people smuggling, it gave  useful  guidance  about
      how loan sharks operated (paragraphs 24 and 26) and noted  the  dearth
      of evidence as to the fate of those with outstanding debts upon return
      (paragraphs 37 and 53).  There was also some  reference  in  HL  (Risk
      -Return - Snakeheads) China CG [2002] UKIAT 03683  to  violence  being
      meted out by loan sharks to those who  could  repay  their  debts  but
      chose not to do so (paragraph 13).  Mr  Smart  argued  that  the  loan
      sharks would be more  likely  to  pursue  the  appellant's  cousin  in
      Guangzhou, a wealthy businessman, than the appellant.   Even  if  that
      were not the case, the appellant  could  relocate  and  there  was  no
      evidence to support the claim that the loan sharks would  be  able  to
      trace her wherever she went. If she registered in a new area there was
      no evidence to indicate that the authorities would pass on her details
      to these unlawful groups. It was unclear from her evidence whether the
      loan sharks in her area had influence only with the local government.

  15.        Mr  Smart  submitted  that  with  regard  to  imprisonment  for
      departing  illegally,  there  was  no  evidence  that  returnees  were
      routinely prosecuted. Had they  been  so  treated,  one  would  expect
      organisations such as Amnesty International or Human Rights  Watch  to
      have reported on it.

  16.       With regard to the submissions made as to the separation of  the
      first appellant from her children if she alone were to be  imprisoned,
      that would not amount to a flagrant denial of her Article 8 rights  as
      separation would be temporary and not permanent  as  envisaged  in  EM
      (Lebanon) [2008] UKHL 64. Moreover  both  the  second  and  the  third
      appellants who were  twins  were  approaching  their  18th  birthdays.
      Should  the  appellant  be  prosecuted,  this  would  not  amount   to
      persecution. Nor would  prison  conditions  amount  to  an  Article  3
      breach. Any term of imprisonment would not impact on  her  ability  to
      subsequently relocate and relocation would not be unduly harsh.

  17.       In reply Mr Bedford submitted that the case  of  TT  was  of  no
      relevance as it addressed the issue of snakeheads. Article 3  did  not
      need to be breached in order to make relocation unduly harsh.  LJ  was
      not a country guidance case and the Practice Directions did not permit
      citation of "any old case".   The  weight  to  be  placed  on  LJ  was
      diminished in any event because the appellant had failed to attend the
      hearing and the case was decided in his absence. Moreover it  was  not
      concerned with the issue of internal relocation.  There  was  evidence
      about prosecutions for illegal exit; this was cited in the COI report.
      The US State Department report of 2007 post dated LJ as  did  the  New
      York Times report of 2006. In  any  event  LJ  was  not  binding.  The
      Immigration Judge's decision to allow the appeals should be upheld.

  18.       At the conclusion of the hearing  I  reserved  my  determination
      which I now give with reasons.

Findings and conclusions

  19.       I bear in mind that the burden is on the appellants to make  out
      their case to the lower standard and that  I  am  able  to  take  into
      account facts and evidence as at the date of  the  hearing.  No  fresh
      evidence has been adduced apart from two Tribunal decisions  submitted
      by Mr Smart (cited in paragraph 13 above), one of which  was  referred
      to in the respondent's grounds for review.

  20.       I consider  two  issues:  that  of  the  viability  of  internal
      relocation and that of the likelihood of prosecution for illegal  exit
      from China.  It should be noted that the  Immigration  Judge  made  no
      specific finding on whether the appellants left  China  illegally  and
      that the screening interview with the first appellant  indicates  that
      they left China by air and that their passports were taken  from  them
      by the agent. This would suggest that they left  China  on  their  own
      passports and that they then entered the UK without travel  documents.
      The background material indicates that the identity  of  all  citizens
      leaving by air is verified by way of computer checks (paragraph 35.02;
      COIR) so  it  appears  unlikely  that  illegal  departure  would  have
      occurred if  a  citizen  left  via  the  airport  at  Beijing  as  the
      appellants did. However as submissions were not made  on  this  matter
      and as it may be inferred from her conclusions in  paragraph  47  that
      the Immigration Judge found that the appellants left clandestinely,  I
      proceed on the basis that the appellants did depart illegally.

  21.       The appellants have submitted no background material to  support
      the claim that they would be prosecuted for  illegally  exiting  China
      and rely entirely upon the section on exit and entry procedures in the
      Country of Origin  Information  Report  June  2008,  provided  by  the
      respondent, to support their assertions on this point.  Indeed  I  was
      not referred by Mr Bedford to any of the background  material  in  the
      appellant's bundle. Mr Smart confirmed that although  a  December  COI
      report had recently been published, it contained nothing different  in
      this respect to that contained in the June report. The COI has this to
      say about Chinese law on illegal exiting, taken from a UNHCR source:

      Article 322 of the Criminal  Law  covers  the  penalties  for  illegal
emigration. It states,       "Whoever  violates  the  laws  and  regulations
controlling secret crossing of the national   boundary  (border),  and  when
the circumstances are serious, shall be sentenced to not      more than  one
year of fixed-term imprisonment and criminal detention or  control"  (35.03:
added emphasis).

  22.       It then cites various other sources:

      As reported by the Canadian IRB  on  9  August  2000,  "Leaving  China
without exit     permission or a passport is a  criminal  offence  in  China
punishable of [sic] up to one year in   prison. Only repeat offenders  would
get a sentence approaching the  maximum.  Most  first        time  offenders
would get a short sentence, depending on the  circumstances  of  their  case
but probably with sentences of 3 months."

  23.       There is then information taken again from  UNHCR  on  financial
      penalties for returnees. Articles 52 and 53 are relevant and state:

      "Article 52. In imposing a fine, the  amount  of  the  fine  shall  be
determined according to the  circumstances of the crime.

       Article 53. A fine is to be paid in a  lump  sum  or  in  instalments
       within the period specified in the judgment.

       Upon the expiration of the period, one who has  not  paid  is  to  be
       compelled to pay. Where the person sentenced is  unable  to  pay  the
       fine in full, the people's court may collect whenever he is found  in
       possession of executable property.

       If a person truly has difficulties in paying because he has  suffered
       irresistible calamity, consideration may be given  according  to  the
       circumstances to granting him a reduction or exemption." (35.04).

  24.       On 11 June 2006 the New York Times reported:

       "There  is  some  dispute  about  what  happens  to  those  who   are
repatriated to China, in part      because  there  have  been  so  few...  A
Department of Homeland Security spokesman told     me, 'We have  no  reports
of people who have been sent back to China being persecuted.'        Others,
though, are not so sanguine. Two years ago, Richard Posner, a judge  on  the
U.S.  Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit, vacated a deportation  order
for a Chinese youth    because the immigration judge did  not  consider  the
evidence - numerous  human  rights   reports  from  both  U.S.  and  British
organizations - that the asylum seeker might well be sent     to jail  or  a
labor camp if returned to China.  Posner  was  concerned  that  the  Chinese
youth       might be tortured upon his return, though he also conceded  that
'the treatment of      repatriated Chinese  by  their  government  is  to  a
considerable extent a mystery.' Indeed, one  Chinese legal scholar  I  spoke
with, Daniel Yu, said that while there is a law on the  books  in      China
that calls for a  short  jail  sentence  if  a  person  leaves  the  country
illegally, more than   likely whatever punishment there might be is  at  the
discretion of local officials." (35.05,      cited in COIR)

  25.       The USSD Report 2007 noted:

      "The law neither provides for a  citizen's  right  to  repatriate  nor
otherwise addresses exile.   The government continued to refuse re-entry  to
numerous citizens who were considered   dissidents,  Falun  Gong  activists,
or troublemakers. Although some dissidents living abroad       were  allowed
to return, dissidents released on medical parole and allowed  to  leave  the
country often  were  effectively  exiled.  Activists  residing  abroad  were
imprisoned upon their  return to the country.

      "MPS officials stated  that  repatriated  victims  of  trafficking  no
longer  faced  fines  or  other   punishment  upon  their  return.  However,
authorities acknowledged that some victims   continued to  be  sentenced  or
fined because of corruption among police, provisions allowing       for  the
imposition   of   fines   on         persons   travelling   without   proper
documentation, and the       difficulty  in  identifying  victims."  (35.06;
cited in COIR).
  26.       Contained in the respondent's bundle  but  not  referred  to  by
      either part is a September 1999 report from the  IRB  which  was  last
      updated on 18 July 2007 (D1-13). One of the issues  considered  within
      that report (which also deals with snakeheads) is whether loan  sharks
      extort or threaten returnees. It cites extracts from two  book  length
      studies devoted to illegal emigration from Fujian  province  published
      by Dr Chin, associate professor at the  School  of  Criminal  Justice,
      Rutgers University-Newark and Dr Kwong, chair of  the  Asian  American
      Studies Programme at Hunter College,  City  University  of  New  York.
      Whilst the report largely deals with snakeheads, it does also  provide
      some helpful information on illegal emigration and though focusing  on
      the situation in Fujian, it can be seen a providing an  indication  of
      how the authorities behave.

  27.       It is not suggested by either expert that corruption affects the
      level of state protection for returnees (D4). Dr Chin notes that there
      is no evidence of harassment of returnees or of their families by debt
      collectors.  He  gives  an  example  of  a  "big  snakehead"  who  was
      threatened by a group of clients who had been unsuccessful in reaching
      their destination and secured a 50% refund of their down  payment.  Dr
      Chin states that:

       "snakeheads have no reasons to  harass  those  smuggled  Chinese  who
have returned to       China...snakeheads are now even willing  to  pay  the
fines for the deportees, mainly to make      sure that  the  deportees  will
not tell the Chinese authorities the identities of the snakeheads"  (D4).

  28.       The same document reports that Jim Fisher, co-ordinator for  the
      Asian Organised  Crime  Unit  at  the  Criminal  Intelligence  Service
      Canada, RCMP Headquarters in Ottawa, stated that he was not  aware  of
      reports of loan sharks pursuing returnees or their families (D5).

  29.       The report also cites the Regulations Concerning  Implementation
      of Law on Exit and Entry of PRC Citizens (1994).  Article 25 provides:

      "Citizens who have obtained Exit and Entry Documents by illegal  means
such as making up      stories, providing false evidence or paying a  bribe,
in case of less serious situations, will     receive warning or be  detained
for no more than 5 days. In case of serious  situation  related        to  a
crime, offenders have to  bear  criminal  responsibility  according  to  the
related articles in    the Criminal Law of the  PRC  and  National  People's
Congress Standing  Committee   supplementary  Regulations  concerning  heavy
penalty on the criminal offence of      organisation and  transportation  of
people across the border/frontier" (D6).

  30.       Details are then provided of penalties and of what constitutes a
      serious offence and it is plain that the harshest penalties of lengthy
      imprisonment and heavy fines are directed at  those  who  arrange  the
      illegal departure and  profit  from  it  (D7-11).   Clause  5  of  the
      Regulations state:

      "Those departing the country illegally will be detained for  a  period
less tan 15 days by the      police or have to pay a fine  between  1000  to
5000 RMB. On top of the detention  in  serious        cases,  they  will  be
imprisoned or detained for a period under 2  years  as  well  as  having  to
pay a fine" (D8).

  31.       The starting point is therefore the provisions  of  the  Chinese
      criminal law set out  in  the  above  paragraphs.   As  can  be  seen,
      imprisonment is not an automatic outcome of conviction;  circumstances
      are taken into account and "control" or fines are an option. There  is
      evidence which indicate that "serious circumstances"  relate  only  to
      those who profit from smuggling people across the border, and  nothing
      to indicate that prosecutions against 'ordinary' citizens  who  depart
      illegally are routinely undertaken.  The IRB information  relied  upon
      by the appellant is  nine  years  old  and  the  basis  on  which  the
      conclusion was reached is not known; possibly it is  no  more  than  a
      summation of  Chinese  law.  Mr  Bedford  submitted  that  because  it
      continued to be included in the COI report it  followed  that  it  was
      still  pertinent  today.  However  I  reject  that   submission.   Its
      conclusion simply shows that the UK Border Agency has  had  regard  to
      all available evidence on various matters with the aim of providing  a
      balanced summary. The view of the Chinese legal scholar cited  in  the
      New York Times article (see paragraph 23) supports  the  finding  that
      prosecutions and imprisonment are far from automatic and  routine.  He
      maintains that penalties are enforced according to the  discretion  of
      local officials. Given that the appellants  have  no  adverse  history
      with the authorities and that their actions were prompted by the  fear
      of unscrupulous  gangs  whom  the  authorities  have  been  trying  to
      control, it is not reasonably likely that a harsh  approach  would  be
      taken towards a woman with two children.

  32.       The Time report of November 2004 (contained at  pp.  153-155  of
      the appellant's bundle) notes that 'shadow bankers'  do  not  in  fact
      charge interest rates much higher than the banks and for  that  reason
      the authorities have little interest in cracking down on  loan  sharks
      (p. 154), However a more recent  report  in  the  respondent's  bundle
      reports on more than twenty loan sharks being arrested in Guangdong in
      2005 for loaning money to gamblers (E1).

  33.       Mr Bedford objected to the reliance placed by the respondent  on
      LJ (China - Prison Conditions) China  [2005]  UKIAT  00099,  which  he
      argued was not reported and hence not  permitted  under  the  Practice
      Directions, however I find no merit in his protestations. The relevant
      sections of the Practice Directions state:

      17.3 Reported determinations will receive a  neutral  citation  number
in the form [2005]     UKAIT 00000 and will be widely  available  (including
being available on the Tribunal's       website). They  will  be  anonymised
and will be cited by the neutral  citation number.

      18.2 A reported determination of the Tribunal or of  the  IAT  bearing
      the letters "CG" shall be treated as an authoritative finding  on  the
      country guidance issue identified in the determination, based upon the
      evidence before the members of the Tribunal or the IAT that determined
      the appeal. As a result, unless it has been  expressly  superseded  or
      replaced by any later "CG"  determination,  or  is  inconsistent  with
      other authority that is  binding  on  the  Tribunal,  such  a  country
      guidance case is authoritative in any subsequent  appeal,  so  far  as
      that appeal:
           (a) relates to the country guidance issue in question; and
           (b) depends upon the same or similar evidence.

  34.       It is therefore clear that all the cases relied upon by Mr Smart
      are reported and therefore permissible under the terms of the Practice
      Directions. Further, Mr Bedford's submission that LJ should  be  given
      less weight than any other Tribunal decision because the appellant  in
      that case did not attend his hearing has no basis.  There  is  nothing
      before me to support his submission that the guidance it  provides  is
      undermined by the absence of the appellant  or  a  representative.  It
      should be noted in any event that the relevance of LJ to the  case  at
      hand does not focus in any way on adverse credibility findings made in
      respect of that appellant's claim. The  findings  relied  upon  by  Mr
      Smart all pertain to the risk of return for  those  who  exited  China
      illegally and those findings were based wholly on background  evidence
      and not on the appellant's account (this  may  be  plainly  seen  from
      paragraphs 14 and 15 of that decision).

  35.       The case of LJ took note of the  IRB  information  of  2000  but
      concluded that:

      "The evidence adduced in this appeal did not  support  the  conclusion
that an individual     returned  to  China,  after  making  an  unsuccessful
claim to asylum in the United Kingdom,  was reasonably likely to be
   a) imprisoned or subjected to administrative detention on his return  for
      having left China unlawfully, and
   b) whilst imprisoned or being detained on that account, subjected to Art.
      3 maltreatment.
      Such  a  conclusion  could  not  properly  be  based  on  the  general
statement  in  the  US  State     Department  Report  to  the  effect   that
conditions in Chinese  prisons  and  administrative    detention  facilities
were "harsh  and  frequently  degrading".  To  support  such  a  conclusion,
clear evidence would be required from bodies such as Amnesty  International,
Human       Rights     Watch or the Canadian Immigration and  Refugee  Board
to the effect that other     persons whose histories and circumstances  were
reasonably comparable with those of the      individual  concerned  had,  on
their return in the  comparatively  recent  past,  been  imprisoned       or
detained and subjected to such maltreatment  in  sufficient  numbers  and/or
with sufficient  frequency.  Such evidence  as  there  was  pointed  in  the
opposite direction.

  36.       Specifically with regard to illegal  exit  and  prosecution  for
      that the Tribunal held that the Adjudicator's decision  to  allow  the
      appeal relying on limited evidence (such as  Immigration  Judge  Pacey
      has done) would have meant that:

      "no Chinese national who left China unlawfully ...could be removed  to
China by the United    Kingdom without the United Kingdom  being  in  breach
of its obligations under Art.3 of the   ECHR"

      and that this was a conclusion not properly open to him.  Before  such
a decision  could have been reached it was necessary to  have  significantly
more detailed    evidence as to:

           "1.   the frequency with which prisoners in China are  subjected
                 to degrading treatment and/or the numbers or percentages of
                 prisoners in  any  one  year  who  are  subjected  to  such
                 treatment,

           2.    the history, circumstances and lengths of sentences -  and
                 the  nature  of  the  offences  of  which  they  have  been
                 convicted - of the prisoners who  have  been  subjected  to
                 degrading treatment whilst in custody in China, and

           3.    the length of any sentence of imprisonment (as opposed  to
                 the maximum sentence) which was likely to be imposed on the
                 individual concerned ...

                 both in China generally and  in...(one's)  home  province)"
(paragraph 15).

  37.       The Tribunal found  that  LJ  would  not  face  imprisonment  on
      account of his having left China unlawfully return because:

       "No  positive  evidence  was  placed  before  us   to   support   the
proposition, and we are not  satisfied, that  any  persons...who  have  been
returned to China within the past 12 months  have been persecuted,  tortured
or subjected to inhuman or degrading treatment  or   punishment  for  having
left China unlawfully either  at  all  or  in  such  numbers  or  with  such
frequency as to indicate that there is a reasonable  likelihood  of  any  of
those things     happening to him (Mr L).   If  persons  who  were  returned
were reasonably likely to  be       persecuted,  tortured  or  subjected  to
inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment on that     account, it  is  to
be expected that reports of that having occurred in other cases  would  have
come to the attention of bodies such as Amnesty International, Human  Rights
Watch - and      have been  included  either  in  the  US  State  Department
Report, the Canadian Immigration  and Refugee Board Reports or  the  Country
Assessment.  No such reports were placed     before us.   We  are  therefore
not satisfied that any such things have happened in  any   comparable  cases
in such numbers or with such frequency  as  to  indicate  that  there  is  a
reasonable likelihood of their occurring in Mr L's case" (paragraph 15a).

  38.       Mr Bedford seized upon the reference to the past  12  months  to
      argue that the Tribunal's findings were  restricted  to  the  lack  of
      evidence over that period and that fresh evidence  was  now  available
      which  was  not  before  the  Tribunal.  However  there   is   nothing
      significant in that fresh evidence to support the submission that  the
      situation has changed  in  any  way  since  the  decision  in  LJ  was
      promulgated.

  39.       Mr Bedford referred to the New York Times article  of  2006  and
      the US State Department report of 2007. Both are summarised  above  at
      paragraphs 23 and 24.  I can find nothing in the newspaper article  to
      support the submission  that  prosecutions  of  returnees  who  exited
      illegally routinely occur or even that there is a real risk of such an
      event taking place. The concerns of one US judge can hardly be said to
      amount to evidence of that and indeed the US Department  for  Homeland
      Security in 2006 had no knowledge of any such treatment. The US  State
      Department report  also  contains  nothing  to  support  Mr  Bedford's
      submissions. It refers to the imprisonment of activists on return  but
      the appellants are not activists of any kind. There is also  reference
      to the fining and imprisonment  of  victims  of  trafficking  but  the
      appellants do not fall into that category either.  Despite my requests
      for any further or up to date evidence to justify such  a  submission,
      Mr Bedford was unable to refer me to anything other than the 2000  IRB
      report. That of course was taken into account in LJ at paragraph 15b.

  40.       What is interesting and  flies  in  the  face  of  Mr  Bedford's
      submissions is the reference in an earlier US State Department  report
      cited in LJ. Cited in paragraph 6.190 of what was then  known  as  the
      CIPU report, the Tribunal notes that in 2003 the US  State  Department
      indicated:

       "that  first  offenders  for  illegal  emigration,  on  repatriation,
sometimes faced fines and that    after  a  second  repatriation  "could  be
sentenced to re-education through labour ".

  41.       As with LJ, the appellants in the present case have no  criminal
      convictions in China and there is therefore:

      "no basis for thinking, and we are not satisfied,  that  he  would  be
sentenced  to  a   substantial     term   of   imprisonment   for   unlawful
emigration...there appears to  be  a  substantial  chance     that  no  more
severe sanction than a fine would be imposed" (paragraph 15c).
  42.       The evidence does not support the proposition that those  unable
      to pay fines are imprisoned. I have already referred  to  Articles  52
      and 53 in paragraph 22 above and indeed this matter was also addressed
      in LJ (paragraph 15d) where the Tribunal found that:

      "there is no indication, that imprisonment for those unable to pay  is
either the normal course     or reasonably likely to be imposed".

  43.       Mr Bedford made other arguments which need to be  addressed.  He
      stated that if the appellants  were  prosecuted  and  imprisoned,  the
      description of prison conditions as "harsh and degrading"  meant  that
      their Article 3 rights would be breached. I have found that  there  is
      no real risk of imprisonment for the appellants on  account  of  their
      illegal departure. However, even assuming that I am wrong and that the
      first appellant were to be imprisoned, the evidence does  not  support
      the claim that her Article 3 rights would be breached. The description
      of prison conditions cited by Mr Bedford is taken from the COI  report
      (paragraph 12.04) but is an  extract  from  the  US  State  Department
      report of 2007 which found that "Conditions in penal institutions  for
      both political prisoners and common criminals generally were harsh and
      degrading".    The  same  description  was  used  in  the  documentary
      evidence considered in LJ (paragraph 15d) yet the Tribunal  held  that
      the conditions did not amount to a subjection of inhuman or  degrading
      treatment or punishment. It noted the variation of  prison  conditions
      in China and it cited the case  of  TC  (One  Child  Policy  -  Prison
      Conditions) China [2004] UKAIT 00138 in which the Tribunal found  that
      the evidence had failed to:

       "demonstrate  a  consistent  pattern  of  gross,  flagrant  or   mass
violations of the human  rights     of  prisoners.   If  there  was  such  a
consistent pattern, we would expect to find more evidence     than there  is
of the scale and frequency of  human  rights  abuses  against  prisoners  in
China." (paragraph 12; TC).

  44.       There is also evidence in the June  2008  COI  report  that  the
      Chinese government is in  the  process  of  building  120  large-scale
      modern prisons  and  that  as  of  mid  2004  30  had  been  completed
      (paragraph 12.01).  Further, the Report of the Special  Rapporteur  on
      torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment,
      published on 10 March 2006, stated:

       "The Special Rapporteur visited a total of 10 detention facilities...
       In general, the Special Rapporteur found that although the specific
       conditions of the facilities varied, in terms of basic conditions,
       such as food, medicine and hygiene, they were generally satisfactory"
       (paragraph 12.03).

  45.       For these reasons I find that the evidence does  not  support  a
      finding that if imprisoned, the appellant's Article 3 rights would  be
      breached. In the circumstances Mr Bedford's submission,  that  if  the
      first appellant were imprisoned, her minor children would be  left  to
      fend for themselves, goes no further.  In any event I find  no  reason
      why the appellant's relatives either in Hainan or in  Guangzhou  would
      be unable to offer support. It must also be borne in  mind  that  both
      children are fast approaching their  18th  birthdays  and  that  their
      situation differs radically  from  the  much  younger  children  whose
      plight is addressed in the sections of the COIR Mr Bedford referred me
      to.  They would not be orphans who were abandoned  (paragraphs  27.14-
      15), they have received an education and  they  have  no  disabilities
      (27.16).  there is no risk of abduction for  the  purpose  of  selling
      them to foreigners who want to adopt as it is unlikely  a  prospective
      parent would want children aged almost 18 (27.17 and 27.22).  As  they
      have relatives in China who could no doubt assist them, they would not
      be abandoned street children (27.18).

  46.       Coming now to the issue of internal relocation, I find that  the
      appellants have produced no evidence to suggest that the  loan  sharks
      in Hainan have a network which extends throughout China.  It  must  be
      borne in mind that Hainan is an island in the south of the country and
      given the size of China and its population, it is very  unlikely  that
      the appellants would be located wherever they went.  No  reasons  have
      been advanced for  why  relocation  would  be  unduly  harsh  for  the
      appellants. They are indeed more fortunate than a lot of appellants as
      they have a wealthy  relative  in  Guangzhou  who  was  generous  with
      financial assistance in the past and who could no  doubt  assist  them
      again. Even if he could not, the appellants are fit  and  healthy  and
      there is no reason why they would be unable  to  relocate  to  another
      part of China.  The authorities cited do not  support  the  contention
      that the loan sharks would pursue the appellants. In the case  of  TT,
      which whilst  dealing  mainly  with  snakeheads  also  addressed  loan
      sharks, the Tribunal held that:

      "even if money was owed by the Appellant to Snakeheads or loan  sharks
there is indeed  a       lack  of  evidence  that  the  Appellant  would  be
actually pursued for the debt particularly in  the   circumstances  of  this
case.   The  Adjudicator  found  that  the  Appellant  did  owe   money   to
Snakeheads.  We find ourselves  in  agreement  with  Mr  Yuen  that  he  was
probably using the     expression "Snakeheads" in the generic sense and  was
incorporating the possibility that       money  was  also  owed  to  a  loan
shark" (paragraph 39).

  47.       and:

      "It  is  however  noteworthy  that  it  does  not  appear  to  be  the
Appellant's claim that he has     experienced such treatment whilst in  this
country.  As Mr Davidson rightly submitted if the  Appellant was  not  being
pursued here for any debt then it would  be  unlikely  that  he  would    be
pursued by Snakeheads upon return..." (paragraph 40)..



      "there is evidence to indicate that individuals and their families  or
      guarantors in certain circumstances in China  may  be  at  risk,  that
      Snakeheads are violent and ruthless towards those who they believe can
      repay their debts but fail to do so" (paragraph 47).

      "The evidence does not satisfy us that those who  cannot  pay  because
      they have  returned  to  China  would  meet  with  similar  treatment"
      (paragraph 48).

  48.       The country guidance case of HL also provides  helpful  guidance
      on those fearing loan sharks. Whilst Mr Bedford  was  right  to  argue
      that LJ and TT were not CG cases, HL is and contains similar  findings
      as were made in TT (paragraph 53).  In HL the Tribunal held:

      "Quite simply the totality of the evidence does not establish  that  a
       returning failed asylum seeker who is indebted to snakeheads or  loan
       sharks will come to harm on return to China.  If this had happened to
       returning failed asylum seekers from  the  United  Kingdom  or  other
       countries it is likely  that  relevant  evidence  would  have  become
       available" (paragraph 12).

      "In this appeal we do not need to consider or make  specific  findings
       in relation to what might happen to an individual who owes  money  to
       snakeheads or loan sharks, remains in the United Kingdom and does not
       for whatever reason make the required payments.  Suffice  it  to  say
       that there is evidence before us to indicate  that  such  individuals
       and their families or guarantors in China may be at risk.  There  are
       strong indications that the snakeheads are violent and  ruthless,  at
       least towards those who can pay but do not do so.  This does not mean
       that they will be equally  ruthless  towards  those  who  cannot  pay
       because they have been returned to China"[1] (paragraph 13).

      "The principal reason for our conclusion that the Appellant would  not
be at risk on  return  is       the  lack  of  any  country  information  to
indicate that she would be at risk.  Nevertheless, logic      also  supports
this  conclusion.   The  snakeheads  and  loan  sharks   are   violent   and
unscrupulous, but they are running what is likely to be a highly  profitable
business and     would prefer to  avoid  actions  which  might  damage  that
business. Violent or  other    persecutory  action  against  those  who  are
returned to China would be unlikely to result  in    the  recovery  of  much
money,  but  would  be  likely  to  discourage  future  customers.   Amongst
the press reports submitted by Mr Yuen are reports of  snakeheads  going  to
great lengths  to        build  spectacular  houses  to  show  to  potential
customers, as an indication of the sort  of    accommodation  and  lifestyle
they can expect if they travel to a western country.  If the  snakeheads  or
loan sharks go to these lengths it  is  not  likely  that  they  would  risk
deterring   potential customers by taking hostile action against  those  who
are returned, usually through     no fault of their own.  Clearly  it  is  a
different matter to ensure that those who remain abroad   and  are  able  to
pay continue to pay  for  fear  of  what  might  happen  to  then  or  their
relatives   at home" (paragraph 15).

  49.       There is no evidence before me  which  would  justify  departing
      from those  findings  and  indeed  the  finding  in  paragraph  13  is
      supported by Dr Chin's report  which  confirms  that  if  someone  was
      returned to China, the snakeheads from  whom  he  had  borrowed  funds
      would not expect the fee to be re-paid (D2).

  50.       With respect to the issue of the appellants registering with the
      authorities in another part of the country  under  the  hukou  system,
      there is no evidence before me to suggest that the  authorities  would
      pass on their details to unlawfully  operating  groups.  The  evidence
      also makes it plain that since  the  late  1990s  the  government  has
      relaxed restrictions on permits for migrants and that  urban  resident
      permits  can  also  be  obtained  by  rural  migrants  (pp.   157-172;
      appellant's bundle).

  51.       In conclusion therefore I find that  the  appellants  would  not
      face a real risk of  prosecution  for  departing  China  illegally  if
      returned, that even if the first appellant or all the appellants  were
      imprisoned, the conditions are not such as to amount to  a  breach  of
      Article 3, that the second and third appellants would not be  left  to
      fend for themselves if only the first  appellant  was  imprisoned  and
      that any separation resulting from that would be  temporary  and  that
      internal relocation either before or after the  term  of  imprisonment
      (if one occurred) would be a viable option.

Decision

  52.       The original Tribunal was found to have made a material error of
      law. The decision to allow the appeals is set  aside  and  substituted
      with the following decision.

  53.       The appeals are dismissed.

Costs order

54.   The appellants seek a costs order in respect of the reconsideration.
      As there was a reasonable prospect of success when reconsideration was
      ordered, it is ordered that the costs be paid out of the relevant
      fund.



      Dr R Keki?

      Senior Immigration Judge








































                       Appendix: Background materials

1.      28.09.99       Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada (IRB);
Country of                   Origin Research. Extended Response to
Information Request

2.       29.03.03        Congressional Executive Commission on China;
China's                           Household Registration System. Sustained
Reform needed to                        protect China's rural migrants

3.      15.11.04         Time online; China's Shadow Banks

4.       31.05.05         China View: Guangdong police arrest 20 loan
sharks

5.       20.09.06         US Congressional Executive Commission on China;
Annual                       Report 2006

6.       11.01.07          Human Rights Watch; World Report for 2006: China

5.       11.03.08      US State Department report for 2007; China

6.        06.05.08         Freedom House; The world's most repressive
societies: China

7.        01.06.08     UK Border Agency; Country of Origin Information
Report: China

8.        Undated      Amnesty International report for 2008: China

9.    Undated    Amnesty International; China: internal migrants:
discrimination                    and abuse. The human cost of an economic
miracle



-----------------------


