
MM (UDPS members - Risk on return) Democratic Republic of Congo CG [2007]
UKAIT 00023

Asylum and Immigration Tribunal




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Determination Promulgated|
|On 11 January 2007 and at Birmingham on|On 13 March 2007         |
|18 October 2006                        |                         |
|                                       |                         |

                                   Before

                     SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE GOLDSTEIN
                     DESIGNATED IMMIGRATION JUDGE FRENCH
                               MRS G GREENWOOD


                                   Between


                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:          Mr R Claire, Counsel
For the Respondent:       Mr J Jones, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


Despite indications from recent political events in the DRC  that  the  UDPS
is perceived as less of a threat than previously, the guidance given  in  AB
and DM Democratic Republic of Congo CG [2005] UKAIT 00118 and  confirmed  in
MK DRC CG [2006] UKAIT 00001 remains correct.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.          The Appellant, born on 23 December 1962, is  a  citizen  of  the
    Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC). He appeals against the decisions of
    the Respondent, respectively dated 18 and 25 May 2006, refusing to him
    the grant of asylum under paragraph 336 of  HC  395  (as  amended)  and
    leave to enter the United Kingdom.

2.      The brief immigration history of the Appellant is  that  he  arrived
    in the United Kingdom on 31 March 2006 and claimed asylum  on  arrival.



The Claim

3.      The Appellant's claim, at its most  extensive  as  revealed  in  his
    various accounts, can be  summarised  as  follows.    He  was  born  in
    Kananga in  the  Province  of  Western  Kasai,  where  he  subsequently
    undertook a course in Nursing for a period of three years.

4.      The Appellant is a Christian whose ethnic group is Muluba.

5.      The Appellant met and married  his  wife  according  to  traditional
    custom in 1995. She was from the same Province.  The couple have  three
    children.  The Appellant's parents are now deceased.   The  Appellant's
    wife and children and two siblings, a brother and  sister,  were  still
    living in the DRC at the time that he left the country.

6.      He claims to be a member of  the  Union  for  Democracy  and  Social
    Progress (UDPS).   He became involved with the UDPS's activities  as  a
    supporter in 2003 and became a member in 2005.   As  a  supporter,  his
    role involved taking part in various peaceful demonstrations to express
    his political views to the Government and the rest of the country.

7.      It is the Appellant's claim that once he became a  member  in  2005,
    his role changed, in that he was involved in running a Party  cell  and
    that he was offered the post of Secretary of one of the Parties'  local
    sub-cells, because he had the appropriate  "militant"  skills  and  was
    able to deliver what the Party  expected.   His  role  as  a  Secretary
    involved compiling reports on sub-cell activities of the Party  in  the
    Bandundu Province.

 8.    In that regard, the Appellant had moved from Western Kasai to Idiofa
    Territory, part of the Kawilu  District,  Bandundu  Province  in  1999,
    because his studies were more affordable in Bandundu.

 9.   The Appellant described his role  as  educating  the  population  and
    Party sympathisers about political developments in the country and  the
    Party's position in relation to the actions of the  government  in  the
    DRC at the time.  He  also  organised  meetings  and  was  involved  in
    promoting  the  Party  through  speaking  to  people,  as  there   were
    insufficient resources to pay for leaflets and other materials.

10.    The Appellant claimed to have carried out his role within  the  Party
    until 30 June 2005, when he was arrested by agents of  the  authorities
    whom he believed were posing as  policemen.   He  was  making  his  way
    towards the meeting point of the  demonstration  that  he  claimed  had
    received official sanction, when stopped by these agents.   It was  the
    Appellant's account that he and others were detained and  arrested  and
    he was forced to lie down inside a car.   He had no clear  idea  as  to
    how long he was detained  or  where  he  was  being  sent  because  the
    authorities:

         "... had changed me from one cell to another every week or so".


11.    It is the Appellant's account, that whilst in  prison,  he  was  told
    that he had no rights because  he  was  disrupting  the  peace  of  the
    country. He was only allowed to have meals every other day and would on
    occasions go for days without food.   Further, access to water was very
    limited.   He was deprived of using the toilet when he needed it.  Many
    of his colleagues were tortured and beaten to death.

12.    The Appellant claims that on 15 January 2006, he escaped from  prison
    and he described the circumstances of the account in his  statement  of
    12 April 2006 as follows:

         "On 15 January  2006  when  I  escaped  from  the  prison,  another
         prisoner tried to escape but was caught. The guards then  came  and
         asked, who did not have family in Kinshasa and as I did not and had
         also been a good prisoner, they  assigned  me  to  look  after  the
         others.  This is because they believed that I would not  cause  any
         trouble like the other prisoners.


         On the same day, I was asked by a guard to go and buy some  drinks.
         The place where I was detained was just down the road from the shop
         where the guard wanted me to go.   When I got  there  just  by  the
         kiosk, there was a man waiting for me who told me he was one of  my
         people, from my political party.   After querying where I was from,
         he took me to a car and we left towards a  house  where  I  was  to
         spend the night."

13.    The Appellant crossed the Congo River and  ended  up  in  Brazzaville
    where he stayed for one and a half months, during which time:

         "I could not get out of the house and I was told to be discreet".


14.    The Appellant left Brazzaville with the same person who  had  brought
    him there,  and  flew  to  Benin.   At  his  Screening  interview,  the
    Appellant explained, that after a few days in Benin, he  was  taken  on
    another flight to the Cote d'Ivoire where they stayed for  about  seven
    days before travelling to Tunisia.   After remaining in Tunisia  for  a
    few hours he and the agent travelled to London.

15.    It was the Appellant's account that he tried to find out why  he  was
    being helped and who was providing the assistance  with  which  he  was
    provided.   He was told he was better off not to ask any questions.

16.    On arrival in the United Kingdom  on  23  April  2006  the  Appellant
    claimed asylum.

17.    The Appellant claimed that if returned to the DRC, he feared that  he
    would be killed by the DRC authorities as a member of the UDPS.

18.    In his Letter of Refusal dated 18 May 2006, the  Secretary  of  State
    stated that the numerous irregularities with regard to the  Appellant's
    account of events led him to believe  that  he  had  not  come  to  the
    adverse attention of the DRC authorities and was not detained  by  them
    prior to travelling to the United  Kingdom.  Such  irregularities  were
    largely predicated on what the Secretary of State mistakenly  believed,
    (see post), was the Appellant's claim to have attended a UDPS march  on
    30 June 2005 in Kinshasa that the Appellant had wrongly claimed had the
    permission of the local Kinshasa authorities. The  Secretary  of  State
    did not accept that the Appellant was a high profile active  member  of
    the UDPS or that he was involved with the UDPS in  the  manner  he  had
    claimed. This strengthened the Secretary of  State's  belief  that  the
    Appellant was of no interest to the DRC authorities due to his  claimed
    political activities.

                               The Proceedings

  19. The parties agreed it would be appropriate to  consider  the  position
    as to the risk to  UDPS  members/supporters  in  light  of  the  recent
    elections in the DRC.   The run-off was due to take place on 29 October
    2006 and it was thus agreed that we would  proceed  to  hear  the  oral
    evidence, following upon which, the hearing would  be  adjourned  part-
    heard for submissions only, for which purpose the Panel  would  sit  at
    Field House and the  parties  would  address  us  by  video  link  from
    Birmingham.  In this regard, we directed that the  parties  serve  upon
    the Tribunal and each other, no later than twenty one days  before  the
    restored  hearing,  further  skeleton  arguments  and  any   additional
    objective material on which they  sought  to  rely,  arising  from  the
    aftermath of the run-off elections in the DRC.

20.     We  informed  the  parties,  that   we   would   prepare   a   typed
    contemporaneous record of the day's hearing  with  copies  provided  to
    each Panel member, so  as  to  ensure  that  our  memories  were  fully
    refreshed of the day's proceedings prior to the reconvened hearing.

21.     The  Tribunal  heard  the  oral  evidence  of  the   Appellant   and
    subsequently at the reconvened hearing at Field  House  on  11  January
    2007, oral submissions from both  representatives,  all  of  which  are
    fully set out in our Record of Proceedings.

22.    The Tribunal also took account  of  the  following  documents  placed
    before us:

    1.      The Respondent's bundle, which is described at PF.1;


    2.      The Appellant's bundle,  and  a  further  bundle  with  updated
         background material served upon the  Tribunal  by  the  Appellant's
         solicitors with their letter of 21 December 2006 including; letters
         with translations purportedly from the  UDPS  and  the  Appellant's
         friend, respectively dated 15 July 2005 and  5  May  2006  together
         with certified translations; a further  letter  from  the  UDPS  in
         London, dated 25 September 2006;


    3.      Country of Origin Information Reports (COIR) on the  Democratic
         Republic of Congo dated April and 27 October 2006.


    4.      Tribunal determinations in:


         VL (Risk-Failed Asylum Seekers) Democratic  Republic  of  Congo  CG
         [2004] UKAIT 00007


         AB and DM (Risk Categories Reviewed  -  Tutsis  Added)  DRC  [2005]
         UKAIT 00118


         MK (AB and DM Confirmed) DRC CG [2006] UKAIT 00001.


23.    We  drew  to  the  parties'  attention  copies  of  recent  documents
comprising:

              The  International  Crisis  Group  Report  'Securing  Congo's
         Elections: Lessons from the  Kinshasa  Showdown'  dated  2  October
         2006.


               A  Freedom  House  Report  'Freedom  in  the  World:  Congo,
         Democratic Republic of (Kinshasa)' dated 6 September 2006.


         US Committee for Refugees  and  Immigrants  Report  'World  Refugee
         Survey 2006: Congo-Kinshasa' dated 14 June 2006.


         The Amnesty International Report 2006 for  the  DRC  dated  23  May
         2006.


         Two BBC News Reports dated respectively 25  July  and  5  September
         2006.


         The UN Integrated  Regional  Information  Networks  Report  'Congo-
         Kinshasa: Counting the Casualties after Kinshasa Battle)' dated  25
         August 2006.


         UK Foreign and Commonwealth  Office  Report  'Human  Rights  Annual
         Report: Democratic Republic of Congo' dated 12 October 2006.


         The United Nations Mission Report - Democratic  Republic  of  Congo
         (MONUC) 'Monthly Human Rights Assessment September 2006'.


         A one page extract from a special report of OHCR dated 27 September
         2006.


    We arranged for copies  of  these  documents  to  be  provided  to  the
    parties' representatives.

24.    We ascertained that the Appellant was satisfied with the  interpreter
    through whom he gave his evidence in French.

25.    The Appellant began his evidence by  adopting  his  statement  of  18
    April 2006 and the answers that he gave at interview on 9 May  2006  as
    his evidence in chief.

26.    Mr Claire handed to us a set of two original photographs,  copies  of
    which appeared in the Appellant's bundle.   The Appellant claimed  that
    they depicted him at a house in  Idiofa  on  30  June  2005  where  the
    authorities  had  initially  taken  him  following  his  arrest.    The
    photographs purportedly showed the Appellant, who was  dressed  all  in
    white, about to be hit by a soldier holding in  an  upright  hand  what
    appeared to be a belt.

27.    The Appellant was cross-examined by Mr Jones.  There was a brief  re-
    examination on the part of Mr Claire.

28.    The Appellant told us that he could not  remember  the  circumstances
    under which the photographs were taken.  He did not know  the  identity
    of the photographer and continued:

         "When I asked through talking to  a  friend  who  facilitated  this
         evidence for me he told me this was facilitated by  our  party  who
         sent this to me".


29.    The Appellant said that the photographs had been sent to him  by  his
    nephew who had received them from the UDPS.   He did not enquire of his
    nephew as to how the Party had obtained the photographs; in fact it was
    through a friend that he had obtained this evidence who  had  contacted
    him because the Party would not provide evidence to anyone other than a
    member of the family.   The Appellant was not in  direct  contact  with
    his nephew save  through  his  friend  who  could  be  reached  on  his
    telephone.

30.    The Appellant told us that he was not  in  direct  contact  with  his
    family as they had no telephone but:

         "My friend goes to where they are".


31.    The Appellant's friend had told him that:

         ".. in any case the situation was not good since I  had  fled...  I
         asked him to tell me about the situation and some details.  I  mean
         as my wife went back to her place  there  is  no  fixed  abode  and
         following the fire at my house my niece was burned'.


32.    When cross-examined as regards the  photographs,  the  Appellant  was
    unable to explain why the date 15 January  1990  appeared  on  each  of
    them.  His friend who obtained the photographs had no idea  as  to  how
    they came into the possession of the UDPS. Indeed, the  Appellant  told
    us:

         "No, he cannot have an idea, I asked him for  evidence,  proof.   I
         said I was arrested.  He sent them to me."


33.    The Appellant told us that the UDPS had given the photographs to  his
    nephew in June. In that regard, he referred us to his  friend's  letter
    from Idiofa and the DHL envelope in which he  claimed  the  letter  was
    enclosed together with the photographs.   When asked  as  to  when  the
    Appellant's nephew obtained the photographs from the UDPS he responded:


         "I do not know. I have the photographs.  It is not up to me to  ask
         about the date, time or place".


34. The Appellant repeated that he had been demonstrating on  30  June  2005
    in Idiofa.   Following his arrest he was put in a house and was beaten.


35.    He had been "grabbed" in the course of fleeing, brought to the  house
    where the photographs were taken.  Upon  arrest  he  saw  other  people
    being put into similar vehicles.  He was told:

         "You are a leader, for everything you do  with  this  movement  you
             will pay. "


36.    He was put in a vehicle on his own.


37.    The Appellant was directed to the photographs and to  the  fact  that
    the top photographs depicted a white chair at the top  of  the  stairs,
    with nothing on it.   In that regard the Appellant responded:

         "Yes, I can see it is on its own.  As for me I was not coming  from
         the stairs but from another part there.


         When they grabbed  me  they  made  me  come  out  from  the  stairs
         underneath from the cellar and  this  is  the  door  I  was  coming
         through" (the Appellant pointed to the door depicted in  the  upper
         photograph).  "When I was arrested they opened it and pushed me in,
         made me go in.  By now when I was coming out they were dragging  me
         to make me go up the stairs".


 38.   The Appellant's attention was drawn to the  bottom  photograph  that
    was taken from a different angle, from the bottom  of  the  steps.   Mr
    Jones put the following question to the Appellant:

         Q.     "There are three white  chairs  in  the  bottom  photograph.
             Each chair is covered with something.  It is from a  different
             angle.  Let me spell it out.  You  say  these  were  the  same
             event.  The top photograph shows a chair with nothing  on  it.
             The bottom photograph shows the chair with something on it.  I
             say these (photographs) have been stage-managed and  taken  at
             different times.  What do you say?"


         A.      "I did not take the photographs. I did not go there to take
             the photographs I received. What can I say?"


39.    The Appellant told us he was taken by  a  vehicle  to  a  house seven
    hundred to eight hundred metres away and  whilst  in  the  vehicle  was
    beaten up.   He explained:


         "First, I was made to lie down on my belly in  the  vehicle.    The
         military police were sat down with their feet on my  back,  beating
         me with belts on the head, calves, back."


40.    The Appellant indicated that he had been beaten on  the  back  of his
    head and his back.


41.    The Appellant claimed that his head did not bleed:

         "I only  had  a  nosebleed  and  swelling  on  my  head,  body  and
         buttocks".

42.    The Appellant told us that at the house he was locked up, and that:

         "Before locking me up they were insulting me.


         In the house they locked me up and went away.  When they came  back
         they put me in a vehicle."


43.    The Appellant told us, that  the  place  where  he  and  others  were
    living in "was not clean".  When asked if he was further beaten in  the
    house again he repeated:

         "When they came they took me and beat me on the head, grabbed me by
         the hand on my polo shirt."


         Q.      "Did they make your nose bleed again?"


         A.      "No my nose did not bleed again, it was only when they were
             taking me there."


44.    When asked by Mr Jones as to whether the clothes that the Appellant
    had worn for the demonstration were the same clothes he wore when he
    was put in the vehicle at the house to take him to Kinshasa, the
    Appellant responded:

         "No, the clothes I had, the polo shirt inside the shirt was taken.


         Shirt and trousers and the polo shirt you see in the photo. The
         polo was underneath the shirt".


         Q.      "The shirt was taken? When?"


         A.      "Before being put in the vehicle.  In fleeing the shirt was
             ripped from me.  It remained in their hands".


         Q.     "The shirt was ripped from you at the demonstration?"


         A.      "When I was arrested."


         Q.     "In the van were you wearing the white polo shirt?"


         A.      "Yes".


         Q.     "When you left the house were you still wearing the white
             polo shirt?"


         A.      "Yes the same".


45.    Mr Jones invited the Appellant to look at the photograph, and
    continued:

         Q.     "You say this was taken as you came out of the house.  There
             is no marking, no blood on the shirt.   There  is  nothing  to
             support your contention that you had  a  nosebleed,  that  you
             were held in a dirty house for hours. I suggest it  is  wholly
             implausible for you to leave the house in a whiter than  white
             shirt after your experiences."


         A.      "No, when I was arrested my nose was bleeding.   I  noticed
             more bleeding when I was  in  the  vehicle.   I  was  in  that
             position (the Appellant bent forward) so when in that position
             it is after when wiping myself with my hands I noticed that my
             tears were mixed with blood.  That does not  mean  that  there
             was blood pouring down".


         Q.     "If you were beaten, kicked, held in a  dirty  house,  blood
             was drawn, why does the shirt in the photographs  have  not  a
             blemish?"


         A.      "I say clearly if you have not noticed  bloodstains  on  my
             polo shirt I noticed blood when wiping myself.  It  was  mixed
             with tears."


46.    The Appellant was questioned as to  the  difference  between  joining
    and  becoming  a  member  of  the  UDPS  and   in   particular,   about
    discrepancies in his account as to the role that he played in the  UDPS
    notably, as between what he said in his witness statement of  12  April
    2006 and subsequently at interview.

47.    The Appellant maintained that his membership card was taken  from him
    following his arrest.

48.    The Appellant was cross-examined as to  the  varying  descriptions he
    had given as to the exact role he played in the Party and as  described
    in the letters from the UDPS in Idiofa and subsequently in London.

49.    With regard to the circumstances under which the  Appellant  obtained
    the letter from the UDPS of 25 September 2006, the Appellant  explained
    that he had attended their offices in London on the same  date  because
    he had to be identified.  The letter was prepared after  his  interview
    and he received it two days later.   He had been interviewed by a party
    member, Albert Mukendi, who was "in charge of the immigration  of  UDPS
    members in the UK".

50.    When asked if he had made any request for a member of  the  party  to
    attend the hearing to give evidence, the Appellant told us he  had  not
    thought about that and suggested that Mr Mukendi:

         "... would have been the one who would have told me.   When  I  met
         him he did not mention it".


51.    When asked as to what evidence the Appellant took  with  him  for the
    interview with Mr Mukendi, the Appellant responded:


         "The evidence came two days later.   He (Mr Mukendi) said he  would
         now see the President and send me a letter, you have it".


    Q.      "When you went for the interview did  you  take  any  documents
         about your membership or activities in the DRC?"


    A.      "To present to him?"


              Reply:  'Yes'.


    A.      "No I talked to him about the situation.  He checked  my  name.
         He interviewed me.   After the interview I had to wait."


    Q.      "When you were interviewed by Mr Mukendi on 25 September,  when
         asked about documents you said there were none?"


    A.      "Yes".


    Q.      "Is it that you wanted the  UDPS  in  London  to  support  your
         application?"


    A.      "No it was simply a way to present myself to the party here  so
         as to be known."


    Q.      "You wanted to be known as a member of the party here?"


    A.      "Yes with the authority of the party here".


    Q.      "If that was the  reason,  why  did  you  take  no  documentary
         evidence to prove your membership of the DRC?"


    A.      When the evidence letter came I then looked to photocopy it and
         I could not find a place to do so. I  sent  it  to  the  solicitor.
         After I asked if I could be sent a photocopy of this evidence.   It
         was so with that I could prove as I went to see the authorities  of
         the party and up till then I  did  not  have  a  copy  which  could
         facilitate presenting myself to the party."


    Q.      "What prevented you going to the solicitor and getting  a  copy
         to take to the party in London?"


    A.       "I thought it was not pertinent to bring such  evidence  as  I
         had not been told that I had to bring such evidence".


    Q.      "Evidence you have had since June  included  a  note  from  the
         President of the branch in Idiofa saying  that  you  were  a  party
         member and Deputy Secretary?  What more  pertinent  evidence  could
         there be for you to produce to the UDPS in London?"


    A.      [No response].


    Q.      "You said you did not think it pertinent to bring  the  letter.
         It was with your solicitors.  Why did you not go to the solicitor's
         office and take it to the Party?"


    A.       "I have replied.  I said I asked those  in  contact  with  the
         authorities of the Party here so I would be known to  them.  It  is
         then I went there.  They did not ask for evidence".


    Q.      "Did you not think it would be a good idea to take evidence?"


    A.       "Which evidence?"


    A.       "From the President in the DRC which you said you had received
         in June of 2006".


    A.       "I do not understand".


    Q.      "I will have one more go.  You wanted the DPS in the UK to know
         of your membership in the DRC is that correct?"


    A.       "Yes to be known".


    Q.      "You were interviewed on 25 September 2006 in  London  is  that
         correct?"


    A.       "Yes I went according to the call".


    Q.      "You did not know the man who interviewed you before,  is  that
         correct?"


    A.       "I talked to him".


    Q.      Did you know him before?"
    A.       "Not face to face - he had given me his name".


    Q.      You had received in  June  documents  from  the  DRC,  is  that
         correct?"


    A.       "Yes".


    Q.      "In those documents was a letter from the President about  your
         position in the Party."


    A.       "As secretary."


    Q.      "The letter from the President, why did you not  take  it  with
         you when you went for interview on 25 September at UDPS in London?"


    A.       "I did not have the photocopy.  I have explained. I said  this
         in London."


    Q.      "The letter was at the solicitors."


    A.       "The letter from June I sent him. I did not have a copy."


    Q.      "Why did you not go to the solicitors to get the letter for the
         interview with the UDPS?"


    A.       "I  would  have  gone  to  do  so  if  through  the  telephone
         conversation the other person had asked for it."


52.      When  cross-examined  as  to  the  circumstances  of  his   claimed
     detention and escape, the Appellant was referred to his statement of 12
     April 2006 in which he stated that he had  no  idea  how  long  he  was
     detained.   Mr Jones put the following to him:

     Q.      "You now tell us that you knew you were detained from  30  June
         2005 until 15 January 2006.  You earlier relied  on  and  adopted
         that statement.  Why did you adopt it if it was partly wrong?"


     A.       "Part of the statement was not wrong.    The  version  I  have
         here does not reflect what you are putting forward.  In the French
         version I said I did not know for how long I had been detained  or
         how long it would be if I did not escape."


     Q.      "The statement in the  Home  Office  bundle,  to  whom  was  it
         given?"


     A.       "My solicitor in Dover."


     Q.      "The solicitor who still represents you?"


     A.       "No"


     Q.      "Did the solicitor bring a French interpreter?"


     A.       "Yes, a lady..."


     Q.      "The French statement in your possession was typed for  you  by
         the solicitor?"


     A.       "Yes".


     Q       "The statement was read over to you in French before you signed
         the English version".


     A.       "There was an oral translation.  Asking me  questions,  typing
         on a computer.   After the paper was in French the interpreter got
         me to read it and I received the French copy  two  or  three  days
         later.  Later on I tried to get in touch to correct mistakes.   He
         said I had to see the  interpreter.    From  the  given  date  the
         interpreter was not available."


     Q.      "To be clear, you were aware of mistakes in the statement?"


     A.       "Yes."


     Q.      "In the French version?"


     A.       "I found many mistakes. The solicitor called.  I went  to  see
         him.  He told me he could not see me because of  the  interpreter.
         At reception I was asked to correct some mistakes.   I  put  these
         mistakes on a piece of paper so as to mention them so  they  could
         be corrected.  He told me by that time it was too  late.   He  had
         already sent things. I needed to come before.  I had  come  before
         and there was in interpreter.  As evidence I tried to correct such
         matters as names of children. They had been  put  backwards.   The
         place of my marriage was also wrong. "


53.     The Appellant maintained that mistakes in  the  English  version  of
     his statement did not appear in the French version.

54.     As regards the circumstances of his detention,  the  Appellant  told
     us that he was moved to various places of detention on an almost weekly
     basis between June 2005 and January 2006 and detained in  Kinshasa.  It
     was by chance that on 15 January 2006, "I was placed in  charge  of  a
     group of prisoners the prisoners previously held there  having  escaped
     that day but later been recaptured".

55.     Each week there were different guards.

56.     The Appellant told us that on 15 January "Others had been  asked  to
     indicate which of them had no family in  Kinshasa.   The  question  was
     asked in the cell".  The Appellant continued:

         "I put my hand up.  I did not see the others do it."


57.     Mr Jones continued his cross-examination in this regard as follows:


     Q.      "The same day you were put in charge you were asked to  go  and
         buy drinks?"


     A.       "Yes".


     Q.      "Was that the first time you had been  asked  to  do  something
         like that by a guard?"


     A.       "Yes".


     Q       "You went out of the cells on your own to buy drinks?"


     A.       "He took me with the empty bottles. We went up some steps to a
         particular level.  He showed me a door.   He pointed to  the  shop
         with his finger."


     Q.      "You went to the shop on your own?"


     A.       "A kiosk rather than a shop."


     Q.      "Did you go on your own?"


     A.       "He opened the door and said 'there' and I went".


     Q.      "What happened to the guard whilst you were on your way to  the
         kiosk?"


     A.       "I do not know. I was looking forward."


     Q.      "How far was the kiosk from the place you were held?"


     A.       "The kiosk was somewhere there, distance is quite difficult to
         estimate, like before that corner". (The Appellant looked  out  of
         the hearing room window to a corner on the adjacent road).


     Q.      "How long was the walk?"


     A.       "At least two minutes.  Not  far.  When  I  gave  the  bottles
         whilst he was looking for some sugary drink,  cola.   During  that
         time I was waiting."


     Q.      "What happened?"


     A.       "I saw someone who said "Are  you  the  prisoner  coming  from
         inside?'  He said 'I am one of yours come'."


     Q       "What did you understand him to mean".


     A.       "Someone from my Party."


               [Question repeated].


     A.      "I understood it must be someone who knew me.  I did  not  know
         him.  I thought it must be someone from my Party."


     Q.      "The man at the kiosk pointed to a car.  It was one  of  yours.
         Did you get into the car on your own?"


     A.       "He came also".


     Q.      "Was someone else already in the car."


     A.       "Someone.  I did not know him."


     Q.      "Was there someone in the driver's seat when you got in?"


     A.       "At some point, yes."


     Q.      "Who was driving the car when you got in by the kiosk?"


     A.       "I do not know - the person was there already."


     Q.      "How long were you driving for, before the car stopped  at  the
         house referred to in the statement?"


     A.       "In any case I have no idea.  It is a big city."


     Q.      "The time?"


     A.       "I do not know".


     Q.      "Did you enquire of either  of  the  men  why  you  were  being
         helped?"


     A.       "To the person outside, yes.  I asked him afterwards."


     Q.      "What did he say?"


     A.       "He did not want me to ask him questions he said not to."


     Q.      "Did you ever discover why you were helped to escape?"


     A.       "Yes, the fact I was outside, he took me to his place."


     Q.      "Have you since discovered how it was he was waiting for you?"


     A.       "I do not know.  He did not want me to ask questions."


     Q.      "Have you never had an answer why you were being helped  or  by
         whom?"


     A.       When I asked him the first question who he was his  reply  was
         'I am one of you'.  He did not want me to ask him questions."


58.     The Appellant continued that  he  had  travelled  from  Kinshasa  to
     Brazzaville with the two men who had helped  him  to  escape.  For  the
     avoidance of doubt, this included the man he  had  met  at  the  kiosk.
     The Appellant stated that he had stayed in Benin, "A few days, I  don't
     remember".

59.   At this point, Mr  Jones  referred  the  Appellant  to  his  screening
     interview at A9, where he had indeed stated, that he had stayed  a  few
     days in Benin. Mr Jones put to the Appellant the following:

     Q.      "You also said that in your statement at paragraph 10.   Please
         explain why at the Screening interview on 31 March 2006  you  told
         the Interviewing Officer that you arrived in Benin on 23 March and
         left the same day for the Ivory Coast."


     A.       "On the same day I arrived  in  Benin  I  went  to  the  Ivory
         Coast."


     Q.      "Why did you say that if now you say you stayed a few days?"


     A.       "Maybe through having forgotten. I know that I went to  Benin.
         I stopped a few days and after the Ivory Coast where I stayed  for
         about a week."


     Q.      "Did the man accompany you to Brazzaville and then to the Ivory
         Coast?"


     A.       "Yes."


     Q.      "Did he accompany you to Tunisia?"


     A.       "No."


60.     The Appellant told us that since his arrival in the United  Kingdom,
     he had no direct contact with any UDPS members in the  DRC.   He  could
     not, for example, write to the  President  Mr  Ibungu,  who  wrote  the
     Idiofa letter of support, claiming that it was, "difficult  to  send  a
     letter there unless I know someone who has a post box for letters to be
     sent".

61.     When re-examined, the Appellant told  Mr  Claire  that  he  was  not
     aware the photographs in question were being taken.  Mr Claire reminded
     the Appellant that in  cross-examination,  the  top  photograph  showed
     nothing on the chair depicted, whilst the  bottom,  second,  photograph
     showed clothes upon each  of  three  chairs.   When  asked  to  further
     explain the Appellant responded:

         "It is difficult to know the circumstances  because  I  am  at  the
         front of the photos.  I do not know the moment they were taken".


62.     Mr  Claire  asked  the  Appellant  to  read  in  French  the  letter
    purportedly from the UDPS in Idiofa dated 15 July 2005.  The  Appellant
    was asked if in the course of his interview with the member of the UDPS
    in London, informed him as to how he would corroborate or  confirm  the
    account that he had given.  The Appellant responded:

         "No he did not tell me how. I simply did the interview.  He had  to
         check and sent me a copy.  I sent it to the solicitor".


63.    The Appellant continued that he was  not  told  the  nature  of those
checks.


64.    The Appellant was reminded that in his statement he referred  to  the
    fact that his "militant skills" made it possible for him to do the work
    of a Secretary and was asked what he meant by "militant  skills".    He
    replied:

         "I mean election.  People are elected, members who lead.  The means
         of designation is through election.  On that day normally a  member
         of the cell above has to be present. For example, a member  of  the
         section or his representatives, they have to be present.  That day,
         one of them will not be present so when the  election  takes  place
         the  sub-cell  assembly   is   sovereign.    So   now   there   are
         administrative procedures, one of the members had to be present but
         in the meantime I arrived in my function.


         During elections as there was nobody from the  higher  level,  then
         the decision of the sub-cell assembly by now, it had  to  be  done.
         The assembly was right to elect me because of  the  quality  of  my
         work."


65.    The Appellant concluded his evidence  by  confirming  the photographs
    showed him being taken from the cellar of the house to a vehicle to  go
    to Kinshasa.

66.    At the resumed hearing at Field House on  11  January,  we  began  by
    informing the Parties' representatives that we had read our  typed  and
    contemporaneous record of the proceedings at Birmingham so as to  fully
    refresh our memories as to the evidence given on that  occasion.  As  a
    matter of prudence, we decided that the parties should first address us
    on matters specifically relating to the substantive appeal, followed by
    their further submissions in relation to country conditions.

67.    Before us, Mr Claire argued that the Appellant was credible.

68.  Mr Claire referred us to paragraph  25  of  the  Secretary  of  State's
    Letter of Refusal, who maintained, that as the  Appellant  was  unaware
    that the UDPS demonstration on 30 June 2005 was not  permitted  by  the
    local Kinshasa authorities for safety reasons,  the  Appellant's  claim
    that the march on that date was allowed and permitted by  the  relevant
    Government department was inconsistent with such information  and  thus
    contradicted the Appellant's claim to be an active member of  the  UDPS
    involved in the demonstration.

69.    Mr Claire reminded us, that Mr Jones now accepted that  the Appellant
    had made no mention of having participated in a UDPS  demonstration  in
    Kinshasa on that date.   His account was that he took part on the  same
    day in a UDPS demonstration in Idiofa.   He thus invited us  to  attach
    no weight to the Secretary of State's contentions in that regard.

70.    Mr Claire maintained that there was  no  inconsistency  in  the  core
    element of the Appellant's account, that he had been  a  supporter  and
    subsequently an active member of the  UDPS.  At  paragraph  10  of  his
    statement of 12 April 2006 the Appellant  had  explained  that  he  got
    involved with UDPS activities as a supporter  in  or  around  2003  and
    became a member in 2005.   In that regard the UDPS  letter  from  their
    office in London of 25 September 2006  was  clear  that  the  Appellant
    joined the Party on 2 January 2002 and was appointed an  Administrative
    Secretary in charge of the campaign of propaganda for the local  Idiofa
    branch in Bandundu Province on 25 April 2005.

71.    Mr Claire, mindful that there was evidence elsewhere  that  suggested
    inconsistencies with this claim, asked us not to adopt a strict literal
    approach  and  to  make  a  comparison  between  a  person  who  was  a
    sympathiser and a member of the organisation.  It was  the  Appellant's
    evidence that he became involved with the party for some  years  before
    becoming a member.  Mr Claire submitted that a sympathiser or supporter
    might well feel part of the organisation, but until such a  person  was
    given an official role or official membership, he might not see himself
    as officially recognised.  It was clear that the Appellant had no  duty
    to assist the UDPS in any form whilst he saw himself as a supporter and
    it was only when he was appointed as a Secretary/Deputy Secretary  that
    he saw himself as a fully fledged member of the organisation.

72.    Mr Claire referred to various  documents  in  which  the  Appellant's
    role   in   the    Party    had    been    variously    described    as
    "Deputy/Administrative/ Designated Secretary".

73.    Mr Claire referred us to the letter from the President  of  the  UDPS
    District Kwilu in Idiofa, Celestin Ibungu, and dated 15 July 2005.  The
    letter as translated described the Appellant  as  a  Party  member  and
    "Deputy Secretary of the Idiofa Branch from June 2005".

74.    Mr Claire reminded us, that in the course of  cross-examination,  the
    Appellant maintained that this was an incorrect  translation  and  that
    "Deputy" was not written in  the  original  French  version.   In  that
    version the Appellant was described  as  'Secretaire  Sous  Cellulaire'
    which had been helpfully translated by the  interpreter  as  "Secretary
    Sub-cell".  Mr Claire  submitted  that  the  Appellant  should  not  be
    penalised for what appeared to be an incorrect translation.

 75.  Mr Claire reminded us, that  the  Appellant  had  been  asked  as  to
    whether he had ever been a Deputy Secretary and he had  explained  that
    he could only be a Secretary in a cell.  The  Appellant  described  his
    role as a Secretary in that sub-cell  in  particular,  taking  care  of
    local administrative matters.   Mr Claire submitted  there  was  little
    difference that could be made out as to the Appellant's description  of
    himself as Secretary or Administrative Secretary.   The  Appellant  had
    described the structure and hierarchy of the local sub-cells. The  sub-
    cell was lower in rank to the main cell and where nobody from the  main
    cell was present at a meeting, the sub-cell assembly was sovereign.

76.    Mr Claire continued, that the Appellant had given a detailed  account
    of the hierarchy of the organisation and the layers between  each  cell
    and branch.  It was in that context that  he  invited  us  to  consider
    whether or not the Appellant was seeking to mislead us as to his  exact
    role in the Party.  Little could turn on the actual definition  of  the
    role that the Appellant played.  The particular title of the  Appellant
    may have been incorrectly described, but Mr Claire submitted,  that  in
    view of the Appellant's knowledge, he  had  discharged  the  burden  of
    proof upon him as required, to show that he was a local UDPS  Secretary
    of a sub-cell in Idiofa.

77.    With regard to the Appellant's account of his  imprisonment,  it  was
    his evidence that  there  were  problems  in  translation.   Mr  Claire
    submitted that the Appellant had been  consistent  with  regard  to  at
    least one particular matter.  He had been clear as to the dates of  his
    arrest, imprisonment and period of detention.  The Appellant had always
    maintained that it was 30 June 2005 until some time in January 2006.

78.    The Appellant explained, that due to  translation  difficulties  with
    his previous solicitor in Dover, there had been some misunderstandings,
    and this should not be a matter that was held adversely against him.

79.    Notably, Mr Claire accepted that "of course, these  matters  had  not
    been put (by the Appellant  or  his  present  representatives)  to  the
    solicitor in Dover whom I recognise would have had the right to respond
    to this allegation".   Nonetheless, Mr Claire asked us to consider that
    the Appellant had said that it was sometime in January 2006.  The  date
    of his escape was stated as 15 January 2006 but it was "not necessarily
    inconsistent with (the Appellant's) account".

80.    Mr Claire submitted, that it was a  possibility  that  the  Appellant
    might be trying "to place a date on an event - a date  that  he  cannot
    necessarily recall.  If he is inaccurate, it does not follow from that,
    that his entire account is a fabrication".

81.    As regards  the  photographs  that  the  Appellant  had  produced  in
    evidence, Mr Claire asserted that there was  a  real  possibility  that
    someone in the police authority who would have been sympathetic to  the
    UDPS would have forwarded the documents to them.  In  this  regard,  it
    was noteworthy that Mr Claire accepted that his suggestion was  indeed,
    no more than speculative.

 82.   As to the factual existence of the photographs and whether they were
    manufactured for the Appellant's asylum claim, Mr Claire  asked  us  to
    consider the photographs of prisoners being abused in  the  Abu  Ghraib
    Prison in Iraq. He further speculated as to whether the purpose of  the
    author of these photographs was to keep a record of the actions of  the
    DRC authorities in the treatment of their prisoners, "knowing full well
    that if such photographs ever came into  the  hands  of  the  press  or
    senior military officials, they  would  be  brought  to  account".   Mr
    Claire continued, "here we have some officials of which  the  Appellant
    doesn't know, having taken photos of his ill-treatment at the hands  of
    the police authorities and if persons can take photographs of incidents
    occurring in Abu Ghraib there is a possibility also that this  practice
    could have been repeated by officials in the DRC".

83.    Mr Claire  submitted  that  it  would  be  wrong  to  treat  the mere
    existence of these photographs as evidence of their fabrication.

84.    As regards the contention that the Appellant wore a  clean  shirt  in
    the photographs when in fact his evidence was that he was  suffering  a
    nosebleed and had, prior to the  photographs,  been  kept  in  a  dirty
    basement, Mr Claire asked us to consider the  Appellant's  evidence  in
    cross-examination.

85.    The Appellant had claimed that he wore two shirts, a polo  shirt  and
    another shirt. The outer shirt was torn away from him at  the  time  of
    his arrest before he was placed in  the  vehicle.   The  Appellant  had
    claimed that when he was arrested he had  noticed  that  his  nose  was
    bleeding and that he was face down but the blood was not pouring.

86.    As regards the Appellant's account of his escape from  detention,  Mr
    Claire submitted that the account of a person's escape was usually  the
    most difficult factual aspect to reconcile with an asylum  claim.   The
    Appellant's evidence was that he was regarded as a model  prisoner  and
    therefore it  was  not  by  chance  that  he  was  given  the  role  of
    supervising other prisoners.  Indeed, it was common practice that where
    political prisoners were detained there was  a  hierarchy  between  the
    prisoners.

87.    when we asked Mr Claire if he had any objective material to which  he
    could refer us to support that suggestion, he responded that he had  no
    such material but suggested that this had  been  the  case  as  regards
    "prisoners in the H  block  in  Northern  Ireland  who  had  their  own
    structure".

88.    Mr Claire submitted even if we were  to  find  that  the  Appellant's
    account of his escape was "exaggerated", this  was  not  fatal  to  his
    claim.

89.    Mr Claire turned to the Appellant's  Screening  Interview,  where  he
    accepted that there was a discrepancy in the  Appellant's  account,  in
    that on the one hand he had claimed to have stayed in Benin for  a  few
    hours, whereas on the other hand, he stated  that  it  was  for  a  few
    days.  Mr Claire fairly reminded us that in  summary,  the  Appellant's
    evidence  before  us  on  this  point  was  that   "maybe   he   forgot
    something".   In any event, continued Mr Claire, such a discrepancy was
    "extremely minor and could have no bearing on the core relevance of the
    Appellant's claim for asylum".   He continued, "Even if you  find  that
    such evidence does affect the  Appellant's  credibility  it  is  not  a
    matter to which disproportionate weight should  be  attached."  It  was
    said Mr Claire, "a peripheral matter".

90.    As regards the London UDPS letter of 25  September  2005,  Mr  Claire
    reminded us that the Appellant was asked in cross-examination as to how
    the author of the letter who in fact interviewed the  Appellant,  would
    have been able to confirm his identity and the Appellant had  responded
    that Mr Mandangi, a UDPS Senior Representative in the  United  Kingdom,
    had been making enquiries.   Asked if the Appellant  had  received  the
    letter on the same day as the interview, the Appellant was  clear  that
    he had not received it until two  days  later.    In  that  regard,  Mr
    Claire submitted, that there was clearly a  gap  in  time  between  the
    Appellant's interview  and  his  receipt  of  the  letter  although  he
    accepted it was "a short gap".

91.    Mr Claire submitted that the Tribunal should couple that letter  with
    that  of  the  UDPS  letter  from  Idiofa.  Taken  together  with   the
    Appellant's evidence regarding his knowledge of  the  UDPS,  they  were
    "sufficient to allow you to conclude the Appellant was a member of  the
    UDPS in the capacity that he has said".

 92.   Mr Claire concluded, by clarifying, that in terms of the  Appellant's
    human rights appeal, our findings under Article 3  of  the  ECHR  would
    inevitably dovetail with our conclusions as to the  Appellant's  asylum
    appeal.   He further confirmed to us  that  there  were  no  Article  8
    issues that he intended to raise as  they  were  not  relevant  in  the
    context of this Appellant's circumstances and this appeal.

93.    Mr Jones explained that there were two aspects  to  his  submissions.
    Firstly, that the Appellant was not a  credible  witness  at  all.  The
    Appellant's historical account was not true and therefore it could  not
    possibly be the case that the Appellant would be  at  any  risk  for  a
    Refugee Convention reason for having a well-founded fear of persecution
    on his return to the DRC.  Secondly, if what  the  Appellant  said  was
    true, Mr Jones would rely on  the  background  material  before  us  to
    demonstrate that as a low level member of the UDPS, the Appellant would
    not in any event be at risk upon return.

94     Mr Jones proceeded to make extensive submissions to  the  effect that
    the Appellant was lacking in all credibility, insofar as his core claim
    was concerned. We shall refer to these later in the determination, when
    setting out our own findings.

95.    It was common ground at the hearing  on  18  October  2006  that  the
    further question to be decided by the Tribunal was the issue as to risk
    to UDPS Members/Supporters on return  to  the  Democratic  Republic  of
    Congo not least in the aftermath of the Presidential run-off  elections
    that resulted in a victory for President Joseph Kabila over the  former
    rebel  leader  Jean-Pierre  Bemba  after  the  results  were   formally
    announced on 16 November 2006.   Indeed, it was for  that  reason  that
    the hearing was adjourned part heard on 18 October for the  purpose  of
    submissions only.

96.    Prior  to  the  restored  hearing  we  received  from  Mr  Jones  the
    following additional documents:


     . Home Office Operational Guidance Note (Democratic Republic of Congo)
       issued on 30 November 2006.


     . The 2006 Year Review: Democratic Republic of Congo July to  December
       published by the Great Lakes Centre for Strategic Studies.

97.    The Tribunal's attention was specifically drawn  to  passages  within
    each of those documents.

98.    The Tribunal received  from  the  Appellant's  solicitors  a  revised
    bundle of documents that now included:

     . Amnesty  International  Report  on  the  DRC  sub-headed  "Overview-
       Covering Events from January - December 2005".


     . Second Carter Centre  Post-Election  Statement  on  the  October  29
       Presidential Elections dated 15 November 2006.

     . Inter Press Service News Agency (IPS) Report that  though  dated  21
       December 2006 related to an IPS Report of 23 August 2006  concerning
       an outbreak of hostilities in Kinshasa that appeared to  be  drawing
       to an end in the run-up to a second round of Presidential Elections.

     . A series of articles released by the South Africa Press  Association
       (SAPA) the first of which was dated 29 October 2006 sub-headed  "DRC
       Election Marred by Violence" and followed by three further  articles
       all dated 30 October 2006.

99.     The  parties'  representatives  proceeded  to  address  us  on   the
    situation in the DRC following the elections and how  it  might  impact
    upon our assessment as to the real risk if  any  to  the  Appellant  on
    return to the DRC.

100.  At the end of the hearing we reserved our decision.

The Legal Framework

101.  The provisions of SI 2006 No 2525 "the Refugee or Person  in  Need  of
    International Protection (Qualification) Regulations 2006",  now  bring
    into United Kingdom domestic law the  Council  of  the  European  Union
    Directive 2004/83/EC of 29 April 2004 on 'minimum  standards'  for  the
    qualification and  status  of  third  country  nationals  or  stateless
    persons as refugees or as persons who otherwise need protection and the
    content of the protection granted", normally referred to in the  United
    Kingdom as the Qualification  Directive.   Changes  were  made  in  the
    Immigration Rules by means of a Statement of Changes in the Immigration
    Rules also taking effect on 9 October 2006.

102.  The determination that we have made has approached the issues in  this
    appeal from the perspective of the 2006 Regulations and  in  particular
    has applied the definitions contained there  in  deciding  whether  the
    Appellant is a refugee under the 1951 Geneva Convention.   We have also
    applied the amended Immigration Rules.   These  have  permitted  us  to
    consider whether the Appellant is in need of humanitarian protection as
    being at risk of serious harm, as defined  in  paragraph  339C  of  the
    Rules.  Finally, we have gone on to consider, inter alia,  whether  the
    Appellant is at risk of a violation  of  his  human  rights  under  the
    provisions of the ECHR.

103.  The burden of proof is upon the Appellant.  The standard of proof  has
    been defined as a 'reasonable degree of likelihood' sometimes expressed
    as 'a reasonable chance' or a 'serious possibility".  The  question  is
    answered by looking at the evidence in the round and  assessed  at  the
    time of hearing the appeal.  We regard the same standards  as  applying
    in essence in human rights  appeals  although  sometimes  expressed  as
    'substantial grounds for believing'.   Although  the  2006  Regulations
    make no express reference to the standard of proof in  asylum  appeals,
    there is no suggestion that  the  Regulations  or  the  Directive  were
    intended to introduce a change in either  the  burden  or  standard  of
    proof.  The amended Immigration Rules, however, deal expressly with the
    standard of proof in deciding whether  the  Appellant  is  in  need  of
    humanitarian protection.

104.  Paragraph 339C of the Immigrating Rules defines a person eligible  for
    humanitarian protection, as a person who does not qualify as a  refugee
    but in  respect  of  whom  substantial  grounds  have  been  shown  for
    believing that the person concerned, if returned,  would  face  a  real
    risk of suffering serious harm.   It seems to us that  this  replicates
    the standard of proof familiar in  the  former  jurisprudence  and,  by
    implication, applies the same standard in asylum cases.

105.  Accordingly, where below we refer to 'risk' or 'real risk' this is  to
    be understood as an abbreviated way of identifying respectively:

    (i)      Whether on return  there  is  a  well-founded  fear  of  being
         persecuted under the Geneva Convention;

    (ii)     Whether on return there are substantial grounds for  believing
         that the person would face a real risk of  suffering  serious  harm
         within the meaning of paragraph 339C  of  the  amended  Immigration
         Rules; and


    (iii)    Whether on return there are substantial grounds for  believing
         that a person would face a real risk of being  exposed  to  a  real
         risk of treatment contrary to Article 3 of the ECHR.


106.  In reaching our conclusion as to whether the  Appellant  would  be  at
    real risk on return, we have been further  mindful  that  the  amending
    Immigration Rules (Cm6918) contain among  other  provisions,  paragraph
    339K which deals with the approach to past  persecution  and  paragraph
    339O headed 'Internal Relocation'.

107.  The Tribunal are mindful were we to find that internal  relocation  is
    indeed pertinent to this appeal, that the proper approach to the  issue
    would require us to apply the principles set out in the recent House of
    Lords judgment in Januzi [2006] UKHL 5 that  adopts  the  criteria  now
    contained in paragraph 339O but also contains more  detailed  guidance.



             The Objective Evidence and Current Country Guidance

108.  As to the question of current risk on return to the DRC, the  Tribunal
    in MK (AB and DM Confirmed) Democratic  Republic  of  Congo  CG  [2006]
    UKAIT 00001 were concerned with an HJT Research News Reporting  Service
    Item of 27 June 2005 concerning suspension by the  Netherlands  of  the
    return of asylum seekers to the DRC.   The Tribunal concluded  that  it
    did not afford a sufficient basis  for  modifying  the  conclusions  on
    failed asylum seekers reached in AB and DM (Risk Categories Reviewed  -
    Tutsis added) (Democratic Republic of Congo) CG [2005] UKAIT 00118.

 109. The Tribunal in AB and DM indeed broadly confirmed the list  of  risk
    categories identified in the earlier Country Guidance  decision  in  VL
    (Risk - Failed Asylum Seekers (Democratic Republic of Congo)) CG [2004]
    UKIAT 00007, namely,  those  with  an  ethnic,  political  or  military
    profile in opposition to the government, but found that in view of  the
    increase in anti-Rwandan feeling, Tutsis, or those suspected  of  being
    Tutsi, were at risk of being associated with  the  Rwandans.   Further,
    that the assessment of risk in an individual case, would depend upon  a
    careful analysis of that individuals origins, background and profile.

110.  The issue of 'profile' was a matter that the Tribunal  in  AB  and  DM
    referred to at paragraph 34 of their determination. There continued  to
    be a real risk for those with a political or  military  profile.   Each
    case was to be judged on its own facts, but  it  was  possible  now  to
    provide a little more detail at least about those who fell  within  the
    'political profile' sub-category.  The Tribunal continued at  paragraph
    45 as follows:

         "We would emphasise first of all that the use of the word 'profile'
         highlights the fact that this category  is  intended  to  mark  out
         those whose actual perceived military or  political  activities  or
         involvements are  likely  to  have  brought  them  to  the  adverse
         attention  of  the  Kabila  regime.   The  mere  membership  of  an
         opposition political party will not demonstrate that a  person  has
         such a profile". (Our emphasis).


111.  We would emphasise in that regard, the Tribunal's reference  to  those
    whose actual perceived military or political activities or involvements
    were 'likely to have brought them' or to bring them in  the  future  to
    the adverse attention of the Kabila regime.

112.  The Tribunal reminded us in AB and DM, that  the  evidence  emphasised
    the primary risk to returnees, who had a political military  or  ethnic
    (Tutsi)  background,  that  made  them  of  adverse  interest  to   the
    authorities.   The risk arose, because of a Claimant's  background  and
    not because he was a returnee. The  issue  for  the  Tribunal,  in  any
    particular case, was whether the position was such  that  there  was  a
    real risk to an Appellant in his particular  circumstances  on  return,
    both in terms of the Geneva Convention and Article 3 of the ECHR.

113.  The conclusions of the Tribunal in VL and AB and  DM  and  MK  provide
    the context, in addition to the further background material before  us,
    in which we have assessed this appeal.

114.  In terms of that further background material, we  have  taken  account
    of those aspects on which the parties' representatives relied.

115.The Tribunal in AB and DM summarised the background to the situation  in
    the DRC as it then stood,  and  we  bear  in  mind,  that  this  was  a
    determination promulgated on 21 July 2005.   They noted that  the  five
    year conflict in the DRC that began in August 1998 between the  various
    rebel groups and the DRC Government, was effectively brought to an  end
    by the December  2002  Peace  Agreement  and  the  setting  up  of  the
    Transitional National Government (TNG) in June  2003.   This  comprised
    the  President  and  four  Vice  Presidents  from  different  political
    groups.   The new National Assembly Senate was opened in  August  2003.
    The National Assembly was made up of  five  hundred  members  from  the
    numerous political parties to the inter-Congolese dialogue, the  former
    government, the unarmed political opposition, civil  society  and  four
    more rebel groups.  The Senate was made up of one  hundred  and  twenty
    members from the various parties to the National Power Sharing  Accord.
    It had to be viewed in the  context  and  complexity  of  the  previous
    conflict.

116.  Tribunal continued at paragraph 24:

         "There were three main groups involved, the government,  army,  the
         rebel group controlled by Rwanda, the Congolese Rally for Democracy
         - Goma (RCD/Goma), and the rebel group controlled  by  Uganda,  the
         Congo Liberation Movement (MLC) lead by J-P Memba.  Further, within
         the RCD movement there have been  dissident  factions.   The  peace
         agreement has been made on a political front but  according  to  Mr
         Kennes, lasting peace would depend upon it being  accepted  by  the
         various military factions.  In April  2002,  there  was  a  partial
         agreement involving the MLC and the government  but  excluding  the
         RCD.  This was not implemented".

117.  The Tribunal noted, that Mr Kennes in  his  reports,  recognised  that
    the UDPS, the Unified Lumumbist Party (PALU) and the Forces  for  Union
    and Solidarity (FONUS) refused to join  the  MLC-Government  Agreement.
    The RCD signed an alliance with the UDPS and others.   There were  then
    further negotiations in South Africa that led to a global agreement  in
    December 2002, leading to power sharing between RCD/Goma, the  MLC  and
    the  Government  with  some  lesser  responsibilities  going  to  other
    parties.

118.  It was noted by Mr Kennes, that the installation of  the  Transitional
    Government did not have any significant  impact  on  the  human  rights
    situation in  the  DRC  and  he  described  the  general  situation  as
    "government by warlords jockeying for power".  The UDPS were  presently
    refusing to participate.  There continued to be a risk of a coup.   The
    overall picture was one of generalised chaos.

119.  The Tribunal noted at paragraph 28 of  their  determination,  that  Mr
    Kennes in identifying the category of people most at risk on return  to
    the DRC, included UDPS members.

120.  The Tribunal at paragraph 41 of their determination concluded that:

         "... we do not find very helpful Mr  Kennes'  suggestion  that  the
         category of Tutsi should be seen  as  including  anyone  who  is  a
         member or sympathiser  of  the  RDC/Goma  Rebel  Movement  or  even
         anybody who was a member of the UDPS...".(Our italics).

121.  The Tribunal continued at paragraph 46:

         "Bearing this point in mind, we accept that at the present time  it
         is very dangerous to be an active member of the UDPS.   The success
         of the ville morte  action  in  bringing  much  of  Kinshasa  to  a
         standstill in January 2005 has threatened  the  Kabila  leadership.
          We accept Mr Kennes' evidence that UDPS militants abroad returning
         now would be at risk of detention."  (Our italics).


122.  At paragraph 51, the Tribunal summarised the risk categories.   In  so
    doing they were clear that they  built  on  previous  country  guidance
    cases and in particular VL.  It  was  necessary  for  the  Tribunal  to
    reformulate and summarise the current risk categories.

123.  At  paragraph  51(3)  the  Tribunal  confirmed  as  an  existing  risk
    category:

         "... those  having  or  being  perceived  to  have  a  military  or
         political profile in opposition to the government.


 124.  It stated that:

         " the risk fluctuates in accordance with the  political  situation.
         On the basis of the evidence before us, the current position is  as
         follows.  The Tribunal accept there is a real risk at  present  for
         UDPS activists." (Our italics).

125.  We must of course look at what has  happened  in  the  DRC  since  the
    start of 2006 with particular regard to the activities of the UDPS.


126. Before so doing, it is important to bear in mind,  that  following  the
    Peace Agreement and the establishment of the  TNG  in  June  2003,  new
    legislation  governing  political  activity   was   passed   in   2004.
    Political parties were free to hold  meetings  and  campaign  but  were
    required to first register with the Ministry of the Interior.

127.  As identified at  paragraph  3.6.4  of  the  Home  Office  Operational
    Guidance Note (OGN),  issued 30 November 2006:

         "This last restriction, which has been  in  place  since  1999,  is
         contested by the main political parties, such as the Union pour  la
         Democratie et le Progress Social (UDPS), which argue that they have
         been registered as a political party since the National  Conference
         in the early 1990s and do not need to do so again."


128.  The OGN at paragraph 3.67, records that:

         "Having initially refused to take part in the TNG  formed  in  June
         2003, an August 2004 part-issued statement indicated that  although
         the UDPS is  not  part  of  the  TNG  the  organisation  was  fully
         participating in the transition process.  On 30 June  2005,  local
         authorities in Kinshasa denied the UDPS Party permission to conduct
         marches  protesting  the  extension   of   the   transition.    The
         authorities cited public safety reasons for their refusal following
         statements by UDPS leaders encouraging citizens  to  overthrow  the
         government.   In November 2005 a senior  UDPS  official  was  found
         dead in mysterious circumstances and in  December  2005  the  party
         boycotted the referendum on the election and also missed the  party
         candidate registration deadline in March 2006.  On  10  March  2006
         UDPS-organised  demonstrations  against   elections   delays   were
         dispersed by  riot  police  and  around  forty  demonstrators  were
         temporarily detained.   On 22 March 2006 demonstrators  again  took
         the streets of Kinshasa to demand that the UDPS be integrated  into
         the country's election organisational  structures.  Throughout  the
         campaigning, elections  and  post-election  events  from  April  to
         September 2006, the UDPS maintained its boycott,  citing  electoral
         irregularities and organised demonstrations  and  spoiling  tactics
         against rival parties and the electoral process."  (Our italics).


129.  Paragraph 17.20 of the COI Report of October 2006  records,  that  the
    UDPS had estimated the number of demonstrators who took to the  streets
    of Kinshasa on 22 March 2006, at five thousand.

130.  It is apparent therefore, that as a consequence of  the  stance  taken
    by the UDPS, they had not only isolated themselves from  any  political
    influence within the TNG,  but  as  a  consequence  of  boycotting  the
    subsequent referendum on the Election in December 2005, were unable  to
    register their Party by the deadline in March 2006 following a  belated
    change of mind.

131.  Parliamentary Elections  and  the  first  round  of  the  Presidential
    Elections eventually took place on 30 July 2006.  The DRC  OGN  records
    at paragraph 3.6.8 that:

         "In the buildup to and immediate aftermath of the vote,  there  was
         high tension and violent exchanges in  urban  areas  between  rival
         sets of supporters of  the  main  candidates  with  accusations  of
         serious irregularities in the administration of the election."


132.  The COI Report of 27 October 2006 records at paragraph 4.07,  that  in
    July  2006,  respect  for  civil  and  political  rights  in  the   DRC
    drastically decreased as the 30  July  election  approached  and  that:
    "UDPS and RCD members were targeted for human rights violations because
    of their political affiliations".

133.  The COI Report records at paragraph 6.30:

         "One of the  main  opposition  parties,  the  UDPS,  boycotted  the
         polls.  The UDPS had boycotted the December 2005 referendum and the
         registration exercise which had taken place in  November  2005  and
         only announced its intention to participate in January  2006  after
         both exercises were closed.   It demanded that registration  should
         be reopened to allow them to take part  in  the  polls.   This  was
         refused by the Electoral Commission which led to demonstrations".


134.  The COI records, that on 12 June 2006, the UDPS held a  protest  march
    demanding negotiations  that  would  see  the  Party  included  in  the
    election process. The protest turned violent with  police  firing  tear
    gas after demonstrators threw stones.  A further march was held  on  30
    June 2006, when police again used tear gas.

135.  It is recorded in the COI at paragraph 6.55 that on 18  July  2006  in
    the capital, Kinshasa:

         "Police fired tear gas at opposition supporters who ran riot in the
         streets, assaulting supporters of other parties  and  pulling  down
         election posters and banners.  They were protesting  on  what  they
         call the irregularities in the  electoral  process  and  many  were
         believed to be supporters of the UDPS".


136. At paragraph 6.77, the COI records events that took place in or  around
    September 2006 as follows:


         "... meanwhile, several opposition politicians,  including  fifteen
         of the thirty three  other  presidential  candidates,  joined  Vice
         President Bemba's Union for the Nation but he failed  to  gain  the
         support of Etienne Tshisekevi or his Union for Democracy and Social
         Progress (UDPS) which again renewed its unwillingness to accept the
         electoral process by  refusing  to  back  either  candidate".  (Our
         italics).

137.  It is thus apparent that by  September  2006,  the  UDPS  had  further
    isolated themselves politically, in that not only were  they  unwilling
    to accept the electoral process but had now decided not to back  either
    of the Presidential candidates.

138.  Such then, was  the  situation  as  it  related  to  the  UDPS,  as  a
    consequence of their political stance and activities, both prior to the
    Provincial elections and subsequently the second round of  Presidential
    elections that took place on 29 October 2006.

139.  The second round of Presidential elections was a run-off  between  the
    current President, Joseph Kabila, who had gained  44.81%  of  votes  in
    round one; and Vice  President  Jean-Pierre  Bemba,  who  had  acquired
    20.03% of the votes.

140.  On 16 November 2006, the second round  outcome  was  confirmed,  with
    Kabila increasing his winning vote share to 58.5% to Bemba's 41.9%.

141. On 27 November 2006, the Supreme Court  rejected  an  appeal  by  Bemba
         and.
         officially confirmed Kabila as President.

142.  Paragraph 3.6.8 of the DRC OGN of November 2006 records:

         "While fraught with disputes between candidates,  their  supporters
         and over the organisation of the elections, the first round results
         of the elections  were  accepted  by  all  sides.    In  the  wider
         context, the information does not suggest that the rivalry  in  the
         competing camps in either the first or second  rounds  amounted  to
         more than highly-charged electioneering in closely-fought elections
         the like of which is unprecedented in the DRC."


143.  We note from paragraph 3.613 of the OGN issued on  30  November  2006,
    (that in effect  supplemented  the  COI  October  report),  that  there
    appears  under  the  sub-heading,  "UDPS  members  or  activists",  the
    following:

         "While mainstream political and former rebel groups integrated into
         the  TNG  and  electoral  process  face  no  systematic   risk   of
         persecution based on party activity, the UDPS  is  somewhat  of  an
         exception. In the build up to the July 2006  elections,  the  party
         maintained its boycott  of  the  electoral  process  and  organised
         numerous demonstrations which were  forcefully  suppressed  by  the
         security forces.  While the party  remains  in  self-imposed  exile
         from mainstream politics, activists who had brought  themselves  to
         the adverse attention of the authorities are liable to face a  real
         risk of persecution.  However, the available information  does  not
         suggest that  low  level  support  or  membership  (i.e.  no  known
         activism) of the UDPS alone automatically constitutes  grounds  for
         the grant of  asylum.   Caseworkers  should  carefully  assess  the
         claimant's level of involvement before deciding  on  whether  their
         particular  circumstances  meet  the  'real  risk'  threshold".(Our
         italics).

144.  Mr Jones referred us to a comprehensive report prepared by  the  Great
    Lakes Centre for Strategic  Studies  (GLCSS)  entitled  "2006  Year  in
    Review: Democratic Republic of Congo: July to December".   The  report,
    in effect, could properly be described as a form of  diary  continually
    updated in terms of the [GLCSS's] monthly  coverage  of  the  political
    landscape in the DRC over the course of the last six months of 2006 and
    which thus covered the situation on the ground as the Election campaign
    intensified.

145.  The GLCSS describes itself as a London-based organisation:

         "dedicated to providing accurate and timely political, economic and
         military information about the African Great Lakes countries."


146.  It describes its "mission" as:

         "To improve  reporting  capacity  in  the  region,  GLCSS  provides
         training  and  investigative  journalism  techniques   to   African
         journalists and provides access  to  its  political,  economic  and
         military databases.


         GLCSS is not a policy  organisation;  its  overarching  aim  is  to
         encourage transparency  in  reporting  about  African  Great  Lakes
         issues and provide a single source of  accurate  information  about
         the region.


         The  GLCSS  website,  when  finished,   will   provide   the   only
         consolidated news site focused on economic, political and  military
         information in the African Great Lakes."


147.  Mr Jones informed us that he had obtained their report via  the  GLCSS
    website.  He regarded it as the only objective evidence that  could  be
    found to cover the events towards the back end of last year.

148.  Having read the report, we would agree with Mr Jones that:

         "It is formatted like a Diary.  It revisits its concerns as  events
         unfold on a month by month basis".


149.  Mr Jones pointed out,  that  the  views  of  this  organisation,  were
    considered by the Home Office to  be  helpful  and  authoritative.   He
    referred us to passages within the COI reports  of  April  and  October
    2006 on the DRC, that were clearly sourced from GLCSS reports.

150.  The report begins in July 2006 and opens  with  the  observation  that
    the political landscape of the DRC had reached a critical moment.   The
    report continues:

         "Official campaigns for the historic elections at the end  of  July
         have started.  This week, GLCSS attempts  to  assess  the  election
         mood vis--vis the security situation."


151. The report goes on to record, that in July 2006, there were many  cases
    of people who had fallen prey to  violence.    The  circumstances  were
    caused  by  a  lack  of  tolerance  among  the  politicians  and  their
    supporters.   The report continued:


         "Previously, GLCSS  has  asserted  that  political  attention  will
         increase ahead of elections and had also predicted  that  if  other
         parties joined UDPS to boycott elections, the situation  would  get
         worse.  This scenario started to unfold barely a few days into  the
         campaigns.  Apart from UDPS calls for the  withdrawal  of  the  1+4
         formula (President and his four Vice  Presidents)  the  Independent
         Electoral Commission (CEI), the High Media Authority (HAM)   and  a
         group of nineteen presidential candidates seconded another idea  on
         4 July, to stop the ongoing  campaign  to  first  solve  what  they
         called 'irregularities' in the electoral process....


         GLCSS believes, despite UDPS's claims  as  well  as  requests  from
         other quarters to have the elections postponed, the  campaign  will
         continue and the elections  will  be  on  schedule.   However,  the
         protests are likely to continue  and  will  cause  more  human  and
         material loss.   UDPS members will increasingly  receive  defectors
         from FONUS, RCD/N and RSF."


152.  Under the sub-heading, "UDPS  Continues  Anti-election  Protests"  the
    following is reported:

         "In another development, UDPS continued its  anti-election  protest
         in Kinshasa. Diplomatic sources in the Congolese  capital  revealed
         that the protest was aimed at destroying  any  election  poster  or
         other materials and to send hostile messages to  the  international
         community whom they accuse  of  having  imposed  elections  on  the
         Congolese  population.   Protestors  who   were   singing   slogans
         supporting  Etienne  Tshisekedi  reportedly  tore  up   candidates'
         posters and burnt the CEI's banderols.   The  protestors  not  only
         attacked  passers-by  wearing  T-shirts  printed  with  candidates'
         portraits but they also tried to  smash  cars  bearing  candidates'
         posters while throwing bricks and burning bottles at the police.


         A group of ten UDPS and Ngbanda's Aparicot supporters are  said  to
         have carried out similar acts of protest  at  the  DRC  Embassy  in
         Paris because the Embassy's reception hall was not  accessible  for
         them  to  mourn  the  passing  of  Bakuwa  Mwamba,   a   journalist
         assassinated at his home during the night of 8 July....


         GLCSS has repeatedly pointed out that the political error  made  by
         Etienne  Tshisekedi  and  his  militants  of  not  registering   to
         participate in the forthcoming elections would lead to  a  dramatic
         end of his party - long considered as the  main  opposition  party.
         In  addition,  Tshisekedi's  hostility  towards  the  international
         community was seen as another error that will systematically weaken
         the veteran politician as well as his party.  GLCSS maintained  the
         protest being organised by the UDPS, indicate its last strong  grip
         on the DRC political scene." (Our italics and underlining).


153.  We would agree with Mr Jones, who submitted that  the  above  referred
    passage only served to exemplify the negative role played by  the  UDPS
    in the election process.   We can appreciate in such circumstances, the
    reasons why Mr Jones was motivated  to  submit  that  the  UDPS  could
    properly be described in the circumstances "as something  of  a  busted
    flush".

154.  Indeed, a further passage within the  report  under  the  sub  heading
    "Ballot Problems", does in our view  serve  to  further  exemplify  the
    negative role of the UDPS in the recent elections, in that it observes:

         "As it had been predicted by GLCSS  in  its  previous  analysis,  a
         serious  and  violent  election  boycott  was  reported  in   Kasai
         Provinces.  Those who boycotted were widely believed to be loyal to
         UDPS leader Etienne Tshisekedi,  and  burnt  polling  stations  and
         voting materials".


155.  The report demonstrates that there was  an  initial  association  with
    Jean-Pierre Bemba and, at its page 16,  (the  report  is  unfortunately
    devoid of paragraph numbering), there is reference  to  the  fact  that
    Bemba was being supported by most of the opposition  parties  including
    the UDPS, that was reported at the time to be determined  to  challenge
    Kabila as it did with Mobutu; and further, at page 18 the report  notes
    as follows:

         "Bemba's association with Mobutu-loyalists and Etienne Tshisekedi's
         Union for Democracy and Social Progress (UDPS) supporters  elevated
         him above other likely contenders."


156. The report, however, wrongly forecast at page 19, a possible  coalition
    of Bemba supported by the UDPS that in fact did not come to fruition.


157.  The report, in covering  the  DRC  political  situation  in  September
    2006, noted that the Independent Election Commission  (CEI)  had  begun
    publishing the legislative elections results, the final count of  which
    was expected to be published on 4 September 2006.   The  report  noted
    that as had been the case in the Presidential  elections,  the  results
    published so far, indicated that  Kabila's  Alliance  for  Presidential
    Majority (AMP) led in the poll followed by Bemba's Rally  of  Congolese
    Nationalists (RENACO).   The AMP was leading with one hundred and sixty
    one of three hundred and twenty four seats  already  published  whereas
    RENACO had forty six seats.

158.  Under the sub-heading "Lists of New Parliament members  Published"  on
    page 28, the GLCSS noted the  published  final  list  of  five  hundred
    Parliamentarians from the 30 July elections.  Neither of the two  major
    parties had gained a majority of the seats.   This  had  confirmed  the
    GLCSS's  analysis  that  the  new  Government  would  be  ruled  by   a
    coalition.   In reality the Election results mirrored the  Presidential
    voting, in that the  AMP  came  first  with  approximately  227  seats,
    whereas RENACO came second with some 114 seats.


159.  Interestingly, the Report, as far as  September  2006  was  concerned,
    noted that at stake was the appointment of the Prime Minister:

         "who is appointed from the ranks of  Parliament's  majority  party,
         and possibly the future of the DRC"


160.  In that regard the  reporter  noted  that  Antoine  Gizenge's  Unified
    Lumumbist Party (PALU) came third with some thirty four seats.

161.  We pause here to note, that at the end  of  December  2006,  President
    Kabila named Antoine Gizenge, leader of PALU and  a  former  opposition
    figure, as the  country's  Prime  Minister.    Interestingly,  we  have
    further noted from a BBC News On-line Report of 30 December 2006,  that
    Mr Gizenge's support was concentrated in Bandundu Province, (indeed the
    Province of the Appellant in the instant appeal),  and  Kinshasa  where
    President Kabila was weaker.

162.  It is apparent, from our consideration  of  the  background  material,
    that the appointment of Gizenge has forestalled indications (not  least
    in the GLCSS report - see page 30) that the fact that PALU  secured  34
    seats without being in any coalition, might, (but for  the  appointment
    of Gizenge as Prime Minister), otherwise have influenced the  Party  to
    form another alliance in the Parliament and provide a challenge to both
    Kabila and Bemba.

163.  Indeed, at page 31 of the report, there is reference to the fact  that
    Kabila's AMP continued to gain ground and indications pointed to a  win
    in the second round. The report continued:

         "The support of Antoine Gizenge and Nzanga Mobutu, who  came  third
         and fourth respectively in the first round, explains the shift.  On
         the other hand, Bemba, who reportedly received  some  support  from
         UDPS supporters in the first round, especially in Kinshasa, has not
         yet managed to officially secure Tshisekedi support."


164.  At page 33 of the report there is reference to the following:

         "Bemba has also been strengthening his coalition, which  is  called
         the National Union (UN).  ...


         As previously  reported  by  GLCSS,  Bemba  supporters  are  mainly
         Mobutists, and the new alliance is seen as an extension of  RENACO.
         As for the UDPS-Bemba coalition it  is  still  obscure  and  RENACO
         would lose a key supporter if Etienne decided not  to  support  any
         candidate  in  the  run-off.   Commenting  on  the  alliance,  UDPS
         Secretary General Remy Masamba stated: 'we have been  contacted  by
         Bemba's people but have not reacted yet.  We  are  talking  to  our
         grass root supporters so a decision is  still  pending.   We  still
         call for talks between the political actors to calm the tensions.'


         GLCSS believe that some UDPS members who  supported  Bemba  in  the
         western provinces in the first round cannot be taken as a guarantee
         that the UDPS Party would automatically support Bemba in  the  run-
         off.  Moreover, even though it supports him,  it  would  not  bring
         many votes to him as most of the UDPS members  are  not  registered
         voters." (Our italics).


165.  The above observations simply further exemplify the  emerging  picture
    of a former major political opposition party whose  influence  has  now
    become severely limited by its political negativity.


166.  Having initially formed an alliance with Bemba, the UDPS in the  event
    withdrew its support.  Indeed, at page  44  of  the  GLCSS  report  the
    following is noted:

         "Some  opposition  parties  said  they  would  not  support  either
         candidate... Etienne Tshisekedi's UDPS has officially said it would
         not support either candidate in the run-off.


         However, some reports indicate that some of its cadres like  Gaston
         Dondo and Fern Kaman have reportedly called on UDPS  supporters  to
         support Jean-Pierre Bemba.  GLCSs would not be  surprised  if  some
         UDPS supporters vote for Bemba because this also  happened  in  the
         first round especially in Kinshasa; therefore  GLCSS  expects  many
         UDPS members to vote for Bemba."

167.  The GLCSS report in terms of its coverage of the election  process  as
    at October 2006, noted that Kabila's probable victory was also based on
    the support from political leaders from Western  DRC  such  as  Antoine
    Gizenge and Mobutu Nzanga (the latter being the son of the late  former
    President Mobutu and  Chairman  of  the  Union  of  Mobutust  Democrats
    (UDEMO).

         "With a  PALU-led  government,  Kabila  will  be  able  to  control
         Kinshasa,   Bandundu   and   Bas   Congo.    Also   many   of   the
         nationalists/Lumumbists will  reinforce  their  support  to  Kabila
         because of Gizenge. In addition, with the participation  of  Nzanga
         Mobutu,  Kabila  will  have  more  access   to   Equatur,   Bemba's
         stronghold.  More so, Etienne Tshisekedi's  announcement  that  his
         UDPS will not support either candidate increases  Kabila's  chances
         of winning".  (Our italics).


168. Page  47  of  the  GLCSS  Report,  records  an  increase  of  political
    intolerance and clashes that resulted in  violence.   Interestingly  at
    page 48 of their report, the GLCSS, in the event  correctly,  predicted
    (see the OGN of 30 November 2006), that:

         "The most likely scenario is that Kabila  wins  the  elections  and
         Bemba files a formal complaint about  the  election  irregularities
         and then decides to co-operate with Kabila"..

169. Significantly,  President  Kabila's  hand  was  strengthened,  probably
    unintentionally, in the Presidential run-off, by the negative  attitude
    of the UDPS.

170.  Neither representative was able to provide us with  evidence  of  what
    had transpired on the ground since November  2006.  There  was  nothing
    before us to indicate evidence of civil or political disruption in  the
    DRC since the Presidential run-off election result was confirmed

171.  It is, however, to be noted, that what is  described  as  the  world's
    biggest peacekeeping force, approximately 17,000 strong, remains in the
    DRC to prevent possible unrest.

172.   We  have  noted  reports  that  show  that  international  observers,
    including the Carter Centre Mission, generally praised  the  elections,
    as being well run despite some disruptions in the  North  East  of  the
    country.  Indeed, the Carter Mission said that they believed fraud  was
    virtually impossible after ballots had been  counted  at  each  polling
    station.

173.  The fact is, that President Kabila was confirmed as President  with  a
    very healthy majority of almost sixty percent of the popular vote.

174.  In that regard, we can  appreciate  the  reasoning  behind  Mr  Jones'
    submission, that it is difficult to see  in  such  circumstances,  what
    motive Kabila or his Party would have in currently seeking to persecute
    UDPS members or activists in  the  DRC  particularly  as  they,  albeit
    inadvertently, provided assistance to him in his establishment of power
    through the  electoral  system  and  would  arguably  appear  to  be  a
    politically spent force.

175.  Furthermore, the negative  approach  of  the  UDPS,  historically,  in
    terms of their refusal to play their political part in the former  TNG,
    and subsequently in the electoral process  including  their  consequent
    alienation from other political opposition  groups,  may  well,  as  Mr
    Jones put it, leave them at present to be  regarded  politically  as  a
    "busted flush", who are now internally and internationally  politically
    isolated and thus perceived as posing no further  threat  to  President
    Kabila or his Government.

176.  Mr Jones submitted that the UDPS were no  longer  the  force  that  it
    once was in the  DRC,  not  least  because  of  its  negative  approach
    throughout the electoral process and he echoed  the  GLCSS  observation
    that such protests were indicative of their "last strong  grip  on  the
    political scene."

177. Mr Jones was clearly mindful that page 8 of the GLCSS report,  referred
    to the political error made by the UDPS leader Etienne  Tshisekedi  and
    his militants in not registering to participate in the elections, that:

    "... would lead to a dramatic end of his party - long considered as the
         main opposition party.  In addition, Tshisekedi's hostility towards
         the International Community was seen as  another  error  that  will
         systematically  weaken  the  veteran  politician  as  well  as  his
         political party.  GLCSS maintains, the protest being  organised  by
         the UDPS indicate  its  last  strong  grip  on  the  DRC  political
         scene."  (Our italics).

178.  Mr Jones submitted that on that evidence, it  was  certainly  arguable
    that following President Kabila's success in the second  round  of  the
    Presidential elections, "there was some evidence to argue there was  no
    longer any risk to any members or activists  involved  with  the  UDPS.
    It is difficult to see what  motive  President  Kabila  would  have  to
    persecute UDPS or its members or  supporters  if  their  very  negative
    actions played a positive part in his eventual electoral victory.   The
    preponderance of evidence now is that these people will no longer be at
    risk, although I accept the position in the Operational  Guidance  Note
    reflects the Tribunal's position in AB and DM and endorsed in MK". (Our
    italics).

179.  Notably, Mr Jones ended his submissions by accepting that there was:

         "... a gap in the  evidence  since  President  Kabila  secured  his
             victory".


180.  It  is  clear  to  us  that  the  UDPS   are   currently   politically
    marginalised, if not arguably neutered. The question is, does this mean
    that neither the Party nor its members are at continued risk?


181.  Mr Claire opened his submissions  by  placing  reliance  on  the  risk
    categories identified by the Tribunal in AB and DM and MK.   He pointed
    out the Operational Guidance Note at paragraph 3.6.13 was clear that:

         "While the party remains  in  self-imposed  exile  from  mainstream
         politics, activists who have  brought  themselves  to  the  adverse
         attention of the authorities are liable to  face  a  real  risk  of
         persecution".


182.  It is noteworthy, that in the same  paragraph,  the  Tribunal  pointed
    out, that the available information did  not  suggest  that  low  level
    support or membership of the UDPS  alone  automatically  constituted  a
    ground for the grant of asylum.

183. Mr Claire rightly observed that as acknowledged by Mr  Jones,  the  OGN
    was clear that Home Office caseworkers were still required to carefully
    assess a Claimant's level of involvement in the UDPS,  before  deciding
    on  whether  their  particular  circumstances  met  the   "real   risk"
    threshold.

184.  Mr Claire invited us to conclude that the new evidence, not  least  in
    light of the  GLCSS  Report,  whose  credentials  he  notably  did  not
    challenge, was insufficient to enable the Tribunal  to  find  that  the
    UDPS as a Party and its members and supporters were no longer at  risk.



185. Mr Claire continued, that there  was  nothing  in  the  COI  Report  of
    October 2006 and in the Operational Guidance  Note  of  November  2006,
    that took issue with the findings of the Tribunal in the above referred
    Country Guidance cases.

186.  Mr Claire maintained that the GLCSS Report  amounted  "to  an  opinion
    which may or may not be borne out by  future  events.   I  submit  that
    insufficient time has  elapsed  and  there  is  insufficient  objective
    material, upon which a submission can be mounted  to  the  extent  that
    UDPS members at whatever level are not at (continued) risk".


187.  Notably, Mr Claire accepted that as indeed found by  the  Tribunal  in
    AB and DM, ordinary UDPS members were not at risk and that there was no
    evidence that the situation in that regard had subsequently changed.

188.  Mr  Claire  did  not  however,  accept  that  the  objective  material
    demonstrated that the UDPS were no longer a political force in the DRC.
    He notably accepted that the recent material indicated  that  the  UDPS
    "were certainly at least initially, at the forefront of the  opposition
    to the elections".

189.  Mr Claire did not accept that as a consequence of  President  Kabila's
    election victory, the UDPS's inadvertent contribution to  that  victory
    would mean that they were no longer perceived as  a  political  threat.
    He maintained that the senior members and activists of the UDPS in  the
    past were treated in a most  brutal  fashion  by  the  authorities  and
    continued:

         "If we now accept they are no longer going to be viewed as a threat
         - it is a reasonable inference to draw they will  be  treated  more
         favourably than they have been in the past.

         That ignores a fundamental point - the politics and  philosophy  of
         the  UDPS  has  not  changed.   Their  aims  and  objective  remain
         primarily the overthrow of the Kabila regime.  No doubt  they  will
         be fully aware that when one abstains from  the  electoral  process
         your political opponents may well benefit, but that is not the  end
         of the process as far as the UDPS are concerned in  bringing  about
         political change in the DRC."


190.  Mr Claire posed the rhetorical question:

         "Is one to assume that the current regime will now  give  up  their
         political opposition or is it more likely that the regime  will  be
         emboldened in view of  the  electoral  success,  to  seek  out  its
         previous political opponents and  pursue  them  with  a  new  zeal?
         There is no evidence that the UDPS will moderate their position and
         unlikely they will abandon their political involvement".


191.  We would not entirely agree with Mr Claire, that there is no  evidence
    that the UDPS would moderate its position, given that albeit too  late,
    and despite their  previous  opposition  to  the  election,  the  Party
    eventually made a  failed  attempt  to  register  itself  in  order  to
    participate in the election process.

192. As we have earlier observed, Mr Claire did not challenge the  expertise
    of the GLCSS and Mr Jones commended its findings to us.

193.  It  is  apparent  from  previous  COI  Reports  that  the  views   and
    observations of the GLCSS are repeatedly sourced and thus relied  upon.
    We find their current report, to be helpful and reliable to the  extent
    that we can attach weight, not least to those passages in the Report to
    which we have above referred.

194.  The current GLCSS Report has been carefully prepared. It  did  contain
    some predictions that in the event were  wrong,  but  then  again,  the
    formatting of the Report necessarily  involved  foresight  as  well  as
    hindsight, the latter being by its very nature a  more  exact  science.
    Overall, the Report's forecasts of events proved to be correct.

195.  Although  Mr  Jones  argued  that  the  UDPS  could  now  properly  be
    described as "a busted flush", by the end of his submissions, he had to
    some extent modified his position by referring to the UDPS as  a  party
    that was "no longer the force that it once was in the DRC..." and  that
    it was "certainly arguable following President Kabila's success in  the
    second round of  the  Presidential  Elections  that  there  (was)  some
    evidence to argue (that the UDPS were) no longer any risk to any member
    or activist involved with the UDPS." (Our italics).

196.  Mr Jones further accepted that there was  a  "gap"  in  the  objective
    evidence since President Kabila secured his victory.

197.  For the reasons above canvassed, we would certainly  agree,  that  the
    UDPS would appear to have boxed themselves into a political corner,  in
    terms not least of their stance  in  the  DRC  election  process,  that
    included their initial refusal to register as  one  of  the  opposition
    political parties who wished  to  take  part,  and  their  belated  and
    unsuccessful attempt to subsequently register and their later  decision
    not to support either of the Presidential candidates  in  the  election
    run-off.

198. We nonetheless find, that it would be premature,  despite  the  current
    indications to the contrary, to conclude that  the  UDPS  are  a  spent
    political force in the DRC or one that is no longer  perceived  by  the
    current regime to pose a continued political threat.

199.  We would agree, with Mr Claire that insufficient time has  elapsed  to
    enable us to reach such a firm conclusion  and  there  is  no  evidence
    before us, that provides any indication as to  the  present  or  indeed
    future political intentions of the UDPS.

200. In such circumstances, it would indeed be premature for us to  conclude
    that the UDPS were no longer a political force or perceived as a threat
    to the regime, and Mr Claire was right to point out, that the  Tribunal
    could not safely rule out the possibility,  that  the  consequences  of
    President Kabila's resounding victory, could in the  alternative,  lead
    him to pursue his political enemies  with  renewed  zeal  in  order  to
    settle old political scores.

201.  Looking at the objective situation as a  whole,  and  mindful  of  the
    past history of the DRC, we have concluded that despite what appears to
    be a dramatic change in the political landscape, that carries  with  it
    the hope that it will result in much needed stability in this vast  and
    previously divided country, it would be premature to  hold  that  these
    prospects have yet translated to adequate improvements on  the  ground,
    so as to justify a revision at this stage of  the  Tribunal's  view  of
    risk to UDPS members, as held in AB and DM , endorsed in MK  and  which
    we thus re-affirm.

202.   It  follows  that   we   continue   to   believe   that   low   level
    members/sympathisers of the UDPS for that reason alone, will not be  at
    real risk on return to the DRC in the  current  climate,  but  conclude
    that it is too early in the process of the transition  of  the  DRC  to
    democratic rule, to find that there is no continuing threat on the part
    of the current Kabila regime  to  persecute  UDPS  activists.   As  the
    Tribunal in AB and DM rightly observed,  the  risk  category  to  those
    having or being perceived to have a military or  political  profile  in
    opposition to the government is one that "fluctuates in accordance with
    the  political   situation."   (See   paragraph   51(iii))   of   their
    determination).

The appeal of the Appellant

203.  We have assessed the account given to  us  by  the  Appellant  in  the
    context of the evidence as to conditions in the DRC, as set out in  the
    previous section. We find that the Appellant was not a credible witness
    for the reasons that we shall now put forward.

The Appellant's claimed membership and activities on behalf of the  UDPS  in
the DRC.

204. Mr Jones accepted that paragraph 21 of the Letter of Refusal  dated  18
    May 2006 contained some errors.

205.  The Secretary of State had referred to background material before  him
    to show that there were demonstrations and incidents  in  Kinshasa  and
    other towns around 30 June 2005.   The letter continued  in  paragraphs
    22 and 23 by referring to extracts from a  Human  Rights  Watch  Report
    (see also COI Report of April 2006 at paragraphs 4.11 and  6.54)  which
    continued to refer to incidents in Kinshasa on 30 June 2005,  following
    protest action on that day called by the UDPS against the  Government's
    decision to postpone the elections.

206. The evidence showed that the local authorities in Kinshasa  denied  the
    UDPS permission to conduct a march on that day and at paragraph  24  of
    the Refusal letter, there was  reference  to  "numerous  irregularities
    with regard to (the Appellant's) account of events"  that  led  to  the
    belief that the Appellant had not come to the adverse attention of  the
    authorities and  to  the  belief  that  he  was  not  detained  by  the
    authorities prior to travelling to the United Kingdom.

207.  At paragraph 25 of the letter, the Secretary of State stated that  the
    fact that the UDPS administration on 30 March 2005 was not permitted by
    the local authorities in Kinshasa  and  the  fact  of  the  Appellant's
    failure to be aware that the march was not permitted, were illustrative
    that the Appellant was not a high profile active member of the UDPS and
    provided support for the Secretary of State's view, as set out  in  the
    letter, that he was never detained for his political activities.

208.  Mr Jones accepted that the Appellant had always stated that  the  UDPS
    march in which he participated on 30 June 2005 took place in Idiofa  in
    Bandundu Province.  There was nothing that Mr Jones could take  us  to,
    that would  show  that  on  30  June  2005  the  march  in  Idiofa  was
    prohibited.   However, the COI of April 2006 at paragraph 4.11  pointed
    out that:

         "There were demonstrations and  incidents  in  Kinshasa  and  other
         towns on and around 30 June 2005, after protest action on that  day
         was called by the UDPS Party against the decision to  postpone  the
         elections. Reports indicated that between 10  and  26  people  were
         killed, scores wounded and that  hundreds  were  arrested  ".  (Our
         italics).


209.  We note that at paragraph 6.54 of the COIR, reference is made  to  the
    US State Department Report 2005 that:

         "On June 30, local authorities in Kinshasa denied  the  UDPS  Party
         permission to conduct  marches  protesting  the  extension  of  the
         transition.  The authorities cited public safety reasons for  their
         refusal following statements by UDPS leaders  encouraging  citizens
         to overthrow the government".


210.  It follows, that there were clearly demonstrations in other towns  and
    not just in Kinshasa. Although the author of the  Refusal  letter  thus
    appeared to have misunderstood what the Appellant had  said  about  his
    march,  the  Appellant  had  given  oral  evidence   before   us,   and
    irrespective of the Secretary of State's failure to  properly  evaluate
    evidence on this point, it is for the Tribunal to  come  to  their  own
    independent view of the Appellant's credibility.

 211. In so doing we accept that there is nothing else  about  the  Refusal
    Letter to show disbelief other than the reasons set  out  at  paragraph
    25.  However, we have to come to our own independent view  and  we  are
    not bound by the Secretary of State's views as expressed in his letter.



212.  We have carefully considered the Appellant's witness statement  of  12
    April 2006, where at paragraph 10 the Appellant provided his account as
    to how he became involved with  UDPS  activities  as  a  supporter  and
    subsequently became a member and in which he described his  role  as  a
    supporter.  The Appellant said that he was initially a supporter of the
    UDPS "three years ago" in about 2003 and became a member  "last  year",
    namely 2005.   Indeed, the Appellant's Chronology of Events at page1 of
    the Appellant's bundle, also stated that the Appellant became  involved
    with the UDPS in approximately 2003 and officially joined the  UDPS  in
    approximately 2005

213.  Such evidence however, needs to be compared  with  the  UDPS  (London)
    letter dated 25 September 2006 where, in the first  paragraph,  it  was
    clearly stated that the Appellant had joined the  Party  on  2  January
    2002 and was appointed an Administrative Secretary on 24 April 2005.

214  We would agree with Mr Jones, who submitted that the evidence  in  this
    regard was thus contradictory,  relating  to  the  date  the  Appellant
    joined or became a member of the Party,  upon  a  comparison  of  those
    documents.   Indeed,  Mr  Jones  had  asked  the  Appellant  in  cross-
    examination about these various discrepancies and as Mr  Jones  rightly
    submitted, his response was lacking in clarity.   At one juncture,  the
    Appellant appeared to say that one joined the Party by writing a letter
    and that he wrote such a letter in January 2002 and joined  in  January
    2002. In contrast, in cross-examination, the  Appellant  said  that  he
    became a member in December 2004 to January 2005.

215.  In such circumstances, when we compare the evidence before us on  this
    point with those documents, it is apparent to us that there is a  clear
    conflict.

216.  As regards the role the Appellant claimed that he played in the  UDPS;
    in his witness statement at paragraph 11, the Appellant  described  how
    his role as a member had changed.   He  was  offered  the  position  as
    "Secretary" of the Party's sub-cell and such position  was  due  to  be
    officially confirmed after he had been assessed  as  having  the  right
    "militant" skills and being able to deliver what the Party expected.

217.  At interview on 9 May 2006, the Appellant described his  title  (Q.51)
    "Designated Secretary".   Thus, so far, the Appellant had claimed  this
    title and that he was a "Secretary".  There was information provided in
    the UDPS letter of 24 September that the  Appellant  was  appointed  an
    "Administrative Secretary" in charge of the campaign and propaganda for
    the UDPS local branch of Idiofa on 25 April 2005.

218.  We find there to be a clear difficulty on the face  of  it  about  his
    being   "Secretary/Designated   Secretary/Administrative    Secretary".
    Furthermore, the letter from the UDPS in London insofar as one can make
    out, makes no reference to the Appellant's position  being  subject  to
    any confirmation.

219.  In this regard, the Appellant was clear in  his  statement,  that  his
    position was subject to confirmation when  he  established  the  proper
    skills, but the letter from the UDPS does  not  say  at  all  that  the
    Appellant's position was subject to any confirmation whatsoever.

220.  The Appellant's bundle contained documents and  translations  relating
    to the Appellant's involvement with the UDPS.   That included a  letter
    purportedly from the UDPS in Idiofa dated 15 July 2005 together with  a
    translation.  The  translation  described  the  Appellant  as   "Deputy
    Secretary of Idiofa Branch".

221.  As  Mr Jones rightly observed to us:

         "Yet another title - but the Appellant's explanation was that  this
         document was wrongly translated when it described  him  as  'Deputy
         Secretary'.  The Appellant told you the document in French did  not
         refer to the word "Deputy" and that  the  translation  should  have
         been 'Secretary for the level  below  the  cell  of  the  party  in
         Idiofa' - that's what the Appellant  put  forward  as  the  correct
         translation.   That  translation  was  confirmed   by   the   Court
         Interpreter.   So even if the translation  is  initially  wrong  on
         'Deputy Secretary' and the translation given in evidence before you
         is correct, there is a difference in the Appellant's title  as  put
         forward in his amended translation when compared with the title put
         forward by the UDPS in their letter of 25 September  and  with  the
         information provided by the Appellant in his statement of 12  April
         and what he said at interview, was his title.


         So there are discrepancies as to what standing and what position he
         had  in  the  Party.   Again,  I  say,  affecting   adversely   his
         credibility."

222.  We would agree and for like reason.

223.  Our finding in this regard has been re-enforced by  our  consideration
    of the UDPS documents put forward by the Appellant in  support  of  his
    account and claims.

224. The Appellant claimed to have received documents in June 2006 from  the
    DRC but that his solicitor had the documents, so he could not take them
    to his interview in September. The solicitor was in Dover.  We note  in
    that regard that significantly, there was no evidence from  them  about
    this matter.

225.  We have concluded that if the documents were sent in June and left  in
    the possession of the Appellant's former solicitors,  then  surely  the
    Appellant would have arranged to collect them, if as he maintained they
    were reliable, in readiness for his UDPS London interview and in  order
    to establish his Party credentials.

226.  We have not considered the  July  2006  UDPS  letter  from  Idiofa  in
    isolation, but as part of the whole evidence before us. Having done so,
    we have concluded that it is not  a  reliable  document,  as  upon  our
    consideration of the Appellant's evidence in its totality,  nothing  in
    that letter could possibly be true.

The Appellant's claimed arrest, detention and escape.

227.  An important question arises as to when the Appellant, as he  claimed,
    left prison.

228.  Mr Jones referred us to paragraph 15 of  the  Appellant's  statement,
    where he claimed that he had been kept in prison until 'around' January
    2006.  The Appellant had no idea how long he was detained or  where  he
    was being sent as the authorities changed him from one cell to  another
    every week or so.

229.  Mr Jones rightly submitted, that the content of  paragraph  15  needed
    to be compared with paragraph 18 of the same statement in that  just  a
    few lines later, the Appellant  was  saying  that  he  was  kept  until
    'around January 2006' whereas he now gave a definite  date,  namely  15
    January 2006 as to when he escaped.

230.  We  find  that  when  he  asked  the  Appellant  about  this  apparent
    inconsistency, the Appellant responded that the statement on file was a
    translation of the original statement he had made in French and that he
    was aware that this contained some mistakes. Further, that he had  gone
    to see a solicitor in Dover to tell him about these  matters  who  told
    him that it was too late, as the statement had already  been  submitted
    in English.

231   We would agree with Mr Jones, that there had  been  ample  opportunity
    prior to the hearing before us in October 2006 to amend any part of the
    Appellant's statement. We would add that there was ample opportunity to
    obtain evidence in this regard from the solicitor in Dover.

232.  The Appellant told us, that the content of his statement of  12  April
    2006 was true and he had adopted it as part of his evidence  in  chief.
    Then, in the course of evidence, the Appellant stated that  there  were
    errors.  We find that if the Appellant knew that there were errors, his
    failure to amend them and his acknowledgement that  the  contents  were
    true, can but only reduce his credibility, in  circumstances  where  he
    knew that some of that content was incorrect. It was notable that these
    protestations only emerged in the course of cross-examination.

233.  As regards the original photographs produced  by  the  Appellant  that
    purported to show that the Appellant was led from a house in Idiofa  on
    30 June 2005 and that he was  taken  in  a  vehicle  to  be  driven  to
    Kinshasa, we find it to be significant that:

         i.       There was no evidence at all as to who actually  took  the
             photographs.  The evidence was that they  were  obtained  form
             the UDPS but no evidence was given as to how  they  came  into
             the possession of the UDPS and it was difficult to  understand
             how they could have come into the hands of the Party.


         ii.      Mr Jones in  the  course  of  cross-examination  had  made
             specific reference to white chairs shown at  the  top  of  the
             stairs on the bottom photograph.  It showed items that  looked
             like  clothing  visible  on  two  of  the  chairs.   The   top
             photograph showed only one chair  with  nothing  on  it.    Mr
             Jones had asked the Appellant about this  and  indeed  he  had
             made a point of ensuring that both Mr Claire and the Appellant
             were shown the photographs in order that he might identify the
             differences between them before putting these matters  to  the
             Appellant.


         iii.     Mr Jones had referred the Appellant to "the very white and
             clean shirt  in  pristine  fashion,  that  the  Appellant  was
             wearing in  the  photos'.   There  appeared,  looking  at  the
             original, no visible marks on that white shirt  and  yet,  the
             Appellant's evidence to the Tribunal, was  that  he  had  been
             badly beaten up on the way from the demonstration to the house
             in which he had been detained for some hours.  He had been  so
             badly  beaten  in  the  army  van  that  took  him  from   the
             demonstration to the house, that he had a nosebleed.  He  also
             said the cellar in which he was held had been filthy dirty.


234. It is apparent to us, that if the Appellant, as  he  claims,  had  been
    put into an army van, beaten up, such that it caused his nose to bleed,
    held in a filthy cellar for some hours, and then  brought  out,  it  is
    extraordinary that nonetheless the photographs show no visible signs of
    marks, stains or anything on the Appellant's white shirt or clothing in
    general.

235.  In cross-examination, the Appellant was specifically asked about  this
    shirt and he had stated that the shirt he had worn in  the  photographs
    was the same shirt he had worn at the demonstration and the same  shirt
    that he had been wearing in  the  Army  van  that  took  him  from  the
    demonstration and the same shirt he was wearing when he was beaten up.

236.  In such circumstances it is clear to us that  these  photographs  were
    manufactured/staged  photographs and that their production as  evidence
    in his support affects adversely the Appellant's credibility.


237.   Mr  Jones  referred  us  to  what  he  described  as  "the   inherent
    implausibility  of  the  Appellant's  account  of   his   escape   from
    detention". In that regard, we recognise that where an account is in  a
    particular aspect inherently unlikely, that  it  does  not  necessarily
    follow that it is untrue. Whilst  mindful  of  the  Court  of  Appeal's
    observation in HK [2006] EWCA Civ 1037, that does  not  mean  that  the
    Tribunal should accept the Appellant's account as to the  circumstances
    of his escape from detention, however unlikely  and  especially  within
    the context of our overall findings and conclusions.

238. According to his evidence, the Appellant was moved from various  places
    of detention on an almost weekly basis between June  2005  and  January
    2006 and detained in Kinshasa. Purely by chance, on 15 January 2006  he
    was placed in charge of a group of prisoners and  that  scenario  arose
    when the former leader of the prisoners had escaped but had later  been
    recaptured.

239.  We observe that on the very first day that  this  dubious  honour  was
    effectively thrust upon him, the Appellant would have us  believe  that
    he was allowed to leave his cell unescorted by any  warden  and  obtain
    drinks from a local kiosk.  Purely by chance, a man was waiting at  the
    kiosk specifically for  the  Appellant  with  a  car  waiting  for  the
    Appellant to run to nearby.


240. We find it to be a truly remarkable coincidence, that on the  same  day
    as the escape of a prisoner who had been  sufficiently  trusted  as  to
    have been made responsible for a group of prisoners that  included  the
    Appellant, and which led to the Appellant being appointed in his place,
    that he should have been allowed in such circumstances,  to  leave  the
    prison unescorted, to go and  buy  drinks  at  a  local  kiosk  and  to
    surprisingly find someone waiting there specifically  for  him  with  a
    waiting car for his  escape.   It  is  difficult  on  the  evidence  to
    understand how this could possibly have been arranged so quickly and in
    so little time.


241.  We find it to  be  further  remarkable,  that  at  the  present  time,
    according to his oral and  documentary  evidence,  the  Appellant  knew
    nothing about who arranged his escape and as to who was responsible for
    the undoubted considerable expense of arranging his various flights  to
    several countries before coming to the United Kingdom.

242.  Our disbelief  in  the  Appellant's  escape  account  is  further  re-
    enforced by the fact that the UDPS  (London)  letter  of  25  September
    2006, said nothing about the Party's  involvement  in  the  Appellant's
    escape or as to any arrangements for him to leave the DRC in  order  to
    travel to London.

243.  We would thus agree with Mr  Jones,  who  maintained  that  "all  this
    strains credibility".

244.  We find therefore, that on the evidence, the  Appellant's  account  of
    his escape was indeed, implausible. It is simply not true.

245.  We now turn to aspects  of  the  Appellant's  Screening  Interview  of
    31 March 2006 that have caused  us  concern.  In  oral  evidence,  the
    Appellant told us that he arrived in Benin on 23 March  2006  and  left
    there on the same day for the Ivory Coast. That  account  also  notably
    appeared in the Appellant's Chronology of Events.

246.  However, in the Appellant's witness statement  of  12  April  2006  at
    paragraph 20, the Appellant was clear that having left Brazzaville with
    the same person who had brought him there, they "went towards Benin for
    a few days before taking another flight towards  Cote  D'Ivoire...".  (
    Our italics)  The Appellant  had  said  very  much  the  same  in  oral
    evidence, namely that he was in Benin for a few days.

247. There is however, a clear difference between a few  days  and  arriving
    and departing Benin on the same day.  We find that the  discrepancy  on
    this  point  is  a  further  indication  of  the  Appellant's  lack  of
    reliability and an indication of his inability to tell the truth.

248.  As regards the UDPS letter of 25 September 2006, it was said that  the
    Party was able to confirm that the Appellant was a member.  But  it  is
    difficult to understand the basis upon which the UDPS  letter  on  that
    date, the  same  date  as  the  interview,  was  able  to  confirm  the
    Appellant's membership of the Party. In addition:

         i.       The Appellant was unable to produce  any  membership  card
             when interviewed by the UDPS in London; and


         ii.      The Appellant had told us in oral evidence that he took no
             documents at all with him to his interview with the UDPS on 25
             September.


249.  Viewed as a  whole,  and  not  least  for  the  proper  reasons  above
    observed, we have thus concluded that the UDPS (London) letter  is  not
    reliable. Further, the information contained in it, as to the date  the
    Appellant joined the Party and his role within it in  the  DRC,  is  at
    variance with the account of the Appellant and therefore sheds  further
    doubt upon the reliability of its content.

250.  Mindful of the risk categories as identified in AB and  DM,  confirmed
    in MK and now re-affirmed by us, we recognise that  had  we  found  the
    Appellant to be credible, we would have concluded that as a person  who
    had a role in the UDPS and who was known to the authorities and who had
    been detained and ill-treated by them for his political opinion and who
    had escaped from detention, he would arguably, not least to  the  lower
    standard of proof, be at risk on return to  the  DRC.   Conversely,  he
    would not be at real risk on return, if we found the Appellant to be no
    more than a mere member of the UDPS.

251.  It was conceded on behalf of the Appellant  that,  as  a  mere  failed
    asylum seeker, he would not be exposed to a real  risk  of  persecution
    were he now to be returned.

252.  For the above various reasons, we find that the Appellant  was  not  a
    credible witness. He was not credible in relation to any  of  the  core
    elements of his accounts and claims.

253.  We find that the Appellant was never a member of the  UDPS  and  never
    undertook the political role and  activities  on  their  behalf  as  he
    claimed.  He  was  never  brought  to  the  adverse  attention  of  the
    authorities in the DRC  on  account  of  such  claimed  membership  and
    activities on behalf of the UDPS. His account of arrest, detention  and
    escape were a fabrication as were the photographs he produced and  upon
    which he relied. The Appellant has no political profile in the DRC  and
    his historical account is simply untrue.

254. We would add for the sake of completeness that we do not find that  the
    provisions of Section 8 of the Asylum  and  Immigration  (Treatment  of
    Claimants etc) Act 2004 apply in this case. It was not a matter  raised
    by Mr Jones in the course of his submissions, and it  is  not  disputed
    that the Appellant claimed  asylum  immediately  upon  arrival  in  the
    United Kingdom.

255.  It was common ground at the hearing on 11 January 2007, that were  the
    Appellant not to be regarded as a refugee, it would follow that he  was
    not a person whose return to the DRC would violate Article 3  of  ECHR.
    For like reason, it was recognised that humanitarian protection did not
    arise because there would be no substantial grounds for believing  that
    the Appellant would, if returned, face a real risk of serious harm.

256. For the above reasons, the Appellant has thus not shown that  he  would
    be at real  risk  of  being  subjected  to  persecution  for  a  Geneva
    Convention reason on return to the DRC or of being  subjected  to  ill-
    treatment in breach of his human rights.  The Appellant is not entitled
    to the grant of humanitarian protection.

Decision

      We dismiss the asylum appeal.

      We  dismiss  the  appeal  under  the  Immigration  Rules  because  the
    Appellant is not entitled to Humanitarian Protection.

      We dismiss the human rights appeal.





Signed
       Date

Senior Immigration Judge Goldstein



         APPENDIX: LIST OF BACKGROUND MATERIALS BEFORE THE TRIBUNAL




|1)    |2006             |2006 Year in Review: Democratic Republic |
|      |                 |of the Congo - July to December 2005.    |
|2)    |March 2006       |US State Department Report on the        |
|      |                 |Democratic Republic of Congo - 2005.     |
|3)    |April 2006       |Country of Origin Information Report on  |
|      |                 |the Democratic Republic of Congo.        |
|4)    |23 May 2006      |Amnesty International Report on the      |
|      |                 |Democratic Republic of Congo for 2006.   |
|5)    |14 June 2006     |US Committee for Refugees and Immigrants |
|      |                 |Report - World Refugee Survey 2006: Congo|
|      |                 |- Kinshasa.                              |
|6)    |2006             |Amnesty International Report: "Overview -|
|      |                 |Covering Events from January- December   |
|      |                 |2005".                                   |
|7)    |July 2006        |BBC News Report: "DR Congo's Kabila and  |
|      |                 |his Kingdom".                            |
|8)    |August 2006      |UN Integrated Regional Information       |
|      |                 |Networks Report 'Congo - Kinshasa:       |
|      |                 |Counting the Casualties after Kinshasa   |
|      |                 |Battle'.                                 |
|9)    |September 2006   |BBC News Report: "Arrests Delay Congo    |
|      |                 |Poll Results".                           |
|10)   |September 2006   |Freedom House Report: "Freedom in the    |
|      |                 |World: Congo, Democratic Republic of     |
|      |                 |(Kinshasa)".                             |
|11)   |September 2006   |United Nations Mission Report -          |
|      |                 |Democratic Republic of Congo (MONUC):    |
|      |                 |"Monthly Human Rights Assessment         |
|      |                 |September 2006".                         |
|12)   |October 2006     |International Crisis Group Report:       |
|      |                 |"Securing Congo's Elections: Lessons from|
|      |                 |the Kinshasa Showdown".                  |
|13)   |October 2006     |United Kingdom Foreign and Commonwealth  |
|      |                 |Office Report: "Human Rights Annual      |
|      |                 |Report: Democratic Republic of Congo".   |
|14)   |October 2006     |Country of Origin Information Reports -  |
|      |                 |Democratic Republic of Congo.            |
|15)   |October 2006     |South Africa Press Association (SAPA)    |
|      |                 |Reports of 29 and 30 October 2006        |
|      |                 |relating to reported incidents of        |
|      |                 |violence in the DRC in the course of the |
|      |                 |elections.                               |
|16)   |November 2006    |Home Office Operation Guidance Note (OGN)|
|      |                 |- Democratic Republic of Congo.          |
|17)   |November 2006    |Second Carter Centre Post-Election       |
|      |                 |Statements                               |
|      |                 |on the October 29 Presidential Elections.|

