


Asylum and Immigration Tribunal

                    PN (Lord's Resistance Army) Uganda CG [2006] UKAIT 00022





                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Promulgated                |
|On  17 January 2006                             |On  06 March 2006          |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                  Dr H H Storey (Senior Immigration Judge)
                   Mr P R Lane (Senior Immigration Judge)
                               Mr A A Lloyd JP

                                   Between


                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms G Brown, of Counsel, instructed by
     Messrs Parker Rhodes, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

There is no current risk from the Ugandan authorities to a former member  of
the Lord's Resistance Army on return to  Uganda.  The  Ugandan  Government's
amnesty to members of the LRA remains in place. A  person  who  is  at  real
risk of forcible conscription into the LRA in the north  of  Uganda  may  be
able to relocate without undue harshness to Kampala. This case confirms  and
supplements the findings in  AZ  (Eligibility  for  Amnesty)  Uganda  [2004]
UKIAT 00166.




                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. This is the determination of  the  reconsideration  by  the  Tribunal,
      pursuant to an order made on 6 June 2005 under  section  103A  of  the
      Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act, 2002, of the decision  of  an
      Immigration Judge, Mr E A W Jones, following a hearing at Taylor House
      on 7 April  2005,  to  dismiss  the  appellant's  appeal  against  the
      decision of the respondent taken on 1 August 2003 to  refuse  to  vary
      the appellant's leave to remain in the United Kingdom.

 Nature of appellant's claim

2.   The appellant, born on 12 August 1985,  is  a  citizen  of  Uganda  who
      arrived in the United Kingdom on 14 May 2003 and claimed asylum on  18
      June 2003.   Although his asylum claim was refused on  23  June  2003,
      the appellant was granted discretionary leave to remain until his 18th
      Birthday on 12 August 2003.  The appellant applied for  further  leave
      to remain on 1 August 2003  but  that  was  refused.    The  appellant
      appealed against that refusal on  the  grounds  that  his  removal  to
      Uganda would be contrary to the United Kingdom's obligations under the
      Refugee Convention and the ECHR.

3.   The appellant's application  for  asylum  was  made  on  the  following
      basis.   The appellant said that he found out in  childhood  that  his
      father  attended  a  church  where  humans  were   sacrificed.     The
      authorities took away the father and shot dead the appellant's mother.
        They also took the appellant's sister.   The appellant  and  another
      sister were taken by these people, who the appellant  discovered  were
      not the Ugandan army but, rather, members of the Lords Resistance Army
      (LRA).    The appellant said that he was punished many  times  by  the
      LRA and his sister was raped.  On one occasion they cut his face  with
      a knife because he refused to kill anyone.   His throat was also  slit
      but the wound healed and he did not die.   The LRA  moved  their  camp
      from time to time.  The appellant got to know  a  member  of  the  LRA
      named Swaleh, who  sought  to  have  sex  with  the  appellant.    The
      appellant resisted Swaleh's demands.   The appellant  and  his  sister
      sought to run away from the camp.   The appellant, however, was called
      back to the camp.  He then ran away again and found his sister, before
      hailing passing cars on the highway to stop.  Swaleh  happened  to  be
      driving the car which picked up the appellant and his  sister.    They
      then lived with Swaleh and both of them became  his  sexual  partners.
      This other sister, however, also subsequently disappeared, after which
      the appellant stayed on with Swaleh, who then  made  arrangements  for
      the appellant to leave the country.    Swaleh, in fact, went with  the
      appellant to the United Kingdom and the two  men  were  together  just
      before the appellant was stopped by  the  police  for  suspected  fare
      evasion at East Croydon station.

 Error of law in determination of Immigration Judge

4.   At  the  hearing  on7  April  2005,  the  Immigration  Judge  drew  the
      attention of the parties to paragraph 353 of the Immigration Rules (HC
      395).   This provides as follows:

           "353.  When a human rights or asylum claim has been refused  and
                 any appeal relating to that claim is no longer pending, the
                 decision maker will consider any further  submissions  and,
                 if rejected, will then determine whether they amount  to  a
                 fresh claim.    These submissions will amount  to  a  fresh
                 claim if they are significantly different from the material
                 that has previously been considered.     These  submissions
                 will only be significantly different if the content:


              (i) had not already been considered; and


                 (ii)   taken  together  with  the   previously   considered
                       material, created a realistic  prospect  of  success,
                       notwithstanding its rejection.


              This paragraph does not apply to claims made overseas."

5.   The letter of refusal sent to the appellant in June 2003 observed  that
      the appellant claimed to fear persecution on the grounds that he would
      be regarded by the Ugandan authorities as being a member of the Lord's
      Resistance Army (LRA).   He also claimed to fear the  LRA  because  he
      had escaped from that group.   The Secretary of State observed that it
      was reasonable for the Ugandan authorities to  track  down  supporters
      and/or members of the LRA and he acknowledged that  on  occasions  the
      security forces "can sometimes be heavy-handed"  in  doing  so.    The
      Secretary  of  State,  however,  rejected  the  assertion  that  those
      authorities could be said to be persecuting suspected adherents of the
      LRA.    As for problems from the LRA itself, the  Secretary  of  State
      took the view that they could not be said to be agents of persecution.
        The appellant could, it was considered, take advantage of an amnesty
      offered by the Ugandan authorities to those who had been involved with
      the LRA.

6.   At the reconsideration hearing  on  23  September  2005,  the  Tribunal
      (Miss K Eshun and Mr P R Lane, Senior Immigration Judges)  noted  that
      the appellant did not appeal against the initial  refusal  of  asylum.
      Although he could have done so under section 65(3) of the  Immigration
      and Asylum Act 1999, that provision had ceased to apply by the date of
      refusal in June 2003. The position was instead governed by section  83
      of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, which permits  an
      appeal on asylum grounds, where leave has nevertheless  been  granted,
      only if that leave (or the aggregate of two or more periods of  leave)
      exceeds one year. That was not so in the present case, which  explains
      why the appellant did not challenge the first decision to  refuse  him
      asylum.

7.   The latest letter of refusal from the Secretary of State is that  dated
      19 November 2004.    This noted the appellant's original claim  to  be
      at real risk of persecution in  Uganda.     It  also  noted  that  the
      appellant was putting forward essentially the same reasons  as  before
      as to why he could not return to Uganda.    At  paragraph  10  of  the
      letter, it is stated that "consideration has been given to whether the
      issues raised in your application for leave should be  regarded  as  a
      fresh application for asylum.    The contents of your application have
      been carefully examined and it has been  decided  not  to  treat  your
      representations as a fresh asylum application because the reasons  you
      have given for requesting further leave do  not  differ  significantly
      from the claims you made when you claimed asylum on 18/6/03".

8.   Paragraphs 12 and 13 of the 2004 letter of refusal  raised  credibility
      issues regarding the appellant's account of his experiences in Uganda.
        So too did paragraphs 14 and 15, which noted respectively  that  the
      appellant did not leave Uganda until 8 months  after  he  had  escaped
      from the LRA and that the appellant did not claim asylum  until  after
      he had been arrested at East Croydon station for fare evasion.

9.   In his determination, the Immigration Judge dealt at paragraphs  12  to
      15 with the issue of the  appellant's  credibility.    Those  findings
      are, the Tribunal considers, cursory in nature and, as we will shortly
      state, are otherwise problematic.     Crucially, they  are  sandwiched
      between paragraphs 11 and 16, which make it plain that the Immigration
      Judge was at  least  primarily  concerned  to  determine  whether  the
      appellant had established grounds for his latest claim for  asylum  to
      be treated as a "fresh claim".

10.  In her grounds of appeal, Ms Brown submitted that this approach on  the
      part of the Immigration Judge "suggests a review-based approach to the
      evidence as opposed to a full merits consideration."     The  Tribunal
      agrees.

11.  By virtue of section 96 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act
      2002, the Secretary of State has power to certify that  a  person  was
      notified of a right of appeal under section 82(1) of that Act  against
      an immigration decision, that the new claim or application relies on a
      matter that could have been  raised  in  an  appeal  against  the  old
      decision and that in the opinion of the Secretary of State there is no
      satisfactory reason for that matter  not  having  been  raised  in  an
      appeal against the old decision.   Where such a certification is made,
      an appeal under section 82(1) may not be brought.

12.  That is plainly not  the  position  in  the  present  case.    No  such
      certification has been made.   Accordingly,  the Immigration Judge had
      before him an appeal under section 82 in respect of which the  grounds
      of appeal included the  assertions  that  the  appellant's  return  to
      Uganda would be contrary to the Refugee Convention and the ECHR.   The
      basis of the appellant's case is  contained  in  the  application  and
      accompanying  documentation   submitted   in   connection   with   the
      appellant's original application for asylum and his appeal against the
      decision to refuse him further leave to remain, after  his  eighteenth
      birthday.   By deciding to  restrict  himself,  at  least  to  a  very
      significant extent, to a determination of the question of whether  the
      appellant had "established grounds for [his application] to be treated
      as a fresh claim for asylum" (paragraph 16 of the determination),  the
      Immigration Judge fell into legal error.

13.  The Immigration Judge also fell into error in giving,  as  one  of  the
      two reasons  why  he  refused  to  place  significant  weight  on  the
      appellant's medical report, the fact that that  report  had  not  been
      produced until two days before the hearing.   The medical report dealt
      with various scars on the appellant's body.     With  respect  to  the
      Immigration Judge, it  is  difficult  without  more  to  see  how  the
      lateness of such  a  report  should  lead  to  its  being  effectively
      disregarded.

14.  None of these errors on  the  part  of  the  Immigration  Judge  would,
      however, have  been  material  unless  it  could  be  shown  that  the
      appellant would be at real risk on return, in the event that his story
      was reasonably likely to have been true.   The Immigration Judge dealt
      with this matter, again in a most cursory way, at paragraph 17 of  the
      determination.  Despite the progress made towards achieving a peaceful
      settlement of the conflict between the  Ugandan  authorities  and  the
      LRA, as evidenced in the documentary materials before us, the Tribunal
      on 23 September found that the appellant's credibility is of relevance
      to the assessment of the risk to him on return today to that  country.
       Apart from anything else, if the appellant's experiences with the LRA
      are true, it may well not be possible for him to return  to  his  home
      area, insofar as that may be  a  place  where  the  LRA  continues  to
      operate.   The issue of internal relocation has not  been  considered.
      Furthermore, unless and until the precise involvement of the appellant
      in the LRA is determined, no sufficiently safe  conclusions  regarding
      the attitude of the Ugandan authorities to his return can be  reached.



15.  For those reasons the Tribunal on  23  September  decided  that,  there
      being materials error of law in the Immigration Judge's determination,
      the reconsideration of the appeal had to be adjourned,  in  order  for
      findings of fact to be made.

16.  The Tribunal  found  that,  at  the  second  stage  reconsideration,  a
      complete re-hearing of  all  the  evidence  would  be  necessary.  All
      matters were to be at large.

Reconsideration proceedings on 17 January 2006

17.      The second stage of the reconsideration took place  on  17  January
      2006, when the Tribunal comprised Dr HH Storey, Mr P R Lane and Mr  AA
      Lloyd.

18.  The appellant gave evidence in English.   He  confirmed  his  name  and
      address and that he had been born in August 1985.   He  said  that  he
      was a Ugandan and a born again Christian.  He confirmed  the  accuracy
      of his written statements.

19.  The appellant said that he was between 12 and 14 years old when he  had
      been  abducted  by  the  LRA.    He  had  remained   with   them   for
      approximately 3 years.   Ms Brown asked the appellant  about  what  he
      was recorded as saying at his Home Office interview at pages I3 to I6,
      where the appellant, when asked if there were any details he wished to
      change to his application, described how he had escaped from  the  LRA
      camp to a government camp.   The  appellant  said  that  some  28  LRA
      personnel walked for a number of hours to  the  camp  of  the  Ugandan
      authorities,  where  they  were  detained,  beaten  and  put  into  an
      enclosure and not allowed to speak to anyone.   The  leader  of  their
      group was taken away after he had told the authorities that the  group
      wished to surrender to them.

20.  The appellant said, that whilst in the government camp, the  group  was
      constantly tortured.   Eventually one of their members, called  Peter,
      began to fight with a guard.  Peter told the others to run away, which
      they did.   At that time, there was only  one  guard  supervising  the
      group.   Having fled  from  the  army  camp,  the  appellant  and  his
      companions returned to the LRA camp, as they had nowhere else to go.

21.  Ms Brown asked the appellant about the person known as Moses,  referred
      at pages 4, 7 and 8 of the interview record.   In that  record,  Moses
      is referred to as one of the group who went to  the  government  camp.
      The appellant said that he  later  met  Moses  at  Croydon,  when  the
      appellant went to provide fingerprints for  the  Immigration  Service.
      The appellant said in oral evidence that Moses had told him in Croydon
      that what the Ugandan government says  is  not  what  it  does.    The
      appellant did not know how Moses had left Uganda nor when he had  left
      the rebel camp.  The appellant did, however, learn from Moses that the
      latter had tried to surrender to the Ugandan government  on  a  second
      occasion.

22.  The appellant was asked why  he  had  not  sought  in  Uganda  to  take
      advantage of the amnesty offered by the government  to  those  in  the
      LRA.   The appellant said that he  did  not  know  too  much  but  had
      enquired about the matter but could not be sure  that  he  could  have
      taken advantage of the amnesty.   He had heard that  some  people  had
      tried to surrender and had been tortured.   Examples of this  included
      his own experience  and  the  subsequent  experience  of  Moses.   The
      appellant had no other information about the amnesty.

23.  As for his life in the United Kingdom, the appellant said that he  knew
      someone called Sara who came from the same village  in  Uganda  as  he
      did.   He was also in a relationship (which had started 19 months ago)
      with a British citizen (whose name he gave the Tribunal).   That  lady
      was half Kenyan and half Ghanaian, having a Kenyan  father.   She  had
      been raised in the United Kingdom.   The couple did not live together.



24.  Ms Brown asked the appellant about his music  career.    The  appellant
      produced a letter (page 72 of the appellant's bundle) dated  21  March
      2005 from 'Pijja Records' in which it is stated that the  company  had
      examined a demonstration disc  recorded  by  the  appellant  with  the
      company 'and we have considered you one of our recording artists.   We
      believe that your voice is on the cutting edge of which this  is  what
      we are looking for' (sic).    The appellant was asked to report to the
      company's offices in Croydon on 1 September 2005  'in  order  to  meet
      with the other signed members of the crew and also to go  through  the
      procedures of you (sic) recording deal'.  The appellant said  in  oral
      evidence that he had so far recorded six tracks with Pijja Records  of
      a projected 17 track album.  It would take between 18 months  and  two
      and a half years to record the entire album.

25.  The appellant was asked about his activities with his church.  At  page
      10 of the appellant's bundle, there is a letter dated  22  March  2005
      from the Senior Pastor of the Liberty Christian Fellowship of Thornton
      Heath, in which it is stated that the appellant is an active member of
      the church, 'is one of  a  handful  of  young  men  who  receive  very
      personal mentoring and training directly from me so as to enhance  his
      effectiveness  as  an  emerging  key  Minister'  and  that  he  'works
      tirelessly in serving God, the choir and the  wider  community'.    At
      the hearing on 17 January, the appellant  produced  a  further  letter
      from the same source, dated 5 January 2006, which states  that  'since
      his joining the congregation [the appellant] has been involved in  the
      church as an Assistant Choir Director.   He  possesses  notable  music
      abilities and is a key leader during  our  worship  services,  hosting
      upwards of 700 worshippers'.   The appellant  said  in  oral  evidence
      that he was equipping people with skills in music and leading  worship
      during fellowship.   He was  also  studying  for  a  B  Tech  National
      Diploma in Sound Engineering at Westminster College.   This  was  a  2
      year course which he commenced in September 2005.

26.  Asked what would happen to him if he returned to Uganda, the  appellant
      said that, according to what he had heard and based  on  what  he  had
      experienced, he would be taken in  for  treason.    Asked  whether  he
      could return to live in Kampala, rather than his home  area,  he  said
      that he knew nobody in the capital and that his  home  in  North  West
      Uganda is quite a distance from it.   The appellant said that he had a
      dream to let people see the presence of God and he wanted to be useful
      to the community.    Those who were found to  have  committed  treason
      were subjected to the death penalty.

27.  Cross-examined, the appellant said that the plan of the  LRA  group  to
      surrender to the Ugandan army was  conceived  by  Peter.    The  group
      managed to evade the LRA guards.    Several of  the  group  approached
      the government camp carrying arms, although the appellant himself  was
      not armed.  On  approaching,  the  group  raised  their  hands.    The
      appellant  said  that  there  were  approximately  ten  Ugandan   army
      personnel in the camp.    The guards there told the group to put  down
      their weapons and move away from them.    The  eldest  member  of  the
      group was then taken away and one guard  was  left  to  supervise  the
      remainder.   The appellant then said that during the day armed guards,
      'a couple say, five' would walk around the group,  who  were  sitting.
      In the evening, a fire was made and the group were sitting  around  it
      whilst the  single  guard  was  drinking.    Their  leader  was  being
      mistreated as he would not talk.   The authorities  thought  that  the
      proposed surrender was a trick.  Peter began fighting with  the  guard
      and told the others to run away, which they did. After the group  made
      its escape, Ugandan military personnel ran after them,  shooting,  but
      the group was able to get away as the camp was not fenced, apart  from
      having some poles at an entrance.

28.  The appellant was asked why his account of the escape from the  Ugandan
      army camp had not been put in his first written  statement,  submitted
      in connection with his application.  The appellant replied that he had
      a solicitor who had prepared that statement by  asking  the  appellant
      questions.   Asked about Moses, the appellant said that he  had  tried
      to telephone him on his mobile phone but the number  was  unavailable.
      They had, however, met on a  subsequent  occasion  after  seeing  each
      other in Croydon,  when  Moses  took  the  appellant  to  a  rally  in
      Trafalgar Square.

29.  The appellant was asked about a question and  answer  recorded  in  the
      Immigration  Judge's  record  of  proceedings.   Asked   if   he   had
      surrendered, the appellant is recorded as having replied that  he  had
      not.  The appellant was asked at the reconsideration hearing  what  he
      had meant by that reply.    He  said  that  the  group  had  tried  to
      surrender to the government troops but were not given  the  chance  to
      surrender.

30.  The appellant was asked why, after the abortive attempt  to  surrender,
      the appellant and others had returned to the LRA camp.   He said  that
      he thought it was best to go there and that they in fact had no choice
      but to return.  Asked what he thought might have awaited him by way of
      a reception, the appellant replied that some things one does one  does
      not think twice about, even though one should have done so.    The  26
      returnees (Peter and the leader being left behind the government camp)
      did not enter the LRA camp as a group.   The appellant said that there
      was no other place to run to, as people in the neighbourhood had  been
      given weapons and told to shoot if they saw a rebel.  There were about
      700 personnel in the rebel camp.   That camp was  some  distance  from
      the army camp, which had only 10 personnel.  That camp, was,  however,
      only a small one.   An army main barracks was elsewhere.

31.  The appellant said that he was apprehended on seeking to enter the  LRA
      camp and taken to a punishment chamber known as the 'dark room', where
      he was beaten and a knife put to his throat.

32.  The appellant was asked why, after he  had  finally  secured  his  exit
      from the rebel camp, he had waited eight months to leave Uganda.   The
      appellant said that a person called Swaleh was  a  middleman  for  the
      rebels and the appellant ran with him to a place that he did not  know
      where he stayed in-doors for eight months.    The appellant still  did
      not know where that place was.

33.  Asked if there were witnesses that might be  used  to  prove  that  the
      appellant was guilty of treason, the appellant said that rebels  would
      get the names of everyone in the LRA camp and then send these names to
      the government and 'without a shadow of a doubt' the government  would
      apprehend the appellant at the airport, if he were returned.

34.  Re-examined, the appellant said that the age range of the  group  which
      sought to surrender was from about 10 to 19.    The  person  known  as
      Peter, who had fought the guard, was 18 or 19.    Some  of  those  who
      hesitated in going back to the LRA camp had been shot by  the  rebels.
      The appellant was in the 'dark room' for three days.   He  begged  for
      his life and did not seek to resist his captors.

35.  In answer to a question from the Tribunal, the appellant said  that  he
      could not remember the year in which he had been  taken  by  the  LRA.
      The oldest member of the group was Opio Vtoko.  It was he who had been
      the first to hand in the guns on the group's behalf.   The  group  had
      only been left with one guard when they had shown that  they  did  not
      intend to fight back.   The rest of the guards had gone  one  by  one,
      until there was only one left.  The group had been able  to  hear  the
      cries of the leader, as he was tortured by the authorities in  another
      part of the camp.

36.  At the invitation of the Tribunal, Ms Brown asked the  appellant  about
      the circumstances surrounding his arrival in the United  Kingdom.  She
      did so in order to deal with the  issue  of  whether  the  appellant's
      credibility was to be  regarded  as  damaged,  by  reason  of  section
      8(3)(b) of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment  of  Claimants,  etc)
      Act 2004, given that the appellant's account  disclosed  that  he  may
      have produced to the immigration authorities in the United  Kingdom  a
      passport which was not valid for the purposes of that section.

37.  The  appellant  said  that  Swaleh  had  produced  a  passport  on  the
      appellant's behalf at Entebbe Airport.  The appellant was not at  that
      stage given the passport.   However, on arrival  at  Heathrow,  Swaleh
      handed the appellant a passport and told him  to  produce  it  to  the
      Immigration  Officer.    Swaleh  was  behind  the   appellant.     The
      appellant was asked by the Officer how long he intended to  remain  in
      the United Kingdom and Swaleh replied for him that it was only  for  a
      short time.   The appellant said that  he  did  not  look  inside  the
      passport which Swaleh had given him.   The couple then  moved  out  of
      the airport and took a taxi to a place whose name  the  appellant  did
      not know.  The following day they boarded a train and, whilst changing
      trains, they were approached by police.   Swaleh kept walking but  the
      appellant stopped to talk to the police.  At that stage the  appellant
      did not know how to claim asylum.  However, after he had been detained
      by the police, an Immigration Officer met the appellant and  told  him
      that he could claim asylum, which he proceeded to do.

38.   The  appellant  told  that  Immigration  Officer  that  he  had   been
      instructed to call himself by the name of the person in  the  passport
      which the appellant had produced.  He  said  that  he  had  come  from
      Uganda, had no family, had been in the LRA and  essentially  told  the
      Immigration Officer his story.

39.  In answer to a question from the Tribunal,  the  appellant  said  that,
      although he had not borne arms whilst in the LRA, he had been involved
      in the abduction of children to serve in that movement.

40.  Being re-examined on the  supplementary  questions  by  Ms  Brown,  the
      appellant said that, if he had been refused to kidnap the children, he
      would have been killed.  As for  the  evidence  about  the  group  co-
      operating with the Ugandan military  whilst  in  the  army  camp,  the
      appellant was asked whether, if he had  continued  to  co-operate,  he
      would not have been beaten.  The appellant said that what scared  them
      most was the fact that their leader was being tortured and they  heard
      words like 'after we've done, we are going to come for you'.

Burden and standard of proof

41.  The burden of proof is  on  the  appellant,  who  must  show  that,  if
      returned to Uganda,  there  is  a  real  risk  that  he  would  suffer
      persecution for a Refugee Convention reason or that  he  would  suffer
      serious ill treatment proscribed by the European  Convention  for  the
      Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms.  We have  applied
      that standard of proof in the present case.   In  doing  so,  we  have
      considered in the round the totality of the evidence before  us;  that
      is to say, the appellant's oral  evidence,  the  documentary  evidence
      particular to his case (listed in Annex A to this  determination)  and
      the documentary evidence relating to Uganda (listed in Annex B).

Tribunal's assessment of appellant's credibility

42.  Both representatives acknowledged that credibility is in issue in  this
      appeal.  Mr Deller submitted that the appellant was not  credible  but
      that, even if he were, the evidence relating to Uganda does  not  show
      that the appellant would be at real  risk  on  return.   Even  if  the
      appellant were at risk in his home area of North West Uganda, it would
      not  be  unduly  harsh  to  require  him  to  relocate  elsewhere;  in
      particular to Kampala.  Ms Brown  submitted  that  the  appellant  had
      given a consistent account  of  events  in  Uganda  in  his  screening
      interview, Statement of  Evidence  Form,  Home  Office  interview  and
      written statements, and in oral evidence, both before the  Immigration
      Judge and us.  There was also  medical  evidence  that  supported  the
      appellant's account.  That account was  consistent  with  the  country
      information relating to the activities of the LRA and the attitude  of
      the Ugandan authorities towards that movement  and  its  members.   It
      should also be borne in mind that the appellant  was  a  minor  of  17
      years when he arrived in the United Kingdom, that he would  have  been
      traumatised by his experiences in Uganda and that the appellant should
      be taken to be telling the truth, as a committed  Christian  who  took
      his religion seriously.

43.    In determining the appellant's credibility, we  have  had  regard  to
      his age; in particular, to the fact that  the  events  which  he  said
      happened to him in Uganda occurred during his  childhood  and  teenage
      years, and that he was some  three  months  short  of  his  eighteenth
      birthday when he arrived in the United Kingdom on 14 May 2003.  It  is
      also the case that his assertion that he was abducted as  a  child  to
      join the ranks of the LRA is consistent with the information  set  out
      at paragraphs 6.96 and 6.97 of  the  COI  report  on  Uganda  (October
      2005), quoting the US State Department report for 2004, that  the  LRA
      continued to abduct thousands of civilians for training as guerrillas;
      that most victims were children and young adults whom the  LRA  forced
      into virtual slavery; and that more than 85% of the  LRA  forces  were
      made up of children whom the LRA had abducted.

44.  We have also had regard to the medical report of Dr Montgomery  of  the
      Eversley Medical Centre, dated 4 April 2005.  In this,  Dr  Montgomery
      records that the appellant told her that whilst trying to escape  from
      a camp in Northern Uganda he was hit with the butt of  a  gun  on  the
      right side of his nose and had his life threatened with a knife, being
      told that he was going to have his throat cut.   Upon examination, the
      appellant was found to have 'a straight scar that would be  consistent
      with such an injury (although I would not consider myself an expert in
      this) of approximately 9 cm in length with some  keloid  change.   The
      scar is on the left lateral border  of  his  neck  above  the  jugular
      vessel but seems to have  been  superficial  rather  than  deep.'  The
      appellant's nose 'does have some slight deviation of the nasal  septum
      which would be consistent with an old injury but any further than that
      I am not able to say whether this was a direct cause of being hit with
      a gun as he describes.'  Dr Montgomery examined the appellant's  legs,
      which 'have scarring all over the anterior  surfaces  of  both  shins,
      which may have been due to running through bushes'.

45.  Taking the evidence in the round, however, the Tribunal does  not  find
      that the appellant is a credible witness in respect of the core of his
      claim.  We reach this conclusion for the following reasons.

46.  The whole account of  the  appellant's  attempt  to  surrender  to  the
      Ugandan army is absent from the detailed statement  submitted  by  the
      appellant in connection with his application for asylum (D17 to  D20).
      At the hearing on 17 January, the appellant  sought  to  explain  this
      omission by  blaming  his  solicitor,  who  he  said  only  asked  him
      questions.  We do not find that  that  is  any  sense  a  satisfactory
      explanation.  There is  no  evidence  to  show  that  the  person  who
      produced the statement for the appellant has  admitted  responsibility
      for the omission.  The statement is, on any reading,  one  that  could
      only have resulted from the appellant being given a  full  opportunity
      to tell his story.  The appellant has, we find,  sought  to  introduce
      the story of the attempted surrender in order to enhance his claim, on
      the ground that he believed that it would go to show why he could  not
      have taken advantage  of  the  Ugandan  government's  amnesty  to  LRA
      fighters (as to which we shall have more to say later).

47.  We find that the appellant has engaged in behaviour to which section  8
      of the 2004 Act applies and of which we are required to  take  account
      as damaging his credibility.  There is no dispute that the  appellant,
      at Heathrow Airport, produced to an  Immigration  Officer  a  document
      which was not a valid passport, as if it were such.   Section  8(3)(b)
      therefore  applies.   Any  resulting   damage   to   the   appellant's
      credibility might be mitigated, were we  to  find  that,  in  all  the
      circumstances, the appellant had a good reason  to  make  use  of  the
      invalid passport, provided that reason is not  incompatible  with  his
      claim to be in need of his international protection.    The  appellant
      attempted to explain that he did not know where Swaleh was taking  him
      and that he just did what the latter told him to do.  In the  case  of
      this appellant, it is simply not credible that he would have boarded a
      direct flight from Uganda to  London  without  knowing  where  he  was
      going.  Furthermore, the appellant's  account  to  us  was  inherently
      flawed.  He said on the one  hand  that  he  had  not  looked  at  the
      passport but also told us that he nevertheless knew the  name  of  the
      person named in that document.

48.  In the circumstances, we  find  that  the  appellant's  credibility  is
      significantly  damaged  by  his  production  of  the  false  passport.
      Furthermore, the whole account of his trip to the United Kingdom  with
      Swaleh beggars belief.  Swaleh is supposed to be  an  LRA  member  who
      drove the appellant away after his final escape  from  the  LRA  camp.
      The appellant lived for eight months with Swaleh but still has no idea
      where this was.   Whether or not the appellant was in  hiding  at  the
      time, that makes no sense.  Nor is it remotely believable that an  LRA
      member would be able or willing to arrange for the appellant's and his
      own departure from Entebbe Airport in Uganda and their  transiting  of
      United  Kingdom  immigration  controls.   Furthermore,   it   is   not
      believable that the appellant would have  been  left  unaware  of  his
      ability to claim asylum in the United Kingdom until after he had  been
      detained in connection with suspected fare  evasion  at  East  Croydon
      Station.

49.  It is highly remarkable that the appellant has been unable to  say  how
      old he was when he was abducted  by  the  LRA.    Notwithstanding  his
      youth, an event of that significance  would  plainly  be  of  enormous
      importance to anyone.  Yet all the appellant could say that was he was
      between the ages of 12 and 14 when this event occurred.  He could  not
      remember the year in which it happened.  The appellant presented as  a
      young man of obvious intelligence.  We do not believe  that,  had  the
      event really occurred, he could be so unclear as to when it  happened.
      The appellant was quite specific in his oral evidence  that  he  could
      not remember the year and that he could do no more than  say  that  he
      was between 12 and 14.  The Tribunal observes that  in  the  interview
      record at question  12,  when  asked  'when  were  you  taken  by  the
      rebels?', the appellant replied '1999 I think  it  was  around  August
      1999.  That is when they raid our village'.  If the event  had  really
      happened, it is incredible that the  appellant  could  have  forgotten
      what he said at that time.

50.  As we have already said, we have  had  regard  to  the  medical  report
      produced on behalf of the appellant.  Dr Montgomery was frank  in  her
      finding that the scar on the appellant's neck was superficial and that
      it was no more than consistent with the description given  to  her  by
      the  appellant  of  how  it  came  to  be  caused.   Furthermore,  she
      acknowledged that she was not an expert in these  matters.   Likewise,
      the deviation of the nasal septum was said by  her  to  be  consistent
      with an old injury but she could not say whether  it  was  the  direct
      result of being hit  with  a  gun.   In  all  the  circumstances,  the
      Tribunal finds that, whilst we accept that the appellant  bears  these
      marks, they are not reasonably likely to have been caused by  the  LRA
      or the Ugandan authorities.

51.  Whilst the Tribunal has taken note that the appellant's account  is  in
      many respects consistent, as between his various  statements,  in  the
      major respects we have identified, it  is  not.   In  conclusion,  the
      Tribunal does not find that the appellant has told us the truth.    We
      say that notwithstanding that we accept that he regards himself  as  a
      born again Christian.   All  that  the  appellant  has  shown  to  the
      requisite low standard is that he  is  a  twenty  year  old  man  from
      Uganda.

Risk on return to Uganda

52.  In the light of the  Tribunal's  credibility  findings,  the  appellant
      faces no risk on return to Uganda.   Given his fundamental failure  to
      demonstrate that his account was reasonably likely to be true, he  has
      failed to show even that he is a person who comes from an  area  where
      the LRA is active.  On our primary finding, accordingly, the issue  of
      internal relocation does not arise.

53.  Mr Deller put the respondent's case on the  basis  that,  even  if  the
      appellant  were  credible,  he  would  still  not   be   entitled   to
      international protection.  The Tribunal heard full  argument  on  that
      issue from Mr Deller and Ms Brown, by reference  to  the  most  recent
      available documentary materials relating to the LRA and  the  attitude
      towards it of the Uganda Government.  We  shall  therefore  deal  with
      position as it would be if, contrary to our  findings,  the  appellant
      has told us the truth about his experiences in Uganda.

History of the Lord's Resistance Army

54.  For some 19 years, the Lord's Resistance Army  has  been  fighting  the
      Ugandan authorities.   According to the COI report  of  October  2005,
      the seeds of the conflict were sown when Milton Obote and Tito  Okello
      were defeated by forces  loyal  to  Uganda's  current  leader,  Woweri
      Museveni.  The remnants of the defeated forces fled  north,  to  their
      home areas.   There they reformed  and  eventually  rallied  to  Alice
      Lakewenya, a spiritualist.  When she was defeated  in  1987,  a  power
      vacuum was left that was eventually filled  by  Joseph  Kony  and  the
      Lord's Resistance Army.

55.  According to the BBC, Kony shrouds himself  in  mystery  and  seeks  to
      portray himself as a messenger of God.  Under his leadership, the  LRA
      has carried out a terror campaign in Northern Uganda.  As the Tribunal
      has already observed, the LRA  seeks  to  abduct  children  and  young
      adults to serve in its ranks.  Kony appears to lack a clear  political
      agenda, at least one that he has seen fit to disclose to those outside
      the LRA (paragraphs 6.89 to 6.100).

Amnesties

56.  Paragraph 6.07 of the COI report states as follows:

         "6.07    The USSD report for 2004 notes the following regarding the
              2000 Amnesty Act: in December 1999 parliament passed  a  bill
              granting a  general  amnesty  to  all  rebels  who  had  been
              fighting to overthrow the Museveni Government  and  who  were
              prepared to renounce rebellion.  An Amnesty Act was passed in
              January 2000 with a date of commencement of 21 January  2000.
              The Act provided for an "amnesty  for  Ugandans  involved  in
              acts of a war-like nature in various parts of the country and
              for other connected purposes."  The  Act  was  to  remain  in
              force for six months and on expiry it could  be  extended  by
              statutory instrument.  The 2000 amnesty law  applies  to  all
              persons involved in insurgencies since the Movement came into
              power in 1986.  Between January and  December,  3,048  former
              LRA combatants were granted amnesty; 7,613 former  combatants
              have received  amnesty  since  2000.   The  amnesty  law  was
              extended through December."


57.  The COI report  continues  by  noting  that  the  amnesty  covers  'any
      Ugandan residing in or outside of the  country'  (paragraph  6.8)  and
      that, according to a BBC article of 13  July  2004,  entitled  'Former
      Rebels join Uganda's Army', the amnesty still exists  for  rebels  who
      escaped or are rescued during clashes with  the  army,  and  that  the
      level of forgiveness amongst the civilian population was high.

58.  Reference to the BBC report of 13 July 2004 is  also  to  be  found  at
      paragraphs 5.78 to 5.84 of the  COI  report.    There,  we  find  that
      'thousands of people had turned out to watch,  as  around  300  former
      Ugandan Lord's Resistance Army (LRA) rebels marched through Gulu  town
      before heading to a showground for a passing-out ceremony.   They were
      there welcomed into the regular Ugandan army' (paragraph  5.78).   The
      same BBC reported quoted a Ugandan army spokesman as saying  that  the
      recruits had received three months' military  training  and  political
      education and would be going back  to  fight  the  LRA,  their  former
      allies.  (paragraph 5.79).  Outside observers, however, were  said  to
      have questioned the wisdom of making such fighters part of the Ugandan
      army, stating that  they  required  a  longer  period  of  counselling
      because many were children who had been abducted and forced to  commit
      atrocities (paragraph 5.80).   The  same  army  source,  however,  was
      quoted by the BBC as emphasising that a  difference  should  be  drawn
      'between the misleaders and misled, the ones that have formed the  new
      Battalion are basically the misled' (paragraph 5.83).

59.  In  AZ  (Eligibility  for  Amnesty)  Uganda  [2004]  UKIAT  00166,  the
      Immigration Appeal Tribunal, in a determination notified  on  22  June
      2004, held that there was no evidence to show that persons who had the
      benefit of the amnesty were  detained  on  arrival  in  Uganda.    The
      Tribunal concluded that a person who had been a member of  the  Allied
      Democratic Forces (ADF), another Ugandan rebel  group,  would  benefit
      from the Amnesty and that there was no evidence to show that he  would
      be at risk of re-arrest as a suspected rebel (paragraphs 25 to  27  of
      the determination).

60.  Ms Brown submitted that the July 2004 BBC report regarding  former  LRA
      members being taken into  the  Uganda  Army  meant  that  the  amnesty
      operated only to the extent that a person was willing and able to pass
      from the LRA directly into the Ugandan armed forces.   Such  a  person
      could not have the option of returning to civilian life.  The Tribunal
      does not find that there is any merit in that submission.    There  is
      nothing in the materials before us to show  that  the  amnesty,  as  a
      general matter, only operates in such a restricted way.   If that were
      the case, the Tribunal would have expected outside observers  such  as
      the US State Department or the International Crisis Group,  which  has
      taken a keen interest in the LRA issue, to have made reference to  the
      matter.   There is also nothing in the material relating to  the  July
      2004 incident to show that the 300 former LRA  rebels  were  reluctant
      recruits to the Ugandan army.

61.  Ms Brown further submitted that the evidence from  the  respondent  was
      that the amnesty law had expired in December 2004.   We  do  not  find
      that to be the case.  Paragraph 6.07 of the COI report, drawing on the
      US State Department report for 2004, makes it plain that  the  amnesty
      was extended by statutory instrument at the end of December 2004.  Not
      only is there no evidence before us to show that a  further  extension
      or extensions have not been  made;  such  evidence  as  is  before  us
      strongly suggests that the amnesty has been so extended.

62.  Paragraph 6.13 of the report quotes the International Crisis Group,  in
      its report of 23 June 2005, as follows:

         "6.13    The International Crisis  Group's  23  June  2005  report,
              "Building a comprehensive peace strategy for nothern  Uganda"
              states:


              'The Amnesty Commission, a statutory government body,  is  the
              major player in Kampala on this issue but it  has  only  just
              begun  the  attempt   to   run   a   comprehensive   national
              disarmament, demobilisation, and reintegration (DDR) program.
               Since May 2005, when a  limited  DDR  program  was  formally
              launched,  the  Commission  has  given   in-kind   and   cash
              reintegration packages to 600 of the 6,000 LRA  ex-combatants
              it has identified as eligible  to  receive  assistance.   The
              program was extended to Gulu on 27 May [2005] and  to  Kitgum
              on 16  June  [2005].   Once  it  is  fully  operational,  the
              Commission  will  have  the  capacity  to  take  in  200  ex-
              combatants daily, some of whom will be referred  to  specific
              agencies  for psychosocial and other additional support'."


63.  There is no suggestion from any of this that  the  Amnesty  Commission,
      which plainly would appear  to  have  been  established  by  the  2000
      Amnesty Act, is dealing only with persons who took  advantage  of  the
      amnesty before 1 January 2005.   Nor is there any such  suggestion  in
      the International Crisis Group's latest report  of  11  January  2006.
      Here we find that in October 2005  the  International  Criminal  Court
      'unsealed arrest warrants it issued three months earlier for five  LRA
      commanders, including the leader, Joseph Kony'.   The  fact  that  the
      leaders of the LRA are being pursued  in  this  way  is  in  no  sense
      incompatible with the Ugandan government's  continued  willingness  to
      offer an amnesty to the movement's foot soldiers, including its forced
      conscripts.

Peace talks and ceasefire

64.  Although there is plainly  some  interrelationship,  the  issue  of  an
      amnesty is to be distinguished from the issue of a  ceasefire  between
      the Ugandan Government and the LRA.  At paragraph  6.111  of  the  COI
      report, we find that the government and the LRA were  due  to  sign  a
      ceasefire on 30 December 2004.   That hope proved  short-lived  since,
      as noted in paragraph 6.112, the government's own ceasefire expired on
      31 December 2004, which was  the  day  when  "the  talks  between  the
      government and the Lord's Resistance Army collapsed'.   On 16 February
      2005, the LRA's top negotiator in the recent peace talks gave  himself
      up to the Ugandan army (6.117).  On 30 November 2005, the BBC reported
      that the Ugandan Interior Minister had welcomed a call for peace talks
      by the Deputy Commander of the LRA, stating that 'the government  will
      seize any opportunity to bring the suffering  of  people  in  Northern
      Uganda to an end'.  The LRA Deputy Commander told the  BBC's  reporter
      in Uganda that the LRA was ready to talk and that he was speaking with
      the backing of Joseph Kony.   Fighting nevertheless continued  between
      the two sides in late 2005, as is clear from a further BBC  report  of
      27 December.   That contained the information that ten  LRA  fighters,
      including a Senior Commander, were killed by the Ugandan army over the
      weekend.    In its January 2006 report, the International Crisis Group
      found that there were credible reports that the Sudanese military were
      still aiding the LRA, despite what  the  BBC  described  as  a  'fresh
      spirit of co-operation between Uganda and Sudan's  new  government  of
      national unity'.   The  International  Crisis  Group,  in  its  latest
      report, is encouraging the  Ugandan  army  to  increase  its  military
      operations against the LRA:-

         "The psychological impact of three or four sharp  attacks  on  LRA
          positions would be significant, and many commanders and  ordinary
          fighters would be tempted to turn themselves in.   A bounty  like
          that used in conjunction with the International Criminal Tribunal
          for Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia should be offered to private
          citizens for capture or assistance in capturing indictees alive'.


Lists of LRA members

  65. The appellant asserted to us that he  understood  that  lists  of  LRA
      members were supplied by the LRA to the Ugandan government, and  that,
      on return, he would be detained at the airport and accused of treason.
        We have not found the appellant to be credible as to his experiences
      with the LRA.   Even if we had done so, however, his  evidence  as  to
      the existence of such lists cannot be more than mere supposition.   Ms
      Brown informed the Tribunal that she had no  documentary  evidence  to
      show us that might  confirm  what  on  the  face  of  it  would  be  a
      surprising practice on the part of a group that  has  been  conducting
      covert operations in Uganda for a number of years, notwithstanding its
      alleged propaganda value.

Treason


66.   The evidence relating to treason is set  out  at  paragraphs  5.44  to
      5.46 of the COI report.   There we find the  US  State  Department  as
      stating that some 40 people have been charged with  treason  over  the
      past two years for collaborating with the People's Redemption Army, an
      organisation identified by the Ugandan authorities as  operating  from
      the Democratic Republic of Congo.  Reference is also made  to  members
      of an Islamic group known as Tabliq being detained on treason charges.
        There is no reference in the report to  anyone  being  charged  with
      treason as a result of LRA membership. Nor did Ms Brown seek  to  draw
      our attention to any other evidence on this issue.

Conclusions as to risk on return

67.  Paragraph 3.6.12 of  the  respondent's  Operational  Guidance  Note  on
      Uganda (13 December 2005) states that active members and supporters of
      the LRA who are engaged in anti-government activities and who are  not
      willing to surrender under the terms of the amnesty will not  be  able
      to avail themselves of the  protection  of  the  Ugandan  authorities.
      However, those LRA members and supporters who  renounce  violence  and
      surrender  under  the  terms  of  the  2000  amnesty  will  not   face
      persecution or prosecution by the authorities.  On the evidence before
      us, the Tribunal considers that  that  continues  to  be  an  accurate
      current assessment of the position.  Even if the  appellant's  account
      of his experiences in Uganda had been true, he has no wish to continue
      to support the LRA in any anti-government activities.    There  is  no
      evidence to show that he would be unwilling to avail  himself  of  the
      amnesty,  either  whilst  he  is  still  in  the  United  Kingdom   or
      immediately on return to Kampala.   There is no evidence whatsoever to
      show that he would  be  arrested,  detained  and  ill-treated  by  the
      authorities upon his arrival there.

Internal relocation

68.  Were the appellant to have demonstrated a  reasonable  likelihood  that
      his home is in an area of Uganda where the LRA continues to be active,
      in particular in enforcibly conscripting young people, we  would  have
      found that,  despite  the  Ugandan  army's  efforts  to  suppress  the
      movement, there would be a real risk to the appellant of such forcible
      conscription.   Although the Tribunal did not  hear  argument  on  the
      issue, which may therefore require to be authoritatively determined in
      another  case,  we  would  assume  for  the  present  that  any   such
      persecution would engage the Refugee Convention by reason  of  imputed
      political opinion.  However, it is manifest that the  appellant  could
      relocate to Kampala without real risk of serious harm from the LRA and
      without undue harshness. There is no evidence that the LRA  is  active
      in the capital or that it is able there forcibly to conscript  persons
      to its ranks. As for undue harshness, on the appellant's story, he has
      no relatives in Uganda with whom he  is  still  in  contact.   He  is,
      however,  a  basically  fit  20  year   old   who   has   demonstrated
      resourcefulness in gaining entry to the United Kingdom and who, whilst
      here, has shown educational aptitude and the ability to begin to forge
      a career for himself as a musician.   Those  attributes  would  enable
      the appellant to make a life for himself in  Kampala,  notwithstanding
      any difficulties which the system of land  tenure  in  that  city  (to
      which the appellant made vague reference) might give him.

Article 8

69.  Ms Brown specifically put the  appellant's  case  under  Article  8  by
      reference to  his  private  life.   That  private  life  included  his
      relationship with a lady, who did not appear or give evidence, who  is
      said  to  be  a  British  citizen  with  whom  the  appellant  is  not
      cohabiting.  Ms Brown submitted that  the  appellant  had  made  major
      achievements whilst in the United Kingdom.   She referred both to  his
      recording contract with Pijja Records and his activities with  Liberty
      Christian Fellowship.   No actual contract has  been  put  before  us.
      We are, nevertheless, able to accept that  the  appellant  is  in  the
      process of recording an album.  We also find that he  is  pursuing  an
      educational qualification in sound recording and  assisting  with  the
      Liberty Christian Fellowship, both as Assistant Choir Director and  in
      other ways.

  70. As the Tribunal has held in MG (Assessing  interference  with  Private
      Life) Serbia and Montenegro  [2005]  UKAIT  00113,  sympathy  for  and
      admiration of an individual do not as such enhance or otherwise affect
      that person's rights under Article 8.   As  is  plain  both  from  the
      opinions in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27 and Huang [2005] EWCA  Civ  105,  in
      case such as  the  present  a  truly  exceptional  situation  must  be
      identified before removal  can  be  said  to  be  of  disproportionate
      interference of a person's right to respect for his private life.   In
      the present case, no such circumstances exist.  Indeed, on the  facts,
      the Tribunal does not find  that  the  appellant  has  shown  that  an
      affirmative answer can be given to the second of  the  five  questions
      posed by Lord Bingham in Razgar, namely  that  his  removal  from  the
      United Kingdom would have consequences of such gravity as  potentially
      to engage the operation of Article 8.

  71. What we have said in the two preceding  paragraphs  assumes  that  the
      appellant was able to argue his appeal before the Immigration Judge on
      human rights grounds. In the light of JM  (Rule  62(7);  human  rights
      unarguable) Liberia * [2006] UKAIT 00009, the determination  of  which
      was reported after the reconsideration hearing in the present case, we
      are bound to  find  that  the  appellant  had  no  such  ability.  The
      immigration decision in this appeal was a decision to refuse  to  vary
      the appellant's leave to remain in the United Kingdom. As the Tribunal
      explains in JM, any removal of the appellant from the  United  Kingdom
      by the respondent, if it were to occur, would not be  'in  consequence
      of' the refusal to refuse to vary leave (see section 84(1)(g)  of  the
      2002 Act), at least so far as  concerns  an  appeal  on  human  rights
      grounds. As a result, the appellant will have an in-country  right  of
      appeal on human rights  grounds  in  the  event  that  the  respondent
      decides to issue removal directions against him under  section  10  of
      the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.  We note  that,  as  in  JM,  the
      appellant can be said to  have  made  a  human  rights  claim  to  the
      respondent by reason of having asserted human rights  grounds  in  his
      notice of appeal.

Decision

72.  The Immigration Judge made a material error of  law.    We  accordingly
      substitute a decision of our own to dismiss the appellant's appeal.












Signed                                  Date
P R Lane
Senior Immigration Judge





                                    ANNEX

           LIST OF BACKGROUND MATERIALS PLACED BEFORE THE TRIBUNAL

Amnesty International Report 2004: Uganda
Human Rights Watch World Report 2005: Uganda
United Nations, Report  of  the  Secretary-General  on  Children  and  Armed
Conflict (Uganda Excerpt), 09/02/2005
International Crisis  Group,  'Peace  in  Northern  Uganda:  Decisive  Weeks
Ahead', 21/02/2005
United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian  Affairs  (OCHA),
'Uganda Humanitarian Update - Feb 2005', 28/02/05
US Department of State, 'Country Reports on  Human  Rights  Practices  2004:
Uganda', 28/02/05
Integrated Regional Information Networks News (IRIN), 'Uganda:  160  rescued
from rebels since January - army', 15/03/05
HJT Research,  'LRA  rebels  attack  and  mutilate  women,  further  attacks
feared', 22/03/2005
Integrated Regional Information  Networks  News  (IRIN),  'Uganda:  Children
suffering gross abuses in northern conflict', 22/03/05
Integrated Regional Information Networks News (IRIN),  'Uganda:  Health  and
education suffer as LRA steps up attacks in the north', 25/03/05
Voice of America News, 'Children traumatised by Rebel  Attacks  in  Northern
Uganda', 28/03/05
Voice of America News, 'Uganda's Lord's Resistance  Army  Cloaked  in  Myth,
Secrecy', 30/03/05
Home Office Country of Origin  Information  Service  Report:  Uganda,  April
2005
Home Office Operational Guidance Note: Uganda, July 2005
Home Office Country of Origin Information Service  Report:  Uganda,  October
2005
BBC News, 'Ugandans welcome rebel overture', 30/11/05
Home Office Operational Guidance Note: Uganda, 13/12/05
BBC News, 'Ugandan civilians killed by army', 27/12/05
International Crisis Group, 'Conflict prevention  and  resolution',  January
2006
BBC News, 'Sudan military 'still aiding LRA', 11/01/06

