
                  SH (A2 nationals-worker authorisation exemption) Bulgaria
[2009] UKAIT 00020


                       Asylum and Immigration Tribunal


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|                                              |                             |
|On 15 January  2009                           |                             |
|At Field House                                |                             |


                                   Before

                       Senior Immigration Judge Storey



                                   Between

                                     Sh

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the appellant: None
For the respondent: Ms Z Kiss, Home Office Presenting Officer


     i) The exemption afforded by the Accession  (European  Economic  Area)
        Regulations 2006   to  A2  nationals  (nationals  of  Bulgaria  and
        Romania) legally working in the  United  Kingdom  at  the  date  of
        accession (1 January 2007) and for an uninterrupted  period  of  12
        months is not contrary to  either  the  relevant  Accession  Treaty
        provisions or to the general EU principle of proportionality.

    ii) The decision in EA (EEA: 3 months residence) Bulgaria [2008]  UKAIT
        00017 is confirmed. Its reasoning is consistent with  that  applied
        by the House of Lords in the recent case of Zalewska  v  Department
        for Social Development [2008] UKHL 67.

   iii) Albeit as illustrated by the instant case and that of the appellant
        in EA, the terms of the exemption can result in  hard  cases,  that
        does not suffice to show they are contrary to Community law.

    iv) For A2 nationals who find themselves just short of  being  able  to
        meet the requirement of 12 months lawful employment  there  are  no
        relevant Home Office policy concessions.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.  The  appellant  is  a  national  of  Bulgaria  aged  27.   This   is   a
reconsideration  of  a  determination  by  Immigration  Judge  (IJ)   Turcan
notified on 10 November 2008 which allowed his appeal against a decision  by
the respondent dated 10 July 2008  refusing  to  grant  him  a  registration
certificate as confirmation of his right of residence in the United  Kingdom
under European Community law. Having  noted  that  the  appellant  was  duly
served with a notice  of  hearing  but  failed  to  respond,  I  decided  to
exercise my discretion to reconsider the case in the absence of one  of  the
parties.

2. The events leading up to the respondent's  decision  are  these.   On  10
February 2006 the appellant was issued  with  a  work  permit  to  undertake
employment as an  Analyst  Programmer  with  a  software  company  based  in
Oxford.  The "Period Covered by the Permit" was stated on this  document  to
be "12 months from the date of leave to enter". The appellant  then  applied
for a work permit visa and on 16 February 2006 the  Visa  Officer  in  Sofia
stamped in his passport a "UK Entry Clearance".  It states that it is  valid
from 16 February 2006 until 16 February 2007. On 18 February  the  appellant
travelled to the United Kingdom, his entry clearance  being  stamped  by  an
Immigration Officer at Luton Airport the same day. The appellant also  began
his employment that same day.

3. A further  10  and  half  months  later  there  was  an  important  event
affecting the appellant's immigration status. From 1 January 2007  Bulgaria,
along with Romania, became a member of the  European  Union  (EU).  However,
they did not become full EU members and their nationals became known as  "A2
nationals" to differentiate them  from  earlier  "accession  nationals"  and
from  other  EU  nationals  generally.  That  was  because  Bulgaria's   and
Romania's membership was made subject to a  derogation  from  provisions  of
Community law relating to workers (art 39 of  the  Treaty  establishing  the
European Communities, articles 1 to 6 of  Regulation  (EEC)  No  1612/68  on
freedom of movement for workers within the Community and  Council  Directive
2004/38/EC on the right of citizens of the Union and  their  family  members
to move and reside freely within the territory of  the  Member  States  (the
Citizens Directive)). That derogation, as set out in  the  Accession  Treaty
for Bulgaria and Romania (signed in Luxembourg on 25  April  2005),  applies
during the accession period which  began  on  1  January  2007  and  can  be
applied by Member States for a transitional period of 5 years, i.e.  from  1
January 2007 to 31 December 2011 with a provision  for  a  Member  State  to
continue to maintain restrictions for a further two years  in  the  case  of
disturbances to its labour market.  (A similar derogation had been  made  in
respect of the previous group of new Member States known as "A8  nationals";
the legal provisions relating  to  them  have  been  the  subject  of  close
scrutiny by the House of  Lords  recently,  in  Zalewska  v  Department  for
Social Development [2008] UKHL 67.)

4. This derogation is not in absolute terms.  It  is  intended  to  regulate
freedom of movement within the  Community  for  nationals  of  Bulgaria  and
Romania rather than exclude their  EU  employment-related  rights  entirely.
Art 2,  Annex  VI  of  this  Treaty  authorises  Member  Stated  during  the
accession period to  apply  "national  measures,  or  those  resulting  from
bilateral  agreements,  regulating  access  to  their  labour   markets   by
Bulgarian nationals ". However, the second  and  fourth  paragraphs  of  the
same article go on  to  provide  a  specific  exception  designed  to  cover
nationals of Bulgaria who were already working in  a  Member  State  at  the
date of accession, 1 January 2007.  They stipulate:

    "Bulgarian nationals legally working in a present Member State  at  the
    date of accession and admitted to the  labour  market  of  that  Member
    State for an uninterrupted period of 12 months  or  longer  will  enjoy
    access to the labour market of that Member State but not to the  labour
    market of other Member States applying national measures".
          ...
    Bulgarian nationals legally working in a present Member  State  at  the
    date of accession, or  during  a  period  when  national  measures  are
    applied, and who were admitted to the  labour  market  of  that  Member
    State for a period of  less  than  12  months  shall  not  enjoy  those
    rights."

5. In order to give effect to these Accession Treaty provisions  the  United
Kingdom enacted the Accession (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006  (SI
2006/3317) (hereafter the "2006  Accession  Regulations");  these  were  the
subject of amendment by  the  Accession  (Worker  Authorisation  and  Worker
Registration)  (Amendment)  Regulations  2007  (SI  2007/3012).   The   2006
Accession Regulations require that for the duration of the accession  period
nationals of Bulgaria and Romania who wish to work in the UK need  to  apply
for "worker authorisation" in order to be able to work in the UK. They  only
have a right to reside in the UK by virtue of  their  worker  status  whilst
they are working in accordance with the worker authorisation scheme.
6. Regulations 9(2)  and  9(3)  provide  in  their  relevant  parts  are  as
follows.
      "9.- (2) For the purpose of these  Regulations,  an  accession  worker
      authorisation document is-
      (a) a passport or other travel document endorsed  before  1st  January
      2007 to show that the holder has leave  to  enter  or  remain  in  the
      United Kingdom under the 1971 Act, subject to a condition  restricting
      his employment in the United  Kingdom  to  a  particular  employer  or
      category of employment;
      ...
      (3) But a document shall cease to be treated as  an  accession  worker
      authorisation document under paragraph (2)-
      (a) in the case of a document mentioned in paragraph  (2)(a),  at  the
      end of the period for which leave to enter or remain is given;...."
7. Mirroring the Accession Treaty  provisions,  however,  these  regulations
also identify certain exceptions  or  exemptions  from  the  requirement  to
obtain worker authorisation. They include one relating to persons who,  like
the appellant, were legally working in the UK on 1 January  2007,  the  date
when Bulgaria acceded to the European Community.
8.  In  reg  2,  headed  "Accession  State  national   subject   to   worker
authorisation", it is stated:
    "(3) A national of Bulgaria  or  Romania  is  not  an  accession  State
    national subject to worker authorisation if he was legally  working  in
    the United Kingdom on 31 December 2006 and had been legally working  in
    the United Kingdom without interruption throughout  the  period  of  12
    months ending on that date;
    (4) A national of Bulgaria or Romania who legally works in  the  United
    Kingdom without interruption for a period of 12 months  falling  partly
    or wholly after 31st December 2006 shall cease to be an accession State
    national subject to worker authorisation at the end of that  period  of
    12 months".
9. In para 12 of the same reg we find this at sub-paras (a) and (b):
      "(a) a person working in the United Kingdom during  a  period  falling
      before 1st January 2007 was working  legally  in  the  United  Kingdom
      during that period if -
      (i) he had leave to enter or remain in the United  Kingdom  under  the
      1971 Act for that period, that leave allowed him to work in the United
      Kingdom, and he was working in accordance with any condition  on  that
      leave restricting his employment; or
      (ia)- (ii) [do not apply]
      (b) a person working in the United Kingdom on  or  after  1st  January
      2007 is legally working during any period in which he-
      (i) [does not apply]
      (ii) holds an accession worker authorisation document and  is  working
      in accordance with the conditions set out in that document;...."
10. On 4 June 2008 the appellant applied for a registration  certificate  to
confirm that he was an EEA national who was exercising  a  Treaty  right  in
the UK under the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations  2006  and
was exempt from these work authorisation requirements.

11. As already noted, the respondent refused  his  application  on  10  July
2008. She stated that she  was  not  satisfied  that  he  had  been  working
legally in the UK without interruption for a period of 12 months  ending  on
or after 31 December 2006. Her letter pointed out  that  the  appellant  did
not have permission to work after 10  February  2007,  which  meant  he  had
failed to complete 12 months of uninterrupted  lawful  employment.   In  his
subsequent determination IJ Turcan allowed the appellant's  appeal.  The  IJ
considered determinative the fact that the appellant  had  been  working  in
the UK without interruption for a period of 12 months and that  this  period
fell partly after 31 December 2006 and ran until 17th February 2007. In  the
IJ's view that brought him squarely within reg 2(4) of  the  2006  Accession
Regulations.

12. The respondent's grounds  for  reconsideration  expressed  disagreement.
They stated that:

    "The appellant in this case was required  to  show  that  he  had  been
    working legally in the UK for a period of 12 months. In order  to  work
    legally the appellant had to be working under the authority of  a  work
    permit. In this case the appellant's work  permit  was  granted  on  10
    February 2006 for 12 months, his visa was granted on 16  February  2006
    until 16 February 2007. The appellant could only work legally up  until
    10 February 2007.


    The appellant's work employment  contract  shows  that  his  employment
    started on 18 February 2006. He could not work legally for  a  year  as
    his work permit only lasted until 10  February  2007.  The  appellant's
    work permit was valid from its issuance and this is the point at  which
    time would begin to run. Therefore, the appellant's work permit did run
    out on 10 February 2007 and the Judge's error on this point resulted in
    him erroneously finding that the appellant  had  completed  12  month's
    legal work."


13. It is not clear why the respondent thought  that  the  appellant's  work
permit ran out on "10 February 2007", 12 months after the date of  issue  of
the work permit. The same permit stated  that  the  period  covered  by  the
permit was "12 months from the date of leave to enter";  it  did  not  state
that the period covered was from the date of issue.

14. However, this mistake in the respondent's  grounds  does  not  help  the
appellant, since in order to show that he  had  completed  12  uninterrupted
months of lawful employment in the United  Kingdom  (so  as  to  fulfil  the
exemption requirements set out in reg 2 (2)-(4)) he would have had  to  have
completed 12 months uninterrupted lawful employment prior to  his  leave  to
enter expiring on 16 February 2007. Whereas he did not start his  employment
until 18 February 2006. By 12 months on from that date, i.e. on 18  February
2007, he no longer had valid leave to  enter:  that  had  expired  two  days
before.

15. Hence the appellant missed out on being able to  meet  the  requirements
of the 2006 Accession Regulations by a  frustratingly  thin  margin  of  two
days.

16. In his grounds of appeal the appellant had argued that the  respondent's
decision on the basis that when the work permit stated that it  covered  the
period of 12 months "from the date of leave to  enter"  it  meant  the  date
that he was admitted to the UK, which was the 18th February, and so met  the
12 months requirement.  The IJ accepted that argument.

17. In order to decide whether the IJ erred in accepting  this  argument  it
is  first  helpful  to  examine  the  position  under  UK  immigration   law
considered in isolation from any EEA context.  The previous  position  under
which the expiry  of  a  period  of  leave  to  enter  could  only  ever  be
calculated by reference back to the date of arrival in  the  United  Kingdom
was changed as a result of the  Immigration  (Leave  to  Enter  and  Remain)
Order 2000 (SI 2000/1161); see also para 25A of the Statement of Changes  in
the Immigration Rules HC 395 (inserted from 30  July  2000  by  HC704).  Art
4(3) of this Order provides that in the case of  entry  clearance  to  which
that paragraph applies (and the  appellant's  entry  clearance  is  such  an
entry clearance)  the  period  of  leave  is  a  period  "being  the  period
beginning on the date that the holder arrives  in  the  United  Kingdom  and
ending at the date of the expiry of the entry clearance"  (emphasis  added).
One of the consequences of this provision is that unless the issue of  entry
clearance and arrival in the country take place on the same day, the  period
of leave granted will always be less than the period of leave  that  can  be
spent in the UK (unless extended). And so it was with  this  appellant,  who
by virtue of his leave to enter expiring 12 months after his grant of  entry
clearance on 16 February 2006 was left 2 days short of being  able  to  show
12 months in lawful employment, even though he had  commenced  work  on  the
same day as he had arrived (on 18 February 2006).

18. At the hearing I put to Ms Kiss that  it  was  not  entirely  clear  how
within this legal framework an A2 national  who  had  been  granted  a  work
permit for 12 months (the normal period)  and  had  arrived  in  the  United
Kingdom on or after 1 January 2007 could ever qualify for the exemption  set
out in the  2006  Accession  Regulations  unless  he  were  to  achieve  the
herculean feat of obtaining his work permit visa,  arriving  in  the  United
Kingdom and commencing work here -  all on the same day. I  sought  to  know
whether the respondent considered this  was  the  true  legal  position  and
whether, if it was, there was any relevant policy guidance on the  operation
of this exemption, so as to ameliorate  the  apparent  insurmountability  of
the 12 months  requirements  as  stated  in  the  Regulations.  Her  further
written submissions made two main points regarding the law.

19. First she submitted that the 12 months requirement contained in  the  UK
2006  Accession  Regulations  mirrored  that  contained  in   the   relevant
Accession Treaty Annex and in both  texts  the  relevant  provision  was  in
mandatory language and admitted of no discretion.

20. Second she submitted that existing Tribunal authority  was  against  the
appellant, the  Tribunal  having  held  in  EA  (EEA:  3  months  residence)
Bulgaria [2008] UKAIT 00017 that an A2  national  "has  to  comply  strictly
with the provisions of the 2006 Regulations in order to obtain the  benefits
derived from them".

21. Ms Kiss also addressed the  question  of  whether  any  policy  guidance
existed relating to this 12 months requirement.  She  stated  that  although
policy guidance was silent about  the  problem,  the  respondent  considered
that existing legal provisions afforded  A2  nationals  in  the  appellant's
position certain ameliorative steps.  Her written submissions stated:

    "It is accepted that the  guidance  does  not  specifically  deal  with
    applicants who fall short of the legal requirements marginally  because
    they did not travel/begin work on the day in the UK on  the  date  that
    entry clearance was issued. However, applicants in this  position  have
    the option to ask their employer to apply for a work  permit  extension
    which could form the basis  of  an  in-country  accession  worker  card
    application; there is nothing to stop an  A2  national  making  a  pre-
    emptive application so that an accession  worker  card  can  be  issued
    before the entry clearance expires. Alternatively a work  permit  could
    have been sought from another employer and the same process followed by
    [the] applicant; EEA applications are non-chargeable and  A2  nationals
    naturally cannot be removed. An A2 national has  avenues  open  through
    which to address the issue."

"Admitted to the labour market..."

22. As regards Ms Kiss's first point, it is not strictly  correct  that  the
2006 Accession  Regulations  mirror  the  terms  of  the  Accession  Treaty.
Whereas reg 2(4)  of  the  Accession  Regulations  excludes  those  "legally
working" for a period of less than 12 months, the Treaty  provision  (art  2
annex VI ) excludes   those "admitted to the labour market  of  that  Member
State" for a period of less than 12 months. The question  is,  however,  can
the difference in wording of the Treaty provision assist the appellant.

23.  In order to answer that question it is  first  necessary  to  ascertain
what is meant in temporal terms by the art 2, second para, Annex  VI  phrase
"admitted to the labour market ...".  In Zalewska the House was required  to
consider precisely  the  same  phrase,  albeit  in  the  context  of  Treaty
provisions made in relation to the previous group of accession  states  (the
'A8'). At para 43 Lord Hope considered that the phrase meant that  admission
to the labour market was obtained as soon as the  accession  national  began
work for an authorised employer; none of the other law Lords  disagreed.  In
my view Lord Hope's opinion represents powerful authority  for  interpreting
the very same phrase in the present case in the same way.

Lawful employment

24. The next issue is whether admission to the labour market must  take  the
form of lawful employment.  The second para of  art 2  Annex  VI  guarantees
access to the labour market of the  Member  State  to  "Bulgarian  nationals
legally working ...at the date of  accession  and  admitted  to  the  labour
market of that Member State for an uninterrupted  period  of  12  months  or
longer...". It might be contended that all this required  of  the  appellant
was to show (1) that on 1 January 2007 he was legally working in the  United
Kingdom; and (2) he had completed  12  months  uninterrupted  employment  in
that same employment (which he  had).  On  that  construction  it  would  be
immaterial that for 2 days of  the  365  days  involved  he  had  no  lawful
permission to work. However, that view could only be correct  if  the  Annex
VI Treaty provisions contemplated that (apart from  the  position  obtaining
on 1 January 2007) the 12  months  in  continuous  employment  could  be  12
months in illegal employment. But such a construction cannot  be  sustained.
For one thing  it  would  entail  having  to  treat  the  "legally  working"
requirement as applying not to the entirety of the period during which  they
are admitted to the labour market, but only to one day out of the  365  (the
date of accession (1 January 2007) and so contemplating  the  most  unlikely
possibility of application to a person who had worked illegally  for  up  to
364 days. For another,  the  same  article  (art  2)  states  in  its  first
paragraph that, by way  of  derogation  from  EU  free  movement  law,  "the
present Member States will apply national  measures...regulating  access  to
their labour markets by Bulgarian nationals". In  other  words  the  Article
empowers Member States to apply  national  measures  to  determining  labour
market access in respect of accession nationals.

 25. That the phrase "admitted to the  labour  market..."  in  the  relevant
Accession Treaty provisions must refer to lawful employment is supported  by
the opinions of their lordships  in  Zalewska.  In  Zalewska,  although  the
question was a different one it raised  a  similar  underlying  issue.  This
case concerned whether a Polish accession national who  had  worked  in  the
United Kingdom without interruption for 12 months had a right of  access  to
the labour market of the United Kingdom so as to enable her to  qualify  for
income support under the relevant social security legislation  as  a  person
who is habitually resident in the UK, despite her  failure  to  comply  with
national measures requiring her to be in work with  an  authorised  employer
throughout that period (the Accession (Immigration and Worker  Registration)
Regulations 2004 (SI 2004/1219)). Their Lordships had to decide whether  the
registration requirements in reg 7 of the 2004 Regulations  were  compatible
with Community law (art  7(2)  of  Regulation  1612/68,  which  entitles  EU
nationals to  the  same  social  and  tax  advantages  as  workers  who  are
nationals of the United  Kingdom.  At  para  27  Lord  Hope  held  that  the
derogating provisions of the Accession Treaty (derogating from arts 1  to  6
of 1612/68) only permitted A8 accession nationals to benefit from  the   art
7(2) Community law  rights if they complied with national measures:

    "But the rights conferred on Polish workers by article 7 were to depend
    on their compliance with the national measures. It  is  those  measures
    that determine their eligibility  to  obtain  access  to  the  national
    labour market on which the rights given by  article  7  in  their  turn
    depend. The reference to  Polish  nationals  "admitted  to  the  labour
    market of a present member state" in the third paragraph of paragraph 2
    of Part 2 of Annex XII is a reference to Polish nationals who have been
    admitted to it under the national measures regulating access."

26. At para 28 he added:

    "So long as the requirements of the national rules are satisfied an  A8
    national is entitled to the benefit of article 7(2) of  the  Regulation
    because he is a person who is admitted to the labour  market,  but  not
    otherwise. Conversely an A8 state  national  is  not  admitted  to  the
    labour market if he does not comply with national measures..."


27. The approach taken here also accords with existing  Tribunal  authority,
that of EA, which was heard by Deputy President Mr C M G  Ockelton  and  SIJ
Latter. Although decided prior to Zalewska, the Tribunal's  approach  in  EA
is entirely consistent with it and, because it concerns a case very  similar
to that of the appellant, sheds helpful light on the underlying  issues.  In
EA the Tribunal had to consider the case of a national of Bulgaria  who  had
arrived in the United  Kingdom  on  14  April  2006  in  reliance  on  entry
clearance issued to him on 12 April and set to expire on 12 April  2007.  He
worked in virtue of a work permit  which  expressed  the  period  for  which
permission is given to work as 12 months from the date  of  leave  to  enter
the United Kingdom. However, by 12  April  2007,  when  he  leave  to  enter
expired, he had only completed 363 days in employment.

28. In concluding that he could not benefit from the exemption  set  out  in
reg 2 of the 2006 Accession Regulations the Tribunal stated:
   "Although his permission to work, if he otherwise met the requirements of
   UK immigration law, expired two days later, he had no leave to enter  the
   United Kingdom after 12 April 2007. It would appear to follow from  that,
   taken by itself, that the appellant's last two days of his twelve months'
   work, upon which he relies, were not days on which he was working legally
   here: they were days on which he was working here in  accordance  with  a
   work permit, but contrary to the provisions of immigration  law,  because
   he had no extant leave."
29. Turning to the appellant's attempt to pray in aid various provisions  of
the 2006 Accession Regulations the Tribunal stated:
    "Unfortunately for the appellant those Regulations exactly confirm  the
    position argued by Mr. Tarlow [the Presenting Officer]. At the  end  of
    the period of validity of the visa the appellant ceased to  have  leave
    to enter under the Leave to Enter and Remain Order. On that date, which
    was 12 April 2007, the document on which he relied for the purposes  of
    the  Accession  Regulations  ceased   to   be   an   accession   worker
    authorisation document. The  last  two  days  of  the  work,  which  he
    undertook  under  his  work  permit,  were  therefore  days  on  which,
    according to the very Regulations on which he relies for the relief  he
    seeks, his work was not legal work  and  he  accordingly  cannot  bring
    himself within the provisions of reg 2(4). "
30. The Tribunal went on to reject the appellant's contention that he  could
make good the 2 days deficit by  relying  on  reg  13(1)  of  the  2006  EEA
Regulations (art 6 of the Citizens Directive), which  enshrines  an  initial
right of residence of 3 months.
31. Earlier on the Tribunal had said at para 13:
    "We do not find the decision  in  this  case  easy,  not  only  because
    neither party has been able to give us a great deal of assistance  with
    the detailed law, but also because it may seem  hard  that  a  decision
    depends on two days. There is no doubt, however, that the structure  of
    immigration law does require that  presence  be  lawful  presence,  and
    unlawful presence (that is to say presence  after  expiry  of  existing
    leave, or  presence  without  leave)  has  the  character  of  unlawful
    presence however short it is".
32. Thus there is also Tribunal authority in support of  Ms  Kiss's  central
contention.

33. Hence I consider Ms Kiss is right to say that the appellant is  excluded
from the exemption by operation of both the 2006 Accession  Regulations  and
the terms of the Accession Treaty. She is also right to  say  that  existing
Tribunal authority supports the respondent's position.

Proportionality

34. That, however, is not the end of  the  matter.  In  order  for  the  EEA
decision in this case to stand I must be satisfied not only that it  was  in
accordance with the 2006 Accession  Regulations  and  the  Accession  Treaty
provisions, but also that it accorded with general principles of EU law,  in
particular the general Community law  principle  of  proportionality.  Here,
once again, the  Zalewska  case  is  instructive.  For  whilst  Lord  Hope's
analysis confirms the  primacy  of  national  measures  in  the  context  of
Accession Treaty provisions, it also highlights the  fact  that  it  remains
the case that national measures are only compatible with  Community  law  if
they also accord with this general Community law  principle:  see  para  30.
One of the key questions in Zalewska was whether it  was  proportionate  for
(United Kingdom) national measures to say that only those A8  nationals  who
work for an authorised employer for an uninterrupted  period  of  12  months
are entitled to the status of "worker", having regard  to  the  consequences
of not according them that status.   On  behalf  of  the  appellant  it  was
argued that the consequences of the claimant's failure to re-register  after
she left her first employment  were  a  complete  denial  of  Community  law
rights: she lost her right to  reside  in  the  United  Kingdom  and,  as  a
consequence of losing that right, access to  social  security  benefits.  On
this matter their lordships were not in agreement, although  by  a  3  to  2
majority Lord Hope's opinion  prevailed.  His  opinion  was  that  the  UK's
accession legislation for A8 nationals and in particular the formalities  of
registration and re-registration  (i) pursued a legitimate aim  of  enabling
the Government to monitor the numbers working and  the  sectors  where  they
were employed; and  (ii)  were  proportionate  to  those  aims  because  the
requirement to re-register enabled  the  Government  to  obtain  up-to  date
statistics and means of verification  of past employment and to impose  some
degree of pressure  on  A8  nationals  to  register  and  re-register  their
employment. He echoed Social  Security  Commissioner  Rowland's  observation
(at the earlier stages of the appeal) that although such a conclusion  could
result in  "hard  cases"  missing  out,  the  Treaty  provisions  themselves
contemplated that  workers who became temporarily sick or  unemployed  after
being employed for just under 12 months (paras 42-44) would lose out.

35. In considering the issue of proportionality in the present case it  must
be accepted that the way the 12 months rule can operate at least in  the  UK
context,  as  illustrated  by  the  appellant's   case,   can   have   harsh
consequences. It might appear that unless a person is given  a  work  permit
and corresponding leave to enter of sufficient duration so as to enable  the
A2 national to complete 12  months  uninterrupted  employment  whilst  still
working legally, he or she can never effectively qualify for  the  exemption
even  though  completing  the  formalities  of  obtaining  a  work   permit,
obtaining entry clearance, travelling to the United Kingdom  and  commencing
employment in as rapid a  fashion  as  possible.  He  faces  denial  of  key
Community law rights and lack of access to social security.  It  might  also
be thought that to say to an A2 national in  this  position  that  he  could
have taken ameliorative steps in the form  of  making  an  application  (in-
country) for an accession worker  authorisation  scheme  card  is  not  good
enough, since what that person seeks is to benefit from  an  exemption  from
such a scheme and in effect  to  be  treated  as  an  ordinary  EU  national
exercising Treaty rights.  Ms  Kiss's  first  suggestion  was  that  persons
granted 12 months work permits due to expire before completion of 12  months
employment could have sought to ask their  employer  to  apply  for  a  work
permit extension which could form  the  basis  of  an  in-country  accession
worker card application: "there is", she  wrote,  "nothing  to  stop  an  A2
national making a pre-emptive application so that an accession  worker  card
can be issued before the entry clearance expires".  But such  an  option  is
only open to someone who is not exempt and requires, in order to be able  to
work legally, worker authorisation. Whereas what this appellant  sought  was
to qualify under the Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations  2006
for a certificate of registration on the basis of being a worker within  the
meaning of Community law.

36. The same problem afflicts Ms Kiss's only other suggestion,  namely  that
alternatively "a work permit could have been sought  from  another  employer
and the same process followed by the applicant".

37. Nevertheless, despite  these  features,  I  do  not  consider  that  the
requirement of 12 months continuous lawful employment  as  set  out  in  the
2006  Accession  Regulations  offends  the  Community   law   principle   of
proportionality, for several reasons.

38. First, in much the same way as arose under the  similar  scheme  put  in
place for A8 nationals, the 2006 Accession Regulations  pursue a  legitimate
aim of enabling the Government to monitor through the  worker  authorisation
scheme the numbers working and the sectors where they were employed.  As  is
made clear in the November  2008  UKBA   Casework  Instructions  (Chapter  7
section 2) and the UKBA notices of 18  December  2008  regarding  continuing
restrictions, they have also enabled the Government  to  obtain  up-to  date
statistics and means of verification of past employment and to  impose  some
degree of pressure on A2  nationals to seek worker authorisation.

39. Second, unlike  the  United  Kingdom  registration  and  re-registration
requirements for A8 nationals in focus in Zalewska, the  requirement  of  12
months continuous lawful employment is, as we  have  seen,  imposed  by  the
relevant Accession Treaty provisions themselves; it is they  which  restrict
the exemption to those who can show 12 months uninterrupted employment  that
is lawful according to national law measures. In the instant case,  although
it is  the  national  law  measure  which  causes  an  A2  national  in  the
appellant's position to miss out (by just 2 days) from being  able  to  show
12 months in  lawful  employment,  that  is  a  direct  consequence  of  the
Accession Treaty provision (here under art 2, Annex VI)  leaving  access  to
the national labour market as a matter for national law regulation.

40. Third, it is also the relevant Treaty provisions themselves that  choose
not to make provision for "hard cases". As was pointed out  in  Zalewska  in
relation  to  very  similar  Accession  Treaty  provisions  applying  to  A8
nationals, no provision is made for  accession nationals  who  miss  out  on
being able to benefit from a Community law right of residence by  virtue  of
temporary illness or unemployment causing their  employment  to  fall   just
short of 12 months.

41. Fourth, even though none  of  Ms  Kiss's  suggested  ameliorative  steps
help persons in the appellant's position  to  benefit  from  the  exemption,
they do nevertheless offer real avenues for an A2  applicant  to  remain  in
the United Kingdom in employment. Put another way, they do show it was  open
to persons in the appellant's position (and in EA's position) to have  tried
to avoid wholesale exclusion  from  the  United  Kingdom  labour  market  by
finding   employment   in   compliance   with   the   worker   authorisation
requirements.

42. Fifth, it would  appear  that  in  law  there  was  an  avenue  open  to
applicants in the appellant's position  to  actually  obtain  exemption.  It
would have  been  open  to  the  appellant's  employer  sometime  before  16
February 2007 to apply for an extension of his work permit and for him  then
to have applied for a short extension of stay.

43. At first sight it might appear that this type of avenue, whilst  it  may
have been open to a third-country national work permit holder, was not  open
to the appellant, by virtue of the fact that he was an EEA national and  EEA
nationals are not subject to immigration control. It might be  thought  that
the respondent has no power in law to grant leave  to  enter  or  remain  in
respect of EEA nationals. However, such would  be  to  misread  the  correct
position in law. Section 7 of the Immigration Act 1988 does  indeed  contain
a provision whose effect is to remove  the  requirement  to  have  leave  to
enter or remain from EEA nationals and their family  members.  But  it  only
removes  that  requirement  from  those  exercising  enforceable   Community
rights. It states in its relevant parts:

    7.  Persons exercising Community rights and nationals of member States
    (1) A person shall not under the principal Act [1971 Act] require leave
    to enter or remain in the United Kingdom in any case  in  which  he  is
    entitled to do so by virtue of an enforceable Community right or of any
    provision made under section 2(2) of the European Communities Act 1972.
    ..."

44. The compatibility of United Kingdom immigration  control  measures  with
Community law in  some  circumstances  where  Community  nationals  are  not
exercising enforceable Treaty rights  was  confirmed  in  Reg.v  Immigration
Appeal Tribunal, Ex parte Antonissen (Case 292/89) [1991] E.C.R.  I-745  and
Chief Adjudication Officer v Wolke [1997] UKHL 50.  The  appellant  in  this
case has never shown that he is  exercising  enforceable  rights  under  the
Treaty or secondary legislation. The normal employment-related rights  of  a
Community national were removed from him by the provisions of the  Accession
Treaty derogating from the free movement rights of workers. He was  only  in
a  position  to  exercise  an  enforceable  right  if  he  first   met   the
requirements for exemption from the worker authorisation scheme.  Hence,  if
the appellant had made an in-time application shortly  before  his  existing
leave to enter or remain expired (16 February  2007)  the  respondent  would
have been able, lawfully, to grant him a short extension, thus enabling  him
to benefit from the exemption.

45. Whilst this last point adds to the reason  for  finding  the  12  months
requirement proportionate, it is one to which I attach minimal weight.  That
is with the following  in  mind.  Despite  being  given  an  opportunity  to
clarify the position, Ms Kiss was unable to point  me  to  any  Home  Office
publicity or literature informing A2 nationals  of  this  potential  avenue.
She herself did not identify this as a possible avenue. Whilst it  might  be
thought that  an  A2  national  in  the  appellant's  position  should  have
realised that his leave to enter or remain was due to expire before  he  had
completed 12 months in employment, it is difficult to  see  that  he  should
have realised there was a legal avenue open to him  to  apply  for  a  short
extension of his existing leave, especially since  the  November  2008  UKBA
European Casework Instructions asserts near the beginning  that  as  from  1
January 2007 A2 nationals were  not  subject  to  immigration  control.  The
Community law principle of legal  certainty  requires  rules  to  be  clear,
precise and predictable in their  effects,  with  clear  criteria  known  in
advance: see Forster (free movement of persons) [2008] EUECJ C-158/07.

46. In the circumstances I consider that the respondent's principal  grounds
for reconsideration are made out. In finding that the appellant  was  exempt
from  the  worker  authorisation  requirements  and   so   entitled   to   a
registration certificate, the IJ materially erred in law.

47. It follows logically that the decision I must  substitute  for  that  of
the IJ is to dismiss the appellant's appeal.

48. I have not dealt with whether the appellant was actually in  a  position
to  benefit  from  the  worker  authorisation  scheme.  The   evidence   and
information that would have been relevant to that  matter  is  lacking.  All
that is known is that he was still in employment with the  software  company
in Oxford on 20 February 2007.  But in general terms, it is worth  recalling
that to obtain authorisation an applicant has to obtain  employment  falling
within one of the  categories  of  employment  designated  by  this  scheme.
Either he would have to fall into one of the  "permit-free"  categories  set
out in Annex  A  of  the  November  2008  UKBA  guidance  (eg  airport-based
operational ground  staff  of  an  overseas  airline;  au  pair  placements;
domestic workers in a private household) or he would have to fall  into  one
of the categories which require an employer to apply for a work permit.  The
November 2008 UKBA guidance states that:

    "Approvals under the work permit arrangements are generally only  given
    for skilled jobs  and  where  suitably  qualified  resident  labour  is
    unavailable to fill the vacancy. However, the work permit  arrangements
    also include the Sectors Based Scheme under which a  quota  of  permits
    may  be  issued  for  lower  skilled  jobs  in  the   food   processing
    industry..."

49. For the above reasons:

The IJ materially erred in law.

The decision I substitute is to dismiss the appellant's appeal.

Signed

Senior Immigration Judge Storey
