
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

R (on  the  application  of  Temiz)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
Department IJR [2016] UKUT 00026 (IAC)

             IN THE MATTER OF AN APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW



|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre         |                              |
|On 19 November 2015                           |                              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

            The queen (on the application of mehmet alper temiz)
                                                                   Applicant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Applicant:     Mr J Walsh, instructed by Qualified Legal Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Miss M Bayoumi, instructed by the Government Legal
Department


                                  JUDGMENT

Judge Grubb:

Introduction

 1. The applicant is a citizen of Turkey who was born on 7  February  1977.
    In these proceedings he challenges the decision  of  the  Secretary  of
    State taken on 16 September 2014 refusing to grant him leave to  remain
    in order to establish himself in a business under  the  Turkey-European
    Community Association Agreement ("the Ankara Agreement") under paras  4
    and 21 of Statement of Immigration Rules for Control  after  Entry  (23
    October 1972) (HC 510).

Background

 2. The applicant came to the United Kingdom on 22 October 2001 with  leave
    as a student valid until 15 April 2002.  His leave  as  a  student  was
    subsequently extended until 20 January 2005.  His leave expired on that
    date although the applicant says that he was unaware of that until 2008
    as he believed that his college was arranging for further leave.

 3. On 22 September 2009, the applicant applied for further leave to remain
    on compassionate grounds.  That application was refused on 5 April 2011
    and on 29 May 2012 the applicant was served with a notice  of  removal.
    His appeal to the First-tier Tribunal was heard on  23  July  2012  but
    dismissed.  His subsequent applications for permission to  appeal  were
    refused by the First-tier Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal on 24  August
    2012 and 12 November 2012 respectively.

 4. Removal directions were set for 12 December 2012 but prior to that  the
    applicant submitted an application for leave, relying upon  the  Ankara
    Agreement, in order  to  establish  a  proposed  business.   A  further
    application was made in February 2013.  On 26 July 2013, the  Secretary
    of   State   refused   that   application.    The   applicant    sought
    reconsideration and his application was again refused  on  28  November
    2013.  Permission to bring judicial review proceedings in  relation  to
    those decisions was refused by the Upper Tribunal on 9 April 2014.

 5. On 28 April 2014, the applicant made a fresh application for  leave  to
    remain on the basis of his  proposed  business  relying  again  on  the
    Ankara Agreement.

 6. On 16 September 2014, the respondent refused that application.

 7. A pre-action protocol letter was sent by the applicant's representative
    on 29 October 2014 and the respondent replied on 25 November 2014.   On
    5 December 2014, these proceedings were filed challenging the  decision
    of the respondent to  refuse  leave  in  order  for  the  applicant  to
    establish his business taken on 16 September 2014.

 8. Permission having been refused on  the  papers  on  12  February  2015,
    following an oral renewal of the application for permission, HHJ Curran
    QC granted the applicant permission by order dated 7 May 2015.

The Applicable Rules: HC 510

 9. It was common ground between  the  parties  that  the  applicant  as  a
    Turkish national seeking leave to establish himself  in  business  fell
    within the so-called "standstill clause" in Art 41(1) of the Additional
    Protocol to the Ankara Agreement.  As a consequence, it was also common
    ground that the applicant was entitled  to  have  his  application  for
    leave decided under the Immigration Rules in force on  1  January  1973
    the day on which the UK joined the European Economic Community.  It was
    also common ground that the application for leave to remain had  to  be
    decided in accordance with paras 4 and 21 of  HC  510  which  were  the
    relevant Immigration Rules in force on that date.

10. Those Rules provide as follows:

         "General considerations

         4.   The succeeding paragraphs  set  out  the  main  categories  of
             people who may be given limited leave to  enter  and  who  may
             seek variation of  their  leave,  and  the  principles  to  be
             followed in dealing with their applications, or in  initiating
             any variation of  their  leave.   In  deciding  these  matters
             account is to be taken of all the  relevant  facts;  the  fact
             that the applicant satisfies the formal requirements of  these
             rules for stay, or further stay, in the proposed  capacity  is
             not conclusive in  his  favour.   It  will,  for  example,  be
             relevant whether the person has observed the  time  limit  and
             conditions subject to which he was admitted;  whether  in  the
             light  of  his  character,  conduct  or  associations  it   is
             undesirable to permit him to remain; whether he  represents  a
             danger to national security; or whether, if allowed to  remain
             for the period for which he wishes to stay, he  might  not  be
             returnable to another country.

         ....

         Businessmen and self-employed person

         21.  People admitted as visitors may apply for the consent  of  the
             Secretary of State to establishing  themselves  here  for  the
             purpose of setting  up  in  business,  whether  on  their  own
             account or as partners in a new  or  existing  business.   Any
             such  application  is  to  be  considered   on   its   merits.
             Permission will depend  on  a  number  of  factors,  including
             evidence that the applicant will be devoting assets of his own
             to the business, proportional to his interest in it;  that  he
             will be able to bear his proportion  of  any  liabilities  the
             business may incur; and that his share of its profits will  be
             sufficient to support him and any dependants.  The applicant's
             part in the business must not amount to disguised  employment,
             and it must be clear that he will not have to  supplement  his
             business activities by employment for which a work  permit  is
             required.  Where the applicant intends  to  join  an  existing
             business, audited accounts should be produced to establish its
             financial position, together with a written statement  of  the
             terms on which he is to enter  into  it;  evidence  should  be
             sought that he will be actively concerned with its running and
             that there is a genuine need for his services and  investment.
             Where the application is granted the applicant's stay  may  be
             extended for a period of up  to  12  months,  on  a  condition
             restricting his freedom to take employment.  A person admitted
             as a businessman in the  first  instance  may  be  granted  an
             appropriate extension of time of stay if  the  conditions  set
             out above are still satisfied at the end  of  the  period  for
             which he was admitted initially."

11. Finally, it  was  common  ground  that  these  Rules  set  out  a  more
    "flexible" approach to the grant of leave to those wishing to establish
    themselves in business or self-employment than the current Rule  in  HC
    395 (see R v SSHD ex parte Joseph [1977]  Imm  AR  70  and  EK  (Ankara
    Agreement - 1972 Rules - construction) Turkey [2010] UKUT 425 (IAC)).

The Respondent's Decision

12. In her decision of 16 September 2014, refusing the applicant leave, the
    respondent applied both paras 4 and 21  of  HC  510  in  the  following
    terms:

         "You have applied  for  leave  to  remain  in  order  to  establish
         yourself  in   business   under   the   Turkey-European   Community
         Association Agreement (ECAA).  This contains a 'standstill  clause'
         which means that the United Kingdom may not impose  conditions  for
         business applicants less favourable than were  in  force  when  the
         agreement came into force for the UK in 1973.  Your application has
         therefore been assessed in accordance with the after entry business
         provisions in force in 1973 (HC510).

         However, your application is refused under paragraphs 4 and  21  of
         HC510.

         You are referred to paragraph 4 of HC510, which states:

         'In deciding these matters account  is  to  be  taken  of  all  the
         relevant facts; the fact that the applicant  satisfies  the  formal
         requirements of these rules for  stay,  or  further  stay,  in  the
         proposed capacity is not conclusive in his favour.   It  will,  for
         example, be relevant whether the person has observed the time limit
         and conditions subject to which he was  admitted;  whether  in  the
         light of his character, conduct or associations it  is  undesirable
         to permit him to remain; whether he represents a danger to national
         security; or whether, if allowed to remain for the period for which
         he wishes to stay, he might not be returnable to another country.'

         Further to the highlighted section of paragraph 4 (and paragraph 21
         below) your  application  is  refused  because  you  have  breached
         immigration law in the following regard:

         The Secretary of State is not satisfied that you have observed  the
         time limit of your leave to remain in the United Kingdom.

         It has previously been established that you have not held leave  to
         remain since 30 January 2005 and your appeal contesting  that  fact
         was dismissed.  You have now  been  an  overstayer  in  the  United
         Kingdom since that date and all your appeal rights  were  exhausted
         on 4 May 2011.

         It has therefore been decided, taking all the circumstances of your
         case into account, that you should not be allowed to  benefit  from
         your breach of immigration law.

         Your case has also been considered under  paragraph  21  of  HC510.
         Permission to establish in business is dependant upon a  number  of
         factors although satisfying  the  Secretary  of  State  that  these
         formal requirements are met is not conclusive  in  your  favour  in
         accordance  with  paragraph  4  of  HC510  above.   However,   your
         application is refused under paragraph 21 of HC510 because, despite
         the fact that you have put together  your  current  application  to
         show your intention to  operate  a  business  as  an  importer  and
         exporter of medical equipment, your documentary  evidence  has  all
         been accumulated whilst you have remained in the United Kingdom  as
         an overstayer with no legitimate right to remain here and so  these
         documents are not acceptable for the purpose  of  consideration  of
         your current application.

         You made your application on 26 April 2014.  However, your leave to
         remain expired on 30 January 2005.   You  therefore  did  not  have
         leave to remain at the time of your application.

         Your application for leave to remain in the United Kingdom has been
         refused and you no longer have any known basis of stay here.  There
         is no right of appeal against this refusal."

The Applicant's Challenge

13. The applicant's challenge is set out in  the  grounds,  in  Mr  Walsh's
    skeleton argument and his oral submissions.  In essence, he  challenged
    the respondent's decision of 16 September 2014 on two bases:

      1. In refusing the applicant's application in reliance upon  the  fact
         that he was an overstayer the Secretary of State has  elevated  the
         applicant's breach of the time limit condition in his  leave  to  a
         'trump' card first by refusing to consider evidence accumulated  in
         the UK whilst he was an overstayer under para 21 and,  secondly  in
         exercising  discretion  in  accordance  with  para  4  against  the
         applicant.

      2. As  a  consequence  of  failing  to  consider  the  merits  of  the
         applicant's claim under para 21, the respondent acted unlawfully in
         refusing  leave  by  failing  to  consider  all   the   applicant's
         circumstances including the merits of  his  claim  when  exercising
         discretion under para 4.

14. Mr Walsh submitted that by relying upon the applicant's  status  as  an
    overstayer in refusing leave  under  HC  510  the  respondent  had,  in
    effect, illegitimately moved arguments previously rejected by the Court
    of Justice concerning the application of the "standstill clause" to  an
    application of the Rules.  In particular,  he  relied  upon  the  ECJ's
    decision in R v SSHD ex parte Savas (C-37/198) [2000]  INLR  398  which
    held that the "standstill  clause"  in  Art  41(1)  of  the  Additional
    Protocol applied even where the individual had remained and carried  on
    business activities as a self-employed person in breach of the domestic
    immigration law.

15. Further Mr Walsh relied upon the decision  in  Oguz  v  SSHD  (Case  C-
    186/10) [2011] Imm AR 843 where the CJEU rejected the  UK  government's
    argument that the "standstill clause" could not apply to an  individual
    who  had  entered  into  self-employment  business  in  breach  of   UK
    immigration law.  In particular, at  [40]  the  CJEU  rejected  the  UK
    government's argument (set out  at  [39])  that  if  the  position  was
    otherwise:

         "such nationals might rely on the  clientele  and  business  assets
         which they may have built up during an unlawful stay  in  the  host
         Member  State,  or  on  funds  accrued   there,   perhaps   through
         employment, and so present themselves to the  national  authorities
         as self-employed persons now engaged in, or likely  to  be  engaged
         in, a viable activity, whose rights ought to be recognised pursuant
         to the EEC-Turkey Association Agreement."

    At [40] the court succinctly stated: "Such an argument cannot succeed".



16. Mr Walsh submitted that the respondent's decision was directly contrary
    to the approach in Oguz.

The Respondent's Position

17. The respondent's case is set out in the detailed grounds of defence and
    in Ms Bayoumi's skeleton argument and her oral submissions.

18. She submitted that the Secretary of State was  entitled  to  take  into
    account that the applicant's application  was  made,  and  based  upon,
    evidence accumulated whilst in the UK as an overstayer.  She  submitted
    that that was not inconsistent with the CJEU's decision in  Oguz  which
    merely decided that the application of the "standstill clause" was  not
    excluded in the case of an overstayer.  She submitted that it was clear
    from the case law that the application of paras 4 and 21  required  the
    Secretary of State to consider "all the  circumstances"  including  the
    individual's immigration status.

19. Ms Bayoumi referred me to the respondent's  relevant  policy  guidance:
    Business applications under the EEC-Turkish  Association  Agreement  (4
    March 2014) at pages 190-193 of  the  bundle.   That  stated  that  the
    respondent  must  consider  "all  the  relevant  circumstances  of   an
    application" including whether an applicant has  worked  in  breach  of
    conditions of leave but that that  must  not  result  in  an  automatic
    refusal of a claim under para 4 of HC 510.  Ms Bayoumi  submitted  that
    the respondent had taken into account all the circumstances under  para
    4 and she was entitled not to take into  account  under  para  21  when
    considering the merits of the application evidence accumulated  by  the
    applicant whilst unlawfully in the UK.  The respondent had cumulatively
    considered all the relevant factors  under  paras  4  and  21  and  had
    lawfully made a decision within the ambit of her discretion  which  was
    not irrational or otherwise unlawful.

Discussion

20. As I have already indicated, it was common ground between  the  parties
    that the applicant's application fell to be decided under paras  4  and
    21 of HC 510.

21. It was common ground that para 21 set out relevant factors (but no more
    than that) to be  considered  by  the  respondent  in  determining  the
    substance of the applicant's claim for  leave  as  a  Turkish  national
    wishing to establish his business in the UK.  In EK, the Upper Tribunal
    accepted that these Rules were an "open textured exercise in discretion
    in the round having regard to the general policy and particular factors
    identified" (at [23]).  The factors  in  para  21  were  not  mandatory
    requirements which an applicant is required  to  fulfil  seriatim  (see
    Joseph at pp.73-4 per Robert Goff J).

22. Indeed, it is  clear  from  the  respondent's  own  guidance  that  the
    exercise of discretion under HC 510, applying paras 4 and 21,  involves
    a  consideration  of  "all  the  circumstances".   Under  the   heading
    "assessing cases under paragraph 4" the guidance says this:

         "While paragraph 4 suggests you must use discretion  to  take  into
         account all the factors of  an  application,  applicants  will  not
         normally be allowed to benefit from:

            . a breach of conditions

            . circumstances where it would be undesirable to permit them to
              remain in the UK  because  of  their  character,  conduct  or
              associations

            . circumstances where  they  represent  a  danger  to  national
              security.

         Case law such as that of Oguz  and  KA  (Turkey)  established  that
         applicants who have breached immigration law must still be assessed
         under  the  1973  rules  and  not  the  more  restrictive   current
         Immigration Rules.  Under the 1973 rules  breaches  of  immigration
         law in business cases are covered by paragraph 4 of HC510.

         Just because an applicant has worked in breach of their  conditions
         does  not  mean  you  must  automatically  refuse  the  case  under
         paragraph 4 of HC510.  Instead you  must  consider  an  applicant's
         breach of immigration law on an individual basis.  This is  because
         a breach of conditions can vary in different ways  and  so  have  a
         different impact on a case.

         You must consider all the relevant circumstances of an application,
         but applicants  must  not  normally  be  allowed  to  benefit  from
         breaches in immigration law.  This includes first  time  or  repeat
         applications based on previously established businesses,  or  where
         there are only superficial changes such as a  change  in  name,  or
         change in the status of a business  from  sole  trader  to  limited
         company.

         The  following  factors  are  relevant  when  you  decide   if   an
         application, where a breach of immigration law has occurred, should
         be refused.  An applicant:

            . has overstayed a previous period of leave

            . has entered or having sought to enter the UK illegally

            . has sought or obtained leave  by  deception  such  as  making
              false representations or failing to disclose  material  facts
              in the application (fraudulent and abusive conduct)

            . has breached their conditions of leave  to  enter  or  remain
              (for example, where the applicant started trading before  the
              initial grant of leave  and  this  put  the  applicant  in  a
              position  to  meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph  21,  in
              circumstances where they should not have been able to  do  so
              otherwise) if an applicant has breached their  conditions  of
              temporary admission or has absconded from temporary admission

         ....

         Working in breach would be considered material (and so more  likely
         to lead to a refusal under paragraph 4) if:

         It affects the ability of the applicant to  meet  the  requirements
         under paragraph 21, for example, the breach enabled  the  applicant
         to meet the requirements of paragraph  21  in  circumstances  where
         they would not be able to meet them otherwise and this  may  amount
         to an abuse of rights.  Again this should not automatically  result
         in refusal  but  is  likely  to  weigh  more  heavily  against  the
         applicant when considering paragraph 4.  An example might be  where
         the money gained from working in breach allowed  the  applicant  to
         buy a share of an existing business that formed the  basis  of  the
         ECAA application

         Where the working in breach occurred after July  2008,  (after  the
         end of the 'pragmatic approach' taken by the Home Office  to  these
         types of cases) this will count more heavily against the  applicant
         and so make a refusal under paragraph 4 more likely."

23. In Oguz the CJEU acknowledged that even in cases of fraud or  abuse  of
    rights an individual was entitled to the application of the "standstill
    clause".  That overturned the previous view, certainly as  espoused  in
    our domestic law, that  such  cases  took  an  individual  outside  the
    standstill clause altogether (see for example R (Tum and Dari)  v  SSHD
    (Case C-1605) [2008] 1 WLR 94 and LF (Turkey) v SSHD  [2007]  EWCA  Civ
    1441 and Somnez v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 582).  That effect of  Oguz  was
    acknowledged by the Court of Appeal in KA (Turkey) v SSHD  [2012]  EWCA
    Civ 1183.

24. Nothing in Oguz, however, disentitles a Member State  from  considering
    all relevant factors, including an individual's immigration  status  if
    that is relevant to the immigration laws and rules which the standstill
    clause require the authorities of a Member State to apply when  dealing
    with a claim by a Turkish national for leave to establish  a  business.
    In the context of the UK, the focus,  therefore,  shifts  to  the  1973
    Rules in HC 510.

25. As para 4 of HC 510 makes plain, in exercising  discretion  whether  to
    grant leave under those Rules, including in respect  of  an  individual
    who relies upon para 21, account must be taken  of  "all  the  relevant
    facts" and it will be, for example, relevant:

         "whether the person has observed  the  time  limit  and  conditions
         subject to which he was admitted".

26. There was, therefore, nothing impermissible in  the  respondent  taking
    into account, at least in principle and subject to what  I  say  below,
    the fact that the applicant was an overstayer in exercising  discretion
    under HC 510.

27.  That  position  is  not  inconsistent  with  the  CJEU  decisions,  in
    particular what is said in Oguz at [39]-[40]  which  simply  recognises
    that the standstill clause applies and therefore the focus  is  on  the
    relevant domestic rules.   I  do  not,  therefore,  accept  Mr  Walsh's
    submission that the  respondent's  decision  is  unlawful  because,  in
    effect, it is contrary to the CJEU's jurisprudence.  There is, however,
    an underlying point in the applicant's first ground  which  is,  in  my
    judgement, well-founded.

28. On any reading of the Rules and as set out by the respondent in her own
    guidance, an individual's immigration status is only a relevant factor.
     Nothing in the Rules dictates  that  evidence  accumulated  whilst  an
    individual is unlawfully in the  UK  should  be  ignored.   Despite  Ms
    Bayoumi's submissions, it is clear to me that that  is  precisely  what
    the  respondent  did  in  her  decision  letter  when  considering  the
    application of para 21.  In doing so, the respondent, in my  judgement,
    deprived herself of the ability to consider "all the circumstances"  of
    the applicant including the merit of his application when applying para
    4.  To that extent, I accept that  the  applicant's  second  ground  of
    challenge is made out.

29. However, in my view the respondent had failed properly to consider  the
    applicant's immigration status in any event.  As  her  decision  letter
    makes plain, she adopted an unnuanced approach, namely that he  was  an
    overstayer and had been  so  since  2005  and  his  application  should
    therefore be refused.

30. I was not taken to the detailed application and supporting documents of
    the applicant's claim, but that is helpfully summarised at  para  8  of
    the applicant's statement of facts and detailed grounds which I did not
    understand Ms Bayoumi to dispute.  There it is said:

         "By application dated 28 April 2014, the  Applicant  made  a  fresh
         application for  leave  to  remain  on  the  basis  of  a  business
         proposal, similar to the one already canvassed and relied on.   The
         business proposal as advanced on this  occasion  contained  a  very
         detailed business plan dated 26 April 2014 [File B page 22 to  78],
         setting out how the proposed business planned to buy and sell  some
         17 different types of endoscopic consumables to  and  from  private
         companies.  The Plan contained a detailed outline of  the  relevant
         regulatory scheme and the experience the Applicant  has  gained  to
         operate the said business.  Extensive market research was relied on
         [File B page 30 to 34].  It sets out  the  initial  investment  and
         company structure (File B page  39  and  42).   Start-up  costs  of
         �14,531 are provided for.  Marketing  Analysis  and  Strategy  have
         been undertaken and set out in the Plan [File B page 48 to  52  and
         63 to 64].  Estimates of  Sales,  Income  and  gross  margins  were
         provided [File B page 66 to  68  and  page  76).   The  application
         contained strong  evidence  going  towards  showing  the  in  depth
         research and contacts the  Applicant  has  developed.   Substantial
         evidence was submitted such as that about the BTI  (Binding  Tariff
         Information)-a tool created to  assist  businesses  to  obtain  the
         correct tariff classification for goods imported and exported (File
         B  page  92  to  101).   Detailed  price  lists  of  the   relevant
         consumables were provided [File B page 104 to  170].   He  produced
         evidence  of  relevant  training  while  studying   for   his   MSc
         ('Management and Development of International Finance' File B  page
         216 to 217), Marketing for Beginners [File  B  page  218  to  219],
         Accounting and finance for Managers [File B page 223],  Certificate
         in Medical Imaging and  Human  Body  [File  B  page  220  to  222],
         Evidence of finances [File B page 279 to 281], Evidence in  respect
         of business premises and business rates [File B page  288  to  321]
         Tax arrangements with HMRC [File B page 399 to 426].  The Plan  and
         supporting documents contained in  the  main  fresh  evidence,  not
         evidence that was part of the applicant's previous applications."

31. Mr Walsh submitted that the applicant was not relying upon evidence  of
    a business or self-employment he had undertaken whilst he did not  have
    leave in the UK.  The applicant was simply relying  upon  documents  he
    accumulated  whilst  in  the  UK  without  leave  either  by   research
    undertaken in the UK or by receiving from Turkey  supporting  documents
    of his activities and financial position prior to coming to the UK.   I
    did not understand Ms Bayoumi ultimately to dispute this.  Indeed,  the
    Secretary of  State  accepts  in  her  decision  that  the  applicant's
    "documentary evidence has all been accumulated" whilst he  remained  in
    the UK.

32. In my judgement, this context was a relevant factor for the  respondent
    to take into account in exercising discretion and taking  into  account
    the fact that the applicant was an overstayer.

33. In KA (Turkey), the Court of Appeal  acknowledged  that  there  were  a
    number of factual situations  underpinning  an  individual's  "unlawful
    status" which were relevant.  At [97] Rix LJ said:

         "I have expressed the view that  LF  (Turkey)  was  premised  on  a
         factual  situation  which  was  viewed  as  an  abuse  of   rights,
         equivalent to fraud, because the applicant there could  only  bring
         himself within the standstill clause by virtue of his breach ...  I
         have sought to demonstrate that the 2005  IDI  did  not  deal  with
         breach of condition  outside  what  could  properly  be  viewed  as
         fraudulent activity or abuse of rights; and that the 2009  IDI  has
         adopted a more nuanced attitude to breach of condition in a  proper
         attempt to  distinguish  cases  of  fraud/abuse  and  other  cases.
         Plainly, cases of fraud or abuse, or applications from persons  who
         were not even lawfully in this country, are very different from the
         situation of incidental breach of condition."

34. In this case, it is not suggested by the respondent that the  applicant
    has engaged in fraud or  abuse.   Equally,  his  situation  is,  as  Ms
    Bayoumi submitted, unlike that of  the  individual  in  KA  where  that
    individual had worked in breach of a condition only for a short  period
    of time but on legal advice and ceased  to  engage  in  self-employment
    when advised that he  could  not  do  so.   Whilst  Rix  LJ  linked  an
    application by a person who was not lawfully in the country with  fraud
    or abuse - to contrast it with "incidental breach of condition" - I  do
    not understand him to have necessarily  seen  those  categories  as  of
    equal dis-merit but simply to contrast them  with  a  case  of  obvious
    merit, namely a "situation of incidental breach of condition".

35. In this case, of course, there is also no suggestion that the applicant
    has actually engaged in self-employment contrary to a condition in  his
    leave or whilst here unlawfully.  All he has done is remain  unlawfully
    in the UK and, during that time,  accumulated  documents  and  material
    (some relating to activity before he was even in the UK) to support his
    application that he has the intention and ability to establish  himself
    in business.  A common sense  view  would  suggest  that  his  unlawful
    presence is not necessarily on an equal footing with a  person  who  is
    unlawfully present and unlawfully engages in self-employment in the  UK
    and then relies on evidence of that self-employment to found his  claim
    under HC 510.

36. In her decision, by simply asserting that the applicant had  overstayed
    albeit for some length of time, the  respondent  failed  to  take  into
    account this context relevant to the application as  one  of  "all  the
    circumstances" she was  required  to  consider  under  para  4  and  in
    accordance  with  her  own  policy  guidance.   The  approach  to   her
    discretion had to accommodate a more nuanced  approach  than  a  simple
    assertion of unlawful presence.  In that regard  also,  the  respondent
    acted unlawfully and her decision to  refuse  the  applicant  leave  is
    flawed.

37. In this case, the applicant has not had the merits of  his  application
    determined and, if the merits are established, the respondent  has  not
    considered the  exercise  of  discretion  having  regard  to  "all  the
    circumstances"  including  the  full   context   of   the   applicant's
    immigration status including the extent to which that  has  contributed
    to his ability to make the application.  The applicant is  entitled  to
    have his application under paras 4 and 21 properly considered.

38. To that extent, I accept that the  first  ground  relied  upon  by  the
    applicant is made out and  for  those  reasons  also  the  respondent's
    decision is unlawful.

Decision

39. The applicant's  claim  succeeds.   The  respondent's  decision  of  16
    September 2014 is unlawful and is quashed.




                                                                      Signed




                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
