
GO (Right of appeal: ss 89 and 92) Nigeria [2008] UKAIT 00025

                       ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at:  Field House
Date of Hearing: 20 November 2007

                                   Before:


 Mr C M G Ockelton, Deputy President of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
                       Senior Immigration Judge Grubb

                                   Between

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      AN IMMIGRATION OFFICER, HEATHROW
                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the Appellant:           Mr. Rana of John & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:          Mr. L. Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer

A person who has entry clearance taking effect as leave to enter granted
before arrival but whose leave is cancelled on arrival is not caught by s
89(1) because he has made no application for leave to enter but has no in-
country right of appeal if s 92(3B) applies to him.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, a citizen of Nigeria, appealed to the Tribunal against a
    decision of the respondent on 29 September 2006.  An Immigration  Judge
    allowed her appeal.  The respondent sought and obtained  an  order  for
    reconsideration.  Thus the matter comes before us.

 2. In  view  of  what  we  have  to  say  about  the  Immigration  Judge's
    determination, we need to set out the facts and  the  documentation  of
    this case in some detail.  The appellant's husband was  in  the  United
    Kingdom as a student.  It appears that, before the date of the decision
    with which we are concerned, his last entry  was  in  July  2006.   The
    appellant herself obtained a multiple entry visit visa for the  purpose
    of visiting him while he was here.  She also, it appears, sought  entry
    clearance as a student herself.  That  application  was  refused.   The
    refusal did not, however, directly affect her  visit  visa,  which  she
    used to travel to the United Kingdom, arriving in the afternoon  of  29
    September 2006.  Under the provisions  of  the  Immigration  (Leave  to
    Enter and Remain) Order 2000 (SI 2000/1161), she was, as  a  holder  of
    such a visa, treated on arrival as a person who had been granted  leave
    to enter before arrival.  On arrival, however, she was examined  by  an
    immigration officer, who, no  doubt  acting  under  para  321A  of  the
    Statement of Changes in Immigration Rules, HC 395, cancelled her  leave
    to enter.  He issued her with a notice of  decision  in  the  following
    terms:

        "You have presented a visa endorsed visit which had effect as leave
        to enter the United Kingdom on 22/07/2005.  However, I believe that
        your purpose in arriving in the United Kingdom today is  to  study,
        which  is  different  from  the  purpose  specified  in  the  entry
        clearance.  I therefore cancel your leave to enter.
        As stated above, I believe that your purpose  in  arriving  in  the
        United Kingdom is to engage in a full time course for a  period  of
        two years.  I have arrived at this conclusion as the  establishment
        of 'Information Technology & Health  and  Social  Science  College'
        have confirmed that you are enrolled on  this  course  and  due  to
        start this course on 02/10/2006.
        I therefore refuse you leave to enter the United Kingdom."

    There is then the statement of the Immigration  Officer's  proposal  to
    remove the appellant and a statement that she has no  right  to  appeal
    against the decision before removal.   There  is  a  list  of  possible
    reasons for that, with boxes, but none of them has been ticked.

 3. The appellant left the United Kingdom.  Within the  period  limited  by
    the rules for appealing from abroad, she  served  a  notice  of  appeal
    against the decision.  We do not need to set out the grounds of  appeal
    in which the appellant made assertions about the purpose of  her  visit
    and about her proposed course in Croydon: for present purposes we  need
    only say that the grounds of appeal raise no human rights issues.   The
    appeal was listed  for  hearing,  at  which  the  respondent  evidently
    protested, asserting that there was no right of appeal in this case.  A
    hearing fixed for 20  March  2007  was  therefore  adjourned,  and  the
    respondent indicated  that  the  reason  for  the  assertion  that  the
    appellant had no right of appeal before removal was that  she  did  not
    have an entry clearance valid for the purpose for which her application
    for leave to enter was made, as provided by s 89(1) of the Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as amended.  The Immigration  Officer's
    covering letter asserts that in the circumstances, the appellant has no
    right of appeal.  Nevertheless,  approximately  contemporaneously,  the
    Immigration Officer was preparing a fuller statement in the form  of  a
    "report", which is dated 11 March 2007.  After  repeating  the  reasons
    for refusal from the  notice  of  decision,  the  report  continues  as
    follows:

        "The passenger sought entry as a  visitor  for  a  period  of  five
        months to visit her husband, ...whom she stated  was  attending  an
        aviation training course in the United Kingdom.   She  stated  that
        her husband had been in the United Kingdom since July 2006.
        The passenger held funds of  �100.00  and  a  return  ticket  dated
        28/02/2007.
        Local records indicated that the passenger had been refused a  long
        term student entry clearance on the 29/08/2006 in Abuja, Nigeria.
        During interview the passenger stated that she had  applied  for  a
        student visa to attend a two  year  Diploma  in  Advanced  Business
        Administration at the college of 'Information Technology  &  Health
        Social Science College' based in Croydon.  She stated that she  had
        been refused the visa as she had not presented  original  documents
        to the Entry Clearance Officer.  She stated that she was  currently
        appealing the decision and understood  that  she  could  enter  the
        United Kingdom as a visitor.  She stated that the duration  of  her
        visit would consist of  visiting  Oxford  with  her  husband.   The
        passenger stated that [she] had two children aged  seven  and  five
        years and that her mother-in-law would be looking after them.
        In terms of employment, the passenger stated that she sold handbags
        and shoes from her house in Ibadan, Nigeria and  that  this  was  a
        joint venture between herself and her sister.  When  questioned  as
        to why she chose this period of time to visit the  United  Kingdom,
        she stated that her husband had invited her.
        The above named school was contacted and confirmed that  the  first
        year's deposit had been paid and that the passenger  should  report
        to the college on 02/10/2006.  They stated that they were not aware
        of any deferment.
        I considered the facts of the case.  I could not be persuaded  that
        the passenger intended to spend six months visiting  Oxford.   Also
        when questioned as to why she had chosen to visit  her  husband  at
        this period in time, which was in fact  so  close  to  the  initial
        registration date at the college she simply  stated  that  she  had
        been invited.  Furthermore she had just started a business  venture
        which she would be neglecting for some time.
        In light of the above and with the authority of  Chief  Immigration
        Officer, N. Green I accordingly refused her  entry  to  the  United
        Kingdom and cancelled her entry clearance."

 4. The matter was again listed for hearing and following a  hearing  on  3
    May 2007, Immigration Judge Brewer issued his determination on 16  May.
    We need to set it out in full, and we  do  so,  omitting  the  heading,
    although observing that in  that  heading  the  respondent  is  wrongly
    described as the Secretary of State for the Home Department.

      "DETERMINATION AND REASONS
      Details of the Appellant
        1. The Appellant, a citizen of Nigeria, is female.   The  Appellant
           was born on 17th September 1974.
        Substantive Issues under Appeal
        2. This appeal is under the Nationality Immigration and Asylum  Act
           2002, against a Decision to remove the Appellant  from  the  UK.
           The Decision was made by the Respondent on 29th September 2006.
        3.  I  have  considered  whether  the  Decision  would  breach  our
           obligations under the 1950  Convention  for  the  Protection  of
           Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms ("the 1950 Convention").




        The Proceedings
        4. I heard no oral evidence by the Sponsor/Appellant but I did hear
           oral submissions from both Representatives,  all  of  which  are
           fully set out in the Record of Proceedings.  I have  also  taken
           into account the follow documents which have been placed  before
           me;
                 i. The Explanatory Statement and its annexes.
                ii. The Appellant's bundle
      5.    At the end of the hearing I reserved my  decision  which  I  now
           give with my reasons.
      THE EVIDENCE AND SUBMISSIONS
      The Applicable Law
        6.       In human rights appeals, it is for the Appellant  to  show
           that there has been  an  interference  with  his  or  her  human
           rights.  If  that  is  established,  and  the  relevant  article
           permits, it is then for the Respondent  to  establish  that  the
           interference was justified.  The appropriate standard  of  proof
           is whether there are  "substantial  grounds  for  believing  the
           evidence.
        7.       The point in time at which I have to consider the relevant
           facts, for both immigration and human rights  issues  (save  for
           Article 3), is the date of the Decision as stated in paragraph 2
           above.  The requirements of the Rules,  which  are  relevant  to
           this appeal, are set out in paragraph 3.
        The Appellant's Claim
        8. The Appellant claims that she was genuinely entering the UK as a
           visitor.  She held a visa to do so and the decision was wrong in
           law.  She  was  not  intending  to  enter  as  a  student.   Her
           application to do that had  already  been  refused  and  she  is
           appealing.
        HUMAN RIGHTS AND THE 1950 CONVENTION
        Article 8
        9. Under this Article I have to determine  the  following  separate
           questions
                 i. Is there an interference with the right to  respect  for
                    private life (which includes the right to  physical  and
                    moral integrity) and family life?
                ii. Is that interference in accordance with the law?
               iii. Does that interference have legitimate aims?
                iv.  Is  the  interference  proportionate  in  a  democratic
                    society to the legitimate aim to be achieved?
       10. I  find  that  the  decision  of  the  Immigration  officer  was
           incorrect.  In   September 2006, the Appellant's husband  was  a
           student in the UK.  And she was entering with a  visit  visa  to
           see him.  I find that she was not entering the UK to come  as  a
           student.  She had previously applied for a visa to do  that  and
           it had been refused.  Her visit visa was  issued  on  22nd  July
           2005 to visit her husband.  He has now finished his  course  and
           has returned to Nigeria.  The Appellant was  refused  entry  and
           returned  forthwith  to  Nigeria.   She  is  anxious  that   her
           immigration history is not besmirched.  She was not  interviewed
           and given little opportunity to state her case.  I note that the
           report was prepared in March 2007.  It appeared that  the  visit
           visa was not picked up by the Immigration Officer.
        Other Articles
       11. I find that no rights under any other Articles  are  engaged  in
           this appeal.
        Decision on the Human Rights Appeal
       12. In the light of the above conclusions, I find that the  Decision
           appeal against would cause the United Kingdom to be in breach of
           the law or its obligations under the 1950 Convention.
        SUMMARY OF DECISIONS
        13.       I  allow  the  appeal  under  Article  8  of   the   1950
        Convention."

 5. It can be seen at once that this is a somewhat surprising document.  In
    the context of this case, we have to say, with regret, that we consider
    it to be well below the professional standard that could be expected by
    the parties or the taxpayer.  Having misdescribed the  respondent,  the
    Immigration Judge goes on to misdescribe the decision at  para  2.   He
    then omits any reference to the relevant  immigration  law  but  states
    merely that he has considered whether the decision was a breach of  the
    appellant's human rights.   By  para  7,  however,  he  appears  to  be
    concerned with questions of immigration  law,  indeed  he  even  refers
    (incorrectly), to having set out the relevant requirements of the Rules
    in para 3.  In para 4 it is by no means  clear  what  the  phrase  "the
    Sponsor/Appellant" means: there could be no oral evidence  from  either
    as, by the date of the hearing, they were outside the  United  Kingdom.
    In view of what follows, it is interesting  to  know  that  he  regards
    himself as having taken into account the documents described in para 4.
     There is no explanatory statement in  this  case,  but  there  is  the
    report which we have set out above.  It is difficult to  know  what  is
    meant by "the Appellant's bundle", which in a  more  accurately-phrased
    determination might be an odd way of describing three sheets  of  paper
    consisting of the first page of a two page e-mail and pages 3 and 4  of
    another six page document electronically produced.

 6. The Immigration Judge appears  not  to  be  troubled  by  the  question
    whether he had jurisdiction to determine an appeal, a matter which,  as
    the Senior Immigration Judge who ordered reconsideration  pointed  out,
    is by no means simple.  He does not appear to have been troubled by the
    fact that the grounds of appeal raised no  question  of  human  rights.
    Further, he does not appear  to  have  been  very  concerned  with  the
    evidence before him.  The only time he descends to any detail on it  is
    at para 10, rather oddly sandwiched between treatments of  "Article  8"
    and "Other Articles".  He there  states  that  the  appellant  was  not
    interviewed, although the report,  which  was  before  the  Immigration
    Judge, describes an interview and  the  appellant's  responses  at  the
    interview.  He says that "it appeared that visit visa was not picked up
    by the Immigration officer", although both the report and the notice of
    decision refer clearly and accurately to the fact  that  the  appellant
    was travelling on a visitor's  visa.   Whilst  in  these  two  respects
    describing the officer as having failed to do what  he  ought  to  have
    done and did in fact do, the Immigration Judge omits any  reference  to
    any factors in the case tending against the appellant.  It is not clear
    what he  means  by  the  decision  of  the  Immigration  Officer  being
    "incorrect", as he  gives  no  reason  for  reaching  that  conclusion.
    Although it may be that the statement of the Immigration  Judge's  task
    in para 9 of the determination is reasonably correct, he entirely fails
    to perform it.  It is difficult to conceive of any basis upon which the
    refusal of a visit visa to the claimant could breach her human  rights,
    and certainly no reason is given.

 7. It follows that in allowing  the  appellant's  appeal  the  Immigration
    Judge totally ignored questions of jurisdiction and of immigration law;
    despite there being so little evidence before him he ignored part of it
    and misstated another part; he elected to deal only with human  rights,
    although no such issues were raised by the appellant and  in  doing  so
    failed properly to carry out the task  he  had  set  himself;  and  his
    conclusions as a whole entirely  lack  reasons.   The  document  simply
    fails to demonstrate that the judge has properly performed his judicial
    function in this case.  What is disturbing is that it looks  very  much
    as though  it  has  been  prepared  according  to  a  template  on  the
    Immigration Judge's computer.  If that is so there may  be  many  other
    similarly defective determinations.  We hope not.

 8. Before us Mr. Rana made a valiant attempt to defend the  determination,
    submitting that it is clear from para 10  that  the  Immigration  Judge
    accepted the appellant's account and  took  the  Immigration  Officer's
    Report into account.  As we have indicated, it is clear  from  para  10
    that the Immigration Judge did not consider the evidence  as  a  whole,
    taking into account evidence against the appellant as well as  that  in
    her favour.  Mr. Rana also submitted that it is clear from para 9  that
    the Immigration Judge had the step by step approach in Razgar  in  mind
    and that it is clear from para 12 that he took into account the task in
    para 9 and the findings in para 10.  Unfortunately that is by no  means
    clear.  Even if Mr. Rana's submissions on those topics  were  accepted,
    however, they  would  not  cure  the  other  omissions  which  we  have
    identified.  There cannot be the slightest doubt that  the  Immigration
    Judge's determination contains material errors of law.

 9. We now turn to the task of substituting a determination.

Jurisdiction

10. The appellant had a visit visa which  on  her  arrival  in  the  United
    Kingdom which took effect (unless cancelled)  as  leave  to  enter  the
    United Kingdom granted in advance of her arrival.  If  it  is  to  take
    such  effect,  it  does  so  without  any  further   formalities.    An
    Immigration Officer is, however, entitled to examine a person who holds
    such a visa, and may under certain circumstances cancel  the  leave  to
    enter.  The relevant statutory provisions relating to that process, and
    to the right of appeal, are as follows.

11. In paragraph 2A of Schedule 2 to the Immigration Act 1971:


      "(1) This paragraph applies to a person who has arrived in the United
                 Kingdom with leave to enter which is in force but which was
                 given to him before his arrival.
         (2) He may be examined by an immigration officer for  the  purpose
           of establishing -
                 a)  whether  there  has  been  such   a   change   in   the
                    circumstances of his case, since that leave  was  given,
                    that it should be cancelled;
                 b) whether that leave was obtained as  a  result  of  false
                    information given by him  or  his  failure  to  disclose
                    material facts; or
                 (c)   whether there are medical grounds on which that leave
                     should be cancelled.
        (2A) Where the person's  leave  to  enter  derives,  by  virtue  of
             section 3A(3),  from  any  entry  clearance,  he  may  also  be
             examined  by  an  immigration  officer  for  the   purpose   of
             establishing whether the  leave  should  be  cancelled  on  the
             grounds that the person's purpose in  arriving  in  the  United
             Kingdom is different from the purpose specified  in  the  entry
             clearance.
        ...
          8) An immigration officer may, on the completion of an examination
             of a person under this paragraph, cancel his leave to enter.
           9) Cancellation of a person's leave under sub-paragraph  (8)  is
              to be treated for the purposes of this Act and Part 5 of  the
              Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (immigration and
              asylum appeals) as if he had been refused leave to enter at a
              time when he had a current entry clearance."


       12.  In  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  (as
           amended):

            "89(1)     A person may not appeal under section  82(1)  against
              refusal of leave to enter in the United Kingdom unless -
                     a) on his arrival in the United Kingdom  he  had  entry
                        clearance, and
               b) the purpose of entry specified in the entry clearance  is
                  the same as that specified in his application  for  leave
                  to enter.
          2) Subsection (1) does not prevent the bringing of  an  appeal  on
             any or all of the grounds referred in section 84(1)(b), (c) and
             (g).
          ....


          92(1)   A person may not appeal under section 82(1) while he is in
              the United Kingdom unless his appeal is of a  kind  to  which
              this section applies.
          ...
           3) This section also applies to an  appeal  against  refusal  to
              leave to enter the United Kingdom if -
                 a) at the time of the  refusal  the  appellant  is  in  the
                    United Kingdom, and
                 b) on his arrival in the United Kingdom the  appellant  had
                    entry clearance.
            (3A) But this section does not apply  by  virtue  of  subsection
(3) if subsection (3B) or                (3C)  applies  to  the  refusal  of
leave to enter
            (3B) This subsection applies to a  refusal  of  leave  to  enter
              which is a deemed refusal under paragraph 2A(9) of Schedule 2
              to  the  Immigration   Act   1971   (c.77)   resulting   from
              cancellation of leave to enter by an immigration officer -
               a) under paragraph 2A(8) of that Schedule, and
               b) on the grounds specified  in  paragraph  2A(2A)  of  that
                  Schedule.
            ..."

13.   The notice of decision served on the appellant stated that she had  no
    in-country right of appeal.  The subsequent letter from the immigration
    officer to the Tribunal specified that the reason for  the  appellant's
    having no in-country right of appeal was that s 89(1) applied  to  her.
    But, as  the  immigration  officer's  letter  also  asserts,  in  those
    circumstances the appellant would have no right of appeal at all.   The
    first question, is, therefore, whether s  89(1)  applies  to  a  person
    whose entry clearance takes effect as leave  to  enter  granted  before
    arrival.  We have reached the firm conclusion that it does not.   There
    are three reasons.  The first is that s 89(1), in its terms, applies to
    a person who makes an application for leave to enter.  A person who has
    entry clearance which takes effect as leave to enter does not make  any
    application for leave to enter: he has no need to  do  so,  because  he
    already has that for which he would be applying.  The second reason  is
    that if s 89(1) completely removed the right of  appeal  in  all  cases
    where leave to enter had been cancelled under para 2A(2A)  of  Schedule
    of 2 to the 1971 Act, on the basis there set out, the provisions  of  s
    92(3A) and (3B), separately removing an in-country right of  appeal  in
    such cases would be superfluous.  The third reason is that if there  is
    any ambiguity in s 89(1), it should in our view be construed  in  order
    to preserve rather than remove a right of appeal.

13. For all these reasons we conclude that s 89(1) does not  apply  to  the
    appellant.  The immigration officer was wrong to say that the appellant
    had no right of appeal; he was doubly wrong to say that  the  appellant
    had no in-country right of appeal because of the provisions of s 89(1),
    because if they had applied she would have had no right  of  appeal  at
    all.

14. The appellant  is,  however,  caught  by  s  92.   Although  under  the
    provisions of para 2A(9) of Schedule 2 to the 1971 Act  she  is  to  be
    treated as a person refused leave to enter at a time  she  had  current
    entry clearance, sub-ss (3A) and (3B) of s 92 of the  2002  Act  remove
    the benefit that sub-s (3) of that section would have given  her.   Her
    right of appeal is exercisable only from abroad.   It  is  indeed  from
    abroad that she has exercised it.

Decision

15. We turn then to the facts.  We have already  set  out  almost  all  the
    evidence of this case.  After refusal of a student's visa the appellant
    travelled on her visitor's visa.  On arrival in the United Kingdom  she
    was challenged as to her intentions.  Investigation showed that she was
    registered for a course in the United Kingdom  starting  shortly  after
    her arrival.  The immigration officer did not believe  her  claim  that
    she had deferred her course because she had not been able to  obtain  a
    visa; his suspicions were confirmed by a telephone call to the college.
     Further questioning of the appellant did not  persuade  him  that  she
    genuinely intended only to make a visit to  the  United  Kingdom.   The
    appellant's grounds of appeal assert the genuineness of her intentions,
    but are not evidence and add little.  The only relevant evidence is the
    e-mail  to  which  we  have  made  reference.   It  must  be  what  the
    Immigration Judge regarded as the  "Appellant's  bundle",  although  he
    makes no reference to its contents.  The e-mail is from  the  appellant
    to her solicitors dated 24 April 2007, that is to  say  shortly  before
    the hearing.   It  has  attached  to  it  below  what  purports  to  be
    correspondence between the appellant and the  college.   In  an  e-mail
    dated 25 September 2006 to "info@thesecretary.net" the  appellant  asks
    to defer her admission until the  following  year.   The  reply  is  as
    follows:

          "Thank you for your email.  We may defer your admission until next
          year, kindly advise us when you are able to reapply.
          Regards
          College Administrator"

    Compared with the precision of the information given by the Immigration
    Officer, we regard that document as entirely  unpersuasive.   There  is
    nothing to show that the e-mail address is the e-mail  address  of  the
    college in question: the "College Administrator" is unnamed,  and  even
    without those difficulties  there  is  no  clear  indication  that  the
    appellant can defer her admission,  nor  is  there  any  indication  of
    financial arrangements in relation to the  deposit  which  had  already
    been paid.

16. Looking at the evidence as a whole as we do, and bearing in  mind  that
    the burden of proof is on the appellant, it seems to us, that, for  the
    reasons he gave, the Immigration Officer was  amply  justified  in  his
    suspicions.  There is  every  reason  to  suppose  that  the  appellant
    intended to undertake her course, for  which  she  had  registered  and
    paid, and which began the week after her arrival in the United Kingdom:
    and there is little  if  any  reason  to  suppose  the  contrary.   The
    Immigration Officer was entirely justified in cancelling her leave  and
    insofar as he exercised his discretion in doing so we see no reason  to
    say that his discretion should have been exercised differently.

17. The appellant has raised no issues of human rights.  Her husband was in
    the United Kingdom undertaking a course of studies whilst she  remained
    in Nigeria.  That was the arrangement they chose.  She was able to come
    to the United Kingdom within  the  terms  of  the  visitors  rules  and
    provided that she did not  abuse  the  privilege  given  to  her  by  a
    multiple entry visa.  We can see no conceivable basis for  saying  that
    refusing her leave to enter in the circumstances of this case  breached
    her human rights.

18. For the forgoing reasons,  having  found  that  the  Immigration  Judge
    materially erred in law, we now substitute a  determination  dismissing
    the appellant's appeal.






                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT
                                                             Date:

