


Asylum and Immigration Tribunal

      KAN (Post-Study Work - degree award required) India [2009] UKAIT 00022


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Procession House (Field House)       |                             |
|on 27th April 2009                            |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                      SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE SPENCER

                                   Between

                                     KAN

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the appellant:     Ms N Bustani, counsel instructed by Paul John & Co,
Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr A Sheikh, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The requirement of paragraph 245Z and paragraphs 51 to 55 of Appendix  A  of
HC 395 as amended is that in order to be entitled to  points  the  applicant
must have been awarded the  requisite  qualification  in  respect  of  which
points are claimed.  It is not sufficient to  show  that  the  qualification
will be awarded.  The language used in the Tier 1 (Post-Study Work)  of  the
Points Based System - Policy  Guidance  in  indicating  what  documents  are
required as evidence of the award, supports this view.

 1. The appellant is a citizen of India,  born  on  6th  March  1983.   Her
    appeal against the decision of the respondent, made on 9h January 2009,
    refusing her application for leave to remain as a  Tier  1  (Post-Study
    Work) Migrant under paragraph 245Z of HC 395 as amended  was  dismissed
    under the immigration rules and on human rights grounds under article 8
    of  the  ECHR  after  a  hearing  by  Immigration  Judge  Monro,  in  a
    determination promulgated on 12th March 2009.

 2.  On  25th  March   2009   Senior   Immigration   Judge   Warr   ordered
    reconsideration for the following reasons:

        "The immigration judge felt constrained to dismiss the appeal on  a
        technical  issue  but  the  appellant  arguably  submits  that  the
        appellant might have succeeded on the guidance referred to.

        In the premises it is appropriate to order reconsideration  on  the
        grounds as pleaded."

 3. In paragraph 1 of her determination the immigration judge recited  that
    on 26th February 2006 the appellant was  granted  leave  to  enter  the
    United Kingdom as a student until 31st January 2007.  On 14th  February
    2007 she was granted leave to remain in the United Kingdom as a student
    until 30th April 2008.  On 28th April 2008 she  was  granted  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom until 31st December 2008.  On  20  October
    2008 she made the application, the refusal of  which  was  the  subject
    matter of the appeal.

 4. In paragraph 5 of  her  determination  she  said  that  she  had  heard
    evidence from the appellant and found her to  be  a  credible  witness.
    The appellant had completed her studies in July 2008 and in October she
    received written confirmation that "the certificate" would  be  awarded
    in March 2009.  She said she had not yet received the certificate.   In
    paragraph 11 of her  determination  the  immigration  judge  said  that
    London South Bank University had confirmed in a letter of 27th  October
    2008 that the appellant "has completed the requirements  for  award  of
    the Postgraduate Diploma in Corporate Governance which will be  awarded
    at the next Examination Board scheduled to be held in March 2009".  She
    explained that in another letter dated 21st January 2009 the university
    had stated:

        "[KAN] is registered as a student on  the  MSc/PgDip  in  Corporate
        Governance Course at  this  university,  which  commenced  on  26th
        September 2005.  Under our corroboration arrangements  with  Loyola
        College Chennai she completed semester one at that institution  and
        came to the UK in February 2006 for completion of the rest  of  the
        course.  [KAN's] attendance record has been  excellent  (over  95%)
        and she is a student in good financial standing with no arrears  of
        fee payments.  In the academic year 2007/8 (i.e. the academic  year
        ending July  2008)  she  successfully  completed  the  Postgraduate
        Diploma in Corporate Governance which will  be  awarded  after  the
        next Examination Board scheduled to be held in March 2009."

 5. In paragraph 12 of her determination the immigration  judge  said  that
    the wording of the two letters from the university was plain.  She said
    there was no doubt that the award would be  made  but  the  wording  of
    Appendix A of HC 395 was also clear.  She said the  student  must  have
    written confirmation that the qualification had been awarded, not  that
    it would be awarded, even if there was little or  no  doubt  that  this
    would  be  the  case.   She  found  the  appellant  did  not  meet  the
    requirement of the rules at  the  date  of  application  and  that  the
    decision made by the Secretary of State was in accordance with the  law
    and rules applicable to the case.

 6. At the hearing before me Ms Bustani confirmed that no certificate  that
    the appellant had been awarded her degree was in existence at the  date
    of the hearing.

 7. In the grounds for review the appellant relied upon the Tier  1  (Post-
    Study Work) of the Points Based System - Policy Guidance issued by  the
    respondent for the proposition that  if  an  applicant  was  unable  to
    provide a certificate of award she could rely upon a  letter  from  the
    body awarding the qualification stating that the certificate  of  award
    would be issued.  The grounds asserted that the immigration  judge  had
    failed to properly apply the  guidance  to  the  appellant's  case  and
    thereupon made a material error of law.

 8. In her submissions to me Ms Bustani submitted that the  combination  of
    the fact that the appellant had succeeded in her course  together  with
    the letter from the London South Bank University,  dated  21st  January
    2009,  saying  that  the  appellant  had  successfully  completed   the
    Postgraduate Diploma in Corporate Governance which would be awarded  at
    the next Examination Board scheduled to be held in March 2009,  in  the
    light of  the  respondent's  guidance  meant  that  the  appellant  had
    complied with the immigration rules.  She submitted  that  a  purposive
    interpretation ought to be given to the immigration rules.

 9. The relevant part of paragraph 245Z of HC 395 for the  purpose  of  the
    appeal is sub-paragraph (c) by which the applicant was required to have
    a minimum of 75 points  under  paragraphs  51  to  58  of  Appendix  A.
    Paragraph 52 of Appendix A indicates that available points are shown in
    Table 9 and paragraph 53 states  that  notes  to  accompany  the  table
    appear below the table.  Table 9  states  that  20  points  are  scored
    where:

        "The applicant has been awarded:

        (a)      a UK recognised Bachelor or Postgraduate Degree, or

        (b)      a UK Postgraduate Certificate or Diploma, or

        (c)       a  Higher  National  Diploma  ('HND')  from  a   Scottish
             institution."

    Paragraph 54 states  that  specified  documents  must  be  provided  as
    evidence  of  the  qualification  and  paragraph  55  states   that   a
    qualification will have been deemed to have been 'obtained' on the date
    on which the applicant was first notified in writing, by  the  awarding
    institution, that the qualification had been awarded.

10. In his judgment in MB (Somalia) v Entry Clearance Officer  [2008]  EWCA
    Civ 102 Laws L J questioned whether the plain and ordinary meaning of a
    rule should be  modified  in  order  to  give  effect  to  a  purposive
    construction.  He accepted that any rule, like any evidence, should  be
    construed so as to further its purpose but said that that purpose could
    usually be identified from the terms  of  the  instrument  itself.   In
    paragraph 38 of his judgment in AM (Ethiopia) &  Ors  &  Anor  v  Entry
    Clearance Officer [2008] EWCA Civ 1082 Laws L J said:

        "It is thus in the  nature  of  the  Immigration  Rules  that  they
        include no over-arching implicit purposes.  Their only  purpose  is
        to articulate the  Secretary  of  State's  specific  policies  with
        regard to immigration control from time to time, as to which  there
        are no presumptions, liberal or restrictive.  The  whole  of  their
        meaning is, so to speak, worn on their sleeve.  Mr Gill's plea  for
        a construction which gives added value to family life  assumes,  or
        asserts, an internal force or  impetus  which  the  Rules  entirely
        lack.  There is no material basis for the suggestion that Mr Gill's
        favoured construction must be adopted to  save  the  vires  of  the
        relevant Rules.  Indeed in light of MW (Liberia) I do not  consider
        that he was entitled to advance such a submission."

11. In my view the plain meaning of the words set out in Table 9  are  that
    an applicant is entitled to points where he or she has been awarded one
    of the specified qualifications.  This interpretation is borne  out  by
    the words of paragraph 55 of Appendix A which refer  to  the  applicant
    being first notified in writing, by the awarding institution, that  the
    qualification had been (my underlining) awarded.   On  this  basis,  in
    stating that specified documents must be provided as  evidence  of  the
    qualification, paragraph 54 of Appendix A is dealing with evidence of a
    qualification that has been awarded.

12. Paragraph 245AA of HC 395 provides that where Appendix A,  inter  alia,
    states that specified documents must be provided, that means  documents
    specified by the Secretary of State in the Tier 1 of the  Points  Based
    System - Policy Guidance.  The relevant documentary  evidence  required
    is set out in paragraphs 74 to 81 of the  guidance.   These  paragraphs
    provide as follows:

         "74.     Paragraph 245AA (and 54 of Appendix A) of the  Immigration
             Rules state that we will only award points  when  an  applicant
             provides  the  specified  evidence  that   he/she   meets   the
             requirements for this category.

        75.      The evidential requirements for each scoring  section  are
             detailed in the application form.  The specified documents  are
             as follows:

             (i)  original certificate of award; and

             (ii)  original  letter  from  the  institution  at  which   the
                 applicant studied towards his/her  eligible  qualification;
                 and

             (iii)     where an applicant is unable to submit their original
                 certificate of award because it has not  yet  been  issued,
                 he/she may submit the application without it.  However, the
                 letter from the institution must include extra  information
                 explaining the individual circumstances; and

             (iv) original passport(s) or travel document(s) containing  the
                 relevant grant(s) of leave in the United  Kingdom  for  the
                 period during which the applicant studied and/or  conducted
                 research for his/her eligible qualification in  the  United
                 Kingdom.

             (i)  Original certificate of award

        76.      This must be the applicant's original certificate  (not  a
             copy) and must clearly show the:

               . applicant's name;

               . title of the qualification; and

               . name of the awarding body

        77.      We will not accept provisional certificates.

             (ii)  Original  letter  from  the  institution  at  which   the
                 applicant studied

        78.      This letter must be an original letter (not  a  copy),  on
             the  official  letter-headed  paper  of  the   United   Kingdom
             institution at which the  applicant  studied  and  bearing  the
             official stamp of that institution.  It must have  been  issued
             by an authorised official of that institution and must  confirm
             the:

               . applicant's name;

               . title of the qualification; and

               . start and end dates of the applicant's  period/s  of  study
                 and/or  research  for  this  qualification  at  the  United
                 Kingdom institution; and

               . date of award (as defined above)

        79.       If  the  qualification  is  a  Postgraduate  Diploma   or
             Certificate, the letter must also include:

               . confirmation that the qualification  is  equivalent  to  or
                 above the level of the United Kingdom Bachelors Degree.

        80.       If  the  qualification  is  an  HND   from   a   Scottish
             institution, the letter must also include:

               . confirmation that the qualification is at HND level and was
                 studied at a Scottish institution

             (iii)      Extra  information  in  original  letter  from   the
                 institution at which the applicant studied

        81.      When the applicant is unable to supply the certificate  of
             award (for example when the  application  is  made  before  the
             applicant's graduation), this letter must also include:

               . details of the body awarding the qualification; and

               . confirmation that the certificate  of  the  award  will  be
                 issued

             (iv) Original passport(s) or travel document(s) containing  the
                 relevant grant(s) of leave in the United  Kingdom  for  the
                 period  during  which  the  applicant  studied   and   (or)
                 conducted research for his (her) eligible qualification  in
                 the United Kingdom"

13. It can be seen from the Guidance that where an applicant is  unable  to
    submit the original certificate of award he is  able  to  rely  upon  a
    letter confirming that the certificate of the  award  will  be  issued.
    That is not the same as saying that an applicant can rely upon a letter
    confirming that the award itself will be issued.  The reference  to  an
    applicant being unable to submit  the  original  certificate  of  award
    because it has not yet been issued is not a reference to  an  applicant
    being unable to submit evidence of the award because the award has  not
    yet been issued.  This interpretation is clearly borne out by paragraph
    70 of the guidance which deals with the date of award of qualification.
     This provides:

         "We will always consider that the date on which the  applicant  was
         first notified in writing, by the awarding  institution,  that  the
         qualification  has  been  awarded,  is  the  date  on   which   the
         qualification was 'obtained' (date of  award).   This  notification
         may have been made in writing, directly to the applicant, or by the
         institution publishing details of the award, either in writing (for
         example, via an institution notice board)  or  electronically  (for
         example, on the institution's website). Where notification was  not
         in the form of direct  correspondence  to  the  applicant  we  will
         require written confirmation from the institution of  the  date  of
         award."

14. In these circumstances there is nothing in the Guidance which  suggests
    that the words used in Table 9 of Appendix A should not be given  their
    ordinary meaning.  At the date of the decision and indeed at  the  date
    of the hearing there was  no  evidence  that  the  appellant  had  been
    awarded  a  UK  Postgraduate  certificate  or  diploma  and  in   these
    circumstances the immigration judge did not make an  error  of  law  in
    dismissing her appeal.

15. Ms Bustani accepted that the application for  reconsideration  had  not
    been made in relation to the dismissal by the immigration judge of  the
    appellant's appeal on human rights grounds and in  these  circumstances
    the decision of the immigration judge dismissing the appeal must stand.


Signed



Senior Immigration Judge Spencer

