
FK and MK (EEA Regulations: "Descendants": meaning) Sierra Leone [2007]
UKAIT 00038

                       ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at: Field House
Date of Hearing: 10 October 2006

                           Date of promulgation: 05 April 2007
                                   Before:


 Mr C M G Ockelton, Deputy President of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
                        Senior Immigration Judge King

                                   Between

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the Appellants:          Mr K Owusu, Pan African Legal Advisory
Services
For the Respondent:          Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer

An adoption requires an intention to adopt: mistakenly treating a  child  as
one's own does  not  amount  to  adoption.   Children  not  related  to  the
sponsor, and not the subject of adoption, are not his  "direct  descendants"
for the purposes of the Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations
2006 or the underlying Directive.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. These appeals are before us for reconsideration at the instance of  the
    respondent, following a determination by an Immigration Judge  allowing
    the appellants' appeals against decisions of the respondent on 17  June
    2005 refusing them EEA family  permits.   Each  appellant  claimed  and
    claims to be entitled to an EEA family permit as the  daughter  of  the
    sponsor, who is claimed to  be  their  father  and  who  is  a  Finnish
    national resident in the United Kingdom.

 2. In refusing the applications, the respondent took a  number  of  points
    against the appellant.  He asserted that some of the documents they had
    produced to  support  their  applications  were  not  genuine,  and  he
    recorded also that "the results of  DNA  testing  do  not  support  the
    claimed relationship between" each  appellant  and  the  sponsor.   The
    Immigration Judge resolved all the questions of documentary evidence in
    favour of the appellants.  So far as the relationship is concerned, the
    Immigration Judge accepted that there was no blood relationship between
    the appellants and the sponsor,  but  nevertheless  decided  that  they
    should be granted EEA family permits on the basis that there  had  been
    some form of de facto adoption of the appellants by  the  sponsor,  and
    that they should therefore  be  treated  as  his  daughters.   He  thus
    allowed the appeals.  The grounds for reconsideration are as follows:

      "Ground 1


      ...


        Although it  is  conceded  there  is  no  definition  of  the  term
        'descendant' for the purposes of the Regulations; it  is  submitted
        that in cases involved alleged de facto  adoptions  an  Immigration
        Judge, taking the purposive approach, should perform  a  rigorously
        thorough examination of parental responsibility and dependency.  It
        is submitted that the Immigration Judge has used the wrong test  at
        paragraph 25.  Even accepting that the appellants have been 'mainly
        dependent on him financially' does not give rise to a finding a  de
        facto adoption exists.   It  is  submitted  that  for  a  de  facto
        adoption claim to be made out, complete or whole dependence  should
        be shown, along with vested responsibility that must not have  been
        delegated for  a  substantial  period  prior  to  the  application.
        Although strictly speaking the Immigration Rules are not applicable
        in this case, it is respectfully submitted  they  can  usefully  be
        referred to for guidance in cases such as these.  Paragraph 309A(a)
        makes clear that a de facto  adoption  can  only  exist  where  the
        adoptive parent has lived with and taken care of  the  child.   The
        sponsor in this case has not.


        Ground 2


        In the alternative, it is submitted that the Immigration  (European
        Economic  Area)  Regulations  2000  do  not  recognise   de   facto
        adoptions, and in fact recognise only  blood  ties.   'Descendants'
        should be given its  natural  meaning.   It  is  submitted  that  a
        'descendant' is one connected to another by a direct vertical blood
        line.  It is submitted that the only exception to this rule  within
        the Regulations must be an official adoption which, in  any  event,
        is the legal mechanism for creating a relationship  akin  to  blood
        ties.  Accepting de facto adoptions are not  recognised  under  the
        Regulations, it  is  submitted  de  facto  adoptions  can  only  be
        considered  under  provisions  of  HC  395,  and  not   under   the
        Regulations."

 3. This appeal is now  governed  not  by  the  2000  Regulations  and  the
    Directives  those  Regulations  implement,  but  by   The   Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 (SI 2006/1003),  implementing
    Directive 2004/38/EC.  It is not, however, suggested  that  this  makes
    any substantive difference to the outcome of this appeal.  The question
    is whether the appellants are,  or  are  entitled,  to  be  treated  as
    "descendants" of the sponsor, within the meaning of the  Directive  and
    the Regulations, if, or, if  not,  whether  they  are  entitled  to  be
    treated as "family members" of his.

 4. We do not need  to  set  out  the  facts  in  any  great  detail.   The
    appellants have different mothers.  The sponsor has had no contact with
    either mother for many years.  The  Immigration  Judge  was  told,  and
    appears to have accepted, that in each case the mother left the sponsor
    to look after the child, in the first appellant's case  in  July  1990,
    when she was between 2 and 3 years old, and in the  second  appellant's
    case in August 1989 when she was only 3 days  old.   The  sponsor  left
    Sierra Leone in 1990 and went to Finland, where he  married  a  Finnish
    woman who he has since divorced.  The evidence discloses  one  (and  we
    think only one) visit by the sponsor to Sierra Leone since 1990.   That
    was in 2001, when it is said he saw the  appellants.   The  appellants'
    day to day care has been performed by the sponsor's  mother  in  Sierra
    Leone.  The sponsor has, however, taken all the important decisions and
    has remitted money for them ever  since  he  left  Sierra  Leone.   The
    Immigration Judge accepted that, despite his long absence from them, he
    has always behaved to them as a father, that they regarded him as their
    father and that he regarded them as his daughters.

 5. The sponsor's evidence to the Immigration Judge was that, until the DNA
    tests in connection with the present applications, he had no idea  that
    the appellants were not his daughters.  So far as the  first  appellant
    was concerned, he had accepted her mother's allegation that  the  child
    was his and in both cases he was unaware that the mother was  having  a
    relationship with any other man whilst she was seeing him.

 6. In his submissions, Mr  Avery  expanded  briefly  on  the  grounds  for
    reconsideration.  He said that the essence of the problem was that  the
    Immigration Judge had simply given too wide a meaning to the notion  of
    "descendant" and "family member".  There was no basis  for  treating  a
    person who was not related at all to the sponsor (either by blood or by
    marriage) as falling within either of  those  categories.   Clearly  an
    adopted child should  be  treated  as  the  sponsor's  child,  but  the
    appellants had not been adopted.   Further,  there  was  no  basis  for
    regarding a de facto adoption as having taken  place:  whether  or  not
    paragraph 309A of the Statement of Changes  in  Immigration  Rules,  HC
    395, was strictly apposite, it ought to  have  been  treated  as  sound
    guidance on what might be needed for a de  facto  adoption.   Mr  Owusu
    submitted that a person should be regarded as a child's  father  if  he
    had assumed the role of the father.  He submitted  further  that  there
    had been a de facto adoption because the  appellants  had  lived  in  a
    household with the sponsor for a year before he left Sierra Leone;  and
    there was the  matter  of  the  sponsor's  continuing  support  of  the
    appellants.  The appellants, he said, were entitled to admission either
    because, as he put it, "on the face  of  it"  they  are  the  sponsor's
    descendants, or because they have become his descendants  by  de  facto
    adoption.

 7. It goes without saying that  the  proof,  during  the  course  of  this
    application, that the  appellants  are  not  the  sponsor's  daughters,
    causes difficulties for  everybody  involved.   The  position  is  that
    although the sponsor and the appellants thought they were related,  and
    behaved as though they were related they are in fact not related.   The
    question is then  whether,  for  the  purposes  of  the  free  movement
    provisions of the Treaties, they should be treated as related.  We  may
    summarise our view by saying that we cannot see any proper  reason  why
    they should be.  There has been a mistake, and it is  a  mistake  which
    may have serious consequences; but despite Mr Owusu's advocacy,  we  do
    not think that the true facts can be ignored, which is essentially what
    he would ask.

 8. The appellants are not the sponsor's descendants because they  are  not
    his children.  They are, in addition, not  his  adopted  children.   We
    would not want to accept Mr Avery's submission that the meaning  of  de
    facto adoption is to be governed or even guided  in  general  terms  by
    paragraph  309A  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  because  that  paragraph
    provides the definition of "de facto adoption" for a particular purpose
    within the limited ambit  of  certain  paragraphs  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  But in its more general sense, de facto adoption is a notion by
    which  English  law  has  in  certain  circumstances   recognised   the
    assumption of parental rights and duties by one who is not  the  parent
    of a child; in particular de facto adoptions may  be  recognised  where
    the applicable law prevents a formal  legally-effective  adoption  from
    taking place.  We cannot, however, envisage an  adoption  of  any  sort
    taking place without an intention to adopt.  There is no such intention
    in this case.  At the date of the application, on the facts as found by
    the Immigration Judge, the sponsor and the appellants  appear  to  have
    thought that they were related as claimed.  There is no possibility  of
    any of them having regarded an adoption as having  taken  place  before
    that.  After the DNA testing there was a further  period  during  which
    enquiries were made at the laboratory.  Even at the date of the hearing
    the Immigration Judge heard evidence from the sponsor that he found the
    results of the tests difficult to accept.  There  is  nothing  here  to
    show that at any  stage  the  sponsor  voluntarily  undertook,  or  was
    prepared voluntarily to undertake, the support, maintenance, or  duties
    of a father in respect of children to whom he was  not  related.   What
    will happen in the future we do not know,  but  so  far  as  the  facts
    relevant to this appeal are concerned, there has been no adoption.  The
    appellants who, on the facts, had been abandoned by their mothers  and,
    apparently, their real fathers, have had for the whole of  their  young
    lives the advantage of the sponsor's mistake as to their paternity.  So
    far as concerns  the  evidence  in  these  appeals,  there  can  be  no
    suggestion that they have been harmed by any reliance on  the  mistake.
    The position is simply that, now the error has been exposed,  they  are
    not entitled to rely on the facts as they were thought to be.

 9. For completeness  we  should  say  something  about  Article  8,  which
    underlay a number of Mr Owusu's submissions.  We entirely  accept  that
    the relationship between the parties to a de facto adoption is  capable
    of amounting to "family life" within the meaning of Article  8.   There
    has, however, been no de facto adoption in this  case.   The  situation
    has been that the sponsor has supported the appellants  in  the  belief
    that they were his daughters but has not lived in  the  same  household
    with them for many years.  What the position is and will be now that it
    is clear that they are not his daughters is entirely unknown.  There is
    no reason at all why he should not  continue  to  support  them  if  he
    wishes to do so.  But nothing in  evidence  before  us  or  before  the
    Immigration Judge shows that to refuse them admission as his  daughters
    would be a disproportionate breach of anybody's  right  to  private  or
    family life.

10. For the foregoing reasons we  find  that  the  Immigration  Judge  made
    material errors of  law  in  his  determination  and  we  substitute  a
    determination dismissing both the appellants' appeals.









                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT
                                                             Date:
