
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


 SA (political activist - internal relocation) Pakistan [2011] UKUT 30 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 11 November 2010                           |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                               LORD BANNATYNE
                       SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE STOREY



                                   Between

                                     SA

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms L A Mulholland, Solicitor of Quinn, Martin &
                    Langan
For the Respondent:    Mr K Kyriacou, Home Office Presenting Officer

   Requiring a political activist to live away from his home area  in  order
   to avoid persecution at the hands of his political  opponents  has  never
   been  considered  a  proper  application  of  the   internal   relocation
   principle: see e.g. Nolan J  in  R  v  Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal,  ex
   p.Jonah [1985] Imm AR 7. And (since  October  2006)  such  a  requirement
   cannot be considered to be consistent with para 3390 of  the  Immigration
   Rules (Article 8 of the Qualification Directive). Indeed, the pitfalls of
   requiring a person to act contrary to his normal behaviour  in  order  to
   avoid persecution have been further emphasised by the Supreme Court in HJ
   (Iran) [2010] UKSC 31.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    The appellant is a national of Pakistan.  In a determination  notified
    on 14 October 2009 Immigration Judge (IJ) Morrow dismissed  his  appeal
    against a decision by the respondent dated 3 April 2009 to  remove  him
    as an illegal entrant having refused to grant him asylum.

2.    The appellant's claim was that he feared persecution at the  hands  of
    opposition party members principally from the Pakistan  People's  Party
    (PPP).  The latter had targeted his brother who was the town  Nazim  (a
    kind of local mayor) in a district of Rawalpindi (Choor Rawalpindi  and
    surrounding villages) and who belonged to the Q  League  (PMLQ  Party).
    Following the fall of President Musharaf in August 2008 there had  been
    widespread riots in the appellant's home area and the tensions  between
    the  various  political  parties  worsened,  expressing  themselves  in
    violent clashes at demonstrations and election meetings.  The appellant
    and his brother had suffered personal attacks from  2005  onwards.   He
    had been very well off, owning shops and a  restaurant;  but  in  early
    2009 members of opposing parties burnt them all down.  In  early  March
    2009 members of the opposing parties had shot and killed his brother at
    a party meeting.  He and his family went to  stay  at  his  brother-in-
    law's house in Islamabad and later at a place in  Muree  where  he  had
    relatives.  In Islamabad he and his family received  threats  to  their
    life via friends and relatives.

3.    Despite finding the appellant a reliable witness and so accepting  his
    account of what had befallen him  in  Pakistan  the  IJ  dismissed  his
    appeal, concluding that: (1) he would be able to receive a  sufficiency
    of protection from the police authorities  in  Rawalpindi  because  the
    main focus of the  PPP  supporters'  attention  had  been  against  his
    brother and although politically involved, the appellant had  not  held
    any office and had not played any major part other than as a  supporter
    of the party; and also because since early 2008 every time  there  were
    clashes between the political parties  the  police  came  and  on  many
    occasions arrested members from both sides; and (2) even if  this  were
    not the case, to avoid adverse attention from  those  who  opposed  his
    brother, he could relocate to another part of Pakistan,  as  indeed  he
    had done for several weeks after his brother had been killed (in  other
    parts of Rawalpindi,  in  Islamabad  and  in  Tarnoul).  There  was  no
    evidence, the IJ said, that the appellant's wife and children had  been
    the focus of attention from the PPP supporters.

4.    The grounds of appeal contended that  the  IJ  had  erred  by  failing
    properly to take account of various negative features of  the  police's
    treatment of the appellant, in particular: their failure on  more  than
    one occasion to charge those who  had  attacked  the  appellant;  their
    failure, on the occasions they did charge his  attackers,  to  raise  a
    First Information Report (FIR); their release without charge  of  those
    accused of burning  down  the  appellant's  shops;  and  their  general
    readiness to side with the PPP because they were in power at a national
    level.  The grounds noted that  despite  the  appellant  reporting  PPP
    members to the police for the murder of his brother, what had  happened
    was that the PPP had threatened to kill him and  his  family  had  been
    harassed and intimidated (his son had been  assaulted).   In  addition,
    the grounds stated, it was unreasonable of the IJ to find the appellant
    would have a viable internal relocation alternative based on his having
    lived in Islamabad and other places during  which  time  the  appellant
    moved around to avoid detection.

5.    We informed the parties at the outset that our  provisional  view  was
    that the IJ had materially erred in law.   In  response  Ms  Mulholland
    relied on the grounds and her skeleton argument.  Mr Kyriacou  accepted
    there were shortcomings in the IJ's treatment of the appellant's  case,
    in particular that he concentrated too much on the general question  of
    whether or not there was a systemic failure of protection on  the  part
    of the authorities in Pakistan and in the appellant's home area without
    dealing fully with the appellant's particular circumstances.  But  even
    so, added Mr Kyriacou, he had addressed the implications and the  steps
    the police had taken to  protect  the  appellant  and  had  also  given
    attention in the alternative to the issue of internal relocation.

      Legal framework

6.     Regulation 4 of the  Refugee  or  Person  in  Need  of  International
    Protection (Qualification) Regulations 2006 (implementing Article 7  of
    the Qualification Directive 2004/83/EC) defines actors of protection in
    a way that mirrors the principles set out by  the  House  of  Lords  in
    Horvath v Secretary of State for the Home Department (2001)  1 AC 489
    where it  was  held  that  whether  protection  was  sufficient  was  a
    "practical standard which takes proper account of the  duty  which  the
    state owes  its  nationals..."  and  that  "the  sufficiency  of  state
    protection is not measured by the existence of a real risk of an  abuse
    of rights but by the availability of a system for the protection  of  a
    citizen and a reasonable willingness of the state to operate  it".   As
    noted by the Tribunal in IM (Sufficiency of Protection)  Malawi  [2007]
    UKAIT 00071, the House of Lords in Bagdanavicius [2005] UKHL 38  left
    undisturbed the propositions set out  by  Auld LJ  on  real  risk  and
    sufficiency of protection in the Court of Appeal (2005) EWCA Civ 1605.
    These propositions are in the following terms:


    "54.    Summary  of  conclusions  on  real  risk/sufficiency  of  state
    protection.


         The common threshold of risk


        55 1)    The threshold of risk is the same in  both  categories  of
                  claim;  the main reason for introducing section 65 to  the
                  1999  Act  was  not  to  provide  an  alternative,   lower
                  threshold of risk and/or  a  higher  level  of  protection
                  against such risk  through  the  medium  of  human  rights
                  claims, but to widen the reach of protection regardless of
                  the motive giving rise to the persecution.


            Asylum claims


            2)   An asylum seeker who claims to be in fear  of  persecution
                  is entitled to asylum if he can show a  well-founded  fear
                  of persecution for a Refugee Convention  reason  and  that
                  there would be insufficiency of state protection  to  meet
                  it;  Horvath [2001] 1 AC 489].


             3)    Fear  of  persecution  is  well-founded  if  there  is  a
                  'reasonable   degree   of   likelihood'   that   it   will
                  materialise; R v SSHD ex p. Sivakumaran [1988] AC 956, per
                  Lord Goff at 1000F-G.


            4)   Sufficiency of state protection, whether from state agents
                  or non-state actors, means a willingness  and  ability  on
                  the part of the receiving state  to  provide  through  its
                  legal system a reasonable level of  protection  from  ill-
                  treatment of which the claimant for  asylum  has  a  well-
                  founded fear;  Osman v UK  [1999]  1 FLR  193],  Horvath,
                  Dhima [2002] EWHC 80 (Admin), [2002] Immigration Judge AR
                  394].


                 5)    The effectiveness of the system provided  is  to  be
                  judged normally by its systemic ability to deter and/or to
                  prevent the form of persecution of which there is a  risk,
                  not just  punishment  of  it  after  the  event;  Horvath;
                  Banomova   [2001]   EWCA   Civ.807.    McPherson    [2001]
                  EWCA Civ 1955 and Kinuthia [2001] EWCA Civ 2100.


       6)   Notwithstanding systemic sufficiency of state protection in  the
                  receiving state a claimant may still have  a  well-founded
                  fear of persecution if he can show  that  its  authorities
                  know or ought to know of circumstances particular  to  his
                  case giving rise to his fear, but are unlikely to  provide
                  the additional  protection  his  particular  circumstances
                  reasonably require;  Osman.


       Article 3 claims


      7)    The same principles apply to claims in removal cases of risk  of
                  exposure to  Article  3  ill-treatment  in  the  receiving
                  state, and are, in general, unaffected by the approach  of
                  the Strasbourg Court in Soering; which, on its facts, was,
                  not only a state-agency case at the highest  institutional
                  level, but also an unusual and  exceptional  case  on  its
                  facts; Dhima, Krepel [2002] EWCA Civ 1265 and Ullah [2004]
                  UKHL 26.

            8)   The basis of an article 3 entitlement in a removal case  is
                  that the claimant, if sent to the  country  in  question,
                  would be at risk there of Article 3 ill-treatment.


                 9)    In most, if not all, Article 3 cases in this context
                  the concept of risk  has  the  same  or  closely  similar
                  meaning to that in the Refugee  Convention  of  a  'well-
                  founded fear of persecution', save that it is confined to
                  a risk of Article 3 forms of  ill-treatment  and  is  not
                  restricted to conduct with any particular  motivation  or
                  by reference to  the  conduct  of  the  claimant;  Dhima,
                  Krepel, Chahal v UK [1996] 23 EHRR 413.


       10)  The threshold of risk required to engage Article  3  depends  on
                  the circumstances of each case, including  the  magnitude
                  of the risk, the nature and severity of the ill-treatment
                  risked and whether the risk emanates from a state  agency
                  or non-state actor;  Horvath.


       11)  In most, but not necessarily all, cases of ill-treatment  which,
                  but for state protection, would engage Article 3, a  risk
                  of such ill-treatment will be more readily established in
                  state-agency cases than in non-state actor cases -  there
                  is a spectrum of circumstances giving rise to  such  risk
                  spanning the two categories, ranging  from  breach  of  a
                  duty by the state of  a  negative  duty  not  to  inflict
                  Article 3 ill-treatment to a breach of  a  duty  to  take
                  positive protective action against such ill-treatment  by
                  non-state actors;  Svazas.


       12)  An assessment to  the  threshold  of  risk  appropriate  in  the
                  circumstances to engage Article 3 necessarily involves an
                  assessment of the sufficiency of state protection to meet
                  the threat of which there is such a risk - one cannot  be
                  considered without the other whether or not the  exercise
                  is regarded as 'holistic'  or  to  be  conducted  in  two
                  stages; Dhima, Krepel, Svazas [2002] EWCA Civ 74.


       13)  Sufficiency of state protection is not a guarantee of protection
                  from Article 3 ill-treatment  any  more  than  it  is  a
                  guarantee of protection from  an  otherwise  well-founded
                  fear of persecution in asylum cases - nor, if and to  the
                  extent that there is any difference, is it eradication or
                  removal of risk of exposure to Article 3 ill-treatment';
                  Dhima, McPherson; Krepel.


       14)  Where the risk falls to be judged by the  sufficiency  of  state
                  protection, that sufficiency is judged, not according  to
                  whether it would eradicate the real risk of the  relevant
                  harm,  but  according  to  whether  it  is  a  reasonable
                  provision in the circumstances;  Osman.


       15)  Notwithstanding such systemic sufficiency of state protection in
                  the receiving state, a claimant  may  still  be  able  to
                  establish an Article 3 claim if he  can  show  that  the
                  authorities there know or ought  to  know  of  particular
                  circumstances likely to expose him to risk of  Article 3
                  ill-treatment;  Osman.


       16)  The approach is the same whether the receiving country is or  is
                  not a party to the ECHR, but, in determining  whether  it
                  would be contrary to Article 3 to remove a person to that
                  country, our courts should decide the factual issue as to
                  risk as if ECHR standards apply  there  -  and  the  same
                  applies to the certification process under section 115(1)
                  and/or (2) of the 2002 Act".


    From the above it is clear that while it will always be relevant to ask
    whether or not there is in general a sufficiency  of  protection  in  a
    country, the critical question will nevertheless remain  in  an  asylum
    case that set out in the  sixth  proposition  by  Auld LJ  and  in  an
    Article 3 case that set out in the fifteenth proposition.  Thus  under
    either head a judge must address not only the matter of  whether  there
    is a general sufficiency of  protection  in  a  country  but  also  the
    question of whether the appellant's particular circumstances  are  such
    that he or she would receive adequate protection.

    Our Assessment


7.    This is a case in which the IJ accepted that the appellant  had  given
    a credible account (para 25) and  the  respondent  has  not  sought  to
    dispute any aspect of his account. It  was  not  in  dispute  that  the
    appellant and his brother had in the past suffered serious harm at  the
    hands of political opponents.


8.    We are satisfied that the IJ materially erred in  law  in  three  main
    respects.  The first two concern the IJ's treatment  of  the  issue  of
    sufficiency of protection.  We agree with Mr Kyriacou that this was not
    a case in which the IJ made the mistake of trying simply  to  deduce  a
    sufficiency of protection for the appellant from a general  sufficiency
    of protection afforded by the Pakistan authorities  to  its  citizenry.
    The IJ did refer to the appellant's particular circumstances.  However,
    his assessment of these circumstances was  flawed.   Despite  accepting
    that the appellant was  from  a  political  family  the  IJ  failed  to
    consider  the  impact  that  this  had  on  his  own  vulnerability  to
    persecution.  As noted at recital 27  of  the  Qualification  Directive
    "[F]amily members, merely due to their relation to  the  refugee,  will
    normally be vulnerable to acts of persecution in  such  a  manner  that
    could be the basis for refugee status".

9.    Further, the  IJ  erred  in  his  treatment  of  the  appellant's  own
    political profile. Certainly the IJ  was  entitled  to  find  that  the
    appellant did not have the prominent political profile of his  brother,
    but the IJ did  not  dispute  the  appellant's  evidence  that  he  had
    nevertheless been an extremely active party worker  attending  numerous
    political gatherings over a lengthy period. Not  to  regard  him  as  a
    political  activist  was  unjustified.  Not  to  have  regard  to   the
    appellant's own adverse experiences after his brother had been murdered
    by the PPP was also unjustified,  for  on  the  accepted  evidence  his
    political opponents  continued to  make  threats  against  him  and  to
    respond aggressively to his efforts to have them prosecuted. There  had
    also been an assault on his son.

10.   The family matrix to the appellant's circumstances had  two  important
    implications.  One concerned the past: plainly he and his  brother  and
    their family had experienced past persecution against which  the  local
    police had failed to protect them:  personal  attacks,  destruction  of
    their shops, the murder of his brother, threats against his  life,  and
    an assault on his son. The police response, such as it  was,  was  also
    partisan. Although on the appellant's own evidence some of the fighting
    that took place between his party and the  PPP  was  two-sided,   on  a
    significant number of occasions attacks it had been instigated by their
    opponents.  On the appellant's own evidence the response of the  police
    on a significant number of occasions could not remotely be construed as
    even-handed:  in  2005  and  2007  following  being  assaulted  by  PPP
    supporters, the police had released  those  concerned  without  raising
    charges.  It was also the appellant's uncontradicted evidence that  the
    police normally sided with the PPP and against the appellant.  For that
    reason the IJ should have considered the application of  para  339K  of
    the Statement of Changes in the Immigration Rules  HC  395  as  amended
    which states:

         "The fact that a person has already been subject to persecution  or
         a serious harm, or to direct threats of such  persecution  or  such
         harm, will be regarded as a serious indication of the person's well-
         founded fear of persecution or real risk of suffering serious harm,
         unless there are good reasons to consider that such persecution  or
         serious harm will not be repeated."


11.   This leads on to the second implication of the IJ's  failure  to  take
    account  of  the  family   matrix   to   the   appellant's   particular
    circumstances.  The question the IJ  should  have  asked  was  whether,
    given past persecution, there were good reasons to consider  that  such
    persecution or serious harm would not be  repeated.   In  this  regard,
    there was nothing in the evidence to indicate that the  police  locally
    would not continue to side with the PPP  against  the  appellant,  even
    though on any return to his home area it was reasonably likely that the
    appellant would again find himself frequently targeted for  attacks  by
    his political opponents and serious threats.  We bear in mind  at  this
    point that the background evidence indicated that since  the  appellant
    had left Pakistan in early 1999 the political  situation  both  in  his
    home area and in Pakistan generally had become more, not less, violence-
    ridden.


12.   A third error concerned the IJ's treatment of the  matter  of  whether
    the appellant  could  relocate  in  safety.   On  the  appellant's  own
    evidence he had a number of legitimate complaints  that  he  wished  to
    pursue against his opponents arising out of past attacks on him and his
    properties as well as their murder of his brother; the only  reason  he
    had not stayed to pursue those was fear  of  further  persecution.   In
    addition, he was quite clear that he had been and would continue to  be
    active in the PMLQ.  His unchallenged evidence was that the  there  was
    strong support in his local area for him to stand for the  Nazim  post,
    which his brother had previously held. The significance of his and  his
    family's political profile and ongoing involvement in the PMLQ was that
    his party and the PPP are national parties and that it  was  reasonable
    to expect that wherever else the appellant went in  Pakistan  he  would
    continue his visible involvement in the PMLQ and that his opponents  in
    Rawalpindi would come to learn where he and his family were.

13.   When considering this matter the IJ attached  particular  significance
    to the fact that the appellant had been able to exercise the option  of
    internal relocation already between the date of  his  brother's  murder
    and his departure.  However, whilst it was true that during this period
    the appellant had lived in other parts of Rawalpindi and  in  Islamabad
    and Muree, his unchallenged evidence was that he was having to move  in
    order to avoid detection ("he had moved around different places when he
    was having trouble").  Further, during this period, even  when  he  was
    living in Islamabad, the PPP had  sent  him  serious  threats  via  his
    relatives.   His experience of internal relocation was  not  experience
    showing it had been viable and the  IJ  was  wrong  to  assume  to  the
    contrary.

14.   In our judgement the appellant should not be  expected  to  return  to
    Pakistan and give up his active involvement in the PMLQ and his pursuit
    of  his  legitimate  grievances  against  local  PPP  members  who  had
    destroyed his property, frequently conducted personal attacks again him
    and his brother, murdered his brother and then subjected  him  and  his
    family to serious threats and intimidation. Yet any return to his  home
    area would expose him to a real risk of serious harm against  which  he
    would not receive adequate protection.

15.   In our judgement also,  the  only  way  the  appellant  could  achieve
    safety by relocation was if he effectively decided to live in hiding or
    in political exile. In UK asylum law, requiring a political activist to
    live away from his home area in order to avoid persecution at the hands
    of his political opponents  has  never  been  considered  as  a  proper
    application of the internal relocation principle: see e.g. Nolan J in R
    v Immigration Appeal Tribunal, ex p.Jonah 1985] Imm AR  7.  And  (since
    October 2006) such a requirement cannot be considered to be  consistent
    with para 339O of the Immigration Rules (Article 8 of the Qualification
    Directive). Indeed, the pitfalls of requiring a person to act  contrary
    to his normal behaviour in order to avoid persecution have been further
    emphasised by the Supreme Court in HJ(Iran) [2010] UKSC 31.

16.   Accordingly we conclude the IJ materially erred  in  law  and  we  set
    aside his decision.

17.   When we made known to the parties our decision as  to  material  error
    of law both were content, so far as the  matter  of  what  decision  we
    should re-make, to rely on their earlier submissions.  In our view that
    properly reflected the fact that in this case the unchallenged evidence
    was such that, had the IJ properly considered the issue of  sufficiency
    of protection and  internal  relocation  by  proper  reference  to  the
    appellant's  particular  circumstances,  he  would  have  allowed   the
    appellant's appeal.   This  was  a  case  where  past  persecution  was
    manifest and there was no good reason  to  consider  that  the  PPP  in
    particular would cease targeting the  appellant  for  serious  harm  or
    that, when they did target him, the local police would alter their past
    pattern of siding with the PPP. There would not  be  a  sufficiency  of
    protection for this appellant. This was also a case in  which  internal
    relocation would only prove viable if the appellant were to forego  his
    long-term political involvements, which  he  could  not  reasonably  be
    expected to do.

18.   For the above  reasons  the  decision  we  re-make  is  to  allow  the
appellant's appeal.



Signed                                             Date


Senior Immigration Judge Storey
(Judge of the Upper Tribunal)

