
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

R (on the application of RK) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
(s.117B(6); "parental relationship") IJR [2016] UKUT 00031 (IAC)

             IN THE MATTER OF AN APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW



|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice Centre      |                              |
|On 5 November 2015                            |                              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                    THE QUEEN (on the application of RK)

                                                                   Applicant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Applicant:     Ms E Rutherford instructed by Cartwright King
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr V Mandalia, instructed by the Government Legal
Department



1. It is not necessary for an individual to have  "parental  responsibility"
   in law for there to exist a parental relationship.

2. Whether a person who is  not  a  biological  parent  is  in  a  "parental
   relationship"  with  a  child  for  the  purposes  of  s.117B(6)  of  the
   Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 depends  on  the  individual
   circumstances and whether the role that individual plays  establishes  he
   or she has "stepped into the shoes" of a parent.

3. Applying that approach, apart from the situation of split families  where
   relationships between parents have broken down and an actual or de  facto
   step-parent exists, it will be unusual, but not impossible, for more than
   2 individuals to have a "parental relationship" with a  child.   However,
   the relationships between a child and professional or voluntary carers or
   family friends are not "parental relationships".

                                  JUDGMENT

Judge Grubb:

 1. I make an anonymity order under  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI  2008/2698  as  amended)  in  order  to
    protect the anonymity of the  applicant's  grandchildren.   This  order
    prohibits the disclosure  directly  or  indirectly  (including  by  the
    parties) of the identity of  the  applicant  or  those  children.   Any
    disclosure and breach of this order may amount to a contempt of  court.
    This order shall remain in force unless revoked or varied by a Tribunal
    or court.

Introduction

 2. The applicant is a citizen of India who was born on 26 June  1957.   In
    these proceedings she challenges  three  decisions  of  the  respondent
    dated 14 March 2014, 12 May 2015  and  7  October  2015  by  which  the
    respondent refused to grant the applicant leave to remain  outside  the
    Rules  under  Art  8  of  the  European  Convention  on  Human  Rights.
    Permission was granted following an oral hearing by  His  Honour  Judge
    Purle QC on 18 March 2015.

 3. As will become clear shortly, the basis of the applicant's challenge is
    that her removal from the UK would breach Art  8  because  she  is,  in
    effect, in a "parental relationship" with her three  grandchildren  who
    live in the UK with her son and daughter-in-law.

Background

 4. The applicant's son ("SA1") and daughter-in-law ("SA2") live in the UK.
     They have four daughters: "L" who was born on 21  November  1998,  "R"
    who was born on 12 May 2002, "E" who was born on 22 August 2007 and "J"
    who was born on 10 November 2011.

 5.  In  2002/2003,  the  applicant's  daughter-in-law  was  diagnosed   as
    suffering from multiple sclerosis and also Lupus.  These conditions are
    serious and progressive in nature and, on the  applicant's  case,  have
    resulted in SA2 being unable to look after her children.

 6. On 8 August 2002, the  applicant  was  granted  entry  clearance  as  a
    visitor valid until 8 February 2003.   She  arrived  in  the  UK  as  a
    visitor on 15 August 2002.

 7. On 27 January 2003, the applicant applied for leave outside  the  Rules
    as a carer.  It was whilst the applicant was in the  UK  that  SA2  was
    first diagnosed with multiple sclerosis.  On 6 June 2003, the applicant
    was granted leave to remain as  a  carer  outside  the  Rules  until  6
    September 2003.

 8. On 29 January 2004, the applicant again applied for leave  outside  the
    Rules as a carer but this was refused on 24 March 2004.   Subsequently,
    on  2  April  2004  following  a  reconsideration  that   refusal   was
    maintained.  A subsequent appeal by  the  applicant  was  rejected,  it
    would appear, because the applicant had no right of appeal.

 9. On 11 August 2004, the applicant again  applied  for  leave  to  remain
    outside the Rules as a carer.  On 7  November  2005,  she  was  granted
    discretionary leave to remain until 7 November 2006.

10. On 31 October 2006, the applicant again applied for  further  leave  to
    remain as a carer outside the Rules but that application was refused on
    25 January 2007.  Thereafter, the applicant became an overstayer.

11. On 7 July 2012, the applicant applied for leave to remain under Art  8.
    Further representations were made on 29 May 2013.   The  basis  of  the
    application was, again, SA2's health and the need for the applicant  to
    remain to look after her grandchildren of which there were now four.

12. On 10 June 2013, the respondent refused the applicant's application for
    leave under Art 8.  That decision was served upon the applicant  on  13
    August 2013.  Thereafter, on 7  November  2013  the  applicant  brought
    judicial  review   proceedings   challenging   that   decision.    That
    application was compromised by a consent order approved  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal on 23 December 2013 on the respondent agreeing  to  reconsider
    the applicant's application for leave.

13. On 14 March 2014, the respondent, having reconsidered the  application,
    again refused the  applicant  leave  to  remain.   That  is  the  first
    decision challenged in these proceedings.  Thereafter, following a pre-
    action protocol letter on 7 April 2014  the  present  proceedings  were
    issued on 2 July 2014.

14. Permission to bring the claim was initially refused on  the  papers  by
    the Vice President of the Upper Tribunal  on  13  November  2014.   The
    applicant renewed her application and, following an oral hearing, on 18
    March 2015, HHJ Purle QC granted  the  applicant  permission  to  bring
    these proceedings on the single ground that the respondent  had  failed
    properly to consider the grandchildren's best interests  in  accordance
    with her duty under s.55 of the Borders,  Citizenship  and  Immigration
    Act 2009 ("BCI Act 2009").

15. On 12 May 2015, the respondent issued a supplementary decision  seeking
    to deal more fully with the grandchildren's best interests.

16. The substantive hearing of the claim was initially listed on 21  August
    2015 before the Vice President.  That hearing was adjourned because  he
    had been the judge who had refused permission on the papers.   However,
    at that hearing the applicant sought  to  raise  an  additional  ground
    namely that the  respondent  had  failed  to  apply  s.117B(6)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("NIA Act  2002")  because
    the applicant had a "genuine and subsisting parental relationship" with
    her grandchildren.  The Vice President gave permission to the applicant
    to  amend  her  ground  to  incorporate   that   challenge   and   made
    consequential directions.

17. On 26 August 2015, the applicant served a re-amended statement of facts
    and grounds to include that challenge.

18. On 7  October  2015,  the  respondent  issued  a  second  supplementary
    decision specifically addressing the new grounds of challenge.

19. On 7 October 2015, the respondent served amended  detailed  grounds  of
    defence.

The Issues

20. The applicant has been granted permission on two grounds.

21. First, and most recently, that the Secretary of State, in assessing the
    applicant's Art 8 claim outside the Rules, failed to apply s.117B(6) of
    the NIA Act 2002 which applied because the nature  of  the  applicant's
    relationship  with  her  grandchildren  amounted  to  a  "genuine   and
    subsisting parental relationship".

22. Secondly, that the respondent's decision failed properly to  take  into
    account the "best interests" of the grandchildren in breach of her duty
    under s.55 of the BCI Act 2009.

23. In the re-amended statement  of  facts  and  grounds  for  review,  the
    applicant also places reliance upon a ground set  out  in  the  initial
    claim, but upon which permission  was  not  granted,  namely  that  the
    respondent unlawfully failed to make an appealable immigration decision
    in accordance with her "request for removal decisions"  policy.   As  I
    have said, the applicant was refused permission on that ground  by  HHJ
    Purle QC.  Before  me,  Ms  Rutherford  did  not  expressly  renew  the
    applicant's application for permission on this  ground.   She  accepted
    that if the applicant could not succeed on her principal ground, namely
    that she had a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship  with  her
    grandchildren, she could not succeed on this ground either.

The Respondent's Decisions

24. The first decision of the respondent was taken  on  14  March  2014  in
    response to the applicant seeking leave outside the Rules under Art  8.



25. Having initially considered, but rejected, the applicant's claim  based
    upon her private life under para 276ADE of the  Immigration  Rules  (HC
    395 as amended), the respondent went on to consider under  the  heading
    "Leave Outside the Rules and section 55  Consideration"  whether  there
    were any "exceptional" circumstances which  resulted  in  unjustifiably
    harsh consequences such that leave should be granted outside the Rules.
     At pages 3-4 of the decision  letter  (tab  C  at  pages  13-14),  the
    decision letter is in the following terms:

         "However,  it  is  not  accepted   that   there   are   exceptional
         circumstances which would mean removal  is  inappropriate  in  your
         case.

         You first entered the  United  Kingdom  on  15  August  2002  as  a
         visitor.  You were subsequently given leave to remain  as  a  carer
         exceptionally outside the Immigration Rules on 06 June 2003  for  3
         months.  As is required you were given  a  warning  to  make  other
         arrangements for the future care  of  your  daughter-in-law  [SA2].
         However you chose to remain in the United Kingdom and make  several
         other applications for leave  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom.
         Given the exceptional circumstances at that time you  were  granted
         12 months'  discretionary  leave.   However  your  application  for
         indefinite leave to remain as a  carer  exceptionally  outside  the
         Immigration Rules was refused.  From the evidence  presented,  your
         daughter-in-law's   medical   condition   appears   not   to   have
         significantly deteriorated since then, and the  carer  category  is
         only regarded  as  a  short-term  measure  to  enable  future  care
         arrangements to be made, and you have already been  in  the  United
         Kingdom for this reason since 15 August 2002.  You have also chosen
         to  ignore  the  Immigration  regulations  particularly   when   an
         Immigration Judge ruled that your appeal against refusal  of  leave
         to remain could not be heard and they refused to accept the  notice
         of appeal.

         You have previously presented evidence from a Sheila  Whitehead  of
         Derby City Council Social Services.  She  stated  '[SA2]  would  be
         eligible for support from Social Services'.  It was also  mentioned
         that support was available from G.P  Dr  Lacey  and  Alison  Smith,
         Neurological Rehabilitation Nurse Specialist.

         Other evidence presented, has stated that [SA2's]  husband  is  now
         self employed and because of this employment the family have  moved
         to Leicester to enable him to be near his main employer.  This move
         enabled [SA1] to be able to help look after his wife for  a  longer
         period and also gave him a degree of  flexibility  for  his  caring
         role  within  the  family.   This  evidence  would  indicate   that
         alternative care is available for [SA2].  As was required  in  your
         first extension of leave to remain.

         It has been stated  that  you  have  been  living  with  your  son,
         daughter-in-law and grandchildren for over ten years and  both  you
         and your family have established a private  and  family  life  with
         each other.  You have stated that should you be  removed  from  the
         United Kingdom your family life will be disrupted.

         All your representations have been reconsidered however  there  are
         no insurmountable obstacles to your  family  life  being  continued
         overseas.

         Furthermore, relationships between adult children and their parents
         will not normally constitute family  life.   In  reconsidering  the
         decision to maintain the refusal of your application the  Secretary
         of State has given careful consideration to your rights under Art 8
         of the European Convention on Human Rights.   When  you  leave  the
         United Kingdom there would  be  no  insurmountable  obstacles  that
         would prevent you from continuing the same  level  of  contact  and
         family life that you had prior to arriving in the  United  Kingdom.
         In view of this, the Secretary of State  is  satisfied  that  there
         will not be a breach of Article 8.

         Throughout this reconsideration we have also taken into account the
         need to safeguard and promote the welfare of children in the United
         Kingdom in accordance with our  duties  under  section  55  of  the
         Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.

         In support of your application you have raised the fact  that  your
         grand children have been cared for by yourself for  a  considerable
         time.  However it has been noted that the children that  have  been
         cared for by you, have both their father and mother  residing  with
         them in the United Kingdom.  As previously stated your son's family
         do qualify for extra help in the care  of  your  daughter  in  law.
         This care would enable the children's father to devote time for the
         care of the children.  You  would  be  able  to  visit  the  United
         Kingdom in the future and they would be able to  visit  to  you  in
         India as they have previously accompanied you and their  family  on
         visits to your homeland.  This means that you will not  lose  (sic)
         contact with your grand children.  Indeed with modern communication
         aids you will be able to keep in contact with your  family  in  the
         United Kingdom on a regular basis.  You will therefore be  able  to
         remain in the children's lives in the future.

         You would return to India knowing the family unit would continue to
         enjoy their family life together.  Whilst this may involve a degree
         of disruption to your  private  life,  this  is  considered  to  be
         proportionate  to  the  legitimate  aim  of  maintaining  effective
         immigration control and  is  in  accordance  with  our  section  55
         duties.  It has been decided that a  grant  of  leave  outside  the
         rules is not appropriate."

26. As can be seen, the Secretary of State  sought  to  take  into  account
    SA2's medical condition and the role played by the applicant in  caring
    for her grandchildren including the context in which previous leave had
    been granted to the applicant as a carer.

27. That letter did not, however, deal specifically with a letter from  the
    school of one of the grandchildren, R.  As a result, on  12  May  2015,
    the Secretary of State issued a supplementary decision  letter  seeking
    more fully to take into account the evidence  concerning  the  children
    and their best interests including that letter.  At pages 1-3  of  that
    letter (tab B at pages  32-34),  under  the  headings  of  "Exceptional
    Circumstances" and "section 55 Consideration", the Secretary  of  State
    offered the following reason for refusing to grant  leave  outside  the
    Rules:

         "Exceptional Circumstances

         ....

         In reaching a decision the Secretary of State has had regard to all
         of the material that was submitted  in  support  of  your  client's
         application for leave to  remain  in  the  UK  and  the  subsequent
         representations made on her behalf.  In particular,  the  Secretary
         of State has had regard to the  matters  set  out  in  the  witness
         statement of your client's  son,  [SA1]  and  her  daughter-in-law,
         [SA2].  The evidence provided in respect of the health of [SA2] has
         been considered, as has the letter from  the  headteacher  of  [...
         School].

         It has been taken into consideration  that  your  client  has  been
         living with her son and daughter-in-law [SA1 and SA2] in the United
         Kingdom whilst caring for their children due to [SA2]'s  illnesses.
         Your client's daughter in  law  suffers  from  multiple  sclerosis,
         connective tissue disorder and lupus arthritis  which  affects  her
         daily life.  Your client  has  previously  been  granted  leave  to
         remain as a carer exceptionally outside the  Immigration  Rules  so
         therefore  your  client's  application  has  been  considered  with
         reference to the Carers concession under Chapter 17, Section  2  of
         the Immigration Directorate Instructions.

         In deciding your case, the following points have been considered:-

           . the type of care required;

           . what care is available;

           . what alternative care arrangements are available.

         Your client  has  previously  provided  evidence  from  Derby  City
         Council Social Services stating [SA2] would be eligible for support
         from Social Services.  Your client's son  and  daughter-in-law  can
         gain access to as much care and support they need in your  client's
         absence.  It is also noted that your client's  son  [SA1]  has  now
         become self employed enabling  him  to  look  after  his  wife  and
         children for a longer period of time  during  the  day.   There  is
         nothing to prevent [SA1 and SA2] from gaining the required  support
         from social services.   It  is  also  noted  that  they  have  been
         receiving help from [SA2] and  the  children's  other  grandmother.
         She has been assisting with the collection  of  the  children  from
         school.  It is therefore seen that [SA1  and  SA2]  have  alternate
         support here in the UK and if they feel this is not sufficient they
         are eligible for more support as stated above.

         Therefore the Secretary of State is not satisfied that your  client
         can meet the requirements of the concession relating to Carers  and
         accordingly your application has been refused.

         Section 55 consideration

         Consideration has also been given to Section  55  of  the  Borders,
         Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 (duty regarding the welfare of
         children).  The duty to have regard to the need  to  safeguard  and
         promote the welfare of children requires us to consider the  effect
         on any children of a decision to exclude, or  deport,  against  the
         need to maintain the integrity of immigration control.  Our aim  is
         always to carry out enforcement of the Immigration Rules  with  the
         minimum possible interference with a family's private life, and  in
         particular to enable a family to maintain continuity  of  care  and
         development of the children in ways that are  compatible  with  the
         immigration laws.

         It is noted that your client claims to have played a  role  in  the
         care for her grandchildren, however all four children [L] born 21st
         November 1998, [R] born 12th May 2002, [J] born  22nd  August  2007
         and [E] born 10th November 2011 all live with both of their parents
         as a family unit  and  are  not  dependant  on  your  client.   The
         parental responsibilities when having  children  are  to  care  and
         provide for your children.  As these are not your client's children
         she cannot been granted leave outside to rules  to  help  care  for
         them.  We have taken into consideration that your client's daughter-
         in-law struggles with daily activities due to  her  illnesses.   As
         previously stated your client's son's family do qualify  for  extra
         help from Social Services in the care of your client's daughter  in
         law.  We have also  taken  into  consideration  that  due  to  your
         client's daughter-in-law's illness, your client will have played  a
         more active role in her  grandchildren's  upbringing.   However  as
         already established, with [SA1] now being  self  employed  and  the
         care available to [SA2] through the  appropriate  authorities  your
         client's grandchildren will be able to spend more time  with  their
         parents and build a stronger family unit together.  Therefore  your
         client can return to India knowing that her grandchildren who  have
         both their father and mother  residing  with  them  in  the  United
         Kingdom can continue their family life  together  and  continue  to
         maintain regular contact through modern means of communication.

         The Secretary of State has carefully considered the content of  the
         letter written by the headteacher of the [... School].  It is noted
         that your client's granddaughter, [R] has had  periods  of  anxiety
         and low self-esteem which had an impact on her health and progress,
         including threats to hurt herself.  The headteacher  considers  the
         loss of her grandmother would undoubtably have a detrimental effect
         on her, both emotionally  and  academically.   The  headteacher  is
         concerned that  [R]  has  already  started  talking  about  hurting
         herself.   These  comments  made  by  the  headteacher  have   been
         carefully considered however, no medical evidence has been provided
         to support this claim, and  as  a  British  Citizen  your  client's
         granddaughter is entitled  to  support  from  the  NHS  and  social
         services if required.   If  your  client's  granddaughter  has  had
         thoughts of self harm recently, or if she is self harming now there
         are telephone help lines with specially trained volunteers who will
         listen to your client's granddaughter, understand what she is going
         through, and help her through the immediate crisis.

         The best interest of the children has been considered as a  primary
         consideration by the  Secretary  of  State.   The  children's  best
         interests are served in the first instance by remaining with  their
         parents.  The removal of your client from the  UK  will  not  alter
         this position.  In determining whether  the  need  for  immigration
         control outweighs children's best interests in the particular facts
         and circumstances of this case, the Secretary  of  State  has  also
         taken account of any factors pointing the other way.  Although your
         client may have a very close relationship  with  her  grandchildren
         and be involved in the arrangements made for their day to day care,
         your client's immigration history is relevant.   The  discretionary
         leave to remain in the UK previously enjoyed by your client expired
         on 7th November 2006 Your client has throughout been given warnings
         to make other arrangements for the future care of her  daughter-in-
         law [SA2],  but  your  client  has  chosen  to  remain  in  the  UK
         unlawfully.  The Secretary of State considers  that  strong  weight
         has to be given to the need to maintain immigration control, and to
         the fact that your client has had no entitlement to remain  in  the
         UK since 7th November 2006.

         Whilst the removal of your client from the UK will involve a degree
         of disruption to your client's private life and cause initial upset
         to her grandchildren, this is considered to be proportionate to the
         legitimate aim of maintaining effective immigration control and  is
         in accordance with our Section 55 duties.  It has been decided that
         a grant of leave outside the rules is not appropriate."

28. Following the adjourned substantive hearing on 21 August 2015, pursuant
    to the Vice President's  permission  to  the  applicant  to  amend  her
    grounds, the Secretary of State issued a second supplementary  decision
    on 7 October 2015 specifically dealing with the  new  issue  which  had
    arisen at that hearing, namely whether the  applicant  could  establish
    that she had a "genuine and subsisting  parental  relationship"  within
    s.117B(6) of the 2002 Act.

29. In the  course  of  that  decision,  the  respondent  referred  to  the
    definition of a "parent" in para 6 of the  Immigration  Rules  and  the
    UKVI Immigration and Directorate Instructions  regarding  partners  and
    parents: "Appendix FM 1.0 Family Life (as  a  Partner  or  Parent)  and
    Private Life: 10-Year Routes" at section 11.2 dealing with what amounts
    to a "genuine and subsisting parental relationship".  For the  present,
    I set out the Secretary of State's reasoning and will return  to  these
    provisions below.  At page  2  of  the  decision  letter  (tab  A  page
    LXXXII):

         "In considering whether the facts and circumstances  of  this  case
         are  sufficient  to  establish  that  your  client  has  a  genuine
         subsisting parental relationship  with  any  one  or  more  of  her
         grandchildren, the Secretary of State has carefully considered  the
         background to this case,  and  the  medical  evidence  relied  upon
         concerning the health of your client's daughter-in-law [SA2].   The
         Secretary of State has also carefully considered  the  matters  set
         out in the Community Care Assessment completed  by  Leicester  City
         Council and the assistance provided by  your  client  in  household
         tasks and in the arrangements for looking after her grandchildren.

         ....

         There are very limited circumstances  in  which  the  Secretary  of
         State would consider that more  than  two  people  could  be  in  a
         parental relationship with a child.  The Secretary of  State  would
         generally expect that only  two  people  could  be  in  a  parental
         relationship with  a  child.  The  circumstances  set  out  in  the
         guidance ensure that those such as  step-parents  are  capable,  in
         appropriate circumstances, of being recognised as having a parental
         relationship with a child.  Even then, recognition  of  a  parental
         relationship would only arise where  the  other  biological  parent
         played no part in the child's life, or there was extremely  limited
         contact  between  the  child  and  other  biological  parent.   The
         guidance makes it plain that other people who spend time  with,  or
         reside with the child in addition to their parents, such  as  their
         grandparent, aunt or uncle or  other  family  member,  or  a  close
         friend of the family, would not generally be considered to  have  a
         parental relationship with the child.

         Your client's four grandchildren live with both of their biological
         parents who both maintain a good and close  relationship  with  the
         children and who both  maintain  parental  responsibility  for  the
         children.  All the important decisions relating to  the  childrens'
         future, including decisions about their welfare, care and education
         will be made by their biological parents.   Your  client  does  not
         therefore have a  parental  relationship  with  her  grandchildren.
         Whilst your client plays a role in the  day  to  day  care  of  the
         children, she does so as a grandparent, and not as a parent.

         Your client lives in the family home with her son,  daughter-in-law
         and her grandchildren.  The children  live  with  their  biological
         parents, who both maintain parental responsibility for the children
         and see the children every day.  There is  no  evidence  that  your
         client has responsibility for the day to day decisions relating  to
         the upbringing of the  children  akin  to  parental  responsibility
         whether by operation of  law  or  otherwise.   It  is  unsurprising
         you're your client's grandchildren have a close  relationship  with
         your client, and would wish her to remain in the UK,  in  light  of
         the current living arrangements.  However, whilst your client plays
         a role in the day to day care of the children, she  does  so  as  a
         grandparent, and not as a parent.

         As your client is not the parent  of  her  grandchildren,  and  the
         household contains both biological parents of those  grandchildren,
         your client does not meet the relationship requirements  for  leave
         to remain as a parent under Appendix FM.

         It must also be noted that the biological parents of your  client's
         grandchildren continue to reside  in  the  same  household  and  it
         cannot therefore be accepted that they absolved themselves of their
         parental duties, regardless of whether one of the parents is deemed
         medically unfit.  The Secretary of State has  carefully  considered
         the medical evidence that has been made  available  concerning  the
         health of your client's daughter-in-law.   The  evidence  that  has
         been provided,  including  the  medical  evidence  and  the  report
         prepared by Leicester City Council is not such that  your  client's
         daughter-in-law is prevented from exercising her rights and  duties
         as a parent of her children.  The evidence  establishes  that  your
         client provides assistance to her daughter-in-law  and  assists  in
         the care of her grandchildren.  However, whilst your client plays a
         role in the day to day care of the  children,  she  does  so  as  a
         grandparent, and not as a parent.

         The household situation is no different to that of any UK household
         where one parent is unable  to  look  after  the  children's  daily
         needs, but another parent is able to do so.  Arrangements  for  the
         care of such children remain a matter  solely  for  the  parent  or
         parents of  such  children  (or  the  local  authority  should  the
         children's welfare be  deemed  so  precarious  that  extra-parental
         intervention is appropriate).

         Whilst the guidance that your client relies upon and which  is  set
         out above, infers that a 'third' parent could demonstrate that they
         have a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with  a  child,
         this is termed in the context of a step-parent, adoptive parent  or
         legal guardian, none of which your client is.  Whilst reference  is
         made to a 'de facto' parent, we do  not  accept  that  your  client
         falls within that definition as the fact remains that both  parents
         remain in the household and that they are  the  'real'  parents  of
         your client's grandchildren.  A de facto  parent  is  one  who  has
         assumed, on day-to-day basis, the role of  the  parent,  fulfilling
         the role of making parental decisions on behalf of the  child,  and
         both  the  child's  physical  and  emotional  needs  for  care  and
         affection, in circumstances  where  the  biological  parent(s)  are
         unable to do so.  Your client's grand children remain in  the  care
         of their biological parents and whilst it is acknowledged that your
         client provides support in  meeting  some  of  her  grandchildren's
         physical and emotional needs, there are others to who the  children
         can turn, including their natural father and maternal grandmother.

         ....

         Considering your client's case on an exceptional basis  outside  of
         the immigration rules, we do not accept that her circumstances,  or
         that of the household, attain the level of such  exceptionality  as
         to warrant granting her leave to  remain  in  the  UK.   As  stated
         above,  the  parents  of  your  client's  grandchildren   face   no
         difficulties beyond those experienced by other UK households in the
         same situation.  Whilst your client may be assisting the  household
         by helping with the grandchildren's daily routines, this is  not  a
         sufficiently compelling factor to allow someone to  remain  in  the
         UK.

         If the children's parents are unable to  cope  with  the  situation
         they  are  in,  then  they  must  take  positive  steps  to  engage
         assistance from someone who does not require daily leave to  remain
         here (whether that is altering their work-life balance  to  furnish
         support for their children, seeking  private  care  assistance,  or
         availing themselves of social services - something that  any  other
         UK parent would be required to do so)

         For the above reasons, we do  not  consider  granting  your  client
         leave to remain is appropriate in the circumstances."

30. There, as will be clear, the respondent concluded that  the  nature  of
    the relationship between the applicant and her  grandchildren  did  not
    amount to a "parental relationship" within s.117B(6)  of  the  NIA  Act
    2002.

Discussion

     1. Section 117B(6)

31. The applicant's first ground relies upon s.117B(6) of the NIA Act 2002.
     That provision is found within the new Part 5A of  the  NIA  Act  2002
    inserted by the Immigration Act 2014 with effect  from  28  July  2014.
    Part 5A applies where "a court or tribunal" is  required  to  determine
    whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts breaches  Art  8  of
    the  ECHR  (see  s.117A(1)).   Of  course,  in  these  proceedings  the
    challenge is to a decision of the Secretary of State and  so,  strictly
    speaking, Part 5A has no application.  However, both parties  recognise
    that the Secretary of State would in practice  apply  Part  5A  to  any
    relevant decision as  a  matter  of  "good  administration"  (see  Dube
    (SS.117A-117D) [2015] UKUT 90 (IAC)).  Mr Mandalia, on  behalf  of  the
    respondent, accepted that was the position.

32. Part 5A sets out a number of considerations relevant in determining the
    "public interest question"  namely  whether  any  interference  with  a
    person's right to respect for his or her private  and  family  life  is
    justified under Art 8.2 (see ss.117A(2) and (3)).  In  considering  the
    "public interest question," a court or tribunal (or by virtue  of  good
    administration the Secretary of State) is required to "have regard"  to
    the considerations listed in s.117B in all cases and to those in s.117C
    in a case concerning the deportation of a foreign criminal.  The latter
    is, of course, not relevant  in  these  proceedings.   Further,  it  is
    accepted that the sole issue in these proceedings is the application of
    sub-section (6) of s.117B.

33. Section 117B(6) is in the following terms:

         "In the case of a person who is  not  liable  to  deportation,  the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where -

         (a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship
             with a qualifying child, and

         (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave  the
             United Kingdom."

34. There is no doubt that each  of  the  applicant's  grandchildren  is  a
    "qualifying child" as a British  citizen  under  the  age  of  18  (see
    s.117D(1)).   Part  5A,  however,  sets  out  no  definition  of   what
    constitutes a "genuine and subsisting parental relationship."

35. In her decision letter, the Secretary of State  set  out  the  relevant
    guidance in her IDI  dealing  with  what  constitutes  a  "genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship" for the purposes of  Appendix  FM  of
    the Immigration Rules, in particular para  EX.1  in  respect  of  leave
    sought as a "partner" or "parent."  No reliance is  placed  upon  those
    Rules in this case, however, the guidance itself deals  with  the  very
    same requirements in s.117B(6).  In para 11.2.1, the  IDI  provides  as
    follows:

         "11.2.1  Is there a genuine and subsisting parental relationship?

         Where the application is being considered under paragraph  EX.1.(a)
         in respect of the 10-year partner or parent  routes,  the  decision
         maker  must  decide  whether  the  applicant  has  a  'genuine  and
         subsisting parental relationship' with the  child.   This  will  be
         particularly relevant to cases where the child is the child of  the
         applicant's partner, or where the parent is  not  living  with  the
         child.

         The phrase goes beyond  the  strict  legal  definition  of  parent,
         reflected in the definition of  'parent'  in  paragraph  6  of  the
         Immigration Rules, to encompass situations in which  the  applicant
         is playing a genuinely parental role in a child's life whether that
         is recognised as a matter of law or not.

         This means that an applicant living with a child of  their  partner
         and taking a step-parent role in the  child's  life  could  have  a
         'genuine and subsisting parental relationship' with them,  even  if
         they had not formally adopted the child,  but  only  if  the  other
         biological parent played no part in the child's life, or there  was
         extremely  limited  contact  between  the  child  and   the   other
         biological parent.  But in a case where the other biological parent
         continued to maintain a close relationship with the child, even  if
         they were not  living  with  them,  a  new  partner  of  the  other
         biological parent could not normally have  a  role  equating  to  a
         'genuine and subsisting parental relationship' with them,  even  if
         they had not formally adopted the child,  but  only  if  the  other
         biological parent played no part in the child's life, or there  was
         extremely  limited  contact  between  the  child  and   the   other
         biological parent.  But in a case where the other biological parent
         continued to maintain a close relationship with the child, even  if
         they were not  living  with  them,  a  new  partner  of  the  other
         biological parent could not normally have a  role  equating  to  'a
         genuine and subsisting parental relationship' with the child.

         In considering whether the applicant has a 'genuine and  subsisting
         parental relationship' the  following  factors  are  likely  to  be
         relevant:

         Does the applicant have a parental relationship with the child?

           . what is the relationship - biological,  adopted,  step  child,
             legal guardian?  Are they the child's de facto primary carer?

                         . is the applicant willing and able to  look  after
                           the child?

                         . are they physically able to care for the child?

         Unless  there  were  very  exceptional  circumstances,   we   would
         generally expect that only  two  people  could  be  in  a  parental
         relationship with the child.

         Is it a genuine and subsisting relationship?

                         . does the child live with the person?

                         . where does the applicant live in relation to  the
                           child?

                         . how regularly do they see one another?

                         . are there any  relevant  court  orders  governing
                           access to the child?

           . is there any evidence provided within the  application  as  to
             the views of the child, other family members or social work or
             other relevant professionals?

           . to what extent is the applicant making an active  contribution
             to the child's life?

         Factors which might prompt closer scrutiny include:

           . the person has little or no contact with the child or  contact
             is irregular;

           . any contact is only recent in nature;

           . support is only financial in nature; there is  no  contact  or
             emotional support; and/or

           . the child is largely independent of the person.

         Other people who spend time with,  or  reside  with  the  child  in
         addition to their parents, such as their grandparent, aunt or uncle
         or other family member, or a close friend of the family, would  not
         generally be considered to have a parental  relationship  with  the
         child for the purposes of this guidance."

36. Both Ms Rutherford on behalf of the applicant and Mr Mandalia on behalf
    of the respondent place reliance upon this guidance.

37. Ms Rutherford submitted that the guidance recognised that more than two
    people could be in a parental relationship with a child.  Applying  the
    factors set out in the  guidance,  Ms  Rutherford  submitted  that  the
    applicant had day-to-day responsibility  for  the  children  and  their
    care.  Even though,  as  she  accepted,  the  applicant  did  not  have
    parental responsibility, that was not fatal to there being a  "parental
    relationship" between the applicant and her grandchildren.   Whether  a
    person had parental responsibility for a child was, she submitted, only
    one factor that had to be taken into account.  Ms  Rutherford  drew  my
    attention to the evidence concerning the closeness of the  relationship
    between the applicant and her grandchildren,  in  particular,  R.   She
    referred me to letters from L and R at  pages  52  and  53  of  tab  B.
    Further, she referred me to a letter  from  the  applicant  herself  at
    pages 64-65 of tab D  which  spoke  to  the  closeness  and  dependency
    between the children and the applicant.  In addition, she  referred  me
    to the supporting medical and  other  professional  evidence  including
    from R's school concerning  SA2's  inability  to  look  after  her  own
    children and the applicant's  involvement  with  them.   Ms  Rutherford
    submitted that when all this information  was  pulled  together,  there
    were effectively three parents bringing up the children.

38. Mr Mandalia also relied upon this guidance  and  pointed  out  that  it
    stated that only in "very exceptional circumstances"  would  more  than
    two people be considered to be in a parental relationship with a child.
     He submitted that a "parental relationship" existed where somebody was
    effectively "standing in the shoes of the parent."  Here, he  submitted
    that the applicant was not in that position.  She played  a  full  role
    but as a grandmother.  The children lived with their parents  who  took
    responsibility for making decisions in  their  lives.   They  played  a
    significant role and the applicant was not a de  facto  primary  carer.
    He pointed out that SA1, in his statement, (at page 40) noted that  the
    maternal grandmother was also available and helped  the  children.   He
    submitted that there was no evidence that the applicant was involved in
    the decisions in the grandchildren's lives.  He submitted that  it  was
    too wide an interpretation of "parental relationship" to include  those
    who provided physical and emotional care when the parents were  present
    and involved.  He submitted that the Secretary of State was entitled to
    find on the evidence that the grandmother played a role,  assisted  the
    family and children and, perhaps, assisted in their day-to-day care but
    that her role was as  a  grandparent  rather  than  as  a  parent.   He
    submitted that the Secretary of State's decision letter  of  7  October
    2015 lawfully concluded that the  applicant  was  not  in  a  "parental
    relationship" such that s.117B(6) applied.

39. I was referred to para 6 of  the  Immigration  Rules.   That  does  not
    provide an exclusive definition of  "parent"  but  rather  states  that
    under the Rules a parent "includes" and then sets out five  situations.
    Those are as follows:

         "A parent includes

         (a)  the stepfather of  a  child  whose  father  is  dead  and  the
             reference  to  stepfather  includes  a  relationship   arising
             through civil partnership;

         (b)  the stepmother of  a  child  whose  mother  is  dead  and  the
             reference  to  stepmother  includes  a  relationship   arising
             through civil partnership and;

         (c)  the father as well as the  mother  of  an  illegitimate  child
             where he is proved to be the father;

         (d)  an adoptive parent, where a child was  adopted  in  accordance
             with  a  decision  taken  by  the   competent   administrative
             authority or court in a  country  whose  adoption  orders  are
             recognised by the United Kingdom  or  where  a  child  is  the
             subject  of  a  de  facto  adoption  in  accordance  with  the
             requirements of paragraph 309A of these Rules (except that  an
             adopted child or a child who is the  subject  of  a  de  facto
             adoption may not make an application for  leave  to  enter  or
             remain in order to accompany, join or remain with an  adoptive
             parent under paragraphs 297-303);

         (e)  in the case of a child born in the United Kingdom who is not a
             British citizen, a person to whom there  has  been  a  genuine
             transfer of parental  responsibility  on  the  ground  of  the
             original parent(s)' inability to care for the child."

40. It was common ground that the definition of "parent" in para 6  of  the
    Immigration Rules was not determinative of whether the applicant had  a
    "parental relationship" with her grandchildren.  That, in my  judgment,
    is correct.  First, para 6 has no direct application to Part 5A of  the
    NIA Act 2002.  Secondly, it defines a "parent" rather than what amounts
    to a "parental relationship."  Thirdly, it is a non-exhaustive list and
    it is clear to me, for reasons I shall give shortly, that  a  "parental
    relationship" may in certain circumstances exist  between  someone  who
    could not, in any legal sense, be seen as a  "parent."   However,   one
    point worth noting from the non-exclusive list in para 6 of  the  Rules
    is that, apart from para 6(c) dealing with an illegitimate  child,  the
    remaining situations where a non-biological parent is considered to  be
    a "parent" all arise where one or both biological parents are no longer
    involved with the child either because they have died,  the  child  has
    been  adopted  or  there  has  been  a  genuine  transfer  of  parental
    responsibility to the "new"  parent  because  the  original  parent  or
    parents are unable to care for the child.

41. I was also referred to the relevant guidance for  Appendix  FM  in  the
    respondent's IDI.  That is no more than guidance  in  relation  to  the
    Rules and it cannot have any definitive role to play when  interpreting
    s.117B(6).  It is, nevertheless, a helpful document which,  as  I  have
    already indicated, was relied upon by both  parties  to  support  their
    cases.  It is recognised in the IDI that more than 2 persons may be  in
    a "parental relationship" with a child.   That,  I  apprehend,  is  not
    contentious.  What is contentious is when and whether it is the case in
    the circumstances of this claim.

42. Whether a person is in a "parental relationship"  with  a  child  must,
    necessarily,  depend   on   the   individual   circumstances.     Those
    circumstances will include what role they actually play in  caring  for
    and making decisions in relation to the child.  That is likely to be  a
    most significant factor.  However, it will also  include  whether  that
    relationship arises because of their legal obligations as a  parent  or
    in lieu of a parent under a court order or other legal  obligation.   I
    accept that it is not necessary for an  individual  to  have  "parental
    responsibility" in law for there to exist  a  "parental  relationship,"
    although whether or not that is the case will  be  a  relevant  factor.
    What is important is that the individual can establish that  they  have
    taken on the role that a "parent" usually plays in the  life  of  their
    child.

43. I agree with Mr Mandalia's formulation that, in effect,  an  individual
    must "step into the  shoes  of  a  parent"  in  order  to  establish  a
    "parental relationship".   If the role they play, whether as a relative
    or friend of the family, is as a caring relative or friend but  not  so
    as to take on the role of a parent then it cannot  be  said  that  they
    have a "parental relationship" with the child.  It is  perhaps  obvious
    to state that "carers" are not per se  "parents."   A  child  may  have
    carers who do not step into the shoes of their parents but  look  after
    the child for specific periods of time (for example whilst the  parents
    are at work) or even longer term (for example  where  the  parents  are
    travelling abroad for a holiday or family visit).  Those carers may  be
    professionally employed; they may be relatives; or they may be friends.
     In all those cases, it may properly be said that there is  an  element
    of dependency between the child and his or her carers.   However,  that
    alone  would  not,  in  my  judgment,  give   rise   to   a   "parental
    relationship."

44. If a non-biological parent ("third party") caring for  a  child  claims
    such  a  relationship,  its  existence  will  depend   upon   all   the
    circumstances including whether or not there are  others  (usually  the
    biologically parents) who have such a relationship with the child also.
    It is unlikely, in my judgment, that a person will be able to establish
    they have taken on the role of a parent  when  the  biological  parents
    continue to be involved in the child's life as the child's  parents  as
    in a case such as the present where the children and  parents  continue
    to live and function together as a family.  It will  be  difficult,  if
    not impossible, to say that a third party has "stepped into the  shoes"
    of a parent.

45. It is not necessary to consider more fully  the  position  of  a  step-
    parent or partner of the primary carer of a child  when  a  family  has
    split after separation or divorce of the parents.   That  is  not  this
    case.  That situation may, depending upon the circumstances, present  a
    persuasive factual matrix  for  there  to  be  a  "third  parent".  The
    respondent's guidance differentiates between situations where the  non-
    residential biological parent plays no (or  no  meaningful)  continuing
    role in the child's life and where he  or  she  does.   In  the  latter
    situation, it is said that the step-parent  or  new  partner  would  be
    unlikely to have a "parental relationship".   Whilst each case will  be
    fact sensitive, I do not inevitably see  the  virtue  of  the  argument
    (other than as a numerical limitation of parents to no more  than  two)
    which excludes a step-parent or partner in this latter  situation  from
    being in a "parental relationship" if that  is  the  substance  of  the
    relationship even where the non-residential biological parent continues
    to play some role.  The issue will be fact sensitive and is best worked
    out in a case where it properly arises for decision.

46. In the instant case, there is no doubt that the medical evidence  shows
    that SA2 cannot in practice perform the full gamut of functions usually
    associated with the role of a parent.  There is also no doubt that  the
    applicant has undertaken a number of the day-to-day practical functions
    that SA2 is unable to perform.   There  is,  undoubtedly,  evidence  of
    dependency  flowing  from  this   between   the   appellant   and   her
    grandchildren.  However, the children's mother remains  in  the  family
    home and living with the children.  Likewise,  the  children's  father,
    SA1 remains present and, the evidence before the  Secretary  of  State,
    was that he has switched from employment to self-employment in order to
    be more available.  There  is  also  evidence  of  others,  namely  the
    maternal grandmother's involvement with the  children.   There  was  no
    evidence before the Secretary  of  State,  and  it  was  not  suggested
    otherwise before me, that the parents had relinquished legal or even de
    facto responsibility for their children.  There was  no  evidence  that
    the applicant made important decisions in  the  grandchildren's  lives.
    Her involvement was to support her son and daughter-in-law and  provide
    day-to-day care and practical help  to  look  after  the  grandchildren
    because of SA2's health difficulties.

47. Despite the force of  Ms  Rutherford's  submissions,  I  am  unable  to
    conclude that the respondent irrationally or otherwise unlawfully  came
    to the conclusion in her decision letter of 7 October 2015  that  there
    was not  a  "parental  relationship"  between  the  applicant  and  her
    grandchildren despite the very close familial relationship between them
    and the supportive role that she played.  In that decision letter,  the
    respondent fully considered all the circumstances but she was  entitled
    to conclude that the applicant was playing no more than the role  of  a
    grandmother albeit one who  was  more  involved  in  the  care  of  her
    grandchildren than many.

48. Consequently, I reject the ground of challenge relying on s.117B(6)  of
    the NIA Act 2002.

    2. Section 55

49. I turn now to consider the second ground,  namely  that  in  her  three
    decision letters the Secretary of State failed properly to have  regard
    to the children's interests, in particular that of R  and  to  properly
    apply her duty under s.55 of the BCI Act 2009.

50. Ms Rutherford submitted that the respondent  had  only  considered  the
    practicalities of the care of  the  grandchildren  particularly  taking
    into account possible support from social  services  if  the  applicant
    were not in the UK.  Ms Rutherford submitted that that failed  to  take
    into account the close emotional ties between the grandchildren and the
    applicant and in particular that  she  had  known  the  three  youngest
    children all their lives and the eldest since she was 4.   In  relation
    to R, Ms Rutherford submitted that  the  Secretary  of  State  had,  in
    particular, failed to consider her  best  interests  and  the  evidence
    concerning her past self-harming and the impact  that  the  applicant's
    removal would have upon R.

51. The respondent's three decision letters have to be read in combination.
      Those  letters  contain  a  very  detailed   consideration   of   the
    circumstances of the four grandchildren and, indeed,  the  impact  upon
    them if the applicant were not in the UK.  The respondent had  well  in
    mind the applicant's claim based upon the caring  role  which  she  had
    provided for her grandchildren since she arrived in  the  UK  in  2002.
    That, no doubt, was part of the basis  upon  which  the  applicant  had
    previously  been  granted  two  periods  of  leave.   The  respondent's
    decision letter of 12  May  2015  (which  I  have  set  out  above)  in
    particular deals at length with the position of the children  including
    that of R and her history of mental health issues including  self-harm.
    The respondent specifically took into account  the  evidence  from  R's
    headmaster in that regard.  In my judgement, the Secretary of State was
    entitled to take into account that if there were  any  reoccurrence  in
    relation to R and there was no up-to-date  medical  or  other  evidence
    about that, then support was available in the UK  both  from  the  NHS,
    social services and, indeed, support organisations.

52. I do not accept Ms Rutherford's  submissions.   In  my  judgement,  the
    respondent  has  given  very  careful  consideration  to  the  evidence
    relating  to  the  grandchildren's  best  interests  and  her  reasons,
    particularly in her decision letters of 12 May 2015 and 7 October  2015
    where she very fully and thoroughly deals with those  matters.   It  is
    clear that the Secretary of State took into account the grandchildren's
    best  interests  in  reaching  her  conclusion  that  there   were   no
    "exceptional" circumstances so as justify the grant  of  leave  outside
    the Rules under Art 8.  There can be no challenge to  the  respondent's
    overall assessment of proportionality under Art  8  as  leave  was  not
    granted on that ground.  That was, in my view, for the  entirely  plain
    and obvious reason that it is wholly unarguable that  the  respondent's
    approach to Art 8 was unlawful.  Having properly and fully assessed the
    grandchildren's best interests and fulfilled her duty under s.55 of the
    BCI Act 2009, the respondent's conclusion that there was no  breach  of
    Art 8 was rational and not otherwise unlawful.

53. For these reasons, therefore, I reject the ground  of  challenge  based
    upon s.55 of the BCI Act 2009.

    3. Removal Decision

54. As I indicated earlier, Ms Rutherford did  not  renew  the  applicant's
    application for permission to rely on ground 3 set out in  the  initial
    claim, namely that the respondent failed to apply  her  policy  by  not
    making an appealable removal decision.  Ms Rutherford accepted that  if
    her other grounds could not succeed, she  could  not  succeed  on  this
    ground either.  That, in my judgment, is plainly correct.  There is  no
    basis upon which the applicant could claim that  she  fell  within  the
    "Requests for Removal" policy either because she "has a dependant child
    under the age of 18 who is a British citizen"  or  because  "there  are
    other exceptional and compelling reasons to make a removal decision  at
    this time."   The  ground  is  without  merit.    I  too  would  refuse
    permission on this ground.

Decision

55. For the above reasons, the claim for judicial review is dismissed.



                                                                      Signed




                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal


