
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal

                 AS (Appeals raising Articles 3 & 8) Iran [2006] UKAIT 00037


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 14 March 2006                                |On 18 April 2006           |
|Prepared                                        |...........................|
|                                                |............               |


                                   Before

                     Mr C M G Ockelton, Deputy President
                     Mr G Warr, Senior Immigration Judge

                                   Between



                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:



For the Appellant:     Mr S Chelvan of Counsel instructed by Powell Spencer
                  & Partners Solicitors
For the Respondent:     Mr P Deller, Home Office Presenting Officer

In a Human Rights  appeal,  an  immigration  judge  should  deal  with  each
relevant and plausible human rights Article that is raised and  indicate  at
the conclusion of  the  determination  on  which  Article  or  Articles  the
appellant succeeds. Where an appeal is allowed under  Article  8  that  does
not preclude an appellant seeking an order for reconsideration on the  basis
that the judge erred in law in not  allowing  the  appeal  under  Article  3
also.  In general a longer period of leave will be conferred and  settlement
will be achieved more readily under current  Home  Office  policy  where  an
appellant succeeds under Article 3 as opposed to Article 8.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Iran born on 21 August 1979.  He  entered
    the United Kingdom on 14 March 2005 on a forged passport.   He  claimed
    asylum on 20 March 2005.   This application was refused on 17 May 2005.
       The  appellant  appealed  under  Section  82  of  the   Nationality,
    Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  and  the  matter  came  before  an
    Immigration Judge (Miss P Clough) on 5 August 2005 when  the  appellant
    was represented, as he was before us, by Mr Chelvan.

2.   The appellant's case before the Immigration Judge was that he would  be
    persecuted in Iran because of an adulterous relationship with a Miss GS
    and that returning him to Iran would engage Articles 2  and  3  of  the
    European Convention on Human Rights.

3.   At the hearing before the Immigration  Judge  both  the  appellant  and
    Miss GS gave evidence.  There was a concession at  the  outset  of  the
    proceedings that the child born to Miss GS had  been  fathered  by  the
    appellant.  We shall refer to the husband of GS as F. and the child  of
    GS and the appellant as M.

4.    The  Immigration  Judge  sets  out  her  findings  in  the   following
    concluding paragraphs of the determination as follows,

    13.  "The appellant's evidence is that he was a minicab driver.  He met
         Miss GS ... in March or April 2001.  He met her through driving her
         in his cab.  They began an illicit  relationship.  The  appellant's
         family sought GS's hand in marriage, but was  refused  because  the
         appellant was younger  than  GS,  because  of  his  employment  and
         because he was less educated than GS.  Two weeks after this  failed
         application the appellant was stabbed on his right arm by a man who
         told the appellant to leave GS alone. The appellant's father called
         the police. The appellant made a complaint to the  police  but  did
         not reveal the reason for the attack. This was because he  knew  GS
         was promised to her paternal cousin by her father.  After this  the
         appellant and GS continued to  meet  in  secret.  In  May  2003  GS
         discovered she was pregnant. They unsuccessfully sought an abortion
         because they could not provide  documentation  of  their  marriage.
         They decided the only solution was for GS to marry her cousin.


    14.  The marriage duly took place and the appellant did  not  have  any
         contact with GS until about February 2006  when  she  came  to  the
         appellant's home with their child in the middle of the  night.  She
         explained she had been repeatedly  beaten  by  her  husband,  whose
         second wife she was, and that she had asked him for a divorce,  but
         he had refused to consent to one. The appellant said GS  could  not
         stay in his home but he would take her to his  mother's  house.  As
         they were going to his car, the appellant was  attacked  by  a  man
         from behind.  GS shouted "Don't do it F".  The  appellant  realised
         this was the appellant's husband. They managed to escape  and  went
         to the appellant's father's house outside the city.


    15.  GS's husband is an officer in the Iranian  organisation  known  as
         Etelehad. The appellant feared for both of them if they were caught
         because of the husband's influence. From  his  father's  house  the
         appellant and GS went to another part of Shiraz until the situation
         calmed down. From there, they went to his cousin's.  They  remained
         there for two weeks when they heard the police  sought  them.  They
         moved to Oromia near Turkey, but decided they  had  to  leave.  The
         appellant's cousin arranged for an agent to take  them  to  safety.
         They travelled with an agent and under  his  direction.  They  were
         arrested leaving the UK and this prompted the asylum claim.


    16.  After hearing from the appellant and GS, I  find  their  claim  to
         have had an illicit relationship from 2001 to be credible and  that
         they are the parents of the child, M, born on 1 January 2004.  This
         is because of the manner in which they gave  evidence  and  because
         GS's claim to have been ill treated by her husband is  corroborated
         by medical evidence.


    17.  I had an impressive Report from  Dr  Enayat  regarding  the  legal
         consequences of the appellants' actions. I accept from the  content
         of this Report that the appellant is at risk of being charged  with
         adultery  or  of  having  an  illicit  relationship  with  GS.  The
         appellant, himself, fears that he will be liable to a  sentence  of
         flogging. This punishment is not behaviour serious enough to engage
         Article 3.  In addition, I do no consider the  evidence  before  me
         supports a finding that Article 2 would be engaged on return.


    18.  It was argued that the  appellant  formed  part  of  a  particular
         social group, in  that  he  was  a  member  of  a  group  that  was
         disadvantaged,  namely  those  who  were  part  of  a   group   who
         transgressed the strict Islamic law on sexual relationships outside
         marriage. I do not find, having considered the case law before  me,
         in particular, TB (PSG - Women) Iran and other authorities to which
         I was referred, that because  the  Iranian  Penal  Code  proscribes
         adultery  and  illicit  sexual  relationships  (that   is,   sexual
         relationships outside marriage) persons who transgress the law form
         a particular social group. The Iranian Penal Code is clearly  based
         on an Islamic "view" of morals. That the Iranian Penal Code has its
         ultimate origin in a religious code does not make  transgressor  of
         it fall within one of the Refugee Convention groups. In  particular
         prosecution for breaching the Code does amount to persecution of  a
         person on account of their religion.


    19.   I  find  that  the  appellant  has  not  proved  he  will  suffer
         persecution for a Convention reason or that he will be treated in a
         way that will engage Articles 2 or 3 or the 1950 Convention.


    20.  However, there is another  factor  to  be  considered  here.   The
         appellant and GS are parents of a child born to GS while married to
         another  man.  The  law  regarding  a  child  born  of  an  illicit
         relationship is discussed at 1.8 of Dr Enayat's Report. It is clear
         under Article 1162 of the Civil Code  that  a  child  born  out  of
         wedlock shall  not  belong  to  the  parents  who  had  an  immoral
         connection. How this leaves the legal position of M is unclear, but
         I consider, if returned with his  parents  his  paternity  will  be
         challenged and his true paternity  will  be  revealed.  I  consider
         there is a real risk that the child would be removed from the  care
         of both parents and raised by the State. The child and his  parents
         now have a family life, in that  they  are  living  together  as  a
         family.  I find that removing the appellant or  GS  and  the  child
         either together or  singly  to  Iran,  will  run  a  real  risk  of
         destroying that family, either in Iran or  elsewhere,  forever.  As
         such,  I  consider  this  risk  falls  within  the   very   unusual
         circumstances discussed in Huang so as to engage Article 8."


5.   The Immigration Judge  accordingly  dismissed  the  appellant's  asylum
    appeal, refused the appeal  under  the  European  Convention  on  Human
    Rights under Articles 2 and 3 but allowed the appeal under Article 8.

6.   An application for an order of reconsideration was made on 9  September
    2005 and the grounds were settled by Mr Chelvan.  It was submitted that
    the Immigration Judge had erred in finding that the ill-treatment  that
    the appellant would expect by being lashed would not breach  Article  3
    and reference was made to HA (Iran) [2003] UKIAT 00095 CG and HS (Iran)
    [2005] UKAIT 00120.

7.   On 19 September 2005 the Tribunal made no order on the  application  on
    the basis that the  appellant's  appeal  had  been  allowed  under  the
    European Convention on Human Rights and  the  appellant  did  not  have
    separate rights under each Article.

8.   The application was  renewed  before  the  High  Court.   Neuberger  LJ
    accepted that if the consequences for the  appellant  of  a  successful
    appeal under Article 8 were in all ways as good as or better  than  the
    consequences would have been if he had succeeded under Article  3  then
    the decision of the Tribunal to refuse to order reconsideration must be
    correct.  Paragraph 3 of the reasons reads as follows:

         "However, if  the  appellant  would  have  been  better  off  in  a
         practical and significant way had his case  under  Article  3  been
         accepted, then I think it must be at least strongly  arguable  that
         he could have been permitted to appeal the adverse  decision  under
         Article 3."


9.   Mr Chelvan told us that no arguments were being pursued in relation  to
    the refusal of the asylum claim.  He pointed out that the appellant had
    not been granted discretionary leave and accordingly the appeal was not
    deemed abandoned as had been the case  in  HN  (Lebanon)  [2004]  UKIAT
    00322.   The appellant's appeal arose under Section 82  in  respect  of
    the decision to issue removal directions and the  relevant  ground  was
    set out in Section 84(1)(g) -

         "That  removal  of  the  appellant  from  the  United  Kingdom   in
         consequence of the immigration decision  would  breach  the  United
         Kingdom's obligations under the  Refugee  Convention  or  would  be
         unlawful under Section 6 of the Human  Rights  Act  1998  as  being
         incompatible with the appellant's Convention rights."

10.  Section 86(2) of the 2002 Act required the Tribunal to  determine  "any
    matter raised as  a  ground  of  appeal..."   Counsel  referred  us  to
    documents from the Home  Office  website  on  discretionary  leave  and
    humanitarian protection which had  been  introduced  on  1  April  2003
    following the abolition of exceptional leave  on  31 March  2003.    A
    person who qualified for humanitarian protection and was granted  leave
    on or after 20 August 2005 should  be  granted  leave  for  five  years
    whereas the duration of grants of discretionary leave in cases  arising
    under Article 8 would be three years - see paragraph 5.1  of  the  Home
    Office policy note on discretionary leave.

11.  On a true construction of the relevant  sections  of  the  2002  Act  a
    separate decision was required  in  respect  of  each  Article  of  the
    European Convention.

12.  Mr Deller acknowledged that in paragraph 17 of the determination  there
    was a gap.  The Immigration Judge had not made a finding as to  whether
    the appellant's fears were well-founded.  The  determination  had  been
    promulgated on 1 September 2005 but  at  the  time  of  the  hearing  a
    successful appeal under Article 3 would not have attracted a  grant  of
    five years humanitarian protection.  There might be circumstances where
    an appellant would have  a  right  to  have  a  status  determined  but
    following the Immigration  Judge's  decision  removal  would  not  take
    place.

13.  The appeal had to be based upon a ground.  The  Immigration  Judge  was
    not determining a lot of little appeals.   Such  a  construction  would
    require a judge to deal with each and every article relied upon  by  an
    appellant under the 1950 Convention. There was no differential  benefit
    in existence at the time when the Immigration Judge was considering the
    case.   The Immigration Judge in the instant appeal had done  all  that
    she was required to do in allowing the appeal under Section 86.

14.  Counsel submitted that at the time of the promulgation of the  decision
    there had  been  a  difference  in  the  consequences  flowing  from  a
    successful outcome of an appeal under Article 8 as opposed  to  Article
    3. There was no gap in  paragraph  17  of  the  determination  and  the
    findings of fact had  been  quite  strong.    Counsel  referred  us  to
    paragraph 2.4 of the Home Office Note on Humanitarian  Protection.   In
    particular Counsel referred us to the following extract:

         "There are two types of case where a person whose asylum  claim  is
         unsuccessful may qualify for humanitarian protection by  virtue  of
         the application of Article 3.  Namely:


          . The treatment feared amounts to persecution but is not  for  one
            of the five Convention reason.


          . The treatment or punishment is in the narrow category of actions
            which are of a severity  and  nature  to  amount  to  Article  3
            treatment but not to amount to persecution - for example,  where
            the actions feared do not have a sufficiently systemic character
            to amount to persecution.  As the Tribunal noted in  Kacaj,  few
            cases are likely to fit this description."

15.  It was submitted that the case  fell  within  the  second  of  the  two
    bullet points.  In paragraph 6 of the Home Office Policy it  was  clear
    that leave on humanitarian protection grounds should be granted  for  a
    period of five years.

16.  At the conclusions of the submissions we  reserved  our  decision.   It
    appears clear to us from the terms of paragraph 17 of the determination
    that the  Immigration  Judge  accepted  the  expert's  report  and  the
    conclusion that the  appellant  was  at  risk  of  being  charged  with
    adultery or of having an illicit relationship  with  GS.  Although  the
    paragraph is not as clear as it might be it can only sensibly  be  read
    in the way contended for by the appellant, i.e.  that  the  Immigration
    Judge accepted that the appellant would be punished in the way that the
    expert had described in  her  report  -  one  hundred  lashes  for  any
    connections specifically  with  adultery  or  ninety  nine  lashes  for
    immoral relations.

17.  In HA (Iran) [2003] UKIAT 00095 CG the appellant had been sentenced  to
    a hundred lashes and then death by stoning  having  had  an  adulterous
    relationship with a divorced woman.   The Adjudicator had  allowed  the
    appellant's appeal on asylum grounds and had also  allowed  the  appeal
    under Articles 2 and 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights.  The
    Secretary of State did not contest on appeal the decision under Article
    3.  The Tribunal reversed  the  Adjudicator's  decision  to  allow  the
    appeal on asylum grounds.

18.  In HW (Iran) [2005] UKAIT 00120 the Tribunal considered  the  risks  on
    return for homosexuals in Iran.  The Tribunal found  at  paragraph  142
    that there was a real risk that the appellant would be found guilty and
    sentenced to a significant prison sentence and lashes  where  he  would
    again be exposed to ill-treatment including ill-treatment amounting  to
    being persecution or other serious harm by reason of his homosexuality.
     In addition he was at real risk, in  the  view  of  the  Tribunal,  of
    serious harm whilst in detention pending charge and trial.

19.  It will be observed that neither of these authorities is  precisely  in
    line with the case before us.  Nevertheless, apart  from  arguing  that
    there was a gap in paragraph 17 of the determination, Mr Deller did not
    draw our attention to any authority to the effect that Article 3  would
    not be engaged in this case.  We find that the Adjudicator erred in law
    in concluding that the punishment would not be serious enough to engage
    Article 3.

20.  In support of his submission that the appellant is entitled  to  pursue
    his appeal under Article 3 notwithstanding his success under Article 8,
    Counsel relies on HN (Lebanon) [2004] UKIAT 00322.  In  that  case  the
    Adjudicator had dismissed the  appellant's  appeal  under  the  Refugee
    Convention and under Article 3 but had allowed the appeal under Article
    8. The appellant had sought and had been granted permission  to  appeal
    to the Immigration Appeal Tribunal in respect of the asylum and Article
    3 issues.   This indicated that the Tribunal had accepted the  argument
    that Article 3 and Article 8 gave rise to separate issues and  separate
    appeal rights.  Of course the argument in that case did not turn on the
    point which now arises for decision.

21.  A right of appeal must  be  brought  against  an  immigration  decision
    under Section 82 of the 2002 Act.   There is no dispute that there  was
    an immigration decision in this case.   Under Section 84 an appeal must
    be brought on one or more of the grounds set out and it is agreed  that
    the relevant sub-paragraph is Section 84(1)(g).   In this case  we  are
    concerned with the words "would be unlawful  under  Section  6  of  the
    Human Rights Act  1998  as  being  incompatible  with  the  appellant's
    Convention rights".  Counsel also draws our  attention  to  Section  86
    which requires the Tribunal to determine under  Section  86(2)(a)  "any
    matter raised as a ground of appeal...".

22.  Counsel points out further that in Section 6 of the  Human  Rights  Act
    it is made unlawful for a public authority "to act in a  way  which  is
    incompatible with a Convention right".  The Convention rights  are  set
    out in Schedule 1 to the 1998 Act and  include  different  rights,  for
    example those under Articles 3 and 8.

23.  Mr Deller submits that it is not right to construe the  legislation  as
    giving rise to a multiplicity of appeals.

24.  We note that in Section 8(1)  of  the  Human  Rights  Act  1998  it  is
    provided that:

         "In relation to any act (or proposed act)  of  a  public  authority
         which the court finds is (or would be) unlawful, it may grant  such
         relief or remedy, or make such  order,  within  its  powers  as  it
         considers just and appropriate."


25.  In Section 87 of the  2002  Act  where  an  appeal  is  successful  the
    Tribunal is given power to make a direction "for the purpose of  giving
    effect to its  decision".    Section  87(2)  provides  that  "a  person
    responsible for making an immigration decision shall act in  accordance
    with any relevant direction under sub-section 1."

26.  It is clear that different consequences flow from  a  successful  human
    rights appeal where the ground which persuades an Immigration Judge  to
    allow the appeal is raised under Article 3 as  opposed  to  Article  8.
    Simply as a matter of practicality and common sense, we cannot see  how
    effect can be given to a decision unless it is clear upon  which  basis
    it was reached.  While it is not  necessary  or  indeed  desirable  for
    directions to be given the appropriate judicial remedy in the  case  of
    the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal is simply to indicate  the  Article
    or Articles upon which the appellant succeeds. It will be assumed  that
    the Secretary  of  State  will  apply  the  appropriate  policy.    The
    appellant would have his remedy elsewhere if  the  Secretary  of  State
    does not do so.

27.  We do not accept this construction gives  rise  to  a  multiplicity  of
    appeals.  The majority of cases will turn on  Articles  3  and  8.  The
    Immigration Judge will need to deal with any  other  Article  which  is
    plausibly raised.

28.  On the Immigration Judge's findings of fact, and in the  light  of  the
    Tribunal authorities which we have cited, the judge  erred  in  law  in
    failing to allow the appeal under Article 3.  In answer to Mr  Deller's
    point about the Home Office policy not being in force at  the  date  of
    the Immigration Judge's hearing, we have to consider the position today
    as we have found  a  material  error  of  law.    There  is  clearly  a
    difference in treatment for those who succeed in appeals under  Article
    3.  Not  only  will  they  be  eligible  for  five  years  humanitarian
    protection (as opposed to three years  discretionary  leave)  but  they
    will be eligible  to  apply  for  indefinite  leave  to  remain  having
    completed five years humanitarian protection.  By way  of  contrast,  a
    person  will  not  normally  become  eligible  for  consideration   for
    settlement or indefinite leave to remain until they have completed  six
    years of discretionary leave - see  paragraph  7  of  the  Home  Office
    Policy.  Anyone granted discretionary leave will  accordingly  have  to
    have at least one  interim  review  before  they  become  eligible  for
    consideration for settlement.

29.  There are accordingly  at  least  two  main  benefits  flowing  from  a
    successful outcome in the case  of  a  human  rights  appeal  based  on
    Article 3 as opposed to Article 8.  In general a longer period of leave
    will be conferred and in  general  settlement  will  be  achieved  more
    readily.

30.  For the reasons we have given the Immigration  Judge  materially  erred
    in law.  Accordingly, we substitute the following decision:

    The asylum appeal is refused.


    The human rights appeal is allowed under Articles 3 and 8.

Signed                                  Date 10 April 2006

 G Warr
Senior Immigration Judge

