
ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL


                 RM (Kwok On Tong:  HC395 para 320) India [2006] UKAIT 00039

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at: Field House  Date of Hearing:  28 February 2006
      Date of Promulgation: 18 April 2006

                                   Before:

                    Mr C M G Ockelton (Deputy President)
                   Mr J Barnes (Senior Immigration Judge)
                   Mr A Jordan (Senior Immigration Judge)


                                   Between


                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, NEW DELHI
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:           Mr J Gillespie, instructed by Kidd Rapinet
For the Respondent:          Miss R Brown, Home Office Presenting Officer

Kwok On Tong is still good law and an  Immigration  Judge  cannot  allow  an
appeal on the ground that the  decision  was  not  in  accordance  with  the
Immigration Rules unless satisfied that the requirements of the  Immigration
Rules were (or are, as appropriate) met.  An appeal is not  limited  to  the
issues raised  in  the  Notice  of  Refusal.   In  the  particular  case  of
paragraph 320, however, only  the  first  seven  subparagraphs  prevent  the
claimant succeeding.  An Immigration Judge is therefore  entitled  to  allow
an  appeal  even  if  he  considers  that  one  (or  more)  of   the   other
subparagraphs apply to the case. See also CP (Section 86(3) and  (5);  wrong
immigration rule) Dominica [2006] UKAIT 00040.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

  1. The Appellant is a citizen of India.  On 4 August  2004,  she  applied
     for entry clearance to the United Kingdom for work permit  employment.
     She proposed to be employed as a general nurse with London Residential
     Healthcare Limited (LRH) at a home approved for such  a  placement  by
     the Nursing and Midwifery Council.  She was interviewed on  12  August
     2004 and her application was refused.  The reason for the refusal  was
     that the Respondent was not satisfied that she met the requirements of
     paragraph 128, in particular  that  he  was  not  satisfied  that  the
     Appellant did not intend to take employment except as specified in her
     work permit.  That reason is further expanded in the notice of refusal
     as follows:

           "Because
           You applied for an entry clearance on  4th  December  2002.   At
           that stage you sought entry as a  family  visitor.   You  stated
           that you wished to visit your aunt for a period of  two  months.
           The ECO was not satisfied that you would leave the UK at the end
           of a short stay, as claimed.  This was due to the fact  that  at
           the time you were unemployed and had resigned from your  job  in
           India purely in order to take a holiday  in  the  UK.   The  ECO
           considered this wholly implausible and concluded  that,  on  the
           balance of probabilities, you were not likely to leave the UK at
           the end of a short stay.


           You appealed against the above  decision  and  your  appeal  was
           allowed on 10th April 2003.  You were duly issued with an  entry
           clearance in line with  the  adjudicator's  directions  at  that
           time.  Your visa was therefore  restricted  and  valid  for  two
           months only.  As such, the  conditions  attached  to  your  stay
           expired on 16th September 2003.


           You travelled to the UK in July 2003 and state that you returned
           in September 2003.  At interview today, you have stated that you
           travelled to the UK in order to attend  a  job  interview.   You
           obtained your current work permit as a  direct  result  of  that
           interview.  I note that at the time of your initial  application
           you stated that the sole reason for your visit had been to visit
           your aunt.  No mention  was  made  of  your  intention  to  seek
           employment in the UK.  The ECO  suspected  that  this  was  your
           motivation in seeking entry at that time and this  is  why  your
           application was refused.  It  is  highly  likely  that  had  the
           adjudicator been aware of  your  intention  to  seek  employment
           within the UK, your appeal would not have been allowed.   I  can
           only conclude that you have  sought  to  wilfully  mislead  this
           office in order to  obtain  your  initial  entry  clearance  and
           thereby seek work in the UK.  I consider this highly damaging to
           your overall credibility.


           You state that upon your return to India you lost your  passport
           in Kerala and that a report was duly filed recording this.   You
           subsequently obtained your current passport on 29th July 2004.


           You have stated that you were  interviewed  in  connection  with
           this position in September 2003.  You have stated that a Mr Jaag
           conducted  your  interview.   However,  we  have  contacted  the
           director of LRH Homes, a Mr Jas Grewal.  He has stated  that  he
           interviewed you in connection with your position.   He  obtained
           your personal file notes and  stated  that  the  interview  took
           place on 3rd April 2004.  It therefore follows that you were  in
           the UK at that time.  This means that you overstayed in  the  UK
           by a period of at least 7� months.  I can only conclude that you
           have  simply  lost  your  passport  in  order  to  disguise  the
           corresponding Indian immigration  arrivals  stamp,  which  would
           have demonstrated the  true  period  of  your  stay.   You  have
           therefore not only overstayed, but obtained a  new  passport  in
           order to disguise this fact.


           I consider that you have demonstrated a palpable  disregard  for
           the provisions of the  Immigration  Rules.   You  have  wilfully
           practised deception on no less than three  occasions  (including
           to an adjudicator by the use of false representations) in  order
           to secure your entry to the UK.  I therefore consider that  your
           credibility has been seriously compromised.  Given your repeated
           misrepresentations, it is no longer possible to be satisfied  as
           to the veracity of your remarks.  I am not  therefore  satisfied
           that having secured your long-term entry to the  UK,  you  would
           not simply seek to take up employment elsewhere.  As such, I  am
           not satisfied that you intend to take employment exclusively  as
           specified in your work permit."

  2. The Appellant appealed, and in connection with her appeal she asserted
     in her grounds that there was a public interest in allowing  qualified
     registered nurses to come to the United Kingdom to work and  that  any
     previous misconduct by the Appellant was as a result of her  receiving
     bad advice.  The Respondent's response  to  that  in  the  explanatory
     statement is as follows:

           "The reasons set out in my refusal notice are clear and I am not
           persuaded  to  retract  them  now.   I  acknowledge  the  public
           interest arguments put forward by the representatives however, I
           consider that  there  are  good  grounds  for  maintaining  this
           decision.  I  find  the  representatives'  suggestion  that  the
           appellant denies having wilfully sought  to  practice  deception
           remarkable.  The appellant had 'lost' her first passport,  which
           would have demonstrated  that  she  had  overstayed.   She  then
           sought to compound that deception by maintaining  that  she  had
           returned within time and that her interview for the position  in
           question had taken place in India.  The appellant knew full well
           that none of the above was correct.  I do not  accept  that  the
           appellant is the victim of poor advice.  This office issues many
           hundreds of entry clearances for nurses,  many  of  whom  secure
           their positions in the  UK  legitimately  and  with  the  entire
           process taking place in India.  The  appellant  would  have  had
           little reason to doubt that  she  could  have  acquired  a  work
           permit and entry clearance in the same manner.  I consider that,
           far from being an innocent party, the appellant has persistently
           sought to abuse the provisions  of  the  Immigration  Rules  and
           subsequently deceive the relevant authorities  in  pursuance  of
           her goals.  I am of the opinion that her  credibility  has  been
           seriously compromised by her own actions.   It  is  subsequently
           difficult to be satisfied as to the veracity of her remarks  and
           therefore her future intentions."

  3. The Appellant's appeal was heard by  an  Immigration  Judge,  Mr  M  B
     Hussain, on 24 October 2005.  He  heard  no  oral  evidence.   He  had
     before him a statement signed by  the  Appellant  asserting  that  her
     earlier arrival in the United Kingdom was indeed as a visitor, that it
     was only after her arrival that she decided to look for  a  job,  that
     she was advised then to apply for a student visa and did so,  but  was
     refused, that she was further advised by a "lawyer"  that  she  should
     remain and seek employment and that  she  would  be  lawfully  in  the
     United Kingdom while she did so,  and  that  having  obtained  a  work
     permit she discovered that she had to leave the United Kingdom and did
     so.  The statement went on to say that she was "extremely  apologetic"
     and "regret that I gave the impression to the Entry Clearance  Officer
     that I have not  overstayed  in  the  United  Kingdom".   Further,  "I
     obviously regret the advice that I followed previously".

  4. The Immigration Judge heard submissions from  representatives  of  the
     Appellant and the Respondent.  During the course  of  the  hearing  he
     appears to have said that he knew the Appellant's representative,  who
     had  "taught  me  all  I  know".   In  response  to  the  Respondent's
     representatives request that  the  hearing  be  conducted  by  another
     Immigration Judge, he took advice and decided to continue to hear  the
     appeal.  No objection to that course of action has been raised  before
     us.

  5. The Immigration Judge noted the admissions made by  the  Appellant  in
     her witness statement and in addition found as a fact  that  when  the
     Appellant came to the United Kingdom in 2003  her  intention  was  not
     exclusively for the purpose of a holiday.  He went on to  decide,  for
     reasons which  are  not  very  clear,  that  "that  finding  does  not
     necessarily  follow  that  she  has  deliberately  mislead  the  Entry
     Clearance Officer" [sic].  The Immigration Judge continued:

           "For the purpose of this determination, however, I  am  prepared
           to assume that the Appellant was deceitful when she entered  the
           United Kingdom.  The Appellant readily admits that whilst  here,
           she overstayed in  this  country.   She  also  admits  that  she
           obtained a fresh Indian passport in order to conceal that  fact.
           The Appellant denies, and I accept, that at  her  interview  she
           mislead the Entry Clearance Officer with regards to  the  person
           who interviewed her."

  6. Whatever her history, the Immigration Judge went on to  say  that  his
     task was to decide whether at the date of the  decision  she  met  the
     requirements of paragraph 128.  The refusal had  been  solely  on  the
     basis that the Entry Clearance Officer  was  not  satisfied  that  she
     intended to take employment only in accordance with her  work  permit.
     The Immigration Judge considered the material going to that issue  and
     found that there was no reason at all to  suppose  that  she  had  any
     other intention.  On the evidence before  him,  he  decided  that  the
     Appellant met the requirements of paragraph 128  and  so  allowed  the
     appeal.

  7. The grounds for review, on the  basis  of  which  reconsideration  was
     ordered at the Respondent's instance, are that the  Immigration  Judge
     should not have allowed the appeal, because paragraph 320(11) and (12)
     provide that entry clearance or leave  to  enter  the  United  Kingdom
     should normally be refused where there has been:

           "(11) Failure to observe the time limit or  conditions  attached
                 to any grant of leave to enter  or  remain  in  the  United
                 Kingdom; [or]
           (12)  The obtaining of a previous leave to enter  or  remain  by
           deception."


  8. For that reason it  was  said  that,  given  the  Immigration  Judge's
     findings as to the Appellant's history, he should have  dismissed  the
     appeal.  Reference was made to R v IAT and another ex  parte  Kwok  On
     Tong [1981] Imm AR 214.  We heard submissions from the representatives
     of both parties.

  9. Under s19 of the 1971 Act, an Adjudicator was to allow an appeal if he
     was satisfied that the decision against which the appeal  was  brought
     was one which was  "not  in  accordance  with  the  law  or  with  any
     Immigration Rules applicable to the case".  The  equivalent  provision
     in the 2002 Act is s86(3)(a):

           "The Tribunal must allow the appeal in so far as it thinks that:
           (a)   a decision against which  the  appeal  is  brought  or  is
                 treated as being brought was not in accordance with the law
                 (including immigration rules)."

 10. In Kwok On Tong (and also in R v IAT ex parte Hubbard  [1985]  Imm  AR
     110) the Court had to consider what the position was if a  refusal  of
     entry clearance was based on one element of the Rules, but by the time
     of  the  hearing  it  became  apparent  that  there  was  some   other
     requirement of the Rules which the appellant  could  not  meet.   Both
     those cases decide that the notice of refusal is not equivalent  to  a
     pleading;  if new elements of the Immigration  Rules  come  into  play
     they are to be dealt with on the  appeal,  and  the  parties  must  be
     allowed any appropriate adjournment in order to avoid the injustice of
     being taken by surprise.  The reason is the wording of s19.   Even  if
     the appellant shows that  he  met  a  particular  requirement  of  the
     Immigration Rules that had been in issue at the appeal,  the  decision
     to refuse him is not a decision that was "not in accordance  with  the
     law including any applicable Immigration Rules" unless, at the time of
     the decision,  he  met  the  requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules
     applicable to his case.  To put it another way, an appellant can  lose
     his appeal by failing to  meet  just  one  requirement  of  the  Rules
     (whether specified or not in the notice of refusal), but  he  can  win
     only by meeting all the requirements of the Immigration Rules (whether
     specified or not in the notice of refusal).

 11. As at present advised, we can  see  no  material  difference  in  this
     respect between the formulation of s19 of the 1971 Act and s86 of  the
     2002 Act.  In an appeal which depends on  the  Immigration  Rules,  an
     Immigration Judge is not entitled to allow it outright unless all  the
     requirements of the Immigration Rules are satisfied.   The  difference
     in the new formulation is the phrase "in so  far  as",  which  had  no
     equivalent in the 1971 Act, and which also appears in subsection  (5),
     giving the basis on which an appeal is to be dismissed.   The  precise
     implications of that phrase can be considered elsewhere.   Suffice  it
     to say for the present  purposes  that  if  the  position  before  the
     Immigration Judge is that only some of the requirements of  the  Rules
     are or can be dealt with, it may well be right for him to look at only
     those requirements and to make findings on them:  if his findings  are
     all in favour of the appellant, he  will  allow  the  appeal  to  that
     extent, and  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer,  Immigration  Officer  or
     Secretary of State as appropriate should be directed to  continue  his
     consideration of the  application  or  case  in  accordance  with  the
     findings made by the Immigration Judge.

 12. The foregoing does not, however, necessarily assist the Respondent  in
     the present case.  Paragraph 320 of the Immigration Rules, upon  which
     the grounds for review relies, is  divided  into  two  parts.   It  is
     headed "Refusal of entry  clearance  or  leave  to  enter  the  United
     Kingdom", and begins as follows:

           "320. In addition to the grounds for refusal of entry  clearance
                 or leave to enter set out in parts 2-8 of these rules,  and
                 subject to paragraph 321 below, the following  grounds  for
                 the refusal of entry clearance or leave to enter apply:"

 13. There is then a heading "Grounds on which entry clearance or leave  to
     enter the United Kingdom is to be  refused",  governing  subparagraphs
     (1) to (7);  that is followed by another  heading  "Grounds  on  which
     entry clearance or leave to enter the United Kingdom  should  normally
     be refused", governing subparagraphs (8) to (21).  As is  acknowledged
     on behalf of the Respondent, the Appellant's  immigration  history  in
     this case raises questions in the  second,  not  the  first,  part  of
     paragraph 320.

 14. It seems to us that if the Immigration Judge had concluded that any of
     subparagraphs (1) to (7) of paragraph 320 applied to this  appeal,  he
     should have dismissed the appeal.  The reason  for  that  is  that  he
     could not consider that the decision was not in  accordance  with  the
     Immigration Rules if, on the basis of the  facts  as  he  found  them,
     "entry clearance ... is to be refused".   In  those  circumstances,  a
     grant of entry clearance would necessarily not be  one  which  was  in
     accordance with the Rules.

 15. Where, however, the facts as found by the Immigration Judge  indicates
     an application of one of the later subparagraphs of paragraph 320, the
     position is quite different.  Under  those  paragraphs,  although  the
     resumption is clearly against entry clearance, there is no  bar  on  a
     grant of entry clearance.   A  grant  of  entry  clearance  would  not
     therefore conflict with the Rules, and an Immigration Judge's  finding
     that circumstances apply to the case does not prevent him allowing  an
     appeal.

 16. The second part of paragraph 320 gives the government official dealing
     with the case a power to decide whether to take the  points  specified
     against the applicant.  If he does so he will give them in the reasons
     for refusal as his ground, or as a further  ground,  for  the  refusal
     itself.  If the relevant facts were known to  the  decision-maker  and
     there is no reference to paragraph 320 in  the  documents  before  the
     Immigration Judge, the latter is no doubt entitled to  take  the  view
     that matters arising under paragraph 320 are not in issue.   In  those
     circumstances, although perhaps entry  clearance  or  leave  to  enter
     should normally be refused, he can perfectly properly  take  the  view
     that he is dealing with a case which is not regarded as  normal.   If,
     then,  he  is  satisfied  that  the  requirements  of   the   specific
     Immigration Rules applicable to the case are satisfied, he will  allow
     the appeal.

 17. If, on the other hand, the person who made the decision against  which
     the appeal is brought has taken a  point  under  paragraph  320(8)  to
     (21), there can be no doubt that he  has  exercised  a  discretion  in
     refusing entry clearance or leave to enter.  In  those  circumstances,
     the Immigration Judge has jurisdiction under s86(3)(b)  to  allow  the
     appeal if and in so far as he thinks the discretion should  have  been
     exercised differently.

 18. A difficulty may arise if  facts  relevant  to  paragraph  320  become
     apparent only during the course of the hearing.  As  we  have  already
     indicated, if the Immigration Judge finds that paragraph 320(1) to (7)
     applies, the appeal must be dismissed.  If  he  takes  the  view  that
     other elements of paragraph 320 may apply to the case, it may be right
     to give the Presenting Officer time to consider whether he  wishes  to
     take any point on paragraph 320, if the Respondent has had no  earlier
     opportunity to do so.  If,  in  these  circumstances,  the  Presenting
     Officer seeks to take a point under the second part of paragraph  320,
     it follows that (as events have transpired) there is a discretion that
     could  have  been  exercised  and,  not  through  any  fault  of   the
     Respondent, has not been.  The appeal will have to be allowed  to  the
     extent only of deciding  that  the  decision  was  unlawful  for  that
     reason.  The Respondent is required  to  exercise  the  discretion  in
     whichever way he considers appropriate, and make a new decision, which
     will carry a new right of appeal.

 19. So far as the present case is concerned,  the  position  is  that  the
     Immigration  Judge  dealt  with  paragraph  128  and  found   in   the
     Appellant's favour on that.  He was not asked to look at  any  of  the
     requirements  of  paragraph  320,  although  the  issues  relating  to
     paragraph 320(11) and (12) were well  known  to  the  Entry  Clearance
     Officer.  It had not previously been suggested that this  was  a  case
     where entry clearance should have been refused  under  paragraph  320,
     and for that reason alone the Immigration Judge was entitled to ignore
     paragraph 320(11) and (12).  In any event, because of the  wording  of
     the heading of the second part of paragraph 320, the  grant  of  entry
     clearance to the Appellant is not one which would be contrary  to  the
     Immigration Rules, despite her history.

 20. For the foregoing reasons, we find no material error  of  law  in  the
     Immigration Judge's determination,  which  we  therefore  order  shall
     stand.


                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT
                                                             Date:
