
RG (EEA Regulations - extended family members) Sri Lanka [2007] UKAIT 00034


                       ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at: Field House
Date of Hearing: 28 November 2006
                                      Date of Promulgation: 22 February 2007

                                   Before:


 Mr C M G Ockelton, Deputy President of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
                       Senior Immigration Judge Allen

                                   Between

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the Appellant:     Ms S O'Rourke, instructed by Tamil Welfare
                       Association
For the Respondent:          Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


(1)  The provisions of subparagraphs (a), (b) and (c) of regulation 8(2)  of
the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 are alternatives, and the tenses  are
important.  Thus, a claimant may fulfil the  requirements  of  reg  8(2)  by
showing that he presently meets the requirements of subpara (a), or that  he
did meet those requirements in the past and now falls  within  (b)  or  (c).
(2)  Because of the definition of 'EEA State' in reg 2, residence in the  UK
by either the applicant or the proposed sponsor does not count as  residence
in an EEA State for the purposes of reg 8(2).  (3) The wording of reg 12  is
not apt to include the case of a person (not being an EEA national)  who  is
in the UK and is joined here by a relative who  is  an  EEA  national.   (4)
Article 37 of the  Citizens  Directive  2004/38/EC  is  not  a  'standstill'
clause and does not prevent any Member  State  adopting  national  law  less
advantageous than that in force previously provided in all  cases  that  the
national law implements the rights given by  the  Directive.   (5)  Although
EEA nationals from non-EU countries are entitled in  the  UK  (and  in  many
other countries) to rights equivalent to or modelled  upon  those  available
to EU citizens under EU law, the claim that national  legislation  does  not
implement a Directive is not available to them unless the Directive  applies
to them.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is the reconsideration of the appeal of the appellant,  a  citizen
    of Sri Lanka, against the decision of the respondent on  15  June  2006
    refusing to issue him with a residence  card  as  confirmation  of  his
    right of residence in the United Kingdom as the extended family  member
    of an EEA national.

 2. The appellant arrived in the  United  Kingdom  on  15  March  1998  and
    applied for asylum.  He had apparently previously applied for asylum in
    some other European country.  He was refused asylum.  He appealed,  and
    the appeal was dismissed.  A further appeal to the  Immigration  Appeal
    Tribunal was also dismissed.  His brother, whom we shall call "T", left
    Sri Lanka in 1989 and moved to Switzerland.  We do not  know  precisely
    the basis of his admission to that country, but he lived there until he
    obtained Swiss nationality in March 2005.  He then came to  the  United
    Kingdom.  He arrived here in November  2005.   He  is,  we  understand,
    working here.  It is on the basis of his presence here  and  his  Swiss
    nationality that the appellant seeks a residence card as his  dependant
    relative.  The Immigration Judge's determination states as a fact  that
    is not in issue that "the appellant is the brother  of  an  EU  citizen
    exercising Treaty rights in the United Kingdom."   That  is  not  quite
    right: Switzerland is not a member  of  the  European  Union.   It  is,
    however, treated for most purposes as being in  the  European  Economic
    Area, and it is common ground that, so far as  United  Kingdom  law  is
    concerned, the decision against which the appellant appeals is  an  EEA
    decision within the meaning of the Immigration (European Economic Area)
    Regulations 2006 (SI 1003/2006).  Despite the reference in  Reg  12  to
    Entry Clearance Officers, it was also common ground that  the  relevant
    regulations are as follows:

      "'Extended family member'
          8.-(1)  In this these regulations 'extended family member' means a
                 person who is not a family member of an EEA national  under
                 Regulation 7(1)(a), (b) or (c) [which the appellant is not]
                 and who satisfies the conditions in paragraph (2), (3), (4)
                 or (5).
          (2)     A person satisfies the condition in this paragraph if  the
                 person is a relative of an EEA national, his spouse or  his
                 civil partner and -
            (a)   the person is residing in an EEA state in  which  the  EEA
                       national also resides and is dependent upon  the  EEA
                       national or is a member of his household;
            (b)   the person satisfied the condition in paragraph (a) and is
                       accompanying the EEA national to the  United  Kingdom
                       or wishes to join him there; or
            (c)   the person satisfied the condition in paragraph  (a),  has
                       joined the EEA national in  the  United  Kingdom  and
                       continues to be dependent on him or to be a member of
                       his household.
                 [there is no suggestion that the  appellant  could  qualify
                 under paragraph (3), (4) or (5)]

      ...

      Issue of EEA family permit
      12. -(1)   An Entry Clearance Officer must issue an EEA family  permit
                 to a person who applies for one if the person is  a  family
                 member of an EEA national and -
            (a)  the EEA national -
                 (i)   is residing  in  the  UK  in  accordance  with  these
                 Regulations; or
                 (ii)  will be travelling to the United Kingdom  within  six
                            months of the date of the application and  will
                            be an  EEA  national  residing  in  the  United
                            Kingdom in accordance with these Regulations on
                            arrival in the United Kingdom; and
            (b)  the family member will be accompanying the EEA national  to
                       the United Kingdom or joining him there and -
                 (i)   is lawfully resident in an EEA State; or
                 (ii)  would meet the requirements in the Immigration  Rules
                            (other than those relating to entry  clearance)
                            for leave to enter the United  Kingdom  as  the
                            family member of the EEA national  or,  in  the
                            case of direct descendants or dependent  direct
                            relatives in the ascending line of  his  spouse
                            or his civil partner, as the family  member  of
                            his spouse or his civil partner, were  the  EEA
                            national or  the  spouse  or  civil  partner  a
                            person  present  and  settled  in  the   United
                            Kingdom.
      (2)   An Entry Clearance Officer may issue an EEA family permit to  an
                 extended family member of an EEA national who  applies  for
                 one if -
            (a)  the  relevant  EEA  national  satisfies  the  condition  in
                 paragraph (1)(a);
             (b)   the  extended  family  member  wishes  to  accompany  the
                       relevant EEA national to the  United  Kingdom  or  to
                       join him there; and
             (c)   in  all  the  circumstances,  it  appears  to  the  Entry
                       Clearance Officer appropriate to issue the EEA family
                       permit.
      (3)   Where an Entry Clearance Officer receives an  application  under
                 paragraph (2) he shall undertake an  extensive  examination
                 of the personal circumstances of the applicant  and  if  he
                 refuses the application shall give reasons  justifying  the
                 refusal  unless  this  is  contrary  to  the  interests  of
                 national security.

      ..."

 3. The reasons for the respondent's refusal of the appellant's application
    as set out in a letter dated 15 June 2006, are that the respondent  was
    not satisfied that the appellant was dependent upon  T,  and  that  the
    evidence available to the respondent suggested that T had a spouse  and
    child in the United Kingdom and a low income, and would  therefore  not
    in any event be able to maintain the appellant.   Further,  "a  refusal
    would not deter the EEA national from exercising his Treaty  rights  in
    the United Kingdom".

 4. The Immigration Judge heard oral evidence from  the  appellant,  T  and
    another witness.  There was substantial  documentary  evidence.   There
    were submissions from Ms O'Rourke to the effect that dependency  was  a
    question of fact on the evidence, and that sub-paragraphs (a), (b)  and
    (c)  in  Regulation  8(2)  were  to  be  read   disjunctively,   giving
    alternative  ways  in  which  extended  family  membership   could   be
    established.  The Immigration Judge considered  LS   Sri  Lanka  [2005]
    UKIAT 00132 and PB India [2005] UKIAT 00082 and reasoned as follows:

      "21.  ... it is suggested that where there  are  semi-colons  between
             sub-clauses, those sub-clauses are to  be  read  disjunctively,
             not conjunctively.


      22.   Whilst I accept that as a general rule  of  interpretation  one
             must look at the Rule itself.  In this Rule it is clear that is
             not the intention of the draftsman for  the  paragraphs  to  be
             read disjunctively.  Firstly sub-paragraphs (b) and (c) require
             the person to have already satisfied the condition of (a).   If
             sub-paragraph (a) itself were the sole qualifying condition  it
             would make no sense if that  person  had  to  also  have  other
             qualifying conditions as set out in sub-paragraphs (b) and (c).


      23.   Furthermore it is quite clear when carefully reading Regulation
             8 that the reference to an EEA State in  sub-paragraph  (a)  is
             not meant to refer to the United Kingdom.  That is  also  clear
             because of the references to the United Kingdom  in  paragraphs
             (b) and (c).


      24.   If one therefore reads sub-paragraph (a)  in  the  way  I  have
             indicated above, it requires that the person seeking to  be  an
             extended family member must have first  lived  in  another  EEA
             State with an EEA national.  In this case the appellant was not
             living with the EEA national at any of the relevant times.   He
             did stay with his brother for several months in  1998,  but  at
             that time his brother was not an EEA national.   In  any  event
             there was a break in residence together of  over  seven  years.
             Looked  at  this  way,  the  appellant  has  never  resided  in
             Switzerland at a time when his brother was a Swiss national.  I
             therefore find that the appellant fails to qualify  under  sub-
             paragraph (a) because he had not resided in an EEA  State  with
             an EEA national upon whom he is dependent.


      25.   Furthermore the appellant does not qualify under both paragraph
             (b) or (c).  He is not seeking to accompany the EEA national or
             follow him to the UK.  Further he had not  already  joined  the
             EEA national in the  UK.   The  situation  here  is  quite  the
             reverse.  The EEA national has come to join the non-national.


      26.   For these reasons I do not think that the  appellant  qualifies
             under Regulation 8."


 5.  The  Immigration  Judge  then  considered  Article  3.2  of  Directive
    2004/38/EC, which the Regulations are supposed to implement.  She found
    that there was nothing there casting doubt on her  decision,  and  made
    further reference to paragraphs 12 and 13 of  PB.   She  dismissed  the
    appeal.  She had, however, found as  a  fact  that  the  appellant  had
    proved that he is a dependant of T, an EEA national, and that  T  could
    maintain him.

 6. The Grounds for Review were that:

        "The IJ usurped the function of the ECO (SSHD) in  accordance  with
        Regulation 12(2) and (3) of the EEA Regulations 2006.   ...  Having
        found dependency the next step should have been to  refer  back  to
        the in-country ECO via the SSHD to use his discretion in accordance
        with Regulation 12(2) and (3) as guided by case law (SY and  Others
        (EEA Regulations) 10(1) Sri Lanka [2006] 00024 ...  .   Accordingly
        the IJ had no power to make a decision for the first time that  has
        not yet been made by the respondent."

      The Grounds go on to make further submissions on SY, PB and  LS.   The
    Grounds conclude by submitting that the matter should be referred  back
    to the respondent for a decision.

 7. We heard extensive submissions from Ms O'Rourke.  We did  not  need  to
    call on Mr Avery to reply to them.  We have no difficulty at  all  with
    the submission that if the appellant shows that he comes within a class
    of persons in respect of  whom  the  respondent  is  given  a  specific
    discretion, and if he also shows that no consideration has  been  given
    to the exercise of the discretion, the Immigration Judge ought to allow
    the appeal to the extent of ruling  that  the  appellant's  application
    remains outstanding before the respondent, awaiting a lawful  decision.
    Mr Avery readily accepted that that was so.  The  problem  is  that  Ms
    O'Rourke's grounds skate very lightly  over  the  Regulations  as  they
    apply to this appellant.  It is  simply  not  the  case  that,  as  she
    asserts in her grounds, once dependency was established, the  appellant
    fell within the class of persons in respect of whom  the  Secretary  of
    State has a discretion under Regulation 12(2).

 8. We consider first Regulation 8.  We are satisfied that the  Immigration
    Judge erred in her interpretation of this Regulation.  Modern statutory
    drafting has abandoned the old fashioned  but  entirely  clear  way  of
    listing "(a) or (b) or (c)" or "(a) and (b) and (c)".   Lists  of  that
    type appear in modern statutes as "(a), (b) or (c)" and "(a),  (b)  and
    (c)".  We doubt if any meaning is to be attributed to the use of  semi-
    colons in such lists: in our experience, a  semi-colon  is  very  often
    used at the end of each element of a list other than the last.  Nothing
    in the layout, punctuation or linking wording of the sub-paragraphs  of
    Regulation 8(2) leads us to suppose that the three  sub-paragraphs  are
    not meant to be true alternatives.  If the paragraph was to be read  in
    the way the Immigration Judge indicated, we would expect  the  elements
    to be linked as "(a); and either (b) or (c)".

 9. The reasoning adopted by the Immigration Judge at paragraph 22  of  her
    determination would be very powerful if it had been based on  a  viable
    reading of the words of the Regulation; unfortunately, it is  not.   It
    fails to acknowledge the difference in tense between sub-paragraph  (a)
    on the one hand and sub-paragraphs (b) and  (c)  on  the  other.   Sub-
    paragraph (a) refers to a condition which exists at the  present  time;
    sub-paragraphs  (b)  and  (c)  refer  to  circumstances  in  which  the
    condition in paragraph (a) is not presently satisfied, but was  in  the
    past.  It is clear to us that a person can satisfy  the  conditions  in
    paragraph (2) if he is a relative of an EEA national and  falls  within
    any one of sub-paragraphs (a), (b) or (c).  To  that  extent  we  agree
    with Ms O'Rourke.  We suppose that her claim that  mere  dependency  is
    enough to bring Regulation 12(2) into play is based  simply  upon  that
    matter  of  interpretation.   The  appellant's  dependency  on  T   is,
    apparently, the point upon which she relies.  She  makes,  however,  no
    submission on the Immigration Judge's reasoning in paragraphs 23 and 24
    of  her  determination.   Regulation  8(2)  does  not  merely   require
    dependency.  It requires, either at present or in the  past,  that  the
    claimant be resident "in an EEA State in which the  EEA  national  also
    resides".   The  Immigration  Judge  decided  as  a   matter   of   the
    interpretation of Regulation 8 that "EEA State" in Regulation  8  could
    not mean the United Kingdom.  As it happens, of  course,  Regulation  2
    shows that she was right.  The phrase is there defined to mean:

      "(a)  A member State, other than the United Kingdom;
          b) Norway, Iceland or Liechtenstein; or
          c) Switzerland".

10. It is beyond doubt that residence  in  the  United  Kingdom  cannot  be
    residence  "in  an  EEA  State"  for  the  purposes  of  Regulation  8.
    Residence of neither the appellant nor T in the United  Kingdom  is  of
    any relevance for Regulation 8.   Further,  as  the  Immigration  Judge
    pointed out,  although  the  appellant  lived  with  T  for  a  period,
    apparently in 1998, that was not residence with an EEA national  in  an
    EEA State because T was not at that time an EEA national.

11. For these reasons we should have decided, with the  Immigration  Judge,
    that the appellant does not fall within Regulation 8(2).  It is fair to
    say that these issues  were  not  canvassed  at  the  hearing,  largely
    because of the way Ms O'Rourke had completely ignored these matters  in
    her Grounds.  If our determination had depended  upon  this  point,  we
    should have recalled the parties to hear their further submissions.  As
    will become clear, however, our determination does not depend  on  that
    issue alone.

12. Assuming, contrary to our actual  conclusion,  that  the  appellant  is
    entitled to be regarded as an extended  family  member,  Ms  O'Rourke's
    submission was that he therefore comes within the ambit  of  Regulation
    12(2) and is  therefore  a  person  in  respect  of  whom,  under  that
    Regulation, the Entry  Clearance  Officer  "may  issue  an  EEA  family
    permit".  That, however, cannot be so.  Regulation 12(2) does not apply
    to all extended family members.  It  applies  only  to  those  extended
    family members who fulfil the requirements of Regulation  12(2).   Sub-
    paragraph (a) appears to be satisfied; and  sub-paragraph  (c)  is  the
    discretion.   Sub-paragraph  (b)  presents  the  appellant  with   real
    problems.  It is very difficult indeed to see that he can be  described
    as the person who "wishes to accompany the relevant EEA national to the
    United Kingdom or to join him there".  He is here and he  has  remained
    here.  Certainly so far  as  the  ordinary  meaning  of  the  words  is
    concerned, a person who stays in the United  Kingdom  at  all  relevant
    times cannot be regarded as accompanying anybody to the United  Kingdom
    or joining such a person here.  We reject Ms O'Rourke's submission that
    the words should be read as including a person who is  joined  here  by
    the relevant EEA national: nothing in the  wording  of  the  Regulation
    suggests that.  Ms O'Rourke then referred us to the Directive,  and  in
    particular to Article 37, which reads as follows:

      "More favourable national provisions


        The provisions  of  this  Directive  shall  not  affect  any  laws,
        regulations or administrative provisions  laid  down  by  a  Member
        State which would be more favourable to the persons covered by this
        Directive."

13. Ms O'Rourke submitted as follows.  First the Regulations previously  in
    force in the United Kingdom, the Immigration (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2000 (SI 23226/2000)  as  amended,  would  have  given  the
    appellant the right to be  considered  as  a  possible  object  of  the
    decision-maker's  discretion.   Secondly,  Article  37   of   Directive
    2004/38/EC had the effect of not merely preserving  any  more  generous
    national  legislation,  but  of  preventing   a   member   state   from
    subsequently amending its legislation in order  to  be  less  generous,
    even if it still complied with  the  substantive  requirements  of  the
    Directive.  Thirdly, the 2006 Regulations should therefore be  read  in
    the light of Article 37 as so interpreted to  preserve  any  right  the
    appellant had under the 2000 Regulations.

14. We reject those submissions.  First, we very  much  doubt  whether  the
    appellant could have succeeded under the 2000 Regulations.  It is  true
    that the requirements now contained in Regulation 12(2)(b) (and  indeed
    in Regulation 8(2)) were not set out in such  precise  terms,  but  the
    operation of those regulations was explored in PB, and it appears to us
    that the present Regulations make express  the  restrictions  that  the
    Tribunal  in  PB  decided  were  implicit  in  the  2000   Regulations.
    Secondly, Article 37 does not mean what Ms O'Rourke submitted  that  it
    does.  It is not  a  "standstill"  clause.   It  does  not  impose  any
    requirement  on  member  states  to  leave  more  generous   provisions
    untouched.  What it does is to provide  that  the  Directive  does  not
    itself affect any more generous  provisions.   It  does  that  for  two
    reasons.  The first is that without some such provision,  it  might  be
    argued that the superior status of the Directive in  any  member  state
    had itself overridden  any  more  generous  provisions  in  the  member
    state's own law; the second is that without it, a  member  state  which
    had and retained more generous provisions might be regarded  as  having
    failed to implement the Directive with its lower  standards.   That  is
    the purpose of Article 37.  When we asked Ms  O'Rourke  what  substance
    she could give to her submission on the  meaning  of  Article  37,  she
    referred in general terms to the Preamble, and when asked  to  be  more
    specific referred to paragraphs 5 and 6.  She  then  referred  also  to
    Articles 2 and 3 of the Directive itself.  Nothing in those paragraphs,
    or Articles, or in the Preamble generally leads to  the  conclusion  Ms
    O'Rourke asks us to draw.  Paragraphs 5 and 6 of the Preamble  set  out
    some of the main purposes of the Directive itself, but nothing there or
    anywhere else, so far as we can see, suggests that it is a  purpose  of
    the Directive to preserve disparate treatment.  All member  states  are
    required to implement the Directive.  Provided that  they  do  so,  and
    provided that their national legislation  is  in  compliance  with  the
    Directive, there is nothing to prevent any member state  from  changing
    its own national legislation from time to time, even if the  effect  of
    such changes is to be less generous to nationals of members states  and
    their families than it once was.

15. Thirdly, there is no reason at all why the Directive should be read  as
    giving any comfort to the appellant in his claim to a residence permit.
     Paragraph 5 of the Preamble, which is the  paragraph  most  in  point,
    reads as follows:

        "The right of all Union citizens to move and reside  freely  within
        the territory of the Member States should, if it is to be exercised
        under objective conditions of freedom and dignity, be also  granted
        to their family members,  irrespective  of  nationality.   For  the
        purposes of this  Directive,  the  definition  of  'family  member'
        should also include the registered partner if  the  legislation  of
        the host Member State treats registered partnership  as  equivalent
        to marriage."

16. In the present case there is no suggestion at all that the absence of a
    family permit for the appellant has, has had, or could have any  effect
    on T's ability to exercise his rights of free movement  and  residence.
    Any right that the appellant has is not a free-standing  right  of  his
    own: it exists only in order to enable a person  who  has  a  right  of
    residence or of free movement to exercise that right without hindrance.
     Where there is no hindrance, there is no reason to construe (let alone
    to distort) the wording of legislation in order to give a right to  the
    family member.

17. There is a fourth problem.  T is a national of Switzerland.  He  is  an
    EEA national for the purposes of the United Kingdom's Regulations.   He
    is not, however, an EU national.  He derives no rights of free movement
    or residence from Directive 2004/38/EC.  The appellant cannot therefore
    invoke the Directive as an aid to interpreting the Regulations  in  his
    case.  As we have indicated, the  Immigration  Judge  appears  to  have
    treated T as though he were an EU national.  So far  as  we  understand
    her submissions on the Directive, Ms O'Rourke must have been doing  the
    same.  The position is substantially more complicated.  If there is  to
    be an appeal to any international agreement, it must be  that  entitled
    "Agreement between the European Community and its Member States of  the
    one part, and the Swiss  Confederation,  of  the  other,  on  the  free
    movement of persons" [2002] O.J. L114/6.  Article 7 of  that  agreement
    imposes on the contracting parties a duty to make provision for certain
    rights in relation to the free movement of persons, in accordance  with
    the provisions of Annex I of the agreement.  "Members  of  the  family"
    are defined in Article 3(2) of the Annex  in  terms  similar  to  those
    defining a family member in Regulation 7 of the EEA Regulations.   That
    definition is incapable  of  assisting  the  appellant.   Article  3(2)
    concludes with the following words:


        "The Contracting Parties shall  facilitate  the  admission  of  any
        member of  the  family  not  covered  by  the  provisions  of  this
        paragraph under (a), (b) and (c), if that person is a dependant  or
        lives in the household of a national of a Contracting Party in  the
        country of provenance."

18. It is not possible to argue that the  possibilities  envisaged  by  the
    "or" include simply being a dependant, because there would then  be  no
    provision as to whose dependant  the  person  in  question  was.   That
    person  must be
     i) a dependant of the national of a Contracting Party in  the  country
        of provenance; or
    ii) living in the household of the national of the Contracting Party in
        the country of provenance.
    As we understand it those possibilities are embodied within  Regulation
    8(2)(a) of the EEA Regulations.  Sub-paragraphs  (b)  and  (c)  of  the
    Regulations give further rights that are not required by the  terms  of
    the Swiss agreement.  This appellant is not entitled  to  rely  on  the
    Directive as an aid to construing the Regulations.  Nothing  before  us
    suggests that if he had instead relied on the Swiss agreement he  could
    have shown any fault in the Regulations.

19. For the foregoing reasons we take the view that there is no reason  not
    to read the relevant portions  of  the  Regulations  in  their  obvious
    sense.  The appellant does not meet the requirements of  Regulation  8;
    but, even if he did, he  would  still  not  meet  the  requirements  of
    Regulation 12(2)(b).  Although  the  Immigration  Judge  erred  in  her
    approach to the construction of Regulation 8, she could  not  but  have
    dismissed the appeal if she had not made that  error.   Her  error  was
    therefore not material.

20. We order that the Immigration  Judge's  determination  dismissing  this
    appeal shall stand.








                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT
                                                             Date:
