


                                             Asylum and Immigration Tribunal

                        NA & Others (Cambridge College of Learning) Pakistan
                                                          [2009] UKAIT 00031

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House (AIT Procession House)   |                             |
|0n 3-5 June 2009                              |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                       SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE STOREY
                      SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE P R LANE
                     senior IMMIGRATION JUDGE pinkerton

                                   Between

                                     NA
                                     ST
                                     MR


                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Macdonald QC, instructed by Ellis Taylor LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr G Clarke, instructed by the Treasury Solicitor

Cambridge College of Learning (CCOL) never ran  a  Postgraduate  Diploma  in
Business  Management  course  or  a  Postgraduate  Diploma  in  IT   course.
Accordingly for a person applying for leave  to  remain  under  the  Tier  1
(Post-Study Work) scheme to rely on a certificate of  an  award  of  such  a
diploma following a course will amount to  a  false  representation  and  so
will fall foul of para 322(1A) of the Statement of Changes  in   Immigration
Rules HC 395. Such a person will also be unable to meet the requirements  of
para 245Z because he or she could never have undertaken such a course.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appeals before us concern decisions refusing applications  made  in
    the second half of 2008 by three students under the new Tier  1  (Post-
    Study Work) scheme on the  basis  of  having  obtained  a  Postgraduate
    Diploma in Business Management or in IT (hereafter "PgDip BM" or "PgDip
    IT") from the Cambridge College of Learning (hereafter  "CCOL").  Since
    certain facts about this college are not in dispute, we  can  best  set
    the scene by explaining that, prior to its closure  in  early  December
    2008, CCOL operated from premises at 151-153 Curtain  Rd,  London  EC2A
    3QL.  It appears to have opened in May 2001  and  to  have  been  first
    included  in  the  Department  for  Education  and  Science's  (DfES's)
    Register of Education and Training Providers  in  January  2005.  (This
    Register,  which  later   became   the   Department   for   Innovation,
    Universities and Science's (DIUS's) Register, closed as from  31  March
    2009 and has been replaced by the UKBA Register of Sponsors.)   In  its
    early days the main business of the college was running English courses
    but by the end of 2007 it also ran a variety of courses in business, IT
    and tourism.  Neither party was  able  to  furnish  definitive  details
    about the history of  the  college,  but  it  appears  that  its  first
    Principal and owner was Mr Adil Chaudry and its second Principal and co-
    owner was Mr Zafar Mustafa. In mid-2008 ownership changed and  Mr  Said
    Ullah then became Principal to be followed shortly after, in  September
    2008, by Mr Zahid Ali Noman.  The Acting Principal, Mr Kashif  Hussain,
    told officers who visited the college  on  2  December  2008  that  the
    owners were Mr Nisar Chaudry and Mr Wasim Yousafi.  A  college  website
    entry written  in  Spring/early  Summer  2008  by  Zafar  Mustafa  when
    Principal stated that two new partners had joined the  management:   Mr
    Islam Ali and Mr Zaman Gondal.

 2. Sometime in the summer of 2008 the United Kingdom Border Agency  (UKBA)
    began to be concerned about the large number  of  applications  it  was
    receiving for the new Tier I (Post-Study Work) scheme (which had  begun
    on 30 June 2008) from students enclosing PgDips  in  either  BM  or  IT
    awarded by the CCOL.  By 6 October 2008 spreadsheets  relating  to  204
    CCOL-related applications had  been  compiled  revealing  a  number  of
    anomalies.  Monitoring continued over the next few weeks.    A  further
    reason for concern was that it had been  reported  that  a  significant
    number of applications put forward academic transcripts with  identical
    percentage marks across all exams or modules.  Over 2,500  CCOL-related
    applications falling into the PgDip BM  or  PgDip  IT  categories  were
    received between 22 October 2008 and 22 December 2008.  In addition,  a
    check on the Home Office records disclosed that there were 181 students
    with current leave to remain within the student category to attend CCOL
    and a further 136 had valid entry clearance.  On 31  October  2008  all
    CCOL-related applications were put on hold.  The  mounting  causes  for
    concern led to Operation Asterion, a UKBA led enforcement visit paid on
    2 December 2008 by the Area 3 Criminal Investigations Team  accompanied
    by officers from the London and South  East  Intelligence  Unit  (RIU).
    That visit compounded UKBA's concerns about the college and led to them
    taking steps to ensure that the  college  was  removed  from  the  DIUS
    register on 4 December 2008.  It appears that the college  then  closed
    on 8 December 2008 and it has never re-opened.  On  22 December  2008
    UKBA issued instructions  to  caseworkers  to  refuse  all  immigration
    applications based on CCOL studies or awards.

 3. Given this background it is inevitable that we must decide  whether  or
    not the respondent's concerns about CCOL are justified,  but  we  would
    emphasise  at  the  outset  that  the  respondent's  position  on  this
    particular college is not that it was a bogus college per se. Indeed he
    accepts that there were no real causes for  concern  until  the  second
    half of 2008 and that, even after that date, the college  continued  to
    run a range of bona fide courses in a legitimate way. The  respondent's
    concerns are confined to claims made about  the  college's  history  of
    running Postgraduate diploma courses and to  the  claims  made  by  the
    three appellants in these appeals (in common with  a  large  number  of
    other appellants, we are told) that CCOL ran PgDips in BM or IT.

 4. The first appellant, a citizen  of  Pakistan,  came  to  the  UK  on  3
    September 2006 as a student and was granted  further  leave  to  remain
    until 11 December 2007  and  again  until  31  December  2008.   On  24
    November 2008 she applied for leave to remain under the Tier  1  (Post-
    Study Work) Scheme.  She enclosed with her  application  a  certificate
    from the CCOL signed by "the Director", Saif Ullah, and saying she  had
    been awarded a "[PgDip BM] having successfully  completed  an  approved
    course of  study  and  having  satisfied  the  board  of  examiners  on
    September 2008". With it there was a letter from the  college  dated  9
    September 2008 headed "To Whom It May Concern" signed (illegibly) under
    the title, "Programme Leader". It stated  that  she  had  "successfully
    completed an approved programme of  study  in  (Postgraduate)  level  7
    Business Management on a full-time programme at one of the DIUS  Listed
    Body [sic] i.e. Cambridge College of Learning". It gave further details
    of the date she had commenced her course and the date she had completed
    it.   It also stated "We would be  grateful  if  you  could  issue  the
    student with PSW-Post Study Work Visa".  A  separate  document,  headed
    "Transcript of Academic Record" bearing the same date and also  signed,
    illegibly, below the title, "Programme Leader", stated that her  course
    title  was  PgDip  in  BM  at  an  NQF  (Revised)  Level  7  level   of
    qualification. It gave the same details for start and finish  date  and
    the marks she had obtained for various subjects.  All  three  documents
    bore the same 12-digit student reference number. On 21 January 2009 the
    respondent refused the first appellant's application stating that:

        "I am satisfied that all the documents submitted  from  the  [CCOL]
        were false, because [CCOL] has  never  offered  a  legitimate  Post
        Graduate  Qualification  in  Business  Management  ....  As   false
        documents have been submitted in relation to your  application,  it
        is refused under paragraph 322(1A) of the Immigration Rules".


    The letter went on to state that in addition the appellant did not meet
    the requirements of para 245Z(c) and 245Z(d) of the  Immigration  Rules
    because she had been awarded no points for "Attributes" under  Appendix
    A or for "English language" under Appendix B. The letter further stated
    that the respondent was also satisfied  that  the  appellant  had  used
    deception in her application and that:


        "Although the decision would be one for an entry clearance  officer
        to make in the future, this means that it is likely that any future
        applications for entry clearance or leave to enter the UK  will  be
        refused under para 320(7B) of  the  Immigration  Rules  (unless  it
        would breach your rights under the Human Rights  Act  1998  or  the
        Refugee Convention) for the following period starting on  the  date
        on which you leave the UK following this refusal:
        -One year if you leave voluntarily, without our having  to  pay  or
        contribute to the costs of your departure;
        -Five years if you leave voluntarily at the Government's expense;
        -Ten years if we remove or deport you..."


 5. The second appellant, a citizen of Mauritius,  came  to  the  UK  as  a
    student on 16 September 2005 and received several  grants  of  further
    leave to remain in the same capacity, the last expiring on 30  November
    2008.  On 24 October 2008 she applied for leave  to  remain  under  the
    Tier 1 (Post-Study Work) scheme.   Accompanying  her  application  were
    three documents in very similar form to those of  the  first  appellant
    but with different details of when  she  was  awarded  her  certificate
    (August 2008),  when  she  had  commenced  the  course,  when  she  had
    completed it and her marks for different subjects. All three  documents
    also showed a  12  digit  student  reference  number.   The  respondent
    decided  on  20  January  2009  to  refuse   that   application.    The
    respondent's reasons were in near-identical terms to those given in the
    first appellant's refusal.

 6. The third appellant is a citizen of Pakistan who has been in the UK  as
    a student since 1 September 2001. His last grant of  further  leave  to
    remain was until 30 November 2008.  On 4 November 2008 he applied under
    the Tier 1 (Post-Study  Work)  scheme  for  further  leave  to  remain.
    Together with his application he submitted three  documents  which  had
    the same standard wording as in the case of the  first  two  appellants
    except that the CCOL certificate was a Certificate of Award of a  PgDip
    IT dated August 2008 (it too was signed by Saif Ullah under the  title,
    "Director") and his "To Whom It May Concern" letter  from  the  college
    dated 20 August 2008 stated that he had commenced his PgDip in IT at  a
    Level 7 course in IT on 11 November 2007 and had  completed  it  on  15
    August 2008. The decision of the respondent to refuse  his  application
    was dated 23 January 2009. All three of his documents showed a 12 digit
    student reference number for him.  The  reasons  for  refusal  were  in
    virtually the same terms as those given for the first  two  appellants,
    except for the fact that they referred to a PgDip  IT  (rather  than  a
    PgDip BM),  and stated that under para  245Z  no  points  were  awarded
    under Appendix C, as well as under Appendices A and B.  No points  were
    awarded under Appendix C because:

        "The Barclays Bank statements provided from 13 August to 8  October
        2008 does not establish that you have been in possession  of  these
        savings for the specified three  month  period  immediately  before
        your application."

Procedural History

 7. On 13 March 2009 the Tribunal gave directions and issued notices for  a
    Case Management Review (CMR)  hearing on 24 April 2009 in  relation  to
    three  separate  appeals  of  appellants  for  whom   the   appellants'
    representatives also act. One of the matters required to  be  canvassed
    at the CMR hearing was the issue of suitable lead  cases.  On  2  April
    2009 the appeals that are now before us  were  identified  as  suitable
    lead cases and were set down for hearing  on  3  June  2009.  A  fourth
    appeal (where reconsideration had been ordered) was subsequently  added
    to the list of lead cases but on 1 May 2009 the Tribunal directed  that
    it was no longer to be joined with the three appeals  before  us.   The
    Tribunal also directed the  parties  to  address  the  question  as  to
    whether the burden of proof (on the  respondent)  was  the  balance  of
    probabilities  or  the  criminal  standard,  in  the  light  of  Re:  B
    (Children) [2008] UKHL 35. On 11 May  2009  there  was  a  further  CMR
    hearing and matters covered in a  memorandum  to  the  parties  arising
    therefrom included a note that the respondent had agreed to set out  in
    writing  her  negative  response  to  a  request  by  Counsel  for  the
    appellants for disclosure of the reason why the decision  was  made  by
    the police authorities and the CPS not to pursue  criminal  proceedings
    against certain persons working at CCOL. The memorandum  also  recorded
    that the parties agreed to cover in their written submissions the issue
    of the burden and standard of proof  in the  present  type  of  appeals
    (where para 322(1A) was being relied on) and the issue of what  weight,
    assuming para  322(1A)  was  found  not  to  have  been  proved,  might
    nevertheless be given to the evidence relating to whether CCOL was  [in
    whole or in part] a bogus college when deciding whether the  appellants
    could show they met the  substantive  requirements  of  para  245Z  and
    Appendix A.

 8.  On  27  May  2009,  in  reply  to  a  letter  from   the   appellants'
    representatives requesting an adjournment in order  for  them  to  have
    more time to deal with a large volume of materials, the Tribunal  wrote
    refusing that application, stating that sufficient time  was  available
    for them to prepare.


 9. Other procedural matters of note are dealt with in  the  body  of  this
    determination.


10. In accordance with  AIT  Practice  Direction  2.4  these  appeals  were
    allocated by a Deputy President of the Tribunal to a  panel  comprising
    three legally qualified members.

The Witnesses

Mr  Julian Fletcher

11. The  respondent  called  six  witnesses,  the  first  being  Mr  Julian
    Fletcher. Mr Fletcher produced three witness statements.  In  these  he
    described his dealings when a Chief Immigration  Officer  with  various
    Tier 1 (Post-Study Work) applications in the course of  his  duties  at
    Eaton House, UKBA. He described his role in the 2 December  2008  visit
    by officers attached to the UKBA  and  his  interview  with  Mr  Kashif
    Hussain. He described Mr Hussain showing him an  Excel  spreadsheet  on
    the computer entitled "ID Cards list". Mr Hussain told him this  was  a
    list of all CCOL students that had been issued with ID cards, which was
    the vast majority of them. Mr Fletcher described checking the names  on
    the sample of 42 persons who had applied for  Tier  1  Post-Study  Work
    based on CCOL certificates against this spreadsheet. Not  one  matched.
    He gave details of various e-mails and other items found  on  the  same
    desktop. He recorded finding a blank CCOL certificate and letterhead on
    the desk in the Admissions room and others  in  the  cupboard  in  that
    room. He detailed the various items that were exhibited.

12.  In his oral evidence Mr Fletcher explained that he had  been  part  of
    the  joint  police/Home  Office  team  of  officers  involved   in   an
    investigation into CCOL, code-named "Operation Asterion".  Although  at
    the time he was a Chief Immigration Officer, his role on the day of the
    visit to CCOL on 2 December 2008 was as  part  of  the  joint  criminal
    investigation team.  When he arrived there, there were no  students  on
    the premises, although some arrived during the day.  He spoke to  a  Mr
    Kashif Hussain, who introduced himself as  the  Acting  Principal.   Mr
    Hussain demonstrated to him on the computer in the  Principal's  Office
    how to access student records.  The print out contained at Bundle B Tab
    4 pages 72-93 of the respondent's bundle showed a four digit number for
    each of the 1,555 names shown.  None showed a 12-digit  number  of  the
    type the three appellants claimed they had.  He had checked  the  names
    of the three appellants against a sample containing  the  names  of  42
    persons who  had  made  Post-Study  Work  applications  based  on  CCOL
    certificates; none of them matched this print-out.

13. In reply to questions from Mr Macdonald, Mr Fletcher agreed  that  what
    he had been able to see on the  day  in  relation  to  student  records
    depended on what Mr Hussain, who had only been Acting Principal  for  a
    short time, had been able and willing to show him.  Although  he  could
    not rule out the possibility that some data on students was held by the
    owners or their confederates offsite, he thought  it  highly  unlikely.
    The officers attending had seized  vast  quantities  of  documents  and
    materials.  Along with DC Arthurs he had been involved  in  the  arrest
    and questioning of Mr Hussain.  According to  Home  Office  records  Mr
    Hussain had leave to remain as a student.   In  his  bag  officers  had
    found a Postgraduate Diploma awarded by CCOL dated September 2008.   He
    agreed that it had struck him as extraordinary that  the  man  who  had
    described himself as Acting Principal of CCOL should have a certificate
    showing he himself had got a  degree  from  there  two  months  before.
    Prior to the 2 December visit the  joint  investigating  team  had  the
    names of two "key nominals".  One of these two was Mr Saif  Ullah.  The
    other, whom he did not wish to name, was someone who had been either an
    owner or former Principal of the college.  What  he  had  seen  at  the
    college confirmed his view that those claiming to have studied for a Pg
    Dip in BM or IT at  CCOL  were  bogus  students,  but  he  agreed  that
    everything else  going  on  at  the  college  appeared  to  him  to  be
    legitimate.  That meant, he accepted, that the college  was  one  which
    had genuine as well as bogus students.  He had not been involved in any
    follow-up investigations into the owners or former Principals or  other
    persons.

14. He was aware that one of the police investigating officers  had  spoken
    to a Mr Zahid Noman on the telephone.  Asked whether some items  of  e-
    mail correspondence from Mr Saif Ullah to the Home Office struck him as
    rather illiterate, he said that such  sloppiness  in  e-mails  was  not
    unusual.

15. In re-examination he confirmed that despite  the  seizure  of  a  large
    quantity of materials found in the college, the investigating team  had
    not found any computer file containing student records apart  from  the
    student ID card log.  In answer to  further  questions  raised  by  the
    Tribunal, he  said  he  was  aware  that  shortly  after  the  raid  on
    2 December a number of students had attended at a  police  station  by
    appointment.  He had viewed the fact that applications by students  who
    had  applied  to  UKBA  for  Post-Study  Work  on  the  basis  of  CCOL
    certificates showed different types of reference numbers as  in  itself
    suspicious.

Mr Jon Stewart

16. In a witness statement dated 7 January 2009 Mr Stewart said that at the
    time when he made his statement he was a Higher Executive Officer  with
    UKBA. Part of his  duties  involved  providing  UKBA  caseworkers  with
    information relating to criminal investigations where this was relevant
    to applications for leave to remain in the UK.  Under  the  Immigration
    Rules as they stood in 2008 colleges which  were  listed  bodies  could
    issue  their  own  PgDips.  As  a  result  such   qualifications   were
    unregulated and could  only  be  verified  by  contacting  the  college
    issuing the certificate. Qualifications from CCOL had given  cause  for
    concern to caseworkers by  dint  of  the  number  and  quality  of  the
    certificates provided as supporting evidence for Tier 1 Post Study Work
    applications. Despite CCOL generally verifying the PgDips  as  genuine,
    concerns remained that they may have  been  fraudulently  produced  and
    obtained without the applicants having studied for them. He then  noted
    that on 31 October 2008 an instruction was issued  to  Post-Study  Work
    Tier 1 caseworkers to put on hold applications  supported  by  evidence
    from a number of colleges, including CCOL and went on  to  mention  the
    intelligence-led enforcement visit to the college on  2  December  2008
    and the subsequent instruction to caseworkers  to  refuse  applications
    supported  by  CCOL  PgDip  qualifications  on  the  basis  that  false
    documents were submitted. The statement concluded with the comment that
    "There is no evidence to suggest that other  qualifications  taught  by
    CCOL are false".


17. At the hearing Mr Stewart  confirmed  he  had  not  been  a  caseworker
    dealing with Post-Study Work.  By January 2009 the  UKBA  had  received
    2,542 applications for Post-Study Work from students claiming they  had
    CCOL PgDips in either BM Management or IT. That was an  unusually  high
    number.  The CCOL cases had brought to light a loophole in that at  the
    relevant time a college that was registered with the DIUS  could  award
    its own postgraduate degrees.  In  reply  to  cross-examination  by  Mr
    Macdonald, Mr Stewart agreed that although the Post-Study  Work  scheme
    was a replacement for the International Graduate  Scheme  (IGS),  those
    eligible were not confined, as was the position under the  IGS  scheme,
    to persons with a university degree in a limited  number  of  subjects.
    Unlike the IGS scheme, the new Rules were not well-regulated. He agreed
    that under the Post-Study Work scheme at the relevant time it looked as
    if an unscrupulous group of  fraudsters  had  been  able  to  hijack  a
    college which had been running genuine courses.  In reply to  questions
    raised by the Tribunal, Mr Stewart said the documentation submitted  to
    UKBA by the three appellants appeared to be in the normal  form  except
    he would not expect to see the college itself asking  in  the  covering
    "To Whom It May Concern" letter that the applicants  be  granted  Post-
    Study Work permission.

Miss Gillian Jackson

18. In her statements dated 27 May 2008 and 2 June 2009 Miss  Jackson  said
    that she  was  employed  as  a  grade  6  lawyer  within  the  Treasury
    Solicitors Office.  She stated in her 2 June  2009  statement  that  Dr
    Mohammed Resaul Karim had informed her that he  was  employed  at  CCOL
    from January 2007 until mid-November 2008 as an IT teacher for specific
    IT modules as and when required by CCOL.  At  CCOL  he  taught  various
    Association  of  Computer  Professionals  (ACP)   and   University   of
    Sunderland BSc modules. He had confirmed to her that a document  seized
    from CCOL premises on 2 December 2008 was a copy of his CV. He told her
    that he had never taught any PgDip courses in IT, nor did he  teach  on
    any of the modules said to be studied by Mr Raja, the third  appellant.
    As far as he knew CCOL did not offer a PgDip in IT and he did not  know
    Mr Raja. In her second statement Miss Jackson said that  in  an  e-mail
    dated 30 May 2009 Dr Karim said he was unwilling to be a witness in the
    present appeals but  confirmed  that  the  information  given  to  Miss
    Jackson on 22 May 2009 was true. In her oral  evidence,  she  confirmed
    the truth of her  two  statements.   In  reply  to  questions  from  Mr
    Macdonald she agreed that Dr Karim's  CV  read  like  that  of  a  NASA
    scientist, but she had no basis to think it was untrue.   She  did  not
    know if any checks had been made on Dr Karim's immigration status.   In
    re-examination she said she had no reason to go further than  the  face
    of the CV document.

Mr Muhammad Faisal Munir Malik

19. In his witness statement of 2 June 2009  Mr  Malik  said  he  had  been
    employed full time at CCOL  as  an  IT  trainer.  His  responsibilities
    included delivering classes to students, solving the internet,  network
    and computer problems encountered by teachers and staff and IT  support
    of the student body. All of his teaching responsibilities were  in  the
    IT Department. CCOL offered ACP Certificate and Diploma courses in  IT;
    BSc courses were accredited  by  the  University  of  Sunderland.  CCOL
    attempted to offer the British Computer Society (BCS) courses as  well,
    but those  were  discontinued  as  no  students  enrolled.  In  the  IT
    department there were approx. 20 students studying an  ACP  course  and
    approx. 15-20 studying the BSc course.  For the ACP-accredited  courses
    he would deliver the modules as created by ACP who  would  provide  and
    mark the  final  examinations.  He  evaluated  the  students'  projects
    although they were finally checked  by  ACP  if  required.  There  were
    usually between 10-12 students in his classes and the majority  of  the
    teaching took place in a classroom setting, with the remainder  in  the
    IT lab.  The classes ran on the ACP term  system  of  three  terms.  He
    personally knew all of the IT teachers (and many of the  students)  and
    none of them was involved in teaching or studying a PgDip in IT. At  no
    time did he see anyone offering a PgDip in IT nor did he hear of anyone
    studying such a course. It was not possible that an entire PgDip course
    could have been offered in his field without him being aware of it. His
    normal hours were Monday to Thursday. He described the  layout  of  the
    college, class sizes,  and  different  courses  run.  He  said  he  was
    familiar with most of the staff except perhaps a few people brought  in
    towards the end of 2008 to teach a single class a few hours a  week  or
    any teachers that only worked on Fridays. He said there  were  four  or
    five teachers in the IT department and approx. 10-12  in  the  Business
    Department. He mentioned an odd incident that had happened in  November
    2008 when a man he believed to be Chinese approached him asking  if  he
    would verify his PgDip in BM, which he refused to do.

20. In his oral evidence Mr Malik confirmed that he knew Miss  Ullah.   She
    had run the Business Studies  courses  throughout  2008  except  for  a
    period of several weeks when she was away for a wedding.   His  job  in
    the college was a dual one: to provide technical IT support and also to
    teach IT courses.  Asked by Mr Macdonald whether he knew anything about
    a Postgraduate Diploma certificate found in Kashif Hussain's  bag  made
    out to a certain Mr Malik, he said he had never seen this and the  name
    on it  was not his full name.  It did not contain "Munir".  His date of
    birth was also different.  The police had not asked him about this.  He
    had never had a qualification from CCOL.  It might be that someone else
    had been trying to use his  name.   The  courses  he  was  involved  in
    teaching in the IT Department were all accredited courses.  The college
    had attempted to run a BCS course, but this  was  discontinued  due  to
    lack of take-up by students.  In his courses  there  were  some  twenty
    students doing ACP courses and fifteen to twenty doing  a  BSc  course.
    He kept an attendance record, using a computer print off given  to  him
    by college administration.  He  ticked  off  the  names  of  those  who
    attended and handed them in to administration (to either the  reception
    or Principal) at the end of each session.   He  had  a  file  for  each
    class.  He had access to the college  record  of  student  IDs  on  the
    college computer, although he could not amend it.  The  college  had  a
    system for keeping  computerised  attendance  records,  but  he  had  a
    problem with the software and relied on his own records.  He  kept  his
    records in the college.  He did not know  if  his  records  were  still
    there.  He had not been there on  2  December  2008,  the  day  of  the
    Operation Asterion visit, but had gone in on 5 December as he had been
    asked to do remedial work on a computer which took a couple  of  hours.
    Everything was upside down.  He had not checked to see if his own files
    were still there.  He confirmed that the details given in his statement
    concerning a Chinese man approaching him to verify an award certificate
    were true.  In reply to questions from Mr Clarke, Mr Malik said he  did
    not know Mr Raja, the third  appellant.   He  would  have  known  if  a
    Postgraduate class in IT was running at the time Mr Raja claims it was.
     Timetables  were  placed  on  a  notice  board,  sometimes  on  headed
    notepaper, sometimes not.  In his  experience  timetables  referred  to
    "terms", not "semesters".  He knew Dr Karim  and  had  worked  together
    with him.

21. In answer to questions from Mr Macdonald and  the  Tribunal,  Mr  Malik
    explained that sometimes if the Principal asked him  he  would  prepare
    timetables.  He kept exam-related materials in a separate file.  He had
    never heard of the college having  a  "board  of  examiners".   At  the
    beginning of his courses he would give  the  students  as  handouts  an
    outline of the course, a scheme of work, sometimes on a CCOL  template,
    sometimes not. They would normally have with  them  a  class  enrolment
    form and/or a student ID. He had seen the student ID card  record  log.
    He recognised some of the student names on it.   He  normally  put  any
    student ID details on  his  attendance  sheets,  to  help  the  college
    administration enter them.  If a student had been suspended or expelled
    from the college, administration would inform the teaching  staff.   He
    agreed that the  college  log  of  student's  IDs  appeared  to  be  an
    historical record  and  did  not  tell  the  reader  who  were  current
    students.  He believed there may have been  a  separate  file  for  all
    current students held by the administration.  He would  sometimes  have
    new students who only had a letter of enrolment.  Normally  they  would
    later get an ID card, but sometimes (rarely) he did not know why,  this
    did not happen.  Student reference  numbers  with  twelve  digits  were
    unfamiliar to him, the normal ones had four digits.

22. In re-examination Mr Malik said it was rare for a student not  to  have
    an ID card.  He had seen records for  overseas  students,  although  he
    could not say if they had different numbers.

Miss Saamia Ullah

23. Miss Ullah had given two statements, one on 4 December 2008, another on
    3 June 2009. In her 4 December statement she described her role as  the
    head  of  department  for  business  and  management  within  CCOL.  In
    performance of this role she managed the entire Association of Business
    Executives (ABE) department, as well as being course instructor on this
    course from July 2007. In July 2008 she had gone abroad for  a  wedding
    for around three weeks. She described the various persons who had  been
    college Principals and what she knew of their roles. She stated that  a
    couple of months before the events of early December there were rumours
    among the students that Postgraduate diplomas from CCOL were being sold
    outside the campus; there were also rumours that  the  directors  would
    enter the college after hours. She stated that "I am  certain  that  no
    courses were and have been running for  postgraduate  diplomas  of  any
    type at [CCOL], nor are we  an  organisation  that  can  award  such  a
    qualification". In her section all  exams  had  to  be  marked  by  the
    awarding body. In her second witness statement Miss Ullah said that she
    had been employed at CCOL,  originally  on  a  part-time  basis,  since
    January 2006, becoming Head of Business Management  from  January  2007
    until  the  college  closed.  Her  responsibilities  included   overall
    responsibility for the day to day running of  the  Business  Department
    and the ABE courses offered within her department. She had an  overview
    of the attendance in all of the business  classes  as  lecturers  would
    report their attendance result to her. A copy of the database was  kept
    in the Principal's office and another copy for  her  records.  She  was
    also responsible for  the  hiring  of  lecturers  for  the  department,
    although she was not involved in the setting up or teaching of the  ILM
    programme which started  in  mid-2008.  She  worked  9.30-5  Wednesday,
    Thursday and Friday. In her department there were  approximately  30-40
    students per term, which included all the ABE course students.  She was
    aware of ILM courses which started in mid-2008 after the arrival of  Mr
    Islam Ali. The latter had purchased the college from Mr Mustafa. Mr Ali
    asked her to be involved in the management of this programme but as she
    already had too many responsibilities she declined. He then managed the
    hiring and the accreditation work himself.   During  her  time  at  the
    college she did not see any PgDip course taught nor any PgDip  students
    either in class rooms or on any attendance records. She had  not  heard
    of any curriculum for such a course, nor had she  ever  met  any  staff
    members who were teaching a PgDip in BM. She was  confident  in  saying
    that the PgDip in BM did not exist.  It was not possible that an entire
    PgDip course could have been offered in her  field  without  her  being
    aware of it. Accreditation from ILM for CCOL to  run  its  Postgraduate
    diploma course was for a very short time. She  mentioned  that  towards
    the end of 2008 she noticed a number  of  people  who  would  begin  to
    arrive at reception after 5 pm. They would always ask  for  Mr  Kashif.
    They would arrive in groups of 5 or 10 and would group together in  the
    student common room on the ground floor.  She  recalled  overhearing  a
    conversation when one male was speaking  on  his  mobile  telephone  in
    Urdu. He told the person to whom  he  was  speaking  that  he  was  not
    willing to pay �2,500 and he would ask if he could pay less.  She  gave
    in her notice on 5 November because she had  become  deeply  suspicious
    about what was happening at the school. Some  students  told  her  that
    CCOL sold fake diplomas around London and  had  many  agents.  She  was
    serving out her notice period at the time of the visit from immigration
    officers and police on 2 December 2008.

24. We next summarise the oral evidence of Miss Ullah, although she did not
    give evidence until after Miss Akbar.  Shortly before the hearing, Miss
    Ullah had informed the respondent that she  had  decided  not  to  give
    evidence voluntarily.  When told of this on the morning of the  hearing
    Mr Macdonald made a request that we issue her with  a  witness  summons
    under Rule 50 of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure)  Rules
    2005.  Mr Clarke said he would  not  object  to  such  a  request.   We
    decided to issue a summons which was duly  served  by  the  appellant's
    representatives although, with the agreement of Mr Macdonald, Mr Clarke
    called her as a witness for the respondent.

25. Miss Ullah adopted her two witness statements. The first she  explained
    had been made to the police in early December 2008,  one  of  whom  had
    typed it out as she was interviewed and then printed it out at the end.
     From January 2007 until December 2008, when the  college  closed,  she
    was  head  of  the  Business  Studies  Department  of  CCOL.  She   had
    responsibility for the ABE courses  as  well  as  for  various  student
    extracurricular activities.  She kept, in  computer  and  manual  form,
    records relating to names, attendance,  performance  and  results.   In
    answer to questions from Mr Macdonald,  she  said  she  had  shown  her
    records to the police when she had gone into the college on 4  December
    2008 but they had said they were not  interested  because  her  courses
    were not Postgraduate Diploma ones.  She shared an office with the head
    of IT, Mr Malik.  Their office was normally locked.  All the  computers
    at the college were linked up to a secure  network;  but  people  could
    only access it by having a username and password.  Apart from computers
    being taken out of their sockets, her office did not appear to have had
    anything removed during the Operation Asterion visit.  As  far  as  she
    was concerned, all the teaching she knew of that was going on  at  CCOL
    was bona fide, but she was aware through the grapevine that some things
    were going wrong from the second half of 2008 onwards.   Lots  of  non-
    students had been seen visiting Mr Kashif Hussain and Mr Zahid Noman in
    the Principal's office after normal (9-5) hours.

26. It had been pointed out to her, she said, that her name was not on  the
    current college website list of college staff.  However, she  was  sure
    her name had been on it in  early  December  2008,  as  she  distinctly
    recalled showing one of the police officers who  interviewed  her  that
    her name was there.  She did not know who had taken her name off.   The
    college website was updated periodically,  she  thought  by  a  website
    engineer who came in to  do  that.   The  main  changes  affecting  the
    college happened in the late summer.  Her understanding was that in the
    first half of 2008 the owner of the college, Mr Zafar Mustapha, who ran
    the college with his wife, had been obliged to sell out to new  owners,
    Mr Islam and one other.  Soon after Mr Islam stopped coming  and  a  Mr
    Saif Ullah announced that he was the new Principal.  Then  a  Mr  Noman
    was hired to be Principal.  It was a  big  disappointment  to  her  and
    other staff when Mr Zafar went.  After he left standards went down.  Mr
    Noman did not appear to be bothered about attending meetings  with  her
    course accreditors.  The courses she taught on were all accredited.  To
    her knowledge there were no Level  7  courses  taught  by  the  college
    although she was aware Mr Islam had initiated an ILM course, which  was
    Level 7, but for some reason it had been cancelled.

27. Miss Ullah said that she had nothing to do with college  communications
    with the Home Office:  reception and  the  college  administration  did
    that.  She had not been aware that the  college  could  award  its  own
    diplomas.  Her student award certificates came by post from  ABE.   She
    had just secured accreditation  for  her  courses  for  2009  when  the
    college closed.

28. In reply to questions from the Tribunal Miss Ullah said she knew  a  Mr
    John Opoku; he had been hired to teach  on  her  ABE  courses,  but  he
    finished before 2008.  She normally worked  Wednesdays,  Thursdays  and
    Fridays.  She did not know a Mr Saheed Khuman.  Miss  Ullah  said  that
    the college had a limited  number  of  rooms.   The  largest  classroom
    (numbered "15") could fit 40 students.  When students began her courses
    they got an ABE Welcome Pack, a book published  by  ABE  and  a  course
    syllabus.  She prepared them for external exams by  various  tests  and
    quiz sessions.


29. The witnesses called by Mr Macdonald were the  three  appellants  only.



Miss Nazia  Akbar

30. In a witness statement dated 9 March  2009  Miss  Akbar  said  she  had
    arrived in the UK as a student in 2006 and during her period  of  valid
    leave (December 2007-December 2008) had obtained admission to CCOL  and
    completed a PgDip in BM. On that basis she applied for further leave to
    remain under the Post-Study  Work  scheme,  which  was  refused  on  21
    January 2009. She strenuously denied the respondent's  allegation  that
    she had used deception; she said she had been an honest and hardworking
    student there. During her entire term  of  study  there  she  had  been
    provided with excellent tuition. She had joined CCOL  because  she  had
    heard they were awarding diplomas that were recognised in  the  UK  and
    had checked the internet to find that the college was accredited  by  a
    number of reputable bodies  and  was  also  on  the  DIUS  list  of  UK
    recognised degree awarding bodies. They were also offering  courses  at
    competitively low prices. She had started her course at CCOL in January
    2008. She produced various documents to demonstrate her  attendance  at
    CCOL "and that the lectures were given  properly  and  professionally".
    These included two assignments, an  enrolment  letter,  a  fee  payment
    receipt, lecture handouts, handwritten lecture notes, extracts from the
    CCOL website, a CCOL promotional video and a prospectus.  She  did  not
    know Miss Ullah or Mr Malik. She had been taught by Mr John Opoku,  who
    was also assisted by Mulikat Omorola Ojulari.

31. Miss Akbar told the Tribunal that before  coming  to  the  UK  she  had
    obtained a Masters degree in IT from Punjab University and  in  the  UK
    had obtained a Post Graduate Diploma in IT from Cecos London College of
    IT and Management.  She had enrolled at  CCOL  in  January  2008.   She
    decided to do a Pg Dip BM course with CCOL so she  could  increase  her
    knowledge of business.  She did not know Miss Ullah or Mr  Malik.   The
    two college tutors who taught her were Mr John  Opoku  and  Ms  Mulikat
    Omorola Ojulari.  She did exams at the end of each  term,  in  January,
    then in May.  She had to do two main pieces of course work, both  being
    assignments.  She had not heard of any bogus goings-on at the college.

32. To questions from Mr Clarke, Miss  Akbar  said  that  her  lawyers  had
    drafted her written statement; she told the facts to her  lawyer.   She
    had not had a student  ID  card.   Her  reference  number  was  on  her
    enrolment  letter.   At  the  end  of  the  course  she  collected  her
    certificate from reception.  Asked about ILM-marked  documents  forming
    part of her assignment, she denied she  had  downloaded  these  herself
    from the ILM website.  Her tutors had provided them to her.  The second
    appellant, Miss Thirakaluthy, was not in her class; she did not know if
    more than one class was doing the same course as her.  Her teachers had
    marked her two assignments.  They did not put  marks  on  them.   Marks
    were put up on a notice board.  As regards the materials in the  bundle
    of documents she had submitted as comprising her course  materials  and
    notes, she could not comment on why some consisted  of  materials  from
    various websites (Alabama, bized, IBM, Prenthall).  She agreed  that  a
    number of pages of those she had submitted as her course materials were
    from a BTech course, which was a sub-degree course.  She had  not  been
    given a syllabus or written course outline, just an oral  introduction.
    The materials at pp. 72-139 of  her  bundle  represented  the  complete
    course materials handed out to her.  Her assignments, which were on the
    subject of British Telecom and Burger King respectively, were  all  her
    own work; she had received no feedback, nor had any mark  been  written
    on them.  Marks were put on the notice board and then  entered  on  her
    letter of enrolment.  Her teachers had never given her past  papers  or
    practice exams; the class was examined  on  the  course  materials  and
    handwritten lecture notes.  The college had seven or eight  classrooms,
    her class used several different ones. Numbers in her class were around
    35, but sometimes they were fewer.  She went to college  three  days  a
    week.  She had never met Miss Thirakaluthy.  She denied  that  she  had
    never attended a Postgraduate course at Cambridge College or  that  she
    had submitted false documents or used deception.

33. In re-examination she said her teachers did not  use  any  powerpoints,
    just a white board.  If some items in her course  materials  were  sub-
    degree standard she did not know that.  In answer to further  questions
    from the Tribunal and Mr Macdonald, she replied that her  teachers  had
    never given feedback on her two assignments  or  spoken  to  her  about
    them; her marks  in  them  had  been  67  per  cent  and  68  per  cent
    respectively.  She had never  been  given  anything  in  writing  about
    college "house style" for references; it had  just  been  told  to  her
    orally.   Her  student  reference  number  was  a  12   digit   number.



Miss Sanghinee  Thirakaluthy

34. In a witness statement dated 9 March 2009 Miss  Thirakaluthy  said  she
    had arrived in the UK as a student and whilst still having valid  leave
    had obtained admission to CCOL and completed a PgDip in BM. It  was  on
    that basis that she had applied for further leave to remain in  the  UK
    under the Post-Study Work scheme, only to  be  refused  on  20  January
    2009. She had joined CCOL because they were awarding diplomas that were
    recognised in the UK and checks on the internet  revealed  the  college
    was accredited by a number of reputable bodies and was also on the DIUS
    register.  She began her course in January 2008. She strenuously denied
    the  allegation  by  the  respondent  that  she  had  used   deception.
    Throughout her time in the UK she had been  a  genuine  student  making
    progress and attending regularly in all her courses. On her CCOL course
    a high -"excellent", she went on to say -  standard  of  education  was
    provided. She had not kept many documents to show she attended on  this
    course nor had she kept any receipts or other formal  documentation  to
    show her studies there, but she was  able  to  attach  various  lecture
    handouts and hand written notes. She did not  know  Miss  Ullah  or  Mr
    Malik. She had been taught by Mr John Opoku, who was also  assisted  by
    Ms Mulikat Ojulari.


35. Miss Thirakaluthy's oral evidence was as follows.  She had  first  come
    to the UK in September 2005 to do a course in Travel Management and had
    then gone back home to Mauritius, working with her sister in  a  beauty
    parlour business.  She had then come back to the UK to do a Bachelor in
    Business Administration (BBA) course at an  institution  in  Stratford,
    East London.  She competed that in August 2007.  This  institution  was
    not a listed body and she had heard from a friend about the IGS  scheme
    and then that CCOL was offering a PgDip BM.  She  had  joined  CCOL  in
    October 2007.  She had not kept many of her  course  materials  as  she
    never thought her application would be refused.   She  reiterated  that
    she did not know Miss Ullah or Mr Malik or that they  taught  at  CCOL.
    Her main teachers were Mr John Opoku and Miss  Ojulari.   It  had  been
    very shocking to her to hear that CCOL  was  said  to  be  involved  in
    fraudulent goings on; UK colleges and universities were supposed to  be
    the best in the world.

36. In reply to  Mr  Clarke  she  said  she  had  studied  eight  subjects.
    Critical Theory was  one  of  them.  Asked  why  her  course  materials
    included promotional materials,  instructional  texts  and  items  from
    various websites, she said these were what had been given to her.   She
    agreed she had said in her written statement that the materials in  the
    bundle submitted were "various lecture handouts", whereas in fact  some
    of the materials were ones she had downloaded herself.  She agreed  her
    materials included an e-mail dated long after the course had  finished.
    She had been in a state of panic and had assembled all old CCOL  course
    materials she could find.  As original research she was expected to  do
    for her course, she did internet research. He  course  had  included  a
    dissertation of 10,000  words.   She  had  done  hers  on  "Tourism  in
    Mauritius", although she had not kept  a  copy.   She  had  it  on  her
    desktop, but her desktop had crashed. She had a laptop  now.   She  did
    not have a copy any more.  She had to do course work  plus  assignments
    in each subject.  She agreed various handwritten notes  in  her  bundle
    were not in her handwriting (including those at pp 114,-134, 189,  198-
    244, 276) and that on some the year shown on the dates entered had been
    changed from "07" to "08".  She agreed some  of  the  material  in  her
    bundle was from her BBA course.  She had not been given a  syllabus  or
    course  outline  except  verbally.   She  thought  the  teachers   were
    reliable.  She attended lectures  two  and  a  half  days  a  week,  on
    Tuesdays, Wednesdays and sometimes on a Friday.  She did  eight  exams.
    She had never got her exam papers back with  marks.   She  had  had  no
    feedback; marks were just posted on the notice board.  She denied  that
    her course materials were just  a  ragbag  of  materials  she  had  put
    together.  She had attended a Pg Dip course at CCOL.  She had  sat  and
    passed exams.  She had not used deception.

37. In re-examination  Miss  Thirakaluthy  said  her  written  English  was
    stronger than her spoken English.  She  had  given  away  most  of  her
    course materials to friends.  In her  one-room  flat  her  papers  were
    scattered about; she had no desk.  The course work she had done was  in
    her own handwriting.  She had  tried  to  collate  the  CCOL  materials
    strewn about, but she had been in a panic and accepted she had mixed up
    some materials from her BBA course.  She  had  not  changed  the  dates
    written  on  some  handwritten  lecture  notes  from  "07"   to   "08".



38. In reply to further  questions  from  the  Tribunal  and  Counsel,  she
    confirmed she had never had a CCOL student ID card; they had asked  her
    for a photo and given her a reference number.   She  kept  her  desktop
    computer in her flat on the floor.  Her class consisted  of  around  25
    students, dropping to fifteen by the time of exams.   They  used  three
    different lecture rooms.  She had chosen "Tourism in Mauritius" for her
    dissertation because Mr Opoku had said she could choose her own  topic.
    Her  assignments were 1,500 to 2,000 words in length. The pages in  her
    course material showing dates in 2009 were from a course she  had  been
    helping her cousin with.  She  did  not  think  the  college  had  been
    "taking her for a ride"; they had been running the course perfectly.

Mr Muhammed Imran Yaseen Raja

39. In his witness statement dated 12 March 2009 Mr Raja stated that he had
    studied and regularly attended all his courses at  CCOL  from  November
    2007 until 30 November 2008. He was an honest and  hardworking  student
    there. A high and excellent  standard  of  education  and  tuition  was
    provided; lectures were given properly and professionally. He had heard
    CCOL were awarding diplomas and having checked the internet  and  found
    that they were  accredited  by  a  number  of  reputable  organisations
    including BAC, ABE, ILM,  ACP  and  a  number  of  universities.  Their
    diplomas were recognised by BAC and ACP and were on the DIUS list of UK
    recognised  degree  awarding  bodies  and  were  being  offered  at   a
    competitively low price. He produced various documents including  three
    relating to CCOL fee payments, a timetable, two  assignments  and  some
    typed lecture notes.  He did not know either Miss Ullah or Mr Malik. He
    was taught by Dr Karim Mohammed Resaul and his personal  tutor  was  Mr
    Saif Ullah, the Principal. Extracts from the college website confirmed,
    he claimed, that diplomas in  IT  were  offered.  Mr  Raja  strenuously
    denied the respondent's allegation that he had used deception in  order
    to obtain leave to enter or remain in the UK.

40. In his oral evidence Mr Raja said he had come to the  UK  in  2001  and
    obtained a BSc Hons from Greenwich University, then a Masters in IT. He
    had then enrolled at the CCOL in  its  Pg  Dip  IT  in  November  2007,
    finishing in August 2008.  He did not know Miss Ullah or Mr Malik.   He
    had been taught by Dr Karim and Mr Saif Ullah.  He did not know why  Dr
    Karim has said in his statement that he did not know of him.

41. In answers to Mr Clarke, Mr  Raja  said  he  had  undertaken  a  second
    Postgraduate course in IT because Greenwich was not  a  listed  college
    and he had heard about the IGS scheme which provided an opportunity for
    post-study work.  He had not been given a syllabus  or  course  outline
    except verbally.  He had four classes a week.  He agreed that the  CCOL
    website prospectus did not in fact mention a PgDip IT.   He  did  eight
    subjects with two assignments for each.  He had only produced  two  but
    could produce more.  Asked about the assignments produced at pp. 31 and
    41-44 of his bundle, he agreed it was word for  word  the  same  as  an
    extract from an internet website, but his tutor had told him to  search
    those sites.  (When typing out the solutions, he added  later,  he  had
    had to produce a CD to hand in with the handwritten assignment, but  he
    had no copy of what was on this)  He agreed that some of the  items  in
    his bundle of course materials were nothing to do with CCOL (e.g. those
    from the University of California,  Berkeley,  and  the  University  of
    McGill).  Dr Karim had given these items as handouts.  He did not  know
    why Dr Karim should have said in his statement that the college ran  no
    Postgraduate Diploma courses.  Some of the course materials were  basic
    level.  That was not satisfactory but he wanted to get the diploma  and
    the course had to cover groundwork.  Asked why then he had said in  his
    written statement the teaching on this course was "excellent",  he  did
    not reply.  He attended college for classes  on  Mondays  and  Tuesdays
    initially but after two to three weeks changed to  Wednesday,  Thursday
    and Friday.  He agreed that for this course he was required to  produce
    original research and he asserted that he had done so.  The tutors  had
    given the assignment scripts back but the marks were only  put  on  the
    notice boards.  He did not get an ID card.  He  had  no  idea  why  the
    college records retrieved during the Operation Asterion visit  did  not
    show his name.  He denied he was  lying  about  taking  a  Postgraduate
    Diploma course at CCOL.

42. In re-examination, further questions from the Tribunal and follow up by
    Counsel, he could not recall whether the CCOL website had had links  to
    further details about courses.  As regards the assignments contained in
    pp. 40-47 of his bundle, he had done these  himself,  typing  them  out
    from the internet.  He was given three weeks to do the one at  pp.  40-
    44.  By doing this it opened up a different programme which he had then
    produced on a CD.  He had paid �2,500 for the course.  The  course  was
    divided into terms, not semesters.  His name,  as  given  on  his  CCOL
    certificate  and  on  his  University  of  Greenwich  Certificate,  was
    different because he did not use  "Raja"  mostly,  although  he  agreed
    "Raja" was used in one of the two bank statements he had  submitted  to
    UKBA.  He had applied to Greenwich before getting his passport.

43. Asked about his assignment at pp.40-44, he  said  that  by  typing  the
    Swedish  internet  solution  himself  this  created  a  Java  language,
    bringing up numbers in rows and in columns in a sort  of  window.   You
    needed a calculator for this.  The work he did for this was  in  a  CD.
    On the CD he had created  variants  of  a  programme.   Asked  why  his
    "Solution" contained square bracketed entries left blank with no values
    written in, he said he had put the values in on the CD.

The Documentary Evidence

44. The documentary evidence produced by the respondent  relating  to  CCOL
    was considerable.  The  materials  submitted  by  the  appellants  also
    included some background information on the college extracted from  its
    website. We have set out earlier facts that were  not  in  dispute,  as
    disclosed by these materials  taken  together,  including  the  various
    causes for concern that UKBA began to have  from  the  middle  of  2008
    onwards which led to  the  setting  up  of  Operation  Asterion.   This
    operation's remit  was  "to  apprehend  and  secure  evidence  of  such
    activities."  The role of the Intelligence Unit was "to act as a  point
    of reference for any college or education related queries that arose on
    behalf of CIT colleagues and to assess the general bona fide status  of
    the education provider in relation to the Immigration Rules".

45. The Operation Asterion Interim Report described the college  facilities
    as consisting of a reception and eight rooms on the  ground  floor  and
    seven rooms in the  basement.   On  the  ground  floor  there  was  the
    Principal's office, a  room  for  staff  members,  a  common  room  and
    library, a silent study room and a storage room.  In the basement there
    was a staffroom, three classrooms and one room containing seven  chairs
    but no desks. Two rooms could not be  accessed.   In  the  respondent's
    assessment there were only 6-8 classrooms, most of which  had  capacity
    for eight to twelve students and the largest for twenty to 25 students.



46. The evidence about numbers of students was not clear.  When interviewed
    during the Operation Asterion visit, Acting Principal Mr Kashif Hussain
    gave varying estimates of the numbers of students registered  with  the
    college - ranging from 60 to 200.  During the  visit  Mr  Hussain  also
    showed officers a student ID card database which he said contained  the
    great majority of CCOL students, but it did not  differentiate  between
    past and present students. Mr Malik in  his  second  witness  statement
    said there was a maximum of 250-350 students. Miss Ullah in her  second
    witness statement estimated that there were approx 100-150 students.

47. On the basis of what officers were told during the  visit  the  college
    was delivering  a  number  of  accredited  courses:  ABE  (Certificate,
    Diploma and Advanced Diploma  Level),  ACP  (Certificate,  Diploma  and
    Advanced Diploma level) University of Sunderland (BSc in Computing) and
    ILM (Level 7 in Executive Management) courses.  The  college  also  ran
    English classes  delivered  at  foundation,  pre-intermediate  and  FCE
    (preparation for the Cambridge [English Language] exam) level  and  two
    part-time evening classes  for  upper  intermediate  and  IELTS  level.
    Although there are similarities the details were not entirely the  same
    as those found on the college website: see below at para 54.

48. During the Operation Asterion visit the officers found a template of  a
    Postgraduate Diploma in the Principal's office.  Amongst  the  contents
    of a bag belonging to Mr Kashif Hussain were  several  CCOL  -  awarded
    PgDips, including one in Business Management made out in his  own  name
    and stated as being awarded in September 2008 and also one in  Business
    Management in the same name of the Principal, Zahid Ali  Noman,  stated
    as being awarded in September 2008.

49. The investigating team took with them a list containing a sample of  2o
    (originally the number given was 25)  students who had presented PgDips
    to the Home Office issued by CCOL in  support  of  Tier  1  (Post-Study
    Work) applications in order to cross-reference this with college files.
     None of the sample students' names  were in the filing  cabinet  which
    Mr Kashif Hussain had identified as containing student files.

50. During the time the investigating team spent  at  the  college  several
    students did attend, the majority to attend English  language  classes.
    Several others who  came  said  they  were  collecting  assignments  or
    wishing to register.

51. The Operation Asterion Interim Report also referred to information  the
    team had obtained from ILM who accredited a  CCOL  Level  7  course  in
    Executive Management, which is equivalent to  a  Postgraduate  Diploma.
    This showed that CCOL was approved by them on 27 March 2008 to offer  a
    Level 6 Award in Management  and  a  Level  7  Award,  Certificate  and
    Diploma  in  Executive  Management.   38  students  from  CCOL   (later
    corrected to 37 students, in evidence before the Tribunal) did register
    with them to undertake the Level 7 courses, but after only four modules
    were completed and a visit by two ILM assessors in May 2008 had  raised
    concerns about standards, ILM suspended their accreditation on 20  June
    2008.  As a result of the 2 December visit UKBA took  steps  to  ensure
    that the college was removed from the DIUS register on 4 December 2008.
     It appears that the college told  its  staff  it  was  to  close  from
    8 December 2008.  On 22 December 2008  UKBA  issued  instructions  to
    caseworkers to  refuse  all  immigration  applications  based  on  CCOL
    studies or awards.

52. The respondent adduced additional evidence indicating that CCOL as well
    as external agents were issuing PgDip certificates and  that  the  same
    were being advertised for sale.  Also being issued were transcripts  of
    academic records and confirmation of completion of course  letters  for
    the purposes of application to UKBA under the Tier 1 (Post-Study  Work)
    scheme. A number of examples exhibited showed that the  start  and  end
    dates and the dates of award of the  actual  certificates  relied  upon
    varied  between  different  months  in  2007/2008.  There   were   also
    statements from two students admitting buying  a  PgDip  in  IT  or  BM
    without having enrolled on or studied for such a qualification.

53. Although Mr Kashif Hussain was arrested he  was  never  charged  and  a
    decision was taken by the CPS not to prosecute.  Mr Saif  Ullah's  name
    had been linked in articles which appeared in The Times newspaper on 21
    and 22 may 2009. These described an investigation by  journalists  from
    that newspaper into alleged bogus colleges. In these articles  Mr  Saif
    Ullah was reported to have left the country.

54. The respondent exhibited the CCOL prospectus and  website  information.
    The website advertised ACP  Computing  courses  (Certificate,  Diploma,
    Advanced  Diploma),  BSc  (Hons)  Computer  Systems  Engineering,   BCS
    Professional Qualifications, a British  Computer  Society  Professional
    Graduate Diploma in  IT  and  a  number  of  Business  Management  (BM)
    courses.  Several of these BM courses were accredited  by  ABE.   There
    was also the ILM Level 7  Award  already  mentioned,  together  with  a
    Certificate Diploma/Professional  Diploma  in  Sales  and  Marketing  -
    London Centre of Marketing and a Diploma in International Trade.

55. The respondent's bundles also included an exchange of  e-mails  between
    UKBA and Mr Saif Ullah in September 2008.  They showed that Mr Ullah in
    his capacity as Principal was asked to provide a list  of  students  on
    the PgDip BM course in the 2007/2008 academic year but could not do so.
     What he stated was that the college had offered its  own  Postgraduate
    diploma course from May 2007 but that it had then dropped  this  course
    and continued with the ILM Diploma in Executive Management.

56. During the visit officers seized a CCOL module specifications document.
     According to the respondent this consisted  of  genuine  Level  7  ILM
    course materials that had been (electronically) copied and pasted.

57. The investigating team obtained statements from several members of  the
    CCOL teaching staff:  Ms S Ullah,  Mr  M  Malik  (who  also  gave  oral
    evidence before us),  Dr  Karim,  Ms  A  Rapacz,  Ms  Da  Silva,  Ms  E
    Ryabinova, Mr A Tariq, Ms J Serra and Mr G Singh Johar. There were also
    statements taken from Ms Lai Lu, who  was  a  receptionist,  and  seven
    students.

58. We have already summarised the evidence of Mr Malik and Miss Ullah  who
    were both adamant that CCOL never ran PgDips in  BM  or  IT.  Mr  Asjad
    Tariq, who had only started working as an IT teacher one  month  before
    CCOL closed, was not aware of any postgraduate courses at CCOL.  Mr G S
    Johar, who had worked as a software projects leader  employed  at  CCOL
    for approximately three months, was unaware of any Business  Management
    course running at the college. None of  the  teaching  staff  who  gave
    statements said that PgDips in IT or BM were run by CCOL.

59.  We  should  also  mention  that  the  background  documents  from  the
    respondent included a 2008 publication of the Quality Assurance  Agency
    for Higher Education  entitled  "The  framework  for  higher  education
    qualifications in England, Wales and  Northern  Ireland  (FHEQ)".  This
    explains, inter alia, that in the UK and Ireland, each stage within any
    framework of qualifications,  be  it  school,  vocational,  further  or
    higher education, is commonly referred to as a  'level'.  In  practice,
    most such levels represent bands of qualifications that  share  similar
    expectations of attainment. The FHEQ has five levels,  three  of  which
    are undergraduate and two  are  postgraduate.  These  are  number  4-8,
    succeeding levels 1-3 which preceded higher education in  the  national
    Qualifications Framework and the Qualifications  and  Credit  framework
    (NQF/QCF).  In Table 1 it is noted that qualifications at FHEQ Level  7
    include Postgraduate diplomas and Postgraduate certificates.


The Legal Framework

60. Para 322(1A)  of  Statement  of  Changes  in  Immigration  Rules  HC395
    states:


         "322. In addition to the grounds for refusal of extension  of  stay
         set out in Parts 2-8 of these Rules, the following provisions apply
         in relation to the refusal of an application for variation of leave
         to enter or remain or, where appropriate, the curtailment of leave:




         Grounds on which leave to remain in the United  Kingdom  is  to  be
         refused
         ...
         (1A) Where false representations have been made or false  documents
         have been submitted (whether or not material  to  the  application,
         and whether or not to the applicant's knowledge), or material facts
         have not been disclosed, in relation to the application."



61. At para 6 of the Rules "deception" is defined as follows:

         "'Deception' means making false representations or submitting false
         documents (whether or not material to the application), or  failing
         to disclose materials facts".


62. The respondent has also made reference to para 320, which reads:

         "320. In addition to the grounds for refusal of entry clearance or
         leave to enter set out in Parts 2-8 of these Rules, and subject to
         para 321 below, the following grounds for refusal of entry
         clearance or leave to enter apply:




          Grounds on which entry clearance or  leave  to  enter  the  United
         Kingdom is to be refused

         (1) the fact that entry is being sought for a purpose  not  covered
         by these Rules;
         (2) the fact that the person seeking entry to the United Kingdom is
         currently the subject of a deportation order;
         (3) failure by the person seeking entry to the  United  Kingdom  to
         produce to the Immigration Officer a  valid  national  passport  or
         other  document  satisfactorily  establishing  his   identity   and
         nationality;
         (4) failure to satisfy the Immigration Officer, in the  case  of  a
         person arriving in the United Kingdom or seeking entry through  the
         Channel Tunnel with the intention of entering any other part of the
         common travel area,  that  he  is  acceptable  to  the  immigration
         authorities there;
         (5) failure, in the case of a visa  national,  to  produce  to  the
         Immigration Officer a passport or other identity document  endorsed
         with a valid and current United Kingdom entry clearance issued  for
         the purpose for which entry is sought;
         (6) where the Secretary of State has personally directed  that  the
         exclusion of a person from the United Kingdom is conducive  to  the
         public good;
         (7) save in relation to a person settled in the United  Kingdom  or
         where the Immigration Officer is satisfied that  there  are  strong
         compassionate reasons justifying admission, confirmation  from  the
         Medical Inspector that, for medical reasons, it is  undesirable  to
         admit a person seeking leave to enter the United Kingdom.
         (7A) where false representations have been made or false  documents
         or information have been submitted (whether or not material to  the
         application, and whether or not to the applicant's  knowledge),  or
         material  facts  have  not  been  disclosed,  in  relation  to  the
         application.
         (7B)  subject  to  paragraph  320(7C),  where  the  applicant   has
         previously breached the UK's immigration laws by:
         (a) Overstaying;
         (b) breaching a condition attached to his leave;
         (c) being an Illegal Entrant;
         (d) using Deception in an application for entry clearance, leave to
         enter or remain (whether successful or not);
         unless the applicant:
         (i) Overstayed for 28 days or less and left the UK voluntarily, not
         at the expense (directly or indirectly) of the Secretary of State;
         (ii) used Deception in an application for entry clearance more than
         10 years ago;
         (iii) left the UK voluntarily, not  at  the  expense  (directly  or
         indirectly) of the Secretary of State, more than 12 months ago;
         (iv)  left  the  UK  voluntarily,  at  the  expense  (directly   or
         indirectly) of the Secretary of State, more than 5 years ago, or
         (v) was removed or deported from the UK more than 10 years ago.
         Where more than  one  breach  of  the  UK's  immigration  laws  has
         occurred, only the breach which leads  to  the  longest  period  of
         absence from the UK will be relevant under this paragraph.
         (7C)  Paragraph  320(7B)  shall  not   apply   in   the   following
         circumstances:
         (a) where the applicant is applying as:
         (i) a spouse, civil partner or unmarried or same-sex partner under
         paragraphs 281 or 295A,
         (ii) a fianc�(e) or proposed civil partner under paragraph 290,
         (iii) a parent,  grandparent  or  other  dependent  relative  under
         paragraph 317,
         (iv) a  person  exercising  rights  of  access  to  a  child  under
         paragraph 246, or
         (v) a spouse, civil partner, unmarried or  same-sex  partner  of  a
         refugee or person with  Humanitarian  Protection  under  paragraphs
         352A, 352AA, 352FA or 352FD; or
         (b) where the individual was under the age of 18 at the time of his
         most recent breach of the UK's immigration laws."

63. Para 245Z provides:

        245Z. Requirements for leave to remain

        To qualify for leave to  remain  as  a  Tier  1  (Post-Study  Work)
        Migrant, an applicant must  meet  the  requirements  listed  below.
        Subject  to  paragraph  245ZA(i),  if  the  applicant  meets  these
        requirements, leave to remain will be  granted.  If  the  applicant
        does not meet these requirements, the application will be refused.
        Requirements:
        (a)      The applicant must not fall for refusal under the  general
             grounds for refusal, and must not be an illegal entrant.
        (b)      The applicant must not previously have been granted  entry
             clearance or leave to remain as  a  Tier  1  (Post-Study  Work)
             migrant.
        (c)      The applicant must have  a  minimum  of  75  points  under
             paragraphs 51 to 58 of Appendix A.
        (d)      The applicant must have  a  minimum  of  10  points  under
             Appendix B.
        (e)      The applicant must have a minimum of 10 points under
             Appendix C.
        (f)      The applicant must have, or have last been granted, entry
             clearance, leave to enter or leave to remain:

             (i)  as a Participant in the Fresh Talent: Working in Scotland
                 Scheme,
             (ii)      as  a  Participant  in  the  International  Graduates
                 Scheme (or its predecessor,  the  Science  and  Engineering
                 Graduates Scheme),
             (iii)     as a Student,
             (iv)      as a Student Nurse,
             (v)  as a Student Re-Sitting an Examination,
             (vi)      as a Student Writing Up a Thesis.

        (g)      An applicant who has, or was  last  granted  leave,  as  a
             Participant in the Fresh Talent:  Working  in  Scotland  Scheme
             must  be  a  British  National  (Overseas),  British   overseas
             territories  citizen,   British   Overseas   citizen,   British
             protected person or a British subject as defined in the British
             Nationality Act 1981.

        (h)      An applicant who has, or was  last  granted,  leave  as  a
             Student and:

             (i)   is  currently  being  sponsored  by   a   Government   or
                 international scholarship agency, or
             (ii)      was being sponsored by a government or  international
                 scholarship agency, and that sponsorship came to an end  12
                 months ago or less,
             must provide the written consent of the  sponsoring  government
                 or agency to the application."


64. The text of para 245Z is the same as was in force at the  date  of  the
    decisions under appeal in the three appeals  before  us.  Table  9  has
    since been amended but, in the form took at the relevant time  for  the
    purposes of these three appeals, it stated:


        "Attributes for Tier 1 (Post-Study Work) Migrants


        51.      An applicant applying for  entry  clearance  or  leave  to
             remain as a Tier 1 (Post-Study  Work)  Migrant  must  score  75
             points for attributes.


        52.      Available points are shown in Table 9.


        53.      Notes to accompany the table appear below the table.


        Table 9


    |Qualifications                                            |Points|
|                                                          |      |
|"The applicant has been awarded:                          |      |
|                                                          |20    |
|(a) a UK recognised bachelor or postgraduate degree, or   |      |
|                                                          |      |
|(b) a UK postgraduate certificate or diploma in education,|      |
|or                                                        |      |
|                                                          |      |
|(c) a Higher National Diploma ('HND') from a Scottish     |      |
|Institution.                                              |      |
|(a) The applicant studied for his award at a UK           |20    |
|institution that is a UK recognised or listed body, or    |      |
|which holds a sponsor licence under Tier 4 of the Points  |      |
|Based System,                                             |      |
|or                                                        |      |
|                                                          |      |
|(b) If the applicant is claiming points for having been   |      |
|awarded a Higher National Diploma from a Scottish         |      |
|Institution, he studied for that diploma at a Scottish    |      |
|publicly funded institution of further or higher          |      |
|education, or a Scottish bona fide private education      |      |
|institution which maintains satisfactory records of       |      |
|enrolment and attendance.                                 |      |
|The applicant's periods of UK study and/or research       |20    |
|towards his eligible award were undertaken whilst he had  |      |
|entry clearance, leave to enter or leave to remain in the |      |
|UK:                                                       |      |
|(a) as a Student, or                                      |      |
|                                                          |      |
|(b) as a dependant of someone with leave in any category  |      |
|permitting the admittance of dependants.                  |      |
|The applicant made the application for entry clearance or |15    |
|leave to remain as a Tier 1 (Post-Study Work) Migrant     |      |
|within 12 months of obtaining the relevant qualification. |      |
|                                                          |      |
|The applicant is applying for leave to remain and has, or |75    |
|was last granted, leave as a Participant in the           |      |
|International Graduates Scheme (or its predecessor, the   |      |
|Science and Engineering Graduates Scheme) or as a         |      |
|Participant in the Fresh Talent:  Working in Scotland     |      |
|Scheme.                                                   |      |




        Qualification: notes


        54.      Specified documents must be provided as  evidence  of  the
             qualification.


        55.      A  qualification  will  have  been  deemed  to  have  been
             obtained on the date on which the applicant was first  notified
             in writing, by the awarding institution, that the qualification
             has been awarded.


        56.      A 'UK recognised body' is an  institution  that  has  been
             granted degree awarding powers by a Royal Charter,  an  Act  of
             Parliament or the Privy Council.


        57.       'UK listed body' is an  institution  that  is  not  a  UK
             recognised body but which provides full courses  that  lead  to
             the award of a degree by a UK recognised body.


        58.      To qualify as  an  HND  from  a  Scottish  institution,  a
             qualification must be at level 8 on  the  Scottish  Credit  and
             Qualifications Framework.


        List of  institutions  to  which  paragraph  1A  of  this  Appendix
             applies.


        ..."


65. In response to a request from the  Tribunal  the  respondent  clarified
    that an amendment was made to the Immigration Rules with effect from 27
    November 2008 which meant that if no points were awarded  for  Appendix
    A, zero points in English language requirements under Appendix B  would
    also be awarded, regardless of whether sufficient evidence  existed  to
    meet the English language requirement itself. A further rule change (HC
    314)  came  into  effect  from  31  March  2009  by  virtue  of   which
    Postgraduate certificates  and  diplomas  other  than  UK  Postgraduate
    Certificates of Education no longer attracted points under  Appendix  A
    for the purposes of an application under Tier 1 (Post-Study  Work)  and
    the provision for dependants was replaced with a reference to Part 8 of
    the Rules.


The Policy Guidance


66. As explained in NA & Others the Policy Guidance on Tier  1  (Post-Study
    Work) has so far appeared in a number of versions (five to date).   The
    version we refer to here is that which was current  when  each  of  the
    three applicants made their application i.e. version two (11  September
    2008, in force until 26 November 2008).  Paragraphs 10 to 13 deal  with
    documents the Secretary of State requires applicants to provide.  Paras
    14-33 deal with verification and other checks (we shall revert to  them
    shortly).  Paras 42-44 explain the requirements of the award of  points
    under Appendix A.  Paras 45-81 deal with  Attributes  in  more  detail.
    Paras 44-53 explain how 20 points is to be awarded if an applicant  has
    certain types of qualification.  At para 50 the Guidance states that:


        "United  Kingdom  postgraduate   certificates   or   diplomas   are
        acceptable for this requirement.   It  is  not  necessary  for  the
        awarding body to be a United Kingdom recognized body."


    (As already  noted,  since  March  2009  postgraduate  certificates  or
    diplomas are no longer acceptable: see HC 314.  But they  were  at  the
    time of the decisions under appeal in these three cases.)


67. Para 53 of the second (11 September 2008) version states that:


         "An applicant can claim 20  points  if  he/she  has  undertaken  a
        period of study for the eligible qualification  at  an  institution
        that ... is a United Kingdom recognized or  United  Kingdom  listed
        body; or is a Scottish publicly funded institution  of  further  or
        higher education, or at a  Scottish  bona  fide  private  education
        institution which maintains satisfactory records of  enrolment  and
        attendance; or holds a sponsor licence under Tier 4 of the  points-
        based system (when implemented)".


68. It is further explained  that  a  United  Kingdom  listed  body  is  an
    institution that is not a United Kingdom recognized body but one  which
    provides full courses that lead to the award of a degree  by  a  United
    Kingdom recognised body.  Reference is made to the fact that the United
    Kingdom recognised bodies and United Kingdom listed bodies that are  on
    the DIUS website are also set out in statutory instruments  (para  55).
    Paras 65-69 deal with the date of award  of  the  qualification  (which
    must be within 12 months of applying).  Paras 70-81, so far as relevant
    here, state:

        "Documents we require


        70.      Paragraph 245AA (and 54 of Appendix A) of the  Immigration
             Rules state that we will only award points  when  an  applicant
             provides  the  specified  evidence  that   he/she   meets   the
             requirements for this category.

         71.     The evidential requirements for each scoring  section  are
             detailed in the application form.  The specified documents  are
             as follows:


             i)   original certificate of award; and


             ii)   original  letter  from  the  institution  at  which   the
               applicant studied towards  his/her  eligible  qualification;
               and


             iii) where an applicant is  unable  to  submit  their  original
               certificate of award because it has  not  yet  been  issued,
               he/she may submit the application without it.  However,  the
               letter from the institution must include  extra  information
               explaining the individual's circumstances; and


             iv)  original passport(s) or travel documents(s) containing the
               relevant grant(s) of leave in the  United  Kingdom  for  the
               period during which the applicant studied  and/or  conducted
               research for his/her eligible qualification  in  the  United
               Kingdom.

              1) Original certificate of award

        72.      This must be the applicant's original certificate  (not  a
             copy) and must clearly show the:

             .  applicant's name;

             .  title of the qualification; and

             .  name of the awarding body.

        73.      We will not accept provisional certificates.

             2) Original letter from the institution at which the  applicant
              studied

        74.      This letter must be an original letter (not  a  copy),  on
             the  official  letter-headed  paper  of  the   United   Kingdom
             institution at which the  applicant  studied  and  bearing  the
             official stamp of that institution.  It must have  been  issued
             by an authorised official of that institution and must  confirm
             the:

             .  applicant's name;

             . title of the qualification;

             . start and end dates of  the  applicant's  period/s  of  study
              and/or research for this qualification at the United  Kingdom
              institution; and

             . date of award (as defined above).

        75.       If  the  qualification  is  a  postgraduate  diploma   or
             certificate, the letter must also include:

             . confirmation that the qualification is equivalent to or above
              the level of a United Kingdom bachelor's degree.

        76.       If  the  qualification  is  an  HND   from   a   Scottish
             institution, the letter must also include:

             . confirmation that the qualification is at HND level  and  was
              studied at a Scottish institution.

             3) Extra information in original letter from the institution at
              which the applicant studied

        77.      When the applicant is unable to provide a  certificate  of
             award (for example, when the application  is  made  before  the
             applicant's graduation), this letter must also include:

           . details of the body awarding the  qualification; and

           . confirmation that  the  certificate  of  the  award   will  be
              issued.

             4) Original passport(s) or travel  document(s)  containing  the
             relevant grant(s) of leave in the United Kingdom for the period
             during which the applicant studied  and/or  conducted  research
             for his/her eligible qualification in the United Kingdom.

        78.      Applicants must send their original passport(s) or  travel
             document(s) with their application.

        79.      We will check the applicant's immigration  status  in  the
             United Kingdom throughout the whole  period  of  his/her  study
             and/or research in the United Kingdom.  To  do  this,  we  will
             cross-check the evidence provided in the application  with  the
             applicant's relevant passport(s) or  travel  document(s).  This
             check will enable us to establish that for the period of  study
             and/or research in the United Kingdom, the applicant  was  here
             as a:

             . student;

             . student nurse;

             . student re-sitting an examination;

             . student writing up a thesis; or

             . As a dependant of someone with leave  in  any  category  that
              allows dependants to join them in the United Kingdom.

        80.      If an applicant  who  is  in  the  United  Kingdom  cannot
             provide the passport(s) or travel  document(s)  containing  the
             relevant grant(s) of leave, we will attempt to  verify  his/her
             status in the United Kingdom during the period of study  and/or
             research by checking the electronic records we hold internally.


        81.      We will not award any points if the applicant has not sent
             us the relevant passport/s or travel document/s, and we  cannot
             establish his/her status during  the  period  of  study  and/or
             research in the United Kingdom by checking his/her  immigration
             history using our internal electronic records.  In  this  case,
             it will not be possible to award points in  this  area  and  we
             will refuse the application."

69. There is no express reference in this or the original  version  of  the
    Policy Guidance to the general grounds for refusal, although in  common
    with later versions it states - in a section dealing with  verification
    and other checks - that if a document is  considered  false,  "we  will
    refuse the application because the applicant does not  meet  the  funds
    requirements and because he/she has sent a false document"  (paras  23,
    28, also 21 of the second version).   And all  versions  starting  with
    version 3, dated 27 November 2008, contain a para 4 which states:

        "Application in all the points  based  system  categories  will  be
        subject to General Grounds for Refusal.  This means  that  even  if
        the applicant qualifies under the specific category  of  the  Rules
        under which he/she is  applying  to  come  here  (such  as  his/her
        previous immigration history) that  may  lead  to  the  application
        being refused."

70. The Policy Guidance provisions dealing with verification state:


         "Verification and other checks


         14. We aim to consider applications quickly. However, we must  also
         be  confident  that  applications  meet  the  requirements  of  the
         immigration rules, and that the information an  applicant  provides
         is a true reflection of his/her background.


         15. We will ask for a variety of verifiable documents to enable  us
         to consider the application.


         16. We may want to check  the  supporting  documents  an  applicant
         sends with his/her application. Therefore, he/she must ensure  that
         all the evidence comes from a source that can be clearly identified
         and that it can be independently confirmed as being genuine.


         17. There are two situations in which we will undertake a check:


          . verification checks - where we have reasonable doubts  that  the
            documents are genuine; or
          . other checks - where we carry out further checks, for example:


               o allegations - where we have received an allegation that an
                 applicant has made a false application; or
               o  additional  checks  -  where  we  have  doubts  about  an
                 application or the document sent with the application  but
                 the doubts are  not  serious  enough  for  us  to  make  a
                 verification check.


         Verification checks


         18. Where we have reasonable doubts that a  specified  document  is
         genuine we may want to verify  the  document  with  an  independent
         person or government agency.


         19. The purpose of these checks is  to  ensure  that  the  document
         provided is genuine and accurately reflects statements made in  the
         application. If the document is being used  as  evidence  to  score
         points, we also want to ensure that it entitles  the  applicant  to
         claim those points.


         20. Verification may delay our decision on  an  application  so  we
         only do it when there are clear reasons for it.


         Reasonable doubt


         21. There are many reasons  why  we  may  doubt  that  a  specified
         document is genuine and what we consider to be a  reasonable  doubt
         will depend on an individual  application.  However  our  judgments
         will be based on the facts we have.


         Outcome of verification check


         22. There are three possible outcomes of a verification check:


          . Document confirmed as genuine.  If  we  can  conclude  that  the
            document is genuine, we will consider the application as normal.


          . Document confirmed  as  false.  If  we  can  conclude  that  the
            document is false, we will refuse the  application,  whether  or
            not the document is essential to the application. If a  document
            is confirmed as false we will normally  refuse  the  application
            for more than one reason.


              For example, if an applicant sends us  a  bank  statement  to
              show that he/she has enough  funds  available,  and  we  have
              evidence that the statement is  false,  we  will  refuse  the
              application because the applicant does  not  meet  the  funds
              requirements and because he/she has sent a false document.


          . Verification check inconclusive. If we cannot  verify  that  the
            document is either genuine or false then we will  ignore  it  as
            evidence for scoring points. If the  applicant  has  sent  other
            specified documents as evidence for scoring the relevant points,
            we will consider these as normal. If the applicant has not  sent
            any other documents, we will award zero points in that area.


         Refusing applications without making further checks


         23. We may refuse an application without making verification checks
         in two circumstances:


           . Where we are concerned about a piece of evidence but  would  in
             any event refuse  the  application  for  other  reasons,  those
             reasons will form the basis of the refusal. We  will  not  make
             verification checks in these circumstances.  However,  we  will
             always verify passports if we doubt they are genuine.


           . Where there is evidence that provides a particular document  is
             false. If we can confirm that  a  document  is  false  we  will
             normally refuse the application for more than one  reason.  For
             example, if an applicant sends us a bank statement to show that
             he/she has enough funds available, and we  have  evidence  that
             the statement is false, we will refuse the application  because
             the applicant does not meet the funds requirement  and  because
             he/she has sent a false document.


         Other checks


         24. We will make other checks where, for example:


           . we have received an allegation that an  applicant  has  made  a
             false application; or


           . we have doubts about an application or the documents sent  with
             the application but these are not serious enough for us to make
             a verification check.


         25. The checks may delay our decision on an application so we  will
         only make them when we have clear reasons to do so.


         Allegations


         26. If we receive an allegation about a particular person,  company
         or document that relates to an application, we may make more checks
         to confirm that the application and all  the  information  provided
         are correct.


         Extra checks


         27. Sometimes we will have suspicions about a  document,  but  they
         will not be enough to  make  us  doubt  that  it  is  genuine.  For
         example, this may be  because  previous  verification  checks  have
         found that some supporting evidence is invalid and some is genuine,
         or where evidence provided contradicts information we already have.
         In these cases, we may carry out more checks.


         Outcome of check


         28. There are four possible outcomes of these checks:


          . Documents confirmed as genuine. If  we  can  conclude  that  the
            document is genuine, we will consider the application as normal.


          . Document confirmed  as  false.  If  we  can  conclude  that  the
            document is false, we will refuse the  application,  whether  or
            not the document is essential to the application. If a  document
            is confirmed as false we will normally  refuse  the  application
            for more than one reason. For example, if an applicant sends  us
            a bank statement to show that he/she has enough funds available,
            and we have evidence that the statement is false, we will refuse
            the application because the applicant does  to  meet  the  funds
            requirements and because he/she has sent a false document.



          . Check inconclusive. If we cannot verify  that  the  document  is
            either genuine or false then we will consider the application as
            if it is genuine.


          . Check  gives  us  cause  to  have  reasonable  doubt  about  the
            genuineness of a specified document. If  we  cannot  verify  the
            document is either genuine or false  but  as  a  result  of  the
            checks we find other reasons  to  doubt  the  genuineness  of  a
            particular  specified  document,  we  may  decide  to   make   a
            verification check.


         Procedure for verification and other checks


         29. The procedures for both verification checks  and  other  checks
         will usually be similar and will vary from case-to-case,  but  they
         may involve:


            .  checking  the  details  or  genuineness  of  documents  with
              employers, the relevant embassy  or  high  commission,  other
              government departments (in the United Kingdom and  overseas);
              and
            . checking the accuracy  and  authenticity  of  documents  with
              banks, universities and professional bodies.


         Standard procedure


         30. We will use a standard  form  to  record  the  results  of  our
         enquiries, we will normally wait for up to a maximum of four  weeks
         for the necessary information.


         32. If we make checks on an applicant who is self-employed we  will
         try to establish the business presence,  for  example  by  checking
         business and/or tax registration.


         33. We may request that our compliance team visits the  applicant's
         employer (if the applicant is currently a work  permit  holder)  or
         educational institution (if the applicant is a student)  before  we
         make a decision on the application."


71. There is also a separate section of the  UKBA  Immigration  Directorate
    Instructions (IDIs) that deals with the Refusal of Variation  of  Leave
    to Enter or Remain on General Grounds (Paragraph 322  HC  395)  (Ch.  9
    Section 4).  In 1.1. it is  stated  that  in  addition  to  refusal  on
    substantive grounds:


        "There are general grounds which need  to  be  taken  into  account
        before  granting  leave  to  remain  or  varying  leave  to  enter.
        Although a person may meet the requirement of the relevant category
        of the Rules consideration must also be given as to whether any  of
        the general grounds apply."


72.  Para  4  headed  "Paragraph  322(1A)  -  Deception  used  in   Current
    Application" deals with  false  representations,  false  documents  and
    material facts not disclosed and the need for  evidence.   Paras  4.11-
    4.12 states:


        "4.11     As  with  any  refusal  it  is   important   to   compile
              corroborative evidence to support the decision.  The  wording
              of paragraph 322(1A) states 'false representations have  been
              made or false documents have been submitted' i.e. the  burden
              of proof is on caseworkers (and not the applicant) to prove a
              false representation and that it was made for the purpose  of
              obtaining leave.  Whilst the standard of proof rests  on  the
              balance   of   probabilities,   for    matters    of    false
              representations and documents  it  is  a  higher  balance  of
              probabilities than normal.


        4.12.    In the case of false  representations  caseworkers  should
              clearly show that the  applicant's  representations  conflict
              with other evidence / previous application."

73. At 4.17 there is a  sub-head,  "Alternatives  to  refusing  on  general
    grounds":  at paras 4.18-4.19.1 the IDIs state:


        "4.18     Where  it  is  thought  that  a  document  is  false  but
              independent verification is not possible, or  disclosing  the
              verification  is  not  possible,  then   caseworkers   should
              consider refusing under the substantive immigration rules.


        4.19      Caseworkers  are  free  to  point   out   the   perceived
              inconsistencies in a document and assert that  it  cannot  be
              relied upon because  of  those  inconsistencies.   This  will
              provide the basis for a robust refusal  on  whatever  grounds
              the document has been provided to substantiate. e.g.


             4.19.1  Scenario 4


             An applicant for further  leave  to  remain  as  a  student  is
             required to show that they are able to maintain and accommodate
             themselves.  In doing so they produce a bank statement  showing
             that their level of funds is sufficient.


             Closer inspection of the statement  reveals  that  the  figures
             given for transactions do not add up to the statement  balance.
             Furthermore there are spelling mistakes on the document.


             The caseworker approaches the issuing authority to verify  that
             the document has been falsified but they are unable  to  supply
             the   caseworker   with   information   because   of   customer
             confidentiality issues.


             Because  independent  verification   cannot   be   sought   the
             caseworker cannot use paragraph 322(1A).


             Instead  the  caseworker  refuses  the  application  under  the
             substantive rules.  The refusal notice should  point  out  each
             error on the statement and state that the caseworker is  unable
             to  accept  it  as  evidence  of  finances  and  therefore  the
             application has not proven they can  maintain  and  accommodate
             themselves."


74. Para 16 heading "Linking  General  Conditions  and  Substantive  Rules"
    includes 16.5 - 16.6, which state:


        "16.5    Where the refusal is based  on  the  general  grounds  but
              there  is  a  link  between  the  general  ground   and   the
              substantive rules, the substantive rule should  be  added  to
              the reasons for refusal. e.g.


          16.6 Scenario 7b


              The student who is required to be enrolled  on  a  course  of
              study  has  provided  a   forged   enrolment   letter.    The
              application falls for refusal on  Paragraph  322(1A)  because
              they have used deception but also Paragraph  60(iii)  because
              they have failed to show they are enrolled  on  a  course  of
              study."

Case law on Tier 1 (Post-Study Work)

75. At the time of the hearing  there  were  no  reported  cases  from  the
    Tribunal dealing with Tier 1(Post Study Work) cases. However,  we  note
    that there have since been two  cases,  KAN  (Post-study  Work  -degree
    award required) India [2009] UKAIT 00022 and NA & Others (Tier 1 (Post-
    Study Work) - funds) [2009] UKAIT 00025. We did not consider we  needed
    to invite submissions from the parties on  the  significance  of  these
    cases to the present appeals, since neither deals with the points  that
    are in issue before us. Nevertheless they do serve as a helpful  source
    of reference concerning general features of  this  scheme  as  well  as
    Appendix A in particular.

Submissions

76. Mr Clarke dealt first with questions the Tribunal had asked the parties
    to address concerning the burden and standard of proof  in  respect  of
    para 322(1A) of the Immigration  Rules.  The  respondent  accepted,  he
    said, that in respect of general grounds  of  refusal,  the  burden  of
    proof lay on the respondent. Paragraph 322(1A) concerned an  allegation
    of false representations/documents.  As regards the standard  of  proof
    to be applied, the House of Lords had recently reiterated that there is
    no "sliding scale" or "heightened  civil  standard".  Rather,  as  Lord
    Hoffman described in Re: B (Children), para  13,  "there  is  only  one
    civil standard of proof and that is proof that the fact in  issue  more
    probably occurred than not."  There was a flexibility to the  standard,
    but, as Richards LJ had expressed it in R (N) v  Mental  Health  Review
    Tribunal (Northern Region) [2005] EWCA Civ 1605  [2008]  QB  468  497-8
    para 62, "the flexibility ... lies not in any adjustment to the  degree
    of probability required for an allegation to be proved ... but  in  the
    strength  or  quality  of  the  evidence  that  will  in  practice   be
    required...".  He urged us not to endorse the submission set out in the
    appellants' first skeleton argument which argued that when  allegations
    of  fraud  or  misrepresentation  were  made  the  standard  should  be
    "indistinguishable from the criminal standard of proof".  To  discharge
    the civil standard under para 322(1A) the respondent would need  cogent
    evidence; however that could be  drawn  by  looking  not  just  at  the
    documents but also at an array of other statements and  documents  that
    clearly pointed to the  conclusion  that  CCOL  during  2008  became  a
    factory for bogus PgDips in BM and IT and established the  respondent's
    case to the requisite standard.

77. Mr Clarke asked us to conclude that the CCOL had never run PgDips in BM
    or IT.  He said there were a number of "indicators"  pointing  strongly
    to that conclusion.  First there was  the  evidence  we  had  from  two
    senior, long-standing members of staff, Mr Malik and  Miss  Ullah,  who
    said that the college had not  run  such  courses.   In  such  a  small
    college, it was not possible for such courses to have run without  them
    knowing.  According to the appellants' evidence, the class  sizes  were
    20 to 35 and there were timetables displayed on notice boards. If  that
    were true, such courses would have been noticed by all  regular  staff.
    In addition, one of the teachers at the college said by Mr Raja to have
    taught him on a PgDip IT - Dr Karim - had said no such course  existed.
    Of the two tutors said by the first two appellants to have taught  them
    in 2008, one of them - Mr John Opoku -  was stated  by  Miss  Ullah  to
    have stopped teaching at the college sometime in 2007.

78.  A  second  indicator,  said  Mr  Clarke,  was  the  absence   of   any
    countervailing evidence.   There  was  a  deafening  silence  from  the
    college owners, Principals and tutors, past and present, said  to  have
    taught these courses.  The CCOL website Prospectus made no  mention  of
    such courses.  There was nothing at  all  about  such  courses  in  the
    promotional literature or in any of the materials found at the college.



79. A third indicator relied on by the respondent was the  absence  of  any
    accreditation.  Mr Clarke accepted that at the  relevant  time  it  was
    technically open to the college to award its own diplomas, but  in  all
    other known respects the college presented itself as offering  external
    awards through accredited courses.  The evidence indicated that in late
    2007/early 2008 the college had  attempted  to  set  up  an  accredited
    Postgraduate Diploma course in the form of a  Level  7  ILM  course  in
    Executive Management, but only a handful registered,  and,  because  of
    ILM withdrawing its accreditation after several months, no one was ever
    awarded this qualification. Further, the various statements made by  Mr
    Saif Ullah on behalf of the college in e-mail correspondence with  UKBA
    was inconsistent as to when the ILM course was said to  have  commenced
    and equivocal if not false as to what was  said  to  have  replaced  it
    after ILM's accreditation was withdrawn.

80. Another indicator was the absence of any designated course materials in
    the form of a syllabus, course outline, reading list,  examination  and
    written work specifications etc.  The materials presented by the  three
    appellants as evidence of their course materials  and  written  lecture
    notes and assignments had not stood up to scrutiny.

81. Against this background it was apparent, submitted Mr Clarke, that CCOL
    had never run PgDip courses and we should find that the respondent  had
    adduced cogent evidence to demonstrate this.

82. Mr Clarke submitted that in the light of all these considerations,  the
    consequences for the three appeals were straightforward.  The  evidence
    of all three appellants was not credible and should be rejected.   They
    had had every opportunity to put forward designated course materials of
    the sort one would expect to find on a PgDip course  or  proffer  other
    evidence to support their case, but had only been able to come up  with
    a random assortment  of  materials  mainly  cut  and  pasted  from  the
    internet.  It was inconceivable that they did not know that the courses
    they claimed to have attended  never  ran.   Accordingly  the  Tribunal
    should conclude that the respondent was right to refuse  each  of  them
    under para 322(1A).  Since they clearly had  known  about  the  use  of
    false documents, they had also used  deception.   The  Tribunal  should
    make a finding on this fact, since it affected the applicability  of  a
    separate general ground of refusal, para 320(7B), that could be applied
    in the event that any of these three  applicants  were  to  apply  from
    abroad for entry clearance.

83. Mr Clarke submitted that we should also find that the three  appellants
    had failed to meet the substantive requirements of para  245Z,  a  rule
    under which the burden of proof was on the  appellants.   Even  if  the
    Tribunal did not accept the respondent's case on para 322(1A),  because
    for example it did not  consider  the  respondent  had  discharged  the
    burden of proof, we should nevertheless find  that,  because  bogus  Pg
    Dips in IT and BM were issued by CCOL or other agents,  the  appellants
    could not show  they  were  entitled  to  be  awarded  any  points  for
    "Attributes" based  on  Postgraduate  Diploma  qualifications,  as  the
    latter were not legitimate. Para 245Z(e) could not be satisfied  simply
    by the production of a piece of paper.  There had to have been study at
    an appropriate level in order for the paper to represent a reality.

84. Mr Macdonald submitted that particularly since the three  appeals  were
    intended to be test cases it was important for the Tribunal to be aware
    of the policy and legislative background.  As a result of  the  way  in
    which the government had introduced first the IGS scheme and  then  the
    Tier 1 (Post-Study Work) scheme, a loophole opened up in May 2007 which
    enabled colleges to award  their  own  Postgraduate  Diplomas  and  for
    students to then rely on these in order to qualify (from June 2008) for
    Post-Study Work.  This had represented a fundamental change  in  policy
    from the position before, whereby students came to the UK for study and
    could not switch to employment categories.  Unsurprisingly this had led
    to a scramble on the part of colleges catering for foreign students  to
    run qualifying courses and had enabled unscrupulous individuals to take
    advantage of the situation. The respondent accepted that  CCOL  had  in
    the past been a bona fide college and that even up until  the  time  it
    closed down in December 2008 there  continued  to  be  genuine  courses
    being  run  there,  with  many  genuine  students.   But   unscrupulous
    fraudsters had got a foothold there mid-way through 2008.

85. The three cases boiled down, submitted  Mr  Macdonald,  to  two  simple
    questions.  First, were PgDips in BM and IT being offered  by  CCOL  in
    2007/2008 as claimed?  Second, if they were, did these three appellants
    undertake such courses?  As to the first question,  the  written,  oral
    and documentary evidence established that these courses were run.   The
    respondent had not discharged  the  burden  of  proof  of  showing  the
    documents submitted by the three appellants were false.

86. As regards the standard of proof, the allegations made in these appeals
    had consequences so serious that the respondent  could  only  discharge
    the legal burden of proof on the basis of very cogent evidence  similar
    to that needed in a criminal trial.  The serious consequences  included
    potential criminal liability and a  potential  long-term  re-entry  ban
    under para 320(7A). It was clear from Lord Carswell's  observations  in
    Re:Doherty that where the consequences were serious  there  had  to  be
    critical or heightened examination and scrutiny. The evidence relied on
    by the  respondent  in  this  case  did  not  exhibit  this  heightened
    scrutiny.

87. The respondent, said Mr Macdonald, relied heavily on the evidence  from
    three staff at the college (Mr Malik, Miss Ullah and to a lesser extent
    Dr Karim), but they freely admitted that although the college  was  not
    large there were a lot of lectures and classes running within  quite  a
    small building and  it  was  not  a  place  where  staff  and  students
    lingered.  Mr Malik for example, had a job elsewhere.   None  of  these
    three worked more than  three  days  a  week.   Miss  Ullah  had  given
    forthright, even bombastic evidence, but it had to be asked whether she
    had not exaggerated her own position and the extent of her knowledge of
    what went on in the college outside her own ABE  courses.  We  had  not
    heard from other persons as being Heads of Department.  It was wrong of
    Mr Clarke to suggest that the college website made no mention of  PgDip
    courses:  it did.  The website and DVD had also to be read with caution
    as they seemed to be based on events prior to mid 2008.

88. Mr Macdonald urged us not to let the cloud of suspicions  hanging  over
    Mr Saif Ullah distract our attention from the clear evidence  contained
    in the e-mail correspondence that  the  college  had  taken  legitimate
    steps to commence an ILM Level 7 course, not achieved until March 2008,
    and it  may  well  have  been  that  the  college  had  begun  its  own
    Postgraduate Diplomas in 2007 with a view to incorporating them into an
    accredited award, until ILM negotiations broke down.  Probably the  ILM
    course was to be the flagship course, but when that did  not  work  out
    the college reverted or converted to running its own courses.  It might
    look "dodgy", but it was probably perfectly legal under the  new  Post-
    Study Work Rules.  At some point unscrupulous fraudsters were  able  to
    take advantage of this situation.

89. Just as Mr Clarke had set out several "indicators" which he said should
    be taken as pointing towards a conclusion of  fraud,  so  Mr  Macdonald
    identified several  indicators  which  he  considered  pointed  to  the
    opposite conclusion.  First there was the student ID log which had been
    seized during  the  raid  on  2 December  2008.   There  were  several
    individuals entered there as being students on  an  "ILM"  or  ILM-PGD"
    course (numbers 1248, 1249, 1250, 1251  and  1255,  1270,  1306,  1383,
    1436, 1477, 1481, 1489, 1494, 1498).  Second, given the introduction of
    the IGS scheme in 2007 and public discussion about the government plans
    to set up a Points Based System, it would be very surprising  if  CCOL,
    like many other colleges around this time,  were  not  trying  to  help
    young students move from the world of study to the world of  work.   It
    would have been a big draw for the college.

90. Turning to the second question (did the three appellants  attend?),  Mr
    Macdonald conceded that the quality of their evidence did vary, but  he
    asked us to deal with each individually.  None of these appellants  was
    the type of persons said by Miss Ullah to be queuing up after hours  to
    see Mr Saif Ullah  and  Mr  Kashif  Hussain.   If  they  had  not  been
    attending as they claimed they would not have been able to give a  good
    description of the layout of the college and the number of  rooms  etc.
    They had been able to specify when they attended and the names  of  the
    people who taught them.  Mr Clarke had been at pains to point out  that
    the course materials they had produced did not appear  to  suggest  the
    degrees they took were up to Level 7 standard.  Yes, there was a lot of
    copying of internet materials, but the question  was  not  whether  the
    CCOL courses were high quality courses or whether the students on  them
    plagiarised,  but  whether  the  courses  and  the  materials  produced
    relating to them were genuine.  If Mr Clarke was right  and  the  three
    appellants had set out to concoct a set  of  course  materials,  surely
    they would have done a better job.  The  materials  of  the  first  two
    appellants included lengthy handwritten notes; was it  to  be  believed
    that they had prepared handwritten notes after the event just to lend a
    veneer of credibility to a completely incredible story?

91. The Tribunal should be extremely wary, urged Mr Macdonald,  about  gaps
    in the evidence.  The  student  ID  list  produced  was  clearly  quite
    defective both as a historic  record  of  students  and  as  a  current
    record.  Mr Malik's evidence was that there were separate records  kept
    for overseas students, who must have formed the bulk of  the  college's
    students.  The evidence given  suggesting  that  twelve  digit  student
    numbers were not normally if ever used needed scrutiny,  since  it  was
    clear that for some purposes only the last four digits were  used.   Of
    the students who were known from the ILM records to  have  enrolled  on
    the ILM course, only two (1250 and 1251) were not  on  the  student  ID
    lists.  Both Miss Ullah  and  Mr  Malik  said  they  had  handed  their
    attendance records to someone employed on reception or who came in from
    outside to do IT work, who then put them on a  computer  list,  but  no
    such list has  come  to  light.   The  respondent  had  confirmed  that
    materials seized included hard drives of some computers.  Yet they  had
    not divulged what they contained.  The investigating team  appeared  to
    have done a very poor job following-up on leads and ensuring  that  all
    with  relevant  knowledge  about  the   college   had   been   properly
    interviewed.  In short, the cases lacked hard evidence.   The  Tribunal
    should find the respondent had not discharged  the  burden  of  proving
    false   documents    or    representations    under    para    322(1A).



92. As regards para 245Z, the new Points Based System of  which  it  formed
    part did not envisage refusal on 245Z grounds based on fraud  or  false
    documents except where separate grounds of refusal were seen to  apply.
    The whole idea of a points based system was to make decisions based  on
    "box-ticking". If the respondent believed  there  was  fraud  or  false
    documents, then he had to take the route  set  out  under  the  general
    grounds of refusal under which he bore the legal burden of  proof;  but
    if the general grounds were not proved, then there  was  no  basis  for
    refusing an applicant's eligibility under para 245Z  on  the  basis  of
    fraud or false documents.  All  that  mattered  under  para  245Z  with
    reference to Appendix A was that those in the college with authority to
    do so had awarded a Postgraduate Diploma.  Further the Policy  Guidance
    contained its own procedures for verifying documents.  If there  was  a
    reasonable suspicion documents were false, inquiries had  to  be  made.
    The premium was on formal compliance.

93. Mr Macdonald said he accepted that if the respondent was considered  to
    have succeeded  in  discharging  the  onus  of  proof  under  paragraph
    322(1A), then the appellants must also fail under para  245Z,  but  the
    two rules had to dovetail.  Para 322 was a very draconian power: it did
    not just apply to third parties.  There would be no point  having  that
    power if every case  involving  falsity  could  be  refused  under  the
    substantive Rule.

94. It would be quite wrong, submitted Mr  Macdonald,  to  draw  inferences
    from an absence of evidence and from, for example, the absence  of  any
    persons (apart from Dr Karim) said by  the  three  appellants  to  have
    taught them.  The Tribunal should avoid speculation.


95. Towards the end of the hearing the Tribunal requested the respondent to
    furnish further information on whether any of the  students  registered
    on the ILM Level 7 courses at CCOL who applied for Tier 1 leave  relied
    on PgDips in the name of CCOL. The respondent's note in reply dated  10
    June 2009  stated that the respondent  had  checked  the  names  of  37
    students [correcting an earlier reference  to  38  students]  on  ILM's
    registration record against its spreadsheet log of applicants for leave
    relying on PgDips in the name of the  college.   This  had  revealed  a
    match in seven cases. The respondent  had  contacted  ILM  for  further
    details but no response had been  received.  The  respondent  had  also
    searched GCID (General Case Information Database) using the 37 names to
    provide details of immigration history/current immigration status.  Due
    to time constraints Tier 1 staff were unable to use Home  Office  files
    for in-depth  analysis.  Despite  a  consequent  lack  of  detail,  the
    respondent considered that his analysis showed that it appeared that at
    least 5 and possibly 7 students registered with ILM at CCOL had applied
    for Tier 1 leave using CCOL PgDips.


96. In reply to this note the appellants' representative submitted that the
    material referred to in the note  should  be  seen  as  supporting  the
    appellants. The fact that there were  students relying upon PgDips from
    CCOL who were registered with ILM showed that CCOL had created its  own
    Postgraduate certificates for business studies, genuinely taking  place
    in the college. It also showed that the student ID  card  register  was
    not an accurate or reliable guide to those who had actually enrolled in
    the college. The absence of proper enrolment or attendance  records  at
    the college was regrettable, but the reason for  their  absence  was  a
    matter for speculation and "genuine students should not have  to  carry
    the  can  for  either  the  disappearance  of  records  or  for   their
    ineffectiveness".

Our decision

Para 322(1A)

97. Para 322(1A) is a general ground of refusal in mandatory form. It is  a
    relatively  recent  addition  to  the  provisions  of  Part  9  of  the
    Immigration Rules dealing with refusal of variation of leave  to  enter
    or remain (having come into effect on 29 February 2008), although there
    have been long-standing provisions governing entry clearance in similar
    form and also a discretionary general ground of refusal  using  similar
    language at para 322(2). It is settled law that a representation can be
    false even if not fraudulent. As stated  by  Staughton  LJ  in  Tahzeem
    Akhtar v Immigration Appeal Tribunal  [1991] Imm AR, 326 at 332  (which
    dealt with para 13(a) of HC 169):

         "...a false representation is one that  is  inaccurate  or  not  in
         accordance with the facts. I say that, first, from the ordinary use
         of the English language and, secondly, because it seems to me  that
         that interpretation squares more easily with the words in the  rule
         "whether or not to the holder's knowledge". I agree that  there  is
         an alternative explanation for those words being in the rule,  that
         is to say, to  cover  the  case  when  somebody  else  has  made  a
         fraudulent representation. But to my mind  they  were  inserted  to
         show that representations, either by the holder or by anybody else,
         need not have been fraudulent..."

The burden and standard of proof

98. In JC (part 9, HC 395 - burden of proof) China [2007] UKAIT  00027  the
    Tribunal reconfirmed its view that in respect of the general grounds of
    refusal the burden of proof rests on the respondent.  That is also  the
    position that the respondent takes, as  can  be  seen  from  the  IDIs,
    Section 4, Chapter 9: see above para  71.  However, in JC although  the
    Tribunal cited with approval the statement of Richards LJ in  R  (AN  &
    Anor) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ 1605
    that there is only a single civil standard, it also approved an earlier
    Tribunal decision which had made reference to allegations of  deception
    or other criminal conduct requiring a standard of proof "at the  higher
    end of the spectrum of balance of probability". In  the  light  of  the
    recent decisions  of  the  House  of  Lords  in  Re  B  (Children)  and
    Re:Doherty the reference to a "spectrum of balance of probability" must
    be seen as incorrect, since it wrongly suggests that the civil standard
    of proof is a variable one.  As their Lordships have clarified,  citing
    with approval the same reference by Richards LJ in R (AN & Anor) to  "a
    single standard of proof ... flexible in it application", the only  way
    in  which  the  greater  seriousness  of  the  allegation  or  of   the
    consequences is of relevance is in relation to the necessary quality of
    the evidence.  Just as JC must now be read  with  this  correction,  so
    must the Home Office IDIs which at para 4.11 currently state (wrongly):

        "Whilst  the  standard  of  proof   rests   on   the   balance   of
        probabilities, for matters of false representation and documents it
        is a higher balance of probabilities than normal."

99. The Tribunal asked the parties prior to the hearing to make submissions
    on the question of whether, given that the CCOL investigations  by  the
    joint police/UKBA  team  had  threatened  more  than  one  person  with
    prosecution, the standard of  proof  applied  should  be  the  criminal
    standard of beyond reasonable doubt.  Neither  party  dealt  with  this
    question squarely in their skeleton arguments, although the appellants'
    skeleton argument, in the context of an analysis of Re: B(Children) and
    Re:Doherty, did submit that:

        "... given  the  very  serious,  indeed  criminal,  nature  of  the
        allegations being made by the  Respondent,  and  the  very  serious
        consequences  for  the  Appellants  were  the  allegations  to   be
        established, the burden  is  upon  the  Respondent  to  prove  such
        allegations with evidence  of  such  cogency  that,  for  practical
        purposes,  it  is  indistinguishable  from  that  which  would   be
        proffered and considered  appropriate  to  discharge  the  criminal
        standard of proof"

      and Mr Macdonald took up the same theme in his submissions before  us.
    Mr Clarke submitted before us that the criminal standard of proof would
    be inappropriate.

100. We cannot agree with Mr Macdonald that  the  allegations  made  by  the
    respondent in deciding to refuse  the  appellants  under  para  322(1A)
    should be seen as requiring  evidence  "appropriate  to  discharge  the
    criminal standard of proof".  That is  not  merely  because  there  was
    nothing before us to show that anyone other than  those  in  charge  of
    CCOL (i.e. non-students] faced  criminal  prosecution.   It  is  rather
    because of the nature of Part 9 of the Immigration Rules. Part 9  deals
    with grounds for refusal based on various types of  wrongdoing  on  the
    part of applicants.  The wrongdoing is not  defined  in  terms  of  any
    criminality,  but  by  reference  to  abuse  of  various   aspects   of
    immigration controls:  see JC.  The  subject-matter  of  the  types  of
    wrong conduct defined in Part 9 of the Immigration  Rules  and  certain
    criminal offences may overlap, but that does not mean the former is  to
    be treated as criminal. In addition, refusal based on such grounds does
    not carry penal consequences. As Mr Clarke pointed out,  refusal  under
    Part 9  of  the  Immigration  Rules  does  not  inherently  deprive  an
    applicant of any right or privilege in  the  same  way  as  a  criminal
    conviction  (for  an  imprisonable  offence)  does  (through  potential
    deprivation of liberty).

101. However, we do  agree  with  Mr  Macdonald  that  the  consequences  of
    refusal under Part 9 can be serious and that this is certainly true for
    persons such as the three appellants who, depending of findings of fact
    made by the Tribunal, may find themselves,  if  removed  from  the  UK,
    faced with a 5 - 10 year re-entry ban under para 320(7B)  (albeit  para
    320(7B) and (7C) contain exemptions designed,  inter  alia,  to  ensure
    compliance with an applicant's human rights). Whilst we would note that
    Lord Hoffman in Re:B (Children) emphasised that the seriousness of  the
    consequences do not require a different standard of proof, we do accept
    that for the respondent to satisfy us he has discharged the  burden  of
    proof on him on the balance of probabilities he would, in  the  context
    of this type of case, need to furnish evidence of  sufficient  strength
    and quality and he (and the Tribunal) would need to  subject  it  to  a
    "critical", "anxious" and "heightened" scrutiny.

102. Such a requirement does  not  impose  any  rigid  formal  rule  on  the
    Tribunal circumscribing the range and scope of the evidence to which we
    may have regard.  It does not in particular require us to be  satisfied
    that the CCOL certificates for an award of PgDip in BM and IT  as  sent
    by the three appellants (and a large number of other foreign nationals)
    were forgeries or documents failing to bear the correct  college  stamp
    or signature.  As already explained,  we  did  not  have  any  decisive
    evidence on that question. However, as Mr  Clarke  correctly  submitted
    (without demur from Mr Macdonald) the Tribunal is not bound  by  strict
    rules of evidence and is entitled to have regard  not  only  to  direct
    witness evidence but an array of other statements and  documents.   The
    Tribunal is not, for example, confined to  evidence  tested  by  cross-
    examination (Khawaja [1983] UKHL 8, para 111), nor  is  it  obliged  to
    disregard written statements by  witnesses  not  available  for  cross-
    examination or  documents  not  supplied  by  direct  written  or  oral
    evidence as to the circumstances in  which  they  came  into  existence
    (Khawaja, para 125).

103. Before turning to give our assessment of the witnesses  who  gave  oral
    evidence, we remind ourselves of the fact that the respondent does  not
    allege that the college was a  wholly  bogus  college.   The  Operation
    Asterion report concluded that whilst the  team  who  carried  out  the
    investigation into college bona fides was satisfied  that  the  college
    had never awarded genuine PgDips, nevertheless:

        "As there was evidence of English language classes running and  the
        lecturer [Ms Rapacz] was able to provide evidence of  her  students
        and attendance, it cannot be determined that [CCOL]  was  a  wholly
        bogus  establishment,  but  it  is  concluded  that  it  is   semi-
        legitimate."


Witnesses for the respondent

104. Mr Macdonald did not seek to challenge the credibility of the evidence
    given by Mr Stewart, Mr Fletcher, Miss Jackson, or Mr Malik.  Whilst he
    did not challenge Miss Ullah's truthfulness  either,  he  did  maintain
    that her evidence was exaggerated and in some respects unreliable.   We
    consider that both Mr Malik and Miss Ullah were witnesses of truth.  We
    had been advised by Mr Clarke earlier that both had freely made written
    statements to the police and  the  respondent  but  were  reluctant  to
    become involved in proceedings.  Mr Malik chose nevertheless to attend.
    He gave his evidence in a  straightforward  way  and  was  able  to  be
    precise about his own role in CCOL and how he combined his duties as IT
    support person and teacher in the IT Department heading the ACP courses
    and a BSc accredited by the University of Sunderland.  It was apparent,
    however, that he had limited knowledge about the college's  filing  and
    records systems:  the contrast between his precise description  of  how
    he kept his own student attendance records and course  particulars  and
    his  uncertain  answers  to  questions  about   whether   the   college
    administration kept separate files  for overseas students was striking.



105. Miss Ullah had informed the respondent prior to the  hearing  that  she
    did not wish to attend the hearing as she was reluctant to be  involved
    in court proceedings. As already noted, following a request made by  Mr
    Macdonald, the Tribunal issued a witness summons.  When she attended in
    compliance with that summons  she  confirmed  that  she  had  made  her
    statements to the police and the respondent freely and that  she  stood
    by them.  We found Miss Ullah an  impressive  witness.   She  gave  her
    evidence in a forthright,  confident  manner  and  dealt  well  with  a
    diverse range of questions  from  counsel  and  ourselves.   The  brief
    statement she had given the police  shortly  after  their  visit  in  2
    December 2008 had provided only a sketchy  account,  but  in  her  more
    recent statement to the respondent and in her evidence to the  Tribunal
    she was able to  fill  that  out  considerably  and  make  the  context
    clearer.  On certain matters her evidence was imprecise, e.g. when  she
    referred to the fact that in the last few months of 2008 there  were  a
    "lot of people" seen coming into the college after 5  p.m.  to  see  Mr
    Kashif Hussain and Mr Noman. Her estimates of student numbers were also
    lower than most others. But in general we  do  not  consider  that  she
    sought to exaggerate or profess knowledge about college affairs she did
    not have.

106. We need to address the matter concerning Miss Ullah's position  at  the
    college.  Whilst not directly challenging her  evidence,  Mr  Macdonald
    did suggest at several points that  it  was  odd  she  should  describe
    herself as "Head" of the Business Department when no one else described
    themselves as Head of Department and her name was not on the website of
    CCOL teachers.  However, it was incorrect of him  to  say  no-one  else
    described themselves as "Head" of a Department at  CCOL:  Miss  Rapacz,
    the English teacher  interviewed,  described  herself  as  running  her
    department (bundle  E,  p.36)  and  Elena  Ryabinova,  another  teacher
    interviewed, refers to Miss Rapacz as Head  of  the  Department  (ibid,
    p.42). And we accept Miss Ullah's evidence that her name did appear  on
    the college website for some period of time and  was  on  it  in  early
    December when she  was  interviewed  by  officers  from  the  Operation
    Asterion team. She explained that the website  was  updated  frequently
    and that, for reasons unknown to her, her name was removed from it.  It
    is clear to us from the detailed evidence that she gave  regarding  her
    time at CCOL that she did run the  courses  as  described  by  her.  Mr
    Malik, who we found to be a  witness  of  truth,  also  confirmed  Miss
    Ullah's position at CCOL. Miss Ullah  was  not  asked  why  she  called
    herself "Head" of the Business Department. This  may  have  been  self-
    styled or a title given to her, but in either  event  we  consider  the
    challenge to her credibility, based  on  her  name  not  being  on  the
    website       now,       of       very       little       significance.



The three appellants

107. The only witnesses called by Mr Macdonald were  the  three  appellants.
    In evaluating their evidence we bear in mind that, having  found  their
    appeals chosen to be the three to be heard together as part of a  "test
    case", it cannot have been easy for them to  face  lengthy  questioning
    from experienced Counsel and a senior panel.  We also bear in mind that
    the documentary evidence they produced included in respect of  each  of
    them a CCOL PgDip award certificate and accompanying "To  Whom  It  May
    Concern" and "transcript of Academic Record" letters. It also  included
    in respect of Miss Akbar and Mr Raja, receipts for fees paid bearing  a
    CCOL stamp. At the same time we bear in mind that  each was allowed  to
    be present throughout the proceedings, so that both  Miss  Thirakaluthy
    and Mr Raja were present to hear Miss Akbar give evidence and  Mr  Raja
    was present to hear Miss Thirakaluthy; that they have  known  for  some
    time that the respondent disputed their claims to be  genuine  students
    or to have attended PgDip courses at CCOL, so that they and their legal
    representatives had ample time to retrieve and check through  materials
    from their claimed courses before submitting them; and that  the  award
    certificates and other documents on CCOL notepaper or  bearing  a  CCOL
    stamp have been very much called into question by the respondent.

108. Miss Akbar was able to describe the layout of the college  sufficiently
    to satisfy us that she had  actually  been  inside  it.   Beyond  that,
    however, we find her evidence  seriously  wanting.   Her  evidence  was
    internally consistent and she was able to give rough  figures  for  the
    number of students on her course and  about  the  number  of  subjects,
    exams and assignments she did.  But her description lacked  detail  and
    we gained the strong impression that she was far  too  ready  to  avoid
    explaining why her coursework materials were deficient by  recourse  to
    the convenient reply that they were what her teachers had given her.

109. Given that Miss Akbar based so much of her claim to have studied  on  a
    PgDip at CCOL on the contents  of  coursework  and  materials  she  had
    submitted, we think it particularly significant to note precisely  what
    they comprised.  She was  adamant  in  reply  to  Mr  Clarke  that  the
    materials she had submitted at pp. 72-139 of her bundle represented the
    entirety of the course handouts her teachers had given  her.   We  note
    that the course concerned was said by her to be a PgDip running for two
    terms - the first commencing in January 2008  and  the  second  at  the
    beginning of May 2008.  We note that amongst these handouts  there  was
    no curriculum, syllabus,  course  outline,  timetable,  reading  lists,
    written style requirements, or the like.  We find far-fetched her claim
    that on such a course her teachers would not have  given  her  and  the
    other students such materials but simply relied on posting them on  the
    college notice board.

110.  According  to  Miss  Akbar  her  coursework  had  included  two   main
    assignments and a further ten to  fifteen  shorter  ones.   These,  she
    said, had all been marked by her teachers.  Yet despite being  able  to
    produce (what she described as) a complete set of course materials, she
    was only able  to  produce  two  assignments.   Neither  of  these  had
    anything specifically to identify them as the work of  a  CCOL  student
    doing a PgDip BM assignment or as work that had been marked by  a  CCOL
    teacher. Asked whether her assignments were ever returned to  her  with
    marks and/or comments, she said they were not and that her teachers had
    given her no feedback, written or  oral,  and  had  simply  posted  the
    results on the notice board.  Taken in  isolation  we  can  just  about
    envisage a PgDip course so badly taught that students  were  not  given
    any feedback on assignments but, in the context of her  evidence  as  a
    whole, we consider this claim simply added to the picture of a  witness
    who was unable to give a credible account of being a genuine student on
    a PgDip course.

111. Despite her claim to have studied at CCOL for eight months  Miss  Akbar
    was unable to produce a student ID card.  She said she had  never  been
    given one.  Whilst we had evidence from Mr Malik and  Miss  Ullah  that
    occasionally students did not have ID cards, we bear in mind that  both
    emphasised that this was rare.  Her name did not appear on any  student
    records seized during the Operation Asterion visit.

112. Miss Thirakaluthy's evidence was  even  more  unsatisfactory.   On  her
    evidence she had already  studied  for  and  successfully  completed  a
    degree in Business Administration (BBA)  from  Stratford  College.   We
    would therefore have expected her to have a relatively good idea  about
    the standards of work involved in pursuing  a  PgDip  in  BM.   In  her
    written statement she was definite that all the  course  materials  and
    handouts she had submitted were "various lecture handouts" produced  by
    the college or as part of its CCOL PgDip BM course.  However,  she  was
    quickly forced to admit under cross-examination that this was far  from
    being the case.  A lot  of  them,  she  conceded  at  one  point,  were
    documents she herself had downloaded from the internet and printed off.
    At another point she said she was unable to distinguish between her own
    downloaded materials and ones given as part of the course.  Some  pages
    of the materials in her bundle bore download dates in 2009, long  after
    her purported PgDip BM course was said to have finished.  Some  of  her
    handouts appeared more in the  nature  of  promotional  materials  than
    lecture handouts.  Like Miss Akbar, even though she was able to produce
    a considerable number of lecture  handouts  (albeit  not  in  her  case
    purporting to be a complete set because, she said,  she  had  not  kept
    them all), she had assembled what she could in a panic. None included a
    curriculum, syllabus, course outline, timetable, reading lists, written
    work, style requirements, or the like. We  find  such  claims  to  lack
    credibility. She plainly had ample time  and  opportunity  to  assemble
    relevant course materials and we find her explanations for the lack  of
    the aforementioned items wholly unsatisfactory.

113. Miss Thirakaluthy said that her course had included a  dissertation  of
    some 10,000 words on the subject of "Tourism in  Mauritius",  her  home
    country. She had submitted it, it had been marked, but she did not have
    a copy.  Initially she said she still had a copy of it on  her  desktop
    computer.  Asked why she had not therefore produced it, she first  said
    it did not cross her mind.   Several  questions  later  she  said   her
    desktop that had crashed.  Later on, in reply  to  questions  from  the
    panel, she explained that in her bedsit she did not have a desk and had
    operated her desktop on the floor. We consider  that  on  this  subject
    Miss Thirakaluthy was floundering and simply unable  to  give  truthful
    answers.  We consider that if she had in truth completed a dissertation
    for this work on  tourism  in  her  own  country  she  would  have  had
    particular reasons to retain a hard copy or arrange to have a copy made
    of the one she claimed to have submitted.

114.  It  transpired  further  that  some  of  the  materials  submitted  as
    handwritten notes taken at CCOL lectures and  tutorials  were  not  her
    own.  Some other notes were her own but turned out  to  relate  to  the
    course she took at Stratford College.  Some had dates  written  in  the
    top right hand corner that had been altered from  "07"  to  "08".   She
    could not explain why those alterations had  been  made.  We  recognise
    that students may sometimes  borrow  and  copy  notes  taken  by  other
    students, in the event for example of absence through  illness  from  a
    particular class, but we do not find Miss Thirakaluthy's notes were  of
    this kind.

115. It was put to Miss Thirakaluthy by Mr Clarke that, given  the  numerous
    shortcomings in the quality and level of the material she said had been
    given to her as lecture handouts,  she must have  worried  whether  her
    teachers knew what they were doing.  She said she considered that  they
    were reliable.  The college was running  perfectly,  she  said  at  one
    point.  Given her claim to have studied for  and  obtained  a  business
    degree at an institution  in  Stratford,  East  London,  we  find  that
    strains credulity and do not accept this as the truth.

116. On the strength of her ability to give a  relatively  accurate  account
    of the layout of the college and its classrooms,  we  are  prepared  to
    accept that, like Miss Akbar, Miss Thirakaluthy had  been  inside  CCOL
    premises at some point, but apart from that we find her evidence highly
    unsatisfactory and we do not consider  that  she  was  ever  a  genuine
    student there.  Despite claiming to have  studied  at  CCOL  for  eight
    months, she was unable to produce a student ID card (she said  she  was
    never issued one) and her name did not appear on  any  student  records
    seized during the Operation Asterion visit.  As noted in respect of  Mr
    Malik and Miss Ullah, not all students had ID cards, but both  accepted
    that it was rare not to have one.

117. We turn to the evidence of Mr Raja. We are prepared to accept  that  he
    too may have been inside CCOL at some point: he also was able to give a
    reasonably accurate  account  of  its  topography.   According  to  his
    evidence, before enrolling at CCOL for a PgDip in  IT  he  had  already
    successfully completed a BSc and a Masters in IT.  We are bound to  say
    we have doubts about the validity of his previous degrees  because  the
    certificates awarding them were not in the same name as appeared on his
    passport or on his CCOL certificate. We did not  find  his  attempt  to
    explain that at all satisfactory. But for the purposes of  this  appeal
    we  shall  assume  there  is  some  legitimate  explanation  for  these
    differences.   Like  Miss  Akbar's  and  Miss   Thirakaluthy's   course
    materials, those he submitted did not include any curriculum, syllabus,
    reading lists, written work style  requirements  etc.   Like  them,  he
    claimed - implausibly - that all these  matters  were  covered  by  his
    tutors purely orally.  However unlike the other two appellants  he  did
    produce a timetable.  In our view it only added to  other  difficulties
    we had with his evidence since it referred to "semesters" whereas there
    has been nothing reliable shown to us from the CCOL website or anywhere
    else to suggest that "semester" as opposed to "term" was a word used by
    the college to describe the segmentation  of  its  academic  year  (the
    website entries produced to us state that the  CCOL  calendar  year  is
    divided into 3 terms and "we conduct all course a the college to fit in
    with this format").

118. Mr Raja said that he had  been  required  as  part  of  the  course  to
    produce around sixteen assignments in all and that  he  had  only  kept
    copies of two.  Asked to explain how  both  of  these  appeared  to  be
    straight reproductions of entries from a Swedish internet  website  and
    how both his answers were in identical wording and font to the  website
    entries, Mr Raja agreed that this was where  he  had  found  them,  but
    insisted that this was what he had been told to do by his teacher.   He
    was pressed to explain how, given that his assignments were mere copies
    of website material, he had done anything  "value-added"  to  them.  He
    first said that the skill dimension to it lay  in  typing  the  Swedish
    website's wording himself.  Several questions  later  he  modified  his
    stance to say that "variants" of his answers were  contained  on  a  CD
    which he had submitted along with the written assignment (but which  he
    had not been able to produce to us). Nevertheless he continued to claim
    that the written assignment answers were answers to the  question  that
    had been set by his tutor.  When asked to explain why, if that was  the
    case, his answer had simply copied a model  answer  which  left  actual
    numerical values blank (so they simply read "[     ]", he was unable to
    offer any coherent reply.  Later on he began to say that  the  solution
    he  had  produced  for  the  second  assignment  consisted  of  a  Java
    programming language which when typed brought  up  boxes  and  columns.
    Elements of what he said (e.g. the reference to  the  Java  programming
    language) made sense, but his attempts to link them  together  made  no
    sense at all - nor did Mr Macdonald seek to persuade us that they  did.
    We conclude that Mr Raja was desperately inventing answers as  he  went
    along.

119. In his  written  statement  Mr  Raja  was  clear  in  stating  that  he
    considered the PgDip course he claimed to have attended at CCOL  to  be
    of "excellent quality".   Yet  faced  with  questions  from  Mr  Clarke
    highlighting  the  significant  number  of  course   materials   simply
    reproduced from the internet websites, some  of  it  at  an  elementary
    level, he altered his position to saying that he had  realised  it  was
    not very satisfactory but that he had put up with it because he  needed
    a  diploma  from  a  listed  college.   Like  Miss   Akbar   and   Miss
    Thirakaluthy, he was a student who claimed he had not been issued  with
    an ID card, despite  studying  for  some  eight  months  and  paying  a
    considerable sum of money (�2,500) in his case.  Like them,  no  record
    of his name has been found  in  any  of  the  college  records  seized.
    Further, of the two tutors he said taught him (Mr  Saif  Ullah  and  Dr
    Karim), the latter has given a statement saying he  did  not  know  the
    appellant and that the college never ran a  PgDip  in  IT.  We  do  not
    consider Dr Karim's statement to be necessarily reliable, but its  lack
    of congruence with Mr Raja's claims highlights the lack  of  supporting
    evidence for his key claims.

120. It  is  of  some  interest  to  consider  the  evidence  of  the  three
    appellants together. Their oral evidence  was  broadly  consistent  one
    with the other (their written statements also  had  several  paragraphs
    identical with one another) but given that  Miss  Thirakaluthy  and  Mr
    Raja were in the hearing room when Miss Akbar  gave  evidence  (and  Mr
    Raja when Miss Thirakaluthy gave evidence),  that  is  not  surprising.
    None said they knew the others as students at CCOL.  Yet Miss Akbar and
    Miss Thirakaluthy each said they did a PgDip BM course around the  same
    time in classes of between 15 and 35 students.   That  they  would  not
    have known each other,  if  they  truly  did  this  course,  is  highly
    unlikely  in  a  college  with  at  most  had  between  five  to  eight
    classrooms.  On their own evidence to us Miss  Akbar  attended  classes
    three days a week (unspecified),   Miss Thirakaluthy  on  Tuesdays  and
    Wednesdays and sometimes Friday afternoons and Mr Raja on Tuesdays  and
    Wednesdays for a few weeks and thereafter on Wednesdays, Thursdays  and
    Fridays. Each of the  appellants  emphasised  that  they  made  use  of
    college notice boards for various types of information.  If  the  first
    two appellants were to be believed, there must have been more than  one
    PgDip BM course running during the  year,  which  makes  it  even  more
    surprising that Miss Saamia Ullah  had  not  heard  of  such  a  course
    running. Further,  despite  attendances  which  on  their  own  account
    overlapped and despite making use of  college  notice  boards,  neither
    Miss Akbar nor Miss Thirakaluthy knew of Miss Ullah, despite  the  fact
    that she was Head of the Business Department.  Mr Raja, who said he did
    a PgDip in IT, did not know Mr Malik, who  was  a  long-standing  staff
    member in the IT department.  Despite Miss Akbar and Miss  Thirakaluthy
    claiming to do the same course running at roughly the  same  time,  the
    lecture notes each produced had not a page in common. The  former  said
    the main written work consisted of "two main assignments".  The  latter
    said the main written work consisted  of  a  dissertation.   Originally
    none said they had considered there was anything  unsatisfactory  about
    the standard and quality of the teaching. Mr  Raja  changed  that  view
    under questioning. None was able  to  explain  satisfactorily  why,  if
    their handouts were largely as provided by  their  tutors,  they  could
    seriously  suggest  that  the  level  of  teaching  was  excellent  and
    professional. None of the student files or other  documentation  seized
    during the Operation Asterion visit related to the appellants. Although
    each was able to produce the 3 documents they had submitted to  UKBA  (
    as well as in the case of Miss Akbar and Mr Raja fee receipts bearing a
    CCOL stamp), none was able to produce a college ID card.


121. Placing the evidence of the three appellants  in  the  context  of  the
    other  evidence  available  about  the  college  and  its  courses  and
    subjecting it to a heightened  degree  of  scrutiny,  we  are  entirely
    satisfied that the respondent has shown that they  were  never  genuine
    students at CCOL.

The Other Evidence

122. Even though we had produced to us in these cases a very large  quantity
    of evidence about CCOL (apart from that specifically  relating  to  the
    three appellants) it is right to say that it contained some significant
    gaps. Evidence provided by the appellants' representatives markedly did
    not include any statements from tutors named by the three appellants as
    their tutors.

123. On the respondent's side we were never furnished with an  inventory  of
    all the documents seized from the college during the Operation Asterion
    visit.  Despite informing us that  among  the  items  seized  from  the
    college were computer hard drives, we were never told what  search  had
    been made of them or what, if anything, they  contained.   Despite  the
    UKBA having mounted a specific monitoring exercise of the  CCOL-related
    applications made to UKBA, and police having  then  mounted  a  special
    investigation code-named "Operation Asterion"  involving  more  than  a
    dozen officers and leading to the arrest and questioning of one of  two
    "key nominals", it appears that when it was learnt that at least one of
    them was abroad in Pakistan, there was little follow-up.   In  relation
    to various persons whose  names  had  been  linked  in  some  way  with
    seemingly bogus activities at the college it would appear that  despite
    UKBA taking the initial steps that led to  the  mounting  of  Operation
    Asterion, once the police became involved, UKBA took a back seat;  and,
    once the CPS took a decision some time in early 2009 not  to  prosecute
    anyone, the police investigation went into abeyance and UKBA failed  to
    take matters much further themselves.  It may be that, unbeknown to us,
    the police and/or the UKBA have made further enquiries of  the  persons
    named as the current owners, or  of  Mr  John  Opoku  (whose  signature
    appears on a number of college documents submitted to UKBA and  who  is
    said to have taught Miss Thirakaluthy and Miss Akbar) or  of  Mr  Islam
    Ali or other persons suggested by some of the  evidence  to  have  been
    involved in seemingly fraudulent activities.  But if so we  would  have
    expected to be told so. We were not.

124. On the appellants' side we were not  told  of  any  efforts  to  obtain
    statements from or call any persons  said  to  have  been  involved  in
    teaching the CCOL PgDips in BM or IT during 2007/2008.   Nor  were  any
    apparent efforts made to obtain the course  materials/lecture  handouts
    used in these alleged courses from past Principals or teachers  at  the
    college or other students said to have been in the same classes as  the
    three appellants.

125. We agree to an extent with Mr Macdonald  that  it  would  be  wrong  to
    infer from gaps in the evidence from the appellants' side that no  such
    evidence exists, but in our  view  the  absence  of  such  evidence  is
    relevant to assessing the true state  of  affairs,  particularly  given
    that ample opportunities to obtain such evidence do not appear to  have
    been taken (we were not told  of  any  attempts  to  trace  and  obtain
    witness statements from, for example, Mr Saif Ullah, Mr John  Opoku  or
    Miss Ojulari).

126. Before turning to the specific issue of CCOL PgDips, there are  several
    matters that require specific attention.

The student ID log

127. A considerable amount  of  time  was  taken  up  at  the  hearing  with
    examining to what extent the student ID log found during the  Operation
    Asterion visit was a reliable record. Certainly no other central record
    was found. The Operation Asterion report refers to student files  found
    in a filing cabinet in one of the staff rooms. They largely matched the
    student ID log, albeit they contained nothing more than an  application
    to join the college: no passport, educational  qualification  or  other
    supporting evidence accompanied them. In our  view,  having  considered
    the evidence as a whole,  we  consider  that  the  student  ID  log  is
    reliable as a (largely complete) historical record of persons who  were
    included in the college's records as students, but  that  it  does  not
    necessarily tell us anything about whether persons whose  names  appear
    on that  record  as  doing  PgDips  or  the  ILM  course  in  Executive
    Management actually undertook studies for such courses.


Student reference numbers

128. Once again, a considerable amount of time was taken up  with  questions
    and submissions relating  to  the  significance  of  different  student
    reference numbers found in the  evidence  before  us.  We  do  find  it
    strange that there should be 12 digit numbers used when on the  student
    ID log there were just 4, but on the other hand there is a  correlation
    between the last  4  digits  of  some  of  the  12-digit  numbers  with
    documents other than the student ID  records.  We  think  the  evidence
    about student reference numbers is too inconclusive to help either  the
    respondent or the appellants.

College layout and class sizes

129. We heard a number of  accounts  of  college  layout  and  class  sizes.
    Comparing the Operation Asterion description with  that  given  by  the
    staff members who gave statements there is broad  agreement  about  the
    layout of classrooms. As regards the number  of  classrooms  and  class
    sizes, however, there has been too much variation for us to settle on a
    precise figure, although we have not seen anything reliable to  suggest
    that the number of class rooms exceeded  8.  Given   the  size  of  the
    classrooms, none of which was particularly large, we think it  unlikely
    that classes normally had above a maximum of 25-40 students  (it  would
    appear that class sizes  were  often  significantly  lower  than  these
    figures) and unlikely that the college had more than 150-300  students.

CCOL PgDips

130. We turn then to  the  specific  issue  of  CCOL  PgDips.  What  is  the
    evidence of the existence  of  CCOL  PgDip  courses  being  run  during
    2007/8?  We agree with Mr Clarke and Mr Macdonald that in  the  absence
    of a complete picture of the evidence, we must  look  at   "indicators"
    pointing one way or the other.

131. We note first of all that the evidence Mr Macdonald was able to  adduce
    of the college running specific Pg Dips in  BM  and  IT  was  extremely
    tenuous.  There were of course the trio of PgDip certificates, "To Whom
    It May Concern" and Academic Transcript letters that each of the  three
    appellants and various other individuals had submitted to UKBA  in  the
    course of making their applications under the Post-Study  Work  scheme.
    But without more they were simply pieces of paper.

132. By contrast, the respondent  was  able  to  assemble  some  significant
    pieces of  evidence from his own research.  We note that the  UKBA  had
    formed the view in October 2008 that  the  evidence  relating  to  such
    certificates was anomalous since, as was  noted  by  a  UKBA  Executive
    Officer, Robin Smith, they were being received in  high  numbers,  well
    beyond the capacity for a relatively small college (some 2,542  in  the
    two months leading up to 22 December 2008). The documentation submitted
    was of poor quality, in varying colours,  some  letters  had  not  been
    signed by an individual but just a 'Programme Leader', the  wording  in
    some letters from the college was identical to others, and  there  were
    several cases where the overseas national  had  entered  the  UK  as  a
    student at another college but had submitted a qualification from  CCOL
    whilst still registered with that other college.  In addition, UKBA had
    undertaken a study of a sample of  supporting  documents  submitted  by
    students claiming to have been awarded a  CCOL  certificate  in  either
    PgDip BM or IT on 20 August 2008.  An  Executive  Officer,  Mr  K  Ara,
    found that of 29 individuals who had all submitted PgDip BM or PgDip IT
    certificates, the accompanying "Transcript of Academic Record",  showed
    that a significant number had obtained  identical  pass  marks  to  one
    another, regardless of the course start date, in  eight  subjects.   We
    would add that all of the  certificates  refer  to  candidates  "having
    satisfied the board of examiners".  We had no evidence to suggest  that
    the college ever had any "board of examiners".

133. However, we did not receive clear evidence  as  to  what  genuine  CCOL
    certificates and supporting documents look like or as to whether  those
    submitted were signed by persons authorised to sign them.  This was not
    a situation where  a  document  has  been  submitted  and  it  is  then
    conclusively  established  that  it  is  a  forgery  or  issued  by  an
    unauthorised person.  At best  therefore  we  can  only  say  that  the
    evidence of the PgDip BM and IT certificates and  supporting  documents
    issued by the college raise a number of doubts about whether they  were
    properly  issued  by  the  College  Principal  or  other  persons  duly
    authorised to issue them.  And as Mr Macdonald properly observed,  such
    doubts do not take matters very far, since it was accepted by him  that
    at some point in mid-2008 unscrupulous persons,  involved  either  with
    the owners or those who became Principal after Mr Mustafa, had  managed
    to issue or have issued bogus certificates in plentiful numbers.   That
    did not prove, he said, that there were not genuine  PgDip  BM  and  IT
    courses going on, or that there were  not  genuine  students  who  took
    those courses and genuine certificates issued.

134. The only other evidence to which Mr Macdonald  was  able  to  point  to
    (apart from the appellants' own evidence) in order to substantiate  his
    claim on their behalf that the respondent had not proved falsity was of
    the claims made by Mr Saif Ullah in e-mail  correspondence  with  UKBA.
    On 17 September 2008 a Mr Parker from UKBA had e-mailed Mr Saif  Ullah,
    who was then said to be the Principal of CCOL, asking him, further to a
    telephone  conversation,  to  furnish  certain   information   and   in
    particular to specify the dates on which CCOL ran its claimed PgDip  in
    BM, whether there was an awarding body for the course, a  list  of  all
    students enrolled on this course for 2007/8, the number of study  hours
    per week and a list of all modules  included  in  the  course.   On  18
    September 2008 Mr Ullah replied stating that:  "We have started  course
    titled as "[PgDip BM]' on 24 May  2007  ....  As  it  was  an  internal
    programme so Cambridge College itself was the  awarding  body  for  the
    course".  The e-mail went on to state that students on the  course  did
    22 hours per week and it gave a list of eight modules. These 8 modules,
    we note, did correspond with the letters  that  Miss  Thirakaluthy  and
    Miss Akbar had submitted to UKBA to show what course  they  had  taken,
    their marks etc. As regards the request for details  of  the  students,
    however, he replied, "I really apologise that I am not in a position to
    send the details of the enrolled students on this course for 2007/8  as
    we are compiling all student files and will be sent to you as  soon  as
    it would be available."  In reply to a further e-mail  from  Mr  Parker
    dated 19 September asking who assessed this diploma  and  whether  CCOL
    was accredited by a governing body, Mr Ullah replied  on  23  September
    stating that the college was  accredited  by  BAC  (British  Accredited
    Council) and the ASIC and:

        "Furthermore our Postgraduate Diploma in Business Management is our
        internal  designed  course  which  normally  assess  [sic]  by  our
        internal teacher [sic] equivalent [sic] to NQF  Level  7.   Now  we
        stopped [sic] our internal Postgraduate Diploma and continue  [sic]
        our another NQF Level 7 course which is 'ILM-Diploma  in  Executive
        Management'."

135. Despite Mr Parker then sending an e-mail the next day  saying  that  he
    still required a full and comprehensive list of all  students  who  had
    been awarded the PgDip BM for  the  2007/8  academic  year,  Mr  Parker
    records on 14 May 2009 that he never received a reply.

136. Mr Macdonald  sought to argue that this correspondence  indicated  that
    the probable truth was that in 2007 CCOL had begun its own internal  Pg
    Dip BM and had then attempted to convert  it  into  an  ILM  accredited
    course before  reverting,  when  ILM  suspended  accreditation,  to  an
    internally  run  course.   We  take  a  less   indulgent   view.    The
    correspondence plainly reveals that Mr Saif  Ullah  told  Mr  Parker  a
    blatant lie.  As Mr Macdonald  himself  acknowledged,  the  independent
    evidence we have from ILM officials shows that they had authorised CCOL
    to run an ILM accredited diploma in Executive Management for  a  period
    of only a few months (between 28 March 2008 and  20  June  2008)   when
    accreditation was suspended, never to be reinstated.  For Mr  Ullah  to
    represent in September 2008, some three months  later,  that  CCOL  was
    running an "ILM-Diploma  in  Executive  Management"  course  was  quite
    false.  Furthermore, he had never furnished the names of  the  students
    undertaking the PgDip course in BM, despite two requests from Mr Parker
    that he do so.

137. Furthermore, if CCOL had begun its own PgDip in BM in 2007/early  2008,
    modelling it on the ILM, and had continued to do so  during  and  after
    the period of ILM accreditation, we would have  expected  to  see  CCOL
    course materials showing this.  But all we have seen is a  CCOL  module
    specifications document seized  from  the  premises  (included  in  the
    respondent's bundle at bundle C, Tab  4)  that  is  simply  copied  and
    pasted from genuine Level 7 ILM materials and the course materials from
    the first and second appellants, whilst including some  ILM  materials,
    contained numerous materials bearing no  relation  to  the  ILM  course
    details.

138. We are unsure what is added to the picture by the  statements  we  have
    from persons who said they were students on a Level  7  ILM  course  in
    Executive Management run by CCOL. Of the five statements before us four
    are from those who are named on the registration list with ILM. Only Mr
    Mohammad Malik's name does not appear on that list. The  statements  do
    broadly agree in suggesting that  at  some  point  early  in  2008  the
    persons concerned enrolled at CCOL on an ILM PgDip  course.   But  they
    also disclose apparent dishonesty on the part  of  their  authors.   Mr
    Farhan Islam, for example, wrote that he attended classes  from  March-
    July  which  went  smoothly  and  that  he  and  fellow  students  only
    experienced problems when they went back to  the  second  semester  and
    were  told  there  were  problems  with  ILM  accreditation.   He  then
    described Mr Saif Ullah giving him an  "interim  progress  certificate"
    and being told by both Mr Ullah and subsequently  Mr  Noman  that  this
    would suffice for UKBA to grant him leave  under  the  Post-Study  Work
    scheme.  He  said  he  submitted  it  to  the  UKBA  believing  it  was
    legitimate and genuine.  The fact of the matter is that at  that  point
    in time he had, on his own account, completed only half his course.  Mr
    Aurangzaib Siddiqui's evidence  was  to  similar  effect,  although  he
    described the internal report he received as including  a  Postgraduate
    certificate "for the last 5-6 months progress report".  The UKBA record
    of what he submitted to them was of a  PgDip  BM  award,  and  made  no
    mention of an interim "progress report".  Mr Mohammed  Malik  spoke  of
    attending an "ILM PgDip in Business Administration", not,  we  note,  a
    PgDip in Business Management or  in  Executive  Management.  Mr  Kashif
    Aslam spoke of having been enrolled on an "ILM Diploma  Level  7"  from
    February to August before  "I  told  [Mr  Ullah]  I  didn't  want  this
    certificate as I  wasn't  interest  [sic]  in  PSW".  That  might  seem
    curious, given that on his own account he said he had  paid  �1,700  so
    far.  Mr Irfan Amir spoke about studying on  a  CCOL  ILM  course  from
    November/December 2007 (when he was told the course was to  be  delayed
    due to low numbers) and from February 2008 to July 2008.   On  his  own
    account his course was supposed to end in September 2008, yet he  spoke
    of sending an application to UKBA for Post-Study Work accompanied by  a
    CCOL award despite not studying  beyond  August  2008.   Significantly,
    considering this group of statements together,  they  describe  an  ILM
    course starting and finishing on different dates  and  given  different
    names. We also bear in mind that an ILM Diploma would in any event have
    been issued by ILM, not CCOL.

139. Turning from Mr Macdonald's suggested indicators of  the  existence  of
    CCOL PgDips, let us consider  the  indicators  which  appear  to  point
    against their existence.

140. There was no specific mention of any CCOL PgDip courses on the  college
    website nor among  any  of  the  college  literature  produced  by  the
    appellants. As noted in the respondent's skeleton argument, the closest
    thing to a PgDip in IT was the "Professional Graduate  Diploma  in  IT"
    offered by the BCS, but that differed from the claimed PgDip in  IT  in
    duration, academic  level,  subject  modules  and  the  nature  of  the
    assessment. In Business Management the closest thing to a PgDip  in  BM
    was the ABE Advanced Diploma in Business Management, but not only  were
    the subjects entirely different  to  those  the  first  two  appellants
    claimed they studied but, being a course run by ABE,  this  led  to  an
    award of the relevant qualification by ABE itself, not by CCOL.

141. We need to say a little more  about  the  CCOL  website.  We  have  the
    details of this website in the form it  was  in  at  the  time  of  the
    hearing.  We are wary of assuming that the  website  was  in  the  same
    state during the earlier period, from June to December 2008.   For  one
    thing, it appears to have been designed to include updates and  college
    news from time to time.  For another Miss Ullah was adamant  -  and  we
    believed her evidence about this - that in early December when she gave
    her statement to the police her name did appear on the page giving  the
    names and positions of staff members.  Yet her name was not on it  now.
    Further, there were at least two names on it, that of Mr John Opoku and
    Miss Mulikat Ojulari, who may not in fact have been teaching at CCOL at
    that time. As regards Miss Ojulari, we had little evidence  apart  from
    that given by the three appellants and so we can only note doubt on our
    part. But as regards Mr Opoku, we have serious doubts as to whether  he
    taught at CCOL in 2008. Both Miss Ullah and Mr Malik whose evidence  we
    found credible, said Mr Opoku had not taught at CCOL since 2007.

142. Be that as it may, what evidence we have of  the  website  contains  no
    reference to Pg Dip BM  or  IT  courses.   There  was  a  reference  to
    "undergraduate  and  postgraduate  level  courses"  and  to  "Level   7
    courses".  There was also  a  reference  to  "Last  year  we  also  saw
    introduction in Certificate, Diploma and Advanced Diploma Level courses
    in the fields of Business Administration, Business Information  Systems
    and Travel, Tourism and Hospitality from the  Association  of  Business
    Executives."  But the only particular course given in any  identifiable
    detail related to the "ILM Level 7 - Management Courses  -  Certificate
    and Diploma".

143. Then there is  the  evidence  we  have  from  several  of  the  college
    teachers.  In particular we have the evidence  of  Mr  Malik  and  Miss
    Ullah  which  included  their  oral  evidence.  Mr  Macdonald  did  not
    challenge that evidence in any important  particular.  They  were  very
    clear that CCOL has never run such courses and that, if they had,  they
    would have known about it.  There were  also  statements  from  several
    other teachers none of whom knew of the existence of such courses.   We
    bear in mind that the CCOL was a relatively small college  occupying  a
    ground floor and a basement, having  no  more  than  8  classrooms  and
    consisting in approx.  150-300  students.   It  is  inconceivable  that
    courses said to have run on dates between late 2007 and late 2008 could
    have taken place, without Mr Malik and  Miss  Ullah  and  probably  the
    other teaching staff who gave statements, knowing about it.

144. Of some interest also is the evidence in the form  of  statements  from
    two individuals who said they had been  able  to  purchase  bogus  CCOL
    PgDips in BM or IT:  Opeoluwa Atinuke  Ehindero  and  George  Ratnaraj.
    Although not playing a significant part in our  assessment,  they  give
    some insight into at least one of the ways in which it came about  that
    a very large number of individuals in the second half of 2008 submitted
    Post-Study Work or student applications to UKBA based on CCOL PgDips in
    BM or IT.  They describe agents selling them bogus certificates.  Their
    description is similar to that given in news articles exhibited to  us.
    Mr Macdonald would have it that these show no more than that there were
    bogus as well as  genuine  applications  made  on  the  basis  of  such
    courses.  In our view however, it is far more  likely  that  they  form
    part of a wider picture showing that these courses never ran.


145. In the light of the above we find that the  respondent  has  discharged
    the burden of proving on the balance of probabilities that  CCOL  never
    ran its own PgDip courses in BM or IT. We further find that the  period
    of time during which the college was ILM-accredited for the Level 7 ILM
    diploma in Executive Management was too short for any CCOL  student  to
    have completed that course and those who had been registered  with  the
    ILM could never have completed various requirements for its  successful
    completion. We should add that in the end the debate about the standard
    of proof has proved  somewhat  academic,  in  that  we  are  absolutely
    confident  that  even  on  Mr  Macdonald's  view  of  this  (as   being
    indistinguishable from the criminal standard of proof) our findings  on
    the aforementioned matters would have been the same.

Para 320(7A)

146. As already noted, the reasons for refusal letter received  by  each  of
    the three appellants (and we are given to understand that  the  wording
    used in many other CCOL-related refusal letters is very similar if  not
    identical) went on to say  that  the  respondent  considered  that  the
    appellant in question had used deception.  It  can  be  seen  from  the
    wording of para 6 of the Rules that, unlike para 322(1A) which does not
    require knowledge on the part of the applicant, para 6 contains no such
    extension. In our view that must mean that for deception to  arise  the
    false representations must have  been  made  knowingly  and  the  false
    documents have been submitted knowingly.


147. It will be apparent from our above findings that we  consider  that  no
    person claiming to have undertaken a PgDip course in IT or BM  at  CCOL
    can have done so without knowing that such a claim amounted to a  false
    representation.

148. There is no suggestion in this case that each of the  three  appellants
    did not know of the  contents  of  the  certificates  and  accompanying
    documents they had submitted and what they purported to show.

149. The fact  that  what  the  appellants  did  amounted  to  making  false
    representations is  self-evident.  We  also  consider  that  all  three
    appellants submitted false documents knowing them to be false. At  this
    point we need to clarify what we understand here by "false  documents".
    Earlier we have made the point that we had no clear evidence to suggest
    that the CCOL  certificates  were  forgeries  or  failed  to  bear  the
    official stamp of CCOL or were not issued by an authorised official  of
    CCOL. From the background evidence, in particular the reference  by  Mr
    Robin Smith of the UKBA concerning receipt of CCOL  PgDip  certificates
    in different colours etc it may well be that some of them are forgeries
    or bear a stamp that is not official  or  are  signed  by  unauthorised
    persons.  But we do not have sufficient  evidence  to  be  clear  about
    that. We do not even know whose signature was used in the "To  Whom  It
    may Concern" and Academic Transcript letters under the words "Programme
    Leader" - because in each case it was illegible. However,  the  falsity
    of a document is not just a matter of whether it genuinely  comes  from
    the organisation or body that is  suggested  was  responsible  for  its
    issue. It is also a  matter  of  that  document  corresponding  to  the
    underlying facts which it  purports  to  verify.  In  this  case  those
    underlying facts were that the certificate was awarded in virtue of the
    person named having "successfully completed" a post graduate course and
    being "examin[ed]" on it. On the above findings none of the CCOL  PgDip
    in IT or in BM certificates submitted by the applicants corresponded to
    such underlying facts. There were no courses run and,  a  fortiori,  no
    successful completion of such courses. There was no examining,  whether
    by a board or anyone else.  Accordingly those submitting them also used
    false documents.


150. So far as para 320(7A) is concerned, therefore, we  conclude  that  the
    respondent was justified in identifying it as a  provision  that  would
    have potential application to each of the three appellants in the event
    of them applying in the future for entry clearance.


CCOL students registered with ILM


151. From Mr Macdonald's submissions we elicit the view that  at  least  for
    those who were enrolled  on  the  ILM-accredited  course  in  Executive
    Management in early-mid 2008 the situation had to  be  different  since
    there clearly was such  a  course,  CCOL  clearly  was  accredited  and
    inspected and there were 37 CCOL students registered with ILM for  this
    course. We also know from the Note  the  respondent  submitted  shortly
    after the hearing that only 5 to 7 out of 37 persons who had registered
    with ILM sought to apply for Post-Study Work leave on the  strength  of
    CCOL certificates.

152. We do not exclude that some of the persons who  enrolled  on  the  ILM-
    accredited course  between  28  March  2008  and  20  June  2008  (when
    accreditation was suspended never  to  be  reinstated)  may  have  been
    entirely genuine. However, it is clear that  there  was  only  a  small
    number of such CCOL students  (5  to  7  in  number  according  to  the
    respondent's Note) who made applications to UKBA under  the  Post-Study
    Work scheme on the basis of  having  an  ILM-accredited  Level  7  post
    graduate diploma in Executive Management. And  in  our  view  any  such
    person must have knowingly made false representations since the reality
    is that ILM accreditation was short-lived  and  none  of  the  students
    registered with ILM ever fulfilled the ILM requirements to obtain their
    Level 7 Postgraduate diploma.


Para 245Z


153. As noted earlier, each of the three appellants  was  refused  not  just
    under a general grounds for refusal, para 322(1A),  but  also  under  a
    substantive ground, para 245Z.  Given that we have found the appellants
    were properly refused under para 322(1A), it is not strictly  necessary
    for us to decide their position under para  245Z;  that  refusal  means
    that their appeals cannot succeed: see para 245Z(a), which states  that
    to avoid refusal "The applicant must not fall  for  refusal  under  the
    general grounds for refusal".  However, the decisions made against each
    were based on both general and substantive grounds; the appeals of each
    have been brought against both; and we  have  had  submissions  dealing
    with both. At our specific request made in advance of the  hearing,  we
    asked for submissions on the interrelationship between para 322(1A) and
    para 245Z. The submissions we received in response also touched on  the
    general interrelationship between general grounds of  refusal  and  the
    new-style immigration rules (arising under  the  points-based  system),
    para 245Z in particular.  For all these reasons, we think it right that
    we should make clear our decision on both 322(1A) and para 245Z. We are
    also conscious of the fact that there are pending appeals  relating  to
    other  colleges  in  which  the  respondent  relies  similarly   on   a
    combination of para 322(1A) and para 245Z. We cannot rule out that they
    may include cases in which the state of the evidence is such  that  the
    respondent has not proved that para 322(1A) applies and so the  appeals
    will stand or fall depending on the decision taken on para 245Z. It  is
    desirable that we address our  view  of  the  general  principles  that
    should govern assessment of such cases.


154. Both parties accepted that whereas under para  322(1A)  the  burden  of
    proof rests on the respondent, under para  245Z  the  burden  of  proof
    rests on the appellant. That must be right.


155. Mr Macdonald said he fully accepted that if  we  found  the  appellants
    properly fell to be refused under para 322(1A), then they were bound to
    fail under para 245Z: that acknowledgement does no  more  than  reflect
    the mandatory requirements of para 245Z (a). However, he contended that
    if we were not persuaded that the respondent had discharged the  burden
    of proof on him under 322(1A) to prove falsity, then there were  cogent
    reasons why we should find that the  appellants  succeeded  under  para
    245Z. The two had to dovetail: there had either to be a refusal on both
    grounds or an allowance coupled with  a  rejection  of  para  322(1A)'s
    application.


156. In part Mr MacDonald's "dovetail"  argument  rested  on  the  evidently
    close correlation between  the  respondent's  reasons  for  considering
    there were false  representations/  documents  (so  as  to  prove  para
    322(1A) applied) and the respondent's reasons for considering that  the
    appellants failed to show they qualified under para 254Z: in both cases
    those reasons were based on the respondent's view that the CCOL  PgDips
    in BM and IT courses never ran.


157. But Mr Macdonald's argument also sought to invoke new features  of  the
    new  Points Based System exemplified by para 245Z,  in  particular  the
    feature that decisions were to be made on the basis of  the  paperwork,
    without involving any exercise of discretion or  individual  judgement.
    Thus, he said, under this new system  the  respondent  had  effectively
    created a dichotomy. Unless (as a  result  of  using  his  verification
    procedures) he considered an applicant had  committed  some  wrongdoing
    justifying refusal under a general ground of  refusal,  the  respondent
    was obliged to treat the documents submitted as reliable. He could  not
    base a refusal under para 245Z on doubts about  whether  the  documents
    were genuine, only on whether  the  documents  provided  the  necessary
    proof that the applicant qualified for points. But if he considered  an
    applicant had committed wrongdoing, then he was  obliged  to  take  the
    route of general grounds of refusal, such as para 322(1A).  If  he  was
    able to prove that para  322(1A)  applied,  that  would  be  enough  to
    justify refusal under para 245Z as  well,  but  the  converse  did  not
    apply. It did not apply because if para 322(1A) could not be made  out,
    the respondent could not rationally continue to hold doubts  about  the
    genuineness of the applicant's application.


158. Mr Clarke, as already noted, did not accept that, in  cases  where  the
    respondent was found not to  have  proved  that  a  general  ground  of
    refusal such as para 322(1A) applied, this meant  that  refusal  of  an
    applicant/appellant under para 245Z could not be based on any  concerns
    about whether or not it was genuine.


159. From our earlier recitation of law and relevant policy, it can be  seen
    that Mr Clarke's submission concurs with the wording of both the Policy
    Guidance and in the Home Office IDIs.


160. It will be recalled that paras 14-33 of the  relevant  Policy  Guidance
    set out the verification procedures applied in Tier 1  applications.  A
    distinction is made between "verification checks" and  "other  checks".
    In respect of verification checks, where there is  a  reasonable  doubt
    that a specified document is genuine, checks are carried out with three
    possible outcomes: the document is confirmed as genuine,  the  document
    is confirmed as false or the verification check is inconclusive. If the
    verification check is inconclusive, the document is ignored as evidence
    for scoring points and, if the applicant has not sent other  documents,
    zero points are awarded. In the case of  other  checks,  which  can  be
    triggered simply by "doubts", the outcomes are not entirely  the  same.
    In particular, if the check is inconclusive, then the  respondent  says
    he will consider the application as if it is genuine. In our view,  the
    different outcomes under the two types of checks properly  reflect  the
    fact that in one there must be reasonable suspicion,  under  the  other
    mere suspicion. Where it is only mere suspicion then, not surprisingly,
    if the outcome is inconclusive, the benefit is given to the applicant.


161. For ease of reference we repeat here the text of   the  IDIs  at  paras
    4.18-4.19.1,  which states:


        "4.18     Where  it  is  thought  that  a  document  is  false  but
              independent verification is not possible, or  disclosing  the
              verification  is  not  possible,  then   caseworkers   should
              consider refusing under the substantive immigration rules.


        4.19      Caseworkers  are  free  to  point   out   the   perceived
              inconsistencies in a document and assert that  it  cannot  be
              relied upon because  of  those  inconsistencies.   This  will
              provide the basis for a robust refusal  on  whatever  grounds
              the document has been provided to substantiate. e.g.


             4.19.1  Scenario 4


             An applicant for further  leave  to  remain  as  a  student  is
             required to show that they are able to maintain and accommodate
             themselves.  In doing so they produce a bank statement  showing
             that their level of funds is sufficient.


             Closer inspection of the statement  reveals  that  the  figures
             given for transactions do not add up to the statement  balance.
             Furthermore there are spelling mistakes on the document.


             The caseworker approaches the issuing authority to verify  that
             the document has been falsified but they are unable  to  supply
             the   caseworker   with   information   because   of   customer
             confidentiality issues.


             Because  independent  verification   cannot   be   sought   the
             caseworker cannot use paragraph 322(1A).


             Instead  the  caseworker  refuses  the  application  under  the
             substantive rules.  The refusal notice should  point  out  each
             error on the statement and state that the caseworker is  unable
             to  accept  it  as  evidence  of  finances  and  therefore  the
             applicant has not proven  they  can  maintain  and  accommodate
             themselves."


162. Also for ease of reference we repeat the text of the relevant parts  of
     para 16, headed "Linking General Conditions  and  Substantive  Rules",
    namely 16.5 - 16.6, which state:


        "16.5    Where the refusal is based  on  the  general  grounds  but
              there  is  a  link  between  the  general  ground   and   the
              substantive rules, the substantive rule should  be  added  to
              the reasons for refusal. e.g.


          16.6 Scenario 7b


              The student who is required to be enrolled  on  a  course  of
              study  has  provided  a   forged   enrolment   letter.    The
              application falls for refusal on  Paragraph  322(1A)  because
              they have used deception but also Paragraph  60(iii)  because
              they have failed to show they are enrolled  on  a  course  of
              study."


163. However, the Policy Guidance as such is not  part  of  the  Immigration
    Rules and, as pointed out in ZH (Bangladesh) [2009]  EWCA  Civ  8,  the
    IDIs are internal instructions to caseworkers and are  not  an  aid  to
    interpretation of the Immigration Rules. It is necessary therefore,  to
    consider existing case law dealing with the  interrelationship  between
    general grounds of refusal and substantive rules.


164. In this regard it  is  helpful  to  remind  ourselves  of  the  general
    structure of the Immigration Rules and  the  interrelationship  between
    Part 9 (which deals with general grounds  of  refusal)  and  the  parts
    setting out substantive rules. In JC (China) the Tribunal noted certain
    differences, observing at para 14 that each of the general grounds  has
    an exclusionary, rather than an inclusionary, intent. The applicant  is
    not showing why he qualifies; rather the decision-maker is  seeking  to
    show why he is, or should normally be, disqualified. The Tribunal  said
    that another key difference lay in the  assignment  of  the  burden  of
    proof. In JC the Tribunal was dealing with para  320(15)  which  unlike
    general grounds in mandatory form such as para  322(1A)   are  cast  in
    discretionary form. Further para 322(1A) had not yet  been  introduced.
    The substantive immigration rule in question was also different,  being
    para 128. Nevertheless the points  made  in  para  25  are  of  general
    application:


         "...The  most  obvious  distinction  [between  general  grounds  of
         refusal and substantive rules] is the one we have just  identified:
         the application of the burden of proof is different for  each.  For
         one the burden is on the respondent to first establish the facts on
         which he relies; for the other the burden rests with the  appellant
         to prove his case. Hence even where the reasons  for  finding  that
         paragraph 320(15) applies are exactly the same as the  reasons  for
         finding paragraph 128 requirements are not met, the  outcome  under
         each paragraph may not necessarily be the same,  depending  on  how
         application of the burden of proof moderates the assessment."

165. The Tribunal  noted  a  number  of  features  possessed  by  the  rules
    contained in Part 9:

         "4. Several features of these general grounds need clarifying.


         5.  First,  each  identifies  an  additional  legal  basis  of  the
         decision; they are not a set of extra reasons.


         6. Second, although  they  are  grounds  "additional"  to  specific
         substantive grounds under Parts 2-8 of the Immigration  Rules  that
         does not mean they cannot form a stand  alone  basis  for  refusal;
         they can. For example, if a person seeks entry for  a  purpose  not
         covered by the immigration rules, and so paragraph 320(1)  applies,
         that means he must be refused (Indeed, a decision taken on  such  a
         ground is one of those which  cannot  be  appealed  on  immigration
         grounds alone: see s.88 (2)(d) of the Nationality, Immigration  and
         Asylum Act 2002 (the "2002 Act".)) It follows from this that  if  a
         person is refused on one or more substantive grounds under Parts 2-
         8 and on one or more general  ground  under  part  9,  he  has  two
         hurdles to surmount. Even if he can show on appeal that one of  the
         two grounds (the substantive and the general)  is  wrong,  he  will
         still fail to meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules if the
         other ground is made out; and so, his appeal under the  Immigration
         Rules will fail.


         7. Third, they fall into two  categories:  grounds  in  respect  of
         which refusal is mandatory (320(1)-(7), 321A (1)-(6),  322(1))  and
         grounds which give discretion (expressed  as  "should  normally  be
         refused"), (320(8)-(21), 321, 322(2)-(11), 323).


         8. Fourth, they are a mixed bag and do not  easily  fit  into  neat
         categories. Some are sui generis and have been added over  time  in
         response to very  specific  circumstances:  e.g.  paragraph  320(4)
         dealing with Channel  Tunnel  arrivals.  Many  are  concerned  with
         documentation. They represent, as it  were,  the  list  of  general
         grounds which the Home Secretary currently thinks  must  or  should
         operate to complement the substantive immigration rules.


         9. Fifth (assuming both substantive and general grounds  are  being
         relied on), there is really no hard and fast rule  for  immigration
         judges to adopt so far as concerns the order in which  they  should
         be addressed. The subject-matter of  the  general  grounds  is  too
         diverse for there to be such a rule. The Home  Office  IDIs  advise
         their staff, at least in respect of some  subparagraphs,  to  first
         address the substantive rather than the general requirements of the
         Rules (in parts 2-8), but they primarily advise that for  pragmatic
         reasons (less scope for argument on appeal). Much  will  depend  on
         which  general   ground   is   matched   with   which   substantive
         requirement(s).  However,  where  the  general  ground  is  one  in
         mandatory form, taking it first would seem logical since a decision
         on that may be dispositive of the appeal - or may indeed  establish
         ineligibility for an appeal: see above paragraph 6.


         10. Sixth, in relation to all of the general grounds the burden  of
         proof  is  on  the   decision-maker   (entry   clearance   officer,
         immigration officer, Secretary of State)  to  establish  the  facts
         relied upon. Their common thread is  that  they  depend  for  their
         validity on the decision-maker being able to establish a  precedent
         fact. Unless it is not contested, the precedent fact  needs  to  be
         established for the duty or power to be exercised. As can  be  seen
         from their early formulation as "general considerations" (see  e.g.
         HC509, HC510), the general grounds, now found at part 9 of HC  395,
         seek to cover circumstances where the Home Secretary considers that
         a person should not succeed under the Immigration Rules even though
         he meets the ordinary substantive requirements.  They  are  general
         grounds for saying "no". (That  in  respect  of  such  grounds  the
         decision-maker is put to  proof  may  be  thought  salutary,  since
         otherwise their operation  could  create  an  executive  "override"
         capable of undermining the efficacy of the substantive rules.)


         11. Another reason why the burden rests on  the  decision-maker  is
         that each of these grounds alleges in one way or another a  failing
         or a wrongdoing on the part of an applicant. As  regards  failings,
         they refer to an applicant's failure to give  information,  furnish
         documents, give undertakings or consent or respond to a request  to
         attend an interview (320(3), (5),  (8),  (8A),  (10),  (14),  (16),
         (20),  321A(6),  322(9),  322(11),  322(10)),   failure   to   show
         acceptable  intentions  (320(4),  (9)),  restricted   returnability
         (320(13), 321(iii), 322(8)), failure to observe the time limits  or
         conditions attached to any  grant  of  leave  to  enter  or  remain
         (320(11), 322(3)), failure by a sponsor to give an  undertaking  to
         be responsible for maintenance and accommodation (322(16)), failure
         by the person concerned to honour any  declaration  or  undertaking
         given as to intended  duration  and/or  purpose  of  stay  (322(7),
         (322(6)),  refusal  to  undergo  a  medical  examination  (320(17),
         (321(iii)),  undesirability  of  admission  for   medical   reasons
         (321A(3)) and failure to maintain or accommodate  himself  and  any
         dependants without recourse to public funds (322(4)).


         12. As  regards  wrongdoings,  they  cover  persons  subject  to  a
         deportation order or exclusion personally directed by the Secretary
         of State (320(2)(6), 321(iii), 321A(4)), persons  whose  character,
         conduct or associations or the fact that they represent a threat to
         national security  makes  permitting  them  to  remain  undesirable
         (322(5)), the obtaining of a previous leave to enter or  remain  by
         deception (320(12)), the making of false representations or  giving
         of false information or failure to disclose any material  fact  for
         the purposes of obtaining employment documents  (320(15),  (321(i),
         321A(2), 322(2)), a change in circumstances since  entry  clearance
         was issued or leave given  (321(ii),  321A(1)),  commission  of  an
         offence punishable with a term of 12 month  imprisonment  (320(18))
         or the existence of a  criminal  record  (321(iii))  and  exclusion
         deemed conducive to the public good (320(19), 321A(5))."


166. The  Tribunal  went  on  to  accept  that  sometimes  the  general  and
    substantive grounds of refusal could be closely interrelated:


         "25... Further, whereas one  cannot  succeed  under  paragraph  128
         unless one meets all its  requirements,  application  of  paragraph
         320(15), as we have seen, imports a discretion  (albeit  one  which
         should normally lead to refusal).


         26. Nevertheless, we do accept that in certain cases  depending  on
         the facts the two provisions may be closely interrelated: when  for
         example, the use of false representations  also  demonstrates  that
         the appellant  does  not  have  the  capability  or  the  requisite
         intention to undertake the work specified (paragraph  128(iii)  and
         (iv)). More generally, if an immigration judge  decides  that  (for
         example)  dishonesty  alleged  under  paragraph  320(15)   is   not
         established, that may sometimes incline him  to  take  a  different
         view than he would otherwise as to the appellant's  credibility  in
         relation to substantive requirements of the Rules, especially those
         concerned with the appellant's intentions."


167. To our understanding this summary is consistent with settled case  law:
    on the entitlement of the decision-maker to treat the  general  grounds
    of refusal  as  furnishing  separate  reasons  for  refusal,  see  e.g.
    Sukhjinder Kaur v Secretary of State for the Home Department [1998] Imm
    AR 110 at p. 9.  And we derive from the summary that we are entitled to
    consider the matter of whether the requirements of para  245Z  are  met
    even if we have not been satisfied that the respondent  has  discharged
    the burden of proof resting on him to show falsity on the part  of  the
    appellants under para 322(1A).


168.  We  agree  with  Mr  Macdonald  that  the  thrust  of  the   new-style
    immigration rules is to achieve a system of decision-making  in  which,
    unless verification or other checking  procedures  are  activated,  the
    decision-maker determines the case  on  the  face  of  the  documentary
    evidence. The emphasis  is  on  quantitative  rather  than  qualitative
    assessment: see NA & Others (Tier 1 Post-Study  Work  -  funds)  [2009]
    UKAIT 00025.  However, it does not follow that if verification or other
    checking procedures have been activated by the UKBA but do  not  result
    in a conclusive finding, the decision-maker should proceed  as  if  the
    findings of the verification process are irrelevant or  somehow  to  be
    put out of mind. The rationale  behind  what  is  said  in  the  Policy
    Guidance or in the IDIs is that such findings  should  continue  to  be
    relevant and in our view it is a  rationale  which  should  inform  any
    proper decision-making process.

169.  Nor  does  it  follow,  even  if  the  UKBA  have  not  activated  the
    verification or other checks procedure  in  any  particular  case  that
    immigration judges can overlook the potential applicability of  general
    grounds of refusal. For one thing, para 245Z(a) specifies as one of its
    requirements that the applicant "must not fall for  refusal  under  the
    general grounds of refusal...". For another, there is a general duty on
    an immigration judge, subject to considerations of procedural fairness,
    to consider whether the evidence raises any Part 9 issues  and,  if  it
    does, to resolve them: see RM (Kwok On  Tong:  HC395  para  320)  India
    [2006] UKAIT 00039.


170. If general grounds of refusal such as para 322(1A)  are  found  not  to
    apply so as to exclude an applicant/appellant, then it follows that  he
    has not been shown to have committed any wrongdoing and it would not be
    open to any decision-maker dealing with a future application from  such
    a person to treat him or her for this reason as  a  wrongdoer  who  has
    used deception. Plainly, for example, in the event of  a  future  entry
    clearance application, para 320(7A) could not be brought to bear on the
    basis of any such deception.


171. But in a case in which both general  and  substantive  grounds  are  in
    play,  a   decision-maker   is   not   entitled   to   find   that   an
    applicant/appellant meets the relevant substantive requirements of  the
    Immigration Rules  unless  separately  satisfied  that  he  or  she  is
    eligible under the substantive rule. In general terms,  it  would  seem
    odd that if a decision-maker shouts "fraud" but cannot prove it, he  is
    thereby debarred from pointing to any shortcomings in the  quality  and
    reliability of the evidence.


172. We raised with the parties whether there was not a close  analogy  here
    with the view  taken  by  the  Tribunal  in  Tanveer  Ahmed  (Documents
    unreliable and forged) Pakistan*  [2002]  UKIAT  00439  in  respect  of
    evidence in asylum appeals. Tanveer Ahmed concerned an asylum  claimant
    whose documentation had been  challenged  at  the  hearing  before  the
    Adjudicator as being false. In this case the  Tribunal  summarised  its
    conclusions as follows.

                 "In summary the principles set out  in  this  determination
are:

         1. In asylum and  human  rights  cases  it  is  for  an  individual
         claimant to show that a document on which he seeks to rely  can  be
         relied on.


         2. The decision maker should consider whether a document is one  on
         which reliance should properly be placed after looking at  all  the
         evidence in the round.


         3. Only very rarely will there be the need to make an allegation of
         forgery, or evidence strong enough to support  it.  The  allegation
         should not be made without such evidence. Failure to establish  the
         allegation on the balance of  probabilities  to  the  higher  civil
         standard does not show that a document is  reliable.  The  decision
         maker still needs to apply principles 1 and 2".

173. Tanveer Ahmed has been approved on a number of occasions by the  higher
    courts, most recently by  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  JN  (Cameroon)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2009] EWCA Civ 241. Clearly
    its reference in para 30 to a "higher standard of proof"  being  needed
    for the respondent to discharge the burden to prove fraud has now to be
    read in the light of Re:B (Children) and Re:Doherty.  But  we  are  not
    concerned here with what Tanveer  Ahmed  said  about  the  standard  of
    proof.

174. Mr Macdonald's response to our question about Tanveer Ahmed  principles
    was to argue that this case was only applicable to asylum appeals which
    were  sui  generis.   We  have  several  observations  concerning  that
    response.

175. First, it is true that as the text of para 38(1) of  the  determination
    makes clear,  the  Tribunal  described  the  principles  summarised  as
    arising in  "asylum  and  human  rights"  cases  without  reference  to
    immigration cases. However, earlier on in the determination it drew  on
    cases dealing with immigration as well as asylum and clearly saw itself
    as dealing with general issues of  proof  as  raised  by  the  Tribunal
    Procedure Rules then current.  Further,  the  more  detailed  reasoning
    which was the subject of the para 38 summary contained no limitation to
    asylum and human rights cases. At paras 34-35 it stated:

         "34. It is sometimes argued before  Adjudicators  or  the  Tribunal
         that if the Home Office alleges that a document  relied  on  by  an
         individual claimant is a forgery  and  the  Home  Office  fails  to
         establish this on the balance of  probabilities,  or  even  to  the
         higher  criminal  standard,  then  the  individual   claimant   has
         established  the  validity  and  truth  of  the  document  and  its
         contents. There is no legal justification  for  such  an  argument,
         which is manifestly incorrect, given that whether the document is a
         forgery is not the question at issue.  The only question is whether
         the document is one upon which reliance should properly be placed.


         35. In almost all cases it would be  an  error  to  concentrate  on
         whether a document is a forgery. In most  cases  where  forgery  is
         alleged it will be of no great importance whether this is or is not
         made out to the required higher civil standard. In all cases  where
         there is a material document it should be assessed in the same  way
         as any other piece of evidence. A document should not be viewed  in
         isolation. The decision maker should look  at  the  evidence  as  a
         whole or in the round (which is the same thing)."

176. Second, the approach which has been taken in the Tribunal  subsequently
    has been to apply Tanveer Ahmed  principles  both  to  immigration  and
    asylum contexts: see e.g. OA (Alleged forgery; section  108  procedure)
    Nigeria [2007] UKIAT 00096.

177. Third, it seems to us there are good  reasons  why  Tanveer  Ahmed  has
    been seen to have wider applicability. Of course, asylum appeals have a
    number of special features, not least that the  standard  of  proof  is
    lower than the normal civil standard and that an asylum claimant is not
    normally required to furnish corroboration of his claim.  However,  the
    underlying point relied on in Tanveer Ahmed is that a  distinction  has
    to be drawn between unreliability and falsity. The essential point made
    is that falsity is a narrower category  than  unreliability  and  that,
    just because the evidence does not suffice to establish  falsity,  does
    not mean that it cannot be considered unreliable.

178. In our view the same  reasoning  applies  in  non-asylum  contexts.  An
    appellant is required under substantive immigration rules to prove that
    he meets their requirements in full, and to discharge that  burden  his
    evidence must normally be considered reliable. In a case in  which  the
    respondent  has  alleged  falsity  in  parallel,  the  reasons  why  an
    appellant's evidence might be considered unreliable are not confined to
    ones that establish fraud or deception or misrepresentation, but can be
    based simply on such considerations as lack  of  credibility,  internal
    contradictions or a mismatch between the account given and  the  likely
    facts. What basically matters is whether the evidence is sufficient.


179. Mr Macdonald's principal response to such an approach was to  highlight
    novel features of the Points Based System. In his view  all  that  para
    245Z required was that the specified documents had  been  submitted  in
    accordance with Appendices A-C and the  accompanying  Policy  Guidance.
    His submission has some attraction. Take the example of  the  issue  of
    provenance of funds that quite often arises  in  cases  concerned  with
    "old-style" maintenance requirements under  various  immigration  rules
    unrelated to the Points Based system. If a  person's  claimed  personal
    savings all stem from one recent large deposit, the decision-maker  may
    treat this as evidence that that person is not in truth  good  for  the
    money claimed. Under such "old-style" maintenance requirements there is
    clearly room for the exercise of individual  judgment.  Arguably  under
    the "new-style" maintenance requirements exemplified by  para  245Z(c),
    it is not open to a decision-maker to look behind the  bank  statements
    produced, unless he opts to apply general grounds of refusal.


180. Nonetheless we do not consider that  such  a  submission  can  or  does
    succeed.


181. One reason why we have come to this conclusion relates to  a  point  we
    have already touched upon: the  decision-maker's  own  Policy  Guidance
    contains a verification procedure and clearly envisages  that  even  if
    falsity is not proved (but reasonable  doubt  exists),  the  result  of
    verification may be that the evidence is seen as  inconclusive  and  no
    points are to be awarded. The IDIs reflect a similar approach.

182.  However, we do think that the fact that the Policy Guidance  sets  out
    criteria governing verification  and  other  checks  obliges  decision-
    makers to follow that procedure rather than seek to apply Tanveer Ahmed
    criteria in abstracto. In particular, we think  it  important  that  if
    decision-makers have decided not to apply a general ground  of  refusal
    but still refuse an application for reasons relating  to  doubts  about
    the reliability of the documents, they confine that to cases where,  in
    line with the Policy Guidance, there were reasonable  doubts  that  the
    document is genuine, leading to a verification check,  and  that  check
    has been inconclusive (see paragraph 69 above).

183. In this way the principles in the Policy Guidance should, we  consider,
    inform the way in which the Tribunal proceeds in an  appeal  against  a
    points-based decision. Although  the  Policy  Guidance  is  a  document
    addressed to an applicant and is designed to tell the applicant what he
    or she is entitled  to  expect  in  terms  of  the  processing  of  the
    application,  the  applicant  is  entitled  to  expect   that   similar
    principles should apply to any further assessment on  appeal.  In  this
    way, the Policy Guidance can be seen as valuable  particularisation  of
    general Tanveer Ahmed principles. What this means in practice is  that,
    in a points-based appeal, the Tribunal should not find that a  document
    relied on by the appellant is incapable of scoring  points  unless  (a)
    the respondent has proved it to be false; or (b) having considered  all
    the evidence, the Tribunal is left with a  reasonable  doubt  that  the
    document is reliable.

184. Another reason, it seems to us, is that whilst rules such as para  245Z
    clearly do seek to eliminate the exercise of  individual  judgement  by
    decision-makers, we do not think they  succeed  (or  were  intended  to
    succeed) in eliminating it entirely. Let us suppose, for example,  that
    in order to try and satisfy the requirement of having �800 in  personal
    savings for 3 months before  applying  an  indigent  applicant  borrows
    money from a friend, not with any intention  of  using  the  money  for
    maintenance but purely as a device to enable him to  show  the  sum  of
    �800 in his bank account for the requisite period. It does not seem  to
    us that the decision-maker  is  prevented  by  the  rule  as  currently
    drafted from deciding that in fact that person did not have  the  level
    of personal savings as shown in the bank  statements  at  the  relevant
    time. In some  cases  of  this  type  it  may  be  considered  that  in
    presenting   such   statements   the   applicant   has    made    false
    representations, but in other cases it may not be so clear-cut; and, if
    not clear-cut, a refusal may still be justified under  the  substantive
    rule. In other words we do not accept that the logic of  the  new-style
    rules is to require either that everything is to be taken at face value
    or that general grounds of refusal must be relied on. Under  para  245Z
    there must still be a correspondence between the documentation and  the
    underlying reality of a person having personal funds as maintenance.


185. That brings us to a third reason which is specific to  the  wording  of
    para 245Z. We need at this point to refer  again  to  the  contents  of
    Table 9 in the version in force at the relevant time (for its text  see
    above para 64).


186.  Table 9 does not simply require an applicant to produce/have  produced
    the specified documents showing  that  the  applicant  has  a  relevant
    qualification. That only qualifies a person for the  first  20  points.
    It also requires, in order to qualify for the second  20  points,  that
    the applicant has "undertaken" "periods of UK  study  and/or  research"
    and done so whilst he had (in this case) leave to enter  or  remain  in
    the UK as a student, Tier 4 migrant or under part 8. Paras 79-81 of the
    Policy Guidance reflect similar considerations.

187. We recognise that it might be argued that the principal concern in  the
    second and third boxes is to ensure the applicant studied for his award
    at a UK recognised or listed body and had valid  leave  in  a  relevant
    capacity at the relevant time, but even if we had  accepted  that  that
    they are the sole concerns, such leave was only given on the basis that
    the person was meeting the  requirements  of  the  student  or  Tier  4
    migrant or part 8 rules. However one looks at it, the requirement makes
    clear that the points are to be awarded on the basis that the applicant
    has undertaken study or research.

188. It seems to us that the last point encapsulates  the  reason  why  each
    appellant in these appeals must also fail under para 245Z(e),  even  if
    we had taken the view that the respondent had not discharged the burden
    of proof on him to show falsity on their part. Whether or not they used
    false representations or submitted false documents they are persons who
    have simply failed to show that they  undertook  the  studies  at  CCOL
    which they claimed to have undertaken. The background evidence did  not
    indicate that such courses were ever run and their own evidence was not
    credible.

189. For the above reasons the appeals of each of the three  appellants  are
    dismissed.


Signed



Senior Immigration Judge Storey

