

Asylum and Immigration Tribunal

                                   NB and JN (right of permanent residence)
                          France [2007] UKAIT 00039


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 17 November 2006                             |On 26 February 2007        |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       Senior Immigration Judge Storey
                                Dr T Okitikpi
                               Miss V S Street


                                   Between


                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:        Mr R O'Ryan, Counsel, instructed by IAS
Manchester
For the Respondent:        Mr M Raj, Home Office Presenting Officer

   1. A person who has a residence permit [now registration certificate] and
      seeks its renewal cannot be refused its renewal or extension (provided
      that he remains a qualified person) save on grounds of public  policy,
      public security or public health.
   2. In stating that confirmation  of  the  worker's  engagement  from  his
      employer or a certificate of employment  is  "sufficient  proof"  that
      someone  is  a  qualified  person,  Regulation  16(2)  of   the   2006
      Immigration (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  is  defining  the
      maximum that can be required; it does not mean  that proof  cannot  be
      given by other appropriate means of evidence.
   3. A person acquires a right to permanent residence simply by meeting the
      qualifying conditions set out in regulation  15  of  the  Regulations:
      this provision implements Article 16 of the Citizens'  Directive.  The
      question of whether an EEA decision breaches a person's  EU  right  of
      permanent residence can arise as a ground of appeal. However,  in  the
      absence of a specific  EEA  decision  refusing  to  grant  a  document
      certifying permanent residence, the AIT has no jurisdiction to  decide
      whether such a document should have been (or should be)  issued.
   4.  By virtue of regulation 14(2) of the 2006 Regulations (read  together
      with Article 37 of the Citizens' Directive) the  family  member  of  a
      qualified person residing in the UK and exercising Treaty rights has a
      right to reside for so long as he remains the  family  member  of  the
      qualified person. There is no "accompanying or joining" requirement.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The first appellant is a citizen of France. The  second  appellant  is  a
citizen of Congo (Brazzaville). The respondent seeks  reconsideration  of  a
determination of Immigration Judge Law notified on 20  March  2006  allowing
their appeals against (1) the decision  on 10 February 2005 that  the  first
appellant was not entitled to a residence  permit  because  she  was  not  a
"qualified person" as set out in the Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
Regulations 2000 SI 1003/2006 (hereafter "the 2000 Regulations") ;  and  (2)
the decision of the same date refusing  to issue the second  appellant  with
a residence document as confirmation of a right of residence in  the  UK  as
the family member of an EEA national exercising Treaty  rights  in  the  UK.
The appellants had applied on 16 August 2004 for a residence permit for  her
and a residence document for him. They had made their  application  on  Form
EEC1, that being the form then in use for those  applying  for  a  residence
permit. Possibly for this reason the first  appellant  made  no  mention  of
having an existing residence permit as an EEA national issued to her  on  11
November 2000 and stated to be valid until 8 November  2005.  When  refusing
their applications the respondent appears not to have noticed that  she  had
an existing (still-current) residence permit. Where below we refer  to  "EEA
Regulations" this is intended to cover both the 2000 and  2006  Regulations.
The provisions of the 2006 Regulations are enclosed within  square  brackets
where appropriate.


2. The first appellant has lived in  the  UK  since  12  October  1999.  She
claimed that during the whole time she has been in the  UK  she  had  always
been a worker or a student or  both.   When  she  came  to  the  UK  in  the
exercise of her Treaty rights she was single.  The  second  appellant  is  a
failed asylum seeker. He came to the UK on 18 April 2000 and  has  not  left
since. The couple married on 18 January 2003. They have had a  son  born  on
23 July 2005.

3. Immigration Judge Law's determination  allowing  both  of  their  appeals
stated at paragraphs 13 and 14:

    "I have given careful consideration to all the documents before me  and
    to the oral evidence and submissions which have been set  out  and  are
    formed (sic) in the Record of Proceedings. I find that at the date that
    the first appellant's application was refused she  was  in  employment.
    The respondent had rejected the same  because  of  the  nature  of  the
    letter from her employers being a  photocopy.   In  dealing  with  this
    matter I refer to the   2003 amended regulations  which  clearly  state
    that a document is to be regarded as  being  what  it  purports  to  be
    provided that it is reasonably apparent. This requirement is  contained
    within regulations 29(4) it is clear that the evidence of the appellant
    and  the  supporting  documentation  with  regard  to  her   employment
    confirmed  that  at  the  time  of  her  request  she  was  in  gainful
    employment. At the date of the present decision of an in country appeal
    LS clearly indicates that the date of decision  is  the  date  when  an
    Immigration Judge makes a decision with regard to the  appeal.  I  have
    heard oral evidence from the first appellant and as  suggested  by  her
    representative it is unfortunate that there was no further evidence  of
    her employment, however I have looked at the requirements for qualified
    persons and the fact that they remain qualified  persons  if  they  are
    without employment for a number of reasons. It is clear that the  first
    appellant was pregnant and gave birth to a boy the birth certificate of
    which had been accepted and not challenged  by  the  respondent.  As  a
    result it is  clear  that  she  was  therefore  entitled  to  have  her
    maternity leave and either to seek other employment at  the  completion
    of the same or to return to her original employers.  I accept that  she
    was accordingly employed as she has stated and that she has returned to
    the same. I similarly accept that her intentions to return  to  student
    life has [sic] been made out and that this will commence  in  September
    2006.  I find that  the  objections  raised  by  the  Home  Office  are
    unsustainable and that the first appellant is entitled as  a  qualified
    person to enter and  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom.     As  such
    therefore under the provisions that are  appertaining  to  spouses  the
    second appellant is entitled to his residence within the United Kingdom
    as the spouse of a qualified person.


    On the totality of the evidence before me I find  that  the  appellants
    have discharged  the  burden  of  proof  and  reasoning  given  by  the
    respondent do not justify  the  refusal.   Therefore  the  respondent's
    decision  is  not  in  accordance  with  the  law  and  the  applicable
    Immigration Rules."

4. The grounds for reconsideration  in  respect  of  the  first  and  second
appellants were  essentially  twofold.  First  it  was  contended  that  the
immigration judge had failed to give adequate reasons for finding  that  the
first appellant could return to her previous employers at  the  end  of  her
maternity leave or that she had returned to work or employment at  the  date
of hearing: "[a]s a result there was  no  evidence  before  the  Immigration
Judge that the appellant was exercising Treaty rights".  Given the  lack  of
evidence before him that the first appellant was  working  at  the  date  of
hearing, the immigration judge  was  said  to  have  materially  misdirected
himself in law in finding she was a worker at the date of hearing.

5.  Second it was submitted that the immigration judge had failed to make  a
clear finding on whether the  first  appellant  was  exercising  her  Treaty
rights as a student, by virtue of having only found an intention  to  resume
her studies in September 2006.

6. Before proceeding further it is necessary  to  clarify  several  matters.
More than one confusion has arisen during the life of these appeals.

7.  We  begin  with  the  fact   highlighted   at   the   outset   of   this
reconsideration, namely that a residence permit had been issued by the  Home
Office to the first appellant valid from 11  November  2000  to  8  November
2005. Extraordinarily, the appellants made no mention of  this  either  when
they applied for residence permits or  when  they  lodged  their  notice  of
appeal. Despite their representatives,  the  Immigration  Advisory  Service,
having noted the fact in a letter to the respondent dated 18 February  2005,
no mention of it  was  made  by  either  side  at  the  hearing  before  the
immigration judge. We cannot be sure that he did not have the IAS letter  in
front of him, but in any event he did not take this  fact  into  account  at
all. We are grateful to Mr O'Ryan for  alerting  us  to  this  fact  and  to
drawing our attention to the photocopy document contained  in  the  original
appellant's bundle at A. We are also grateful to Mr Raj  for  confirming  in
response that he accepted on behalf  of  the  respondent  that  a  residence
document had been properly issued to the first appellant and amounted  to  a
grant of a residence permit for a continuous period of five  years  covering
the  period  as  shown  in  the  photocopy.  Mr  Raj  also   confirmed   the
respondent's acceptance that the first appellant was a worker  at  the  time
of her application in August 2004 as well as at the date of decision  on  10
February 2005. The significance of the fact that the first appellant held  a
valid residence permit and was a worker  at  the  time  of  application  and
decision is obviously  the  first  issue  we  shall  have  to  address  when
furnishing our analysis of the relevant legal issues below.

8. Arising from the fact that the first appellant  had  a  residence  permit
still valid at the date of decision, Mr O'Ryan submitted that this  document
was evidence necessitating that we consider as a matter of law  whether,  by
virtue of having resided in the UK on the basis of a residence permit for  a
continuous period of five years, the  appellant  had  acquired  a  permanent
right of residence under regulations 15(1)(a) of the  Immigration  (European
Economic Area) Regulations 2006 (hereafter 2006  Regulations).  For  reasons
which will  become  apparent,  we  agree  with  Mr  O'Ryan  that  the  first
appellant is entitled to have  this  question  considered  as  a  ground  of
appeal  additional  to  those  which  she  originally  lodged  against   the
decision.

9. Another point of confusion in these cases arises from  Immigration  Judge
Law's reference to - and attempted interpretation of  -  the  "2003  amended
Regulations". As part of his reasoning in paragraph 13 for finding that  the
first appellant was employed at the date  of  decision,  he  had  relied  on
regulation 29(4) of the "2003 amended Regulations". By  these  he  can  only
have meant the 2000 Regulations as  amended  by  the  Immigration  (European
Economic Area) (Amendment) Regulations 2003 (SI No.549). On the strength  of
this provision of the 2000 Regulations he considered it  correct  to  accept
as genuine a letter from her employers  in  the  form  of  a  photocopy.  He
understood this provision to  "clearly  state  that  a  document  is  to  be
regarded as being what its purports to be provided that this  is  reasonably
apparent".

10. There are  two  problems  here.  First  of  all,  he  misread  the  2000
Regulations. Regulation 29(4) of the 2000 Regulations state:


    "Appeal rights
    29 - (1) Subject to paragraphs (2) to (4), a person  may  appeal  under
         these Regulations against an EEA decision.
             (2) If a person claims to be  an  EEA  national,  he  may  not
         appeal under these Regulations unless he produces -
                 (a) a valid national identity card; or
                 (b) a valid passport, issued by an EEA State.
             (3) If a person claims to be  the  family  member  of  another
         person, he  may  not  appeal  under  these  Regulations  unless  he
         produces -
                 (a) an EEA family permit, or
                 (b) other proof that he is related as claimed to that other
             person.
            (4) For the purposes of paragraphs (2) and (3), a document -
                (a) is to be regarded  as  being  what  it  purports  to  be
             provided that it is reasonably apparent; and
                (b) is to be regarded as relating to the person producing it
             unless it is reasonably apparent that  it  relates  to  another
             person.
              ...".


11.  Manifestly  this  regulation  does  not  contain  a  rule  of   general
application about acceptance of  documents  and  certainly  does  not  cover
documents evidencing employment. Its scope is confined to  setting  out  who
may appeal under these Regulations against an EEA decision  and  deals  only
with documents required to prove either  a person's nationality (under  regs
29(2)) or his family member's connection with him (under regulation  29(3)).
It may well be that the provisions of the 2000 Regulations  the  immigration
judge meant to invoke were regulation 15(1) and 15(3), which are part  of  a
paragraph  dealing  with  the  issue  of  residence  permits  and  residence
documents. They state:

    "(1) Subject to regulations 16 and 22(1), the Secretary  of  State  must
    issue a residence permit  to  a  qualified  person  on  application  and
    production of -
       a) a valid identity card or passport issued by an EEA State; and
       b) the proof that he is a qualified person."
    ...
    (3) In the case of a worker, confirmation  of  the  worker's  engagement
    from his employer or a certificate of employment is sufficient proof for
    the purposes of paragraph 1(b)."

12. Secondly, the immigration judge overlooked the fact that in  respect  of
both outstanding applications and appeals the governing Regulations  (except
in one  respect)  were  in  fact  the  2006  Regulations,  these  being  the
applicable law retrospectively as well as prospectively. These  Regulations,
of course, implement  in  UK  law  the  Citizens'  Directive  (EC  Directive
2004/38/EC).  The  provision  he  should  have  considered,  therefore,  was
regulation 16(2) of the 2006 Regulations. This  states  that  it  is  to  be
considered "sufficient proof" for the purposes of proving one  is  a  worker
that a person produce at  the  date  of  application  "confirmation  of  the
worker's engagement from his employer or a certificate  of  employment  ..."
Strictly speaking, regulation  regulation  16(2)  of  the  2006  Regulations
(like regulation 15(2) of the 2000 Regulations) is only concerned  with  the
issuing of a registration  certificate  (formerly  residence  permit)  to  a
person upon application for the same.  Regulation  16(2)  is  not  concerned
with renewal of such a document. But in any event neither regulation  16  of
the 2006 Regulations nor  any  earlier  set  of  EEA  Regulations  (nor  any
provisions  of  the  Citizens'  Directive)  specifies  anything  about   the
national  decision-maker  needing  to  see  the   originals   of   documents
evidencing employment.

13. It is right that production of  originals  should  be  regarded  as  the
principal way  to  prove  employment,  since  if  proof  by  such  means  is
provided, that is the  end  of  the  matter;  but  it  is  not  said  to  be
necessarily the only way. Indeed, it is a  general  principle  of  Community
law relating to the exercise of free movement rights that, except  where  it
is specified that only certain means of evidence  are  admissible,  evidence
may be adduced "by any appropriate means" (Case C-36389 Roux  [1991]  ECR-1-
273; C-215/03 Salah Oulane, para 53). So far as UK  appeals  are  concerned,
rule 51(5) of the Asylum and Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules  2005
leaves to the discretion of the Tribunal, where a party seeks to  rely  upon
a copy of a document as evidence, whether to require the  original  document
to be produced; such discretion in an EEA case  would  have  to  applied  in
accordance with general principles of Community law.


14. We have already presaged another point of confusion  which  has  arisen.
Indeed it is one which arises in many EEA appeals currently. Since the  time
when the application for  reconsideration  came  before  Senior  Immigration
Judge Nicholls (on 6 April 2006) the relevant legal framework  has  changed.
By virtue of paragraph 3(1) of Schedule 4 to the 2006 Regulations:

    "(1) An application for an EEA family permit, a residence permit  or  a
    residence document made but not determined under the  2000  Regulations
    before 30 April 2006 shall be treated as  an  application  under  these
    Regulations for an EEA family permit, a registration certificate  or  a
    residence, respectively."

15. By virtue of paragraph 5(1) of Schedule 4 to the  2006  Regulations,  it
became necessary as from 30 April 2006 to decide all pending  appeals  under
these new Regulations, even though at the date of decision -  and  the  date
of hearing -  the 2000 Regulations (as  amended)  still  applied.  Paragraph
5(1) of Schedule 4  states:


    "Where an appeal against an EEA decision under the 2000 Regulations  is
    pending immediately before 30 April 2006 that appeal shall  be  treated
    as a pending appeal against the corresponding EEA decision under  these
    regulations".

16. Only in the context of considering the prior issue of whether - in  view
of the fact that the first appellant had a residence permit which was  still
valid at the time of application - the decision made by  the  respondent  in
respect of both appellants on 10  February  2005  was  lawful,  will  it  be
necessary to have regard to the 2000 Regulations.

The applicable legal framework
17. So far as the immigration judge's treatment  of  the  first  appellant's
appeal is concerned, we have already noted that  it  is  necessary  to  have
regard first of all to whether, given that she had a valid residence  permit
[registration certificate] at the time, the decision of  the  respondent  on
10 February 2005 was a lawful one. To decide that it is first  necessary  to
have regard to the law in place at that time, in particular  regulations  18
(1), 19(1) and 22(2) of the 2000 Regulations. Regulation 18(1) states:

   "18. Duration of residence permit
      1) Subject to the following  paragraphs  and  to  regulations  20  and
         22(2), a residence permit must be valid for at least 5  years  from
         the date of issue."

18. Regulation 19(1) states:

    "Renewal of residence permit
    (1) Subject to paragraph (2) and (3) and to regulations 20 and 22(2), a
    residence permit must be renewed on application.
    (2) On the occasion of the first renewal of a workers' residence permit
    the validity may be  limited  to  one  year  if  the  worker  has  been
    involuntarily unemployed in the United Kingdom for more than one year.
    (3) In the case of a student whose first residence permit is limited to
    one year by virtue of regulation 18(5),  renewal  may  be  for  periods
    limited to one year".

19. Regulation 22 of the 2000  Regulations,  headed  "Refusal  to  issue  or
renew residence permit or residence document, and  revocation  of  residence
permit, residence document or EEA family permit" states at (2):


    " (2) The Secretary  of  State  may  revoke,  or  refuse  to  renew,  a
    residence permit or      residence document if -
         (a) the revocation or refusal is justified  on  grounds  of  public
         policy, public security or public health; or
         (b) the person to whom the residence permit or  residence  document
         was issued -
           i) is not, or has ceased to be, a qualified person;
            (ii) is not, or has  ceased  to  be,  the  family  member  of  a
            qualified person."




20. In the  2006  Regulations  the  provision  covering  similar  ground  is
regulation 20(1) and (2), which state:

    (1) The Secretary of State may refuse to issue,  revoke  or  refuse  to
    renew  a  registration  certificate,  a  residence  card,  a   document
    certifying permanent residence or a permanent  residence  card  if  the
    refusal or revocation is justified on grounds of public policy,  public
    security or public health.
    (2) The Secretary of State may revoke a registration certificate  or  a
    residence card or refuse to renew a residence card if the holder of the
    certificate or card has ceased to have a right to  reside  under  these
    Regulations".

21. Regarding the right to reside, regulation 14(1) of the 2000  Regulations
states: "A qualified person is entitled to reside  in  the  United  Kingdom,
without the requirement for leave to remain under the 1971 Act, for so  long
as he remains a qualified person". Regulation 14(1) of the 2006  Regulations
is in similar terms.

22. Also relevant to the  first  appellant's  case  (for  reasons  explained
earlier) are regulations 15, 16 and 18:

    "Permanent  right of residence


    15. (1) the following persons shall acquire the right to reside in  the
         United Kingdom  permanently -


        (a)   an EEA national who has resided  in  the  United  Kingdom  in
              accordance with these regulations for a continuous  period  of
              five years;


        (b)   ...;


        (c)   a worker or self-employed  person  who  has  ceased  economic
              activity;


              (d)- (f) ...


    (2) Once  acquired,  the  right  of  permanent  residence  under  these
         regulations shall be lost only  through  absence  from  the  United
         Kingdom for a period exceeding two consecutive years.


    (3) but this regulations is subject to regulation 19(3)(b)


    Issue of registration certificate


    16. (1) The Secretary of State must issue a registration certificate to
         a qualified person immediately on application and production of  -


         (a)  a valid identity card or passport issued by an EEA state;
         (b)  proof that he is a qualified person.


        (2)   In the  case  of  a  worker,  confirmation  of  the  worker's
         engagement from his employer or a    certificate of  employment  is
         sufficient proof for the purposes of paragraph  (1)(b).
           ...
         (7) A registration certificate issued under this  regulation  shall
         state the name and address of the person registering and  the  date
         of registration and shall be issued free of charge.


         (8) But this regulation is subject to regulation 20(1)."
         ....


     Issue of document  certifying  permanent  residence  and  a  permanent
    residence card
    18 (1) The Secretary of State  must  issue  the  EEA  national  with  a
    permanent right of  residence  under  regulation  15  with  a  document
    certifying permanent residence as soon as possible after an application
    for such a document and proof that the EEA national has such a right is
    submitted to the Secretary of State.


          (2)  The Secretary of State must issue a person who is not an EEA
    national who has a permanent right of  residence  under  regulation  15
    with a permanent residence card no later than six months after the date
    on which an application for a permanent residence card and  proof  that
    the person has such a right is submitted to the Secretary of State.


           (3) Subject to paragraph (5) and regulation 23(3),  a  permanent
         residence card shall be valid for ten years from the date of  issue
         and must be renewed on application.


            (4) A document certifying permanent residence and  a  permanent
         residence card shall be issued free of charge.


           (5) A document certifying permanent residence  and  a  permanent
         residence card shall cease to be valid if the holder ceases to have
         a right of permanent residence under regulation 15."


23. So far as the second appellant is concerned, here too  it  is  necessary
first of all to  consider the law as it stood at the date  of  decision  and
in particular regulation 15(2) and regulation 20 of  the  2000  Regulations.
Regulation 15(2) states:

   "Subject to regulation 22(1)[refusal on grounds of public policy,  public
   security or public health], the Secretary of State must issue a residence
   permit to a family member of a qualified person  (or,  where  the  family
   member is not an EEA national, a residence document) on  application  and
   production of -
     a) a valid identity card issued by an EEA State or a valid passport;
     b) in the case of a family member who required an EEA  family  permit,
        for admission to the United Kingdom, such a permit; and
     c) in the case of a person not falling within sub-paragraph (b), proof
        that he is a family member of a qualified person."

24. Regulation 20(1) of the same 2000 Regulations states that:

    "The family member of an EEA national is entitled to a residence permit
    or residence document of the same  duration  as  the  residence  permit
    granted to the qualified person of whose family he is a member; and the
    family member's residence permit or residence document  is  subject  to
    the same terms as to renewal".

25. Insofar as it is necessary to consider the second  appellant's  position
under the 2006 Regulations, the key provision is  regulation  14(2)  of  the
2006 Regulations, which states:

     "A family member of a qualified person residing in the United  Kingdom
    under paragraph (1) or of an EEA national with  a  permanent  right  of
    residence under regulation 15 is  entitled  to  reside  in  the  United
    Kingdom for so long as he remains the family member  of  the  qualified
    person or EEA national."


26. The requirement to retrospectively  treat  the  first  appellant's  pre-
existing residence permit as a  registration  certificate  is  contained  at
paragraph 2(2) of Schedule 4 to the 2006 Regulations:

    "(2) Subject to paragraph (4), a residence permit issued under the 2000
    Regulations shall, after 29 April 2006, he treated  as  if  it  were  a
    registration certificate issued under these Regulations".

Our analysis and decision on whether there is a material error of law

27.  As  already  noted,  it  is  first  necessary  to  evaluate  the  legal
consequences of the fact that at the date of decision in February  2005  the
first appellant had a residence permit [registration certificate] which  was
still valid. Even though the Secretary  of  State  (and  immigration  judge)
overlooked  this,  we  cannot.   As   a   residence   permit   [registration
certificate] had already been issued and was still valid, the only  decision
open to him to make was whether it should or should  not  be  renewed.   Her
residence permit [registration certificate] being  still  valid,  the  first
appellant continued to  be  a  "qualified  person"  within  the  meaning  of
regulation 5 of the 2000 Regulations unless the Secretary of  State  made  a
decision under regulation 22 to revoke or refuse  to  renew  that  residence
permit [registration certificate]. Regulation 22 gave  him  the  power  (not
the obligation) to do that in two circumstances only:  where  revocation  or
refusal is justified on grounds of public policy, public security or  public
health (22(2)(a)); or where the first appellant "is not, or  has  ceased  to
be,  a  qualified  person..."  (22(2)(b)).  Under  the   2006   Regulations,
regulation 20(1) and (2) are to the same effect.

28. So far as regulation 22(2)(a) is concerned, there is nothing  before  us
to suggest that at that time there were public policy,  public  security  or
public health grounds for not  renewing  her  residence  permit[registration
certificate].

29. What about regulation 22(2)(b)? It is not in dispute that from the  time
she arrived in the UK up until her application on 16 August 2004, the  first
appellant was either in work or enrolled as a  student.  We  have  very  few
details of her student history in the  UK  but  in  any  case  there  is  no
dispute about the fact that  during  this  period  she  was  exercising  her
Treaty rights. The same is true of the period between  her  application  and
the date of decision, the 10 February 2005. Prior to the  immigration  judge
issuing his determination the  respondent  did  dispute  that  the  covering
letter from her employers sent with the application was satisfactory, as  it
was not endorsed with the company's stamp and she had not provided 3  recent
wage slips. However, Mr Raj stated that it was not  now  disputed  that  she
had worked as claimed from 19 July 2004 until June or July 2005.  Given  the
state of the documentary evidence which was  before  the  immigration  judge
(comprising, in addition to  the  employer's  certificate  included  in  the
first appellant's completed Form EEC1, an Inland Revenue PAYE Coding  Notice
for 2004-5 and bank statements showing payments from her employers into  her
account covering a good deal of the relevant period), that in our  view  was
a sensible concession.

30. In any event this concession is decisive to the proper outcome  of  this
case. For it establishes that at the date  of  decision  the  appellant  was
still a worker. She had not thus ceased  to  be  a  qualified  person  under
regulation 22(2)(b).

31. Accordingly neither of the only two circumstances set out in  regulation
22(2) of the 2000 Regulations  (rendering  renewal  of  a  residence  permit
capable of refusal) applied.  Applying the corresponding provisions  of  the
2006 Regulations (regulation 20(1) and (2)) gives the same result.

32. Arguably, since the first appellant sought issue of a  residence  permit
rather than, as she should have, renewal of her residence permit, she  might
be thought to  have  never  made  an  application  for  renewal  whilst  her
residence permit was still valid. However, we  consider  that  in  order  to
give effet utile to her EEA rights, her application must  be  understood  to
have been in  essence  to  renew  her  residence  permit  [now  registration
certificate: see regulation 3(1) of Schedule 4 to the 2006 Regulations].

33. Hence the decision of 10 February 2005, being made under  provisions  of
the EEA Regulations which had no application to the first appellant's  case,
was not in accordance with the law.

34. The failure of the immigration judge to recognise that the  decision  of
the Secretary of State was unlawful amounted to an  error  of  law.  It  was
also a material error, since it involved him in allowing  the  appeal  under
inapplicable provisions of the 2006 Regulations.

35. It seems to us that similar considerations  must  apply  to  the  second
appellant's appeal. Here also the immigration judge allowed the appeal on  a
flawed basis. He failed to recognise that the decision of the  Secretary  of
State was unlawful. Being made under  inapplicable  provisions  of  the  EEA
Regulations, the immigration judge's decision to allow the  appeal  was  not
in accordance with the law.

Our decision on these appeals
36. We consider we are in a position to decide these appeals for  ourselves.
The relevant facts are no longer in dispute and the legal  consequences  are
clear-cut.

The first appellant
37. In relation to the first appellant, she was plainly a person who  had  a
right of  residence  under  regulation  14  of  the  2000  Regulations  [now
regulation 14 of the 2006 Regulations], by virtue of remaining  a  qualified
person. Her application for a residence permit must be  understood  to  have
been for a renewal of a residence permit [now registration certificate]  and
the only decision that could have been  made  on  that  application  was  to
renew her residence permit [now registration certificate]. Regulation 19  of
the 2000 Regulations states:

    "Renewal of residence permit
    (1) Subject to paragraph (2) and (3) and to regulations 20 and 22(2), a
    residence permit must be renewed on application.
    (2) On the occasion of the first renewal of a workers' residence permit
    the validity may be  limited  to  one  year  if  the  worker  has  been
    involuntarily unemployed in the United Kingdom for more than one year.
    (3) In the case of a student whose first residence permit is limited to
    one year by virtue of regulation 18(5),  renewal  may  be  for  periods
    limited to one year".

38. [The 2006 Regulations contain similar rights in respect  of  renewal  of
registration certificates.]

39. As already explained  regulation  22(2)  of  the  2000  Regulations  and
regulation 20(1) and (2) of the 2006 Regulations did not apply to the  first
appellant since she was not affected by the public policy proviso  contained
in these regulations and she had not ceased to be a worker under them.

40. We would also observe that renewal of the  first  appellant's  residence
permit [now registration certificate] could not contain  any  limitation  on
its validity since on that occasion (10 February  2005)  she  had  not  been
involuntarily unemployed in the United Kingdom for more than  one  year  and
had not had her first residence permit limited to one year.

41. The decision we substitute for that  of  the  immigration  judge  is  to
allow the first appellant's appeal on the basis that the law  requires  that
at the date of decision she should  have  been  granted  a  renewal  of  her
residence permit [now registration certificate].

42. Since we have to give effect to the 2006 Regulations - and  as  we  have
sought to indicate where  appropriate  by  use  of  square  brackets  -  the
document which will now have to be issued to the first appellant  will  have
to be in the form of a registration  certificate:  see  regulation  3(1)  of
Schedule 4.

43. There is a further question of whether we should  also  include  in  our
decision a declaration that the first appellant has  a  permanent  right  of
residence, but that is best left for treatment later on.

The second appellant
44. In relation to the second appellant, at the date of decision he  plainly
had  a  right  to  reside  by  virtue  of  regulation  14(2)  of  the   2000
Regulations, which states:

    "A family member of a qualified person is entitled  to  reside  in  the
    United Kingdom without the requirement for [leave to remain  under  the
    1971 Act]. For so long as he remains the family member of  a  qualified
    person. "

45. Regulation 14(3) of the 2006 Regulations states similarly:

    "A family member who has retained the right of residence is entitled to
    reside in the United Kingdom for so long as he remains a family  member
    who has retained the right of residence".


46. It is also clear from the 2000 Regulations that  prior  to  10  February
2005 the first and second appellants' right to reside  and  pursue  economic
activity was unaffected by the fact that their 16  August  2004  application
for a (renewal of a) residence document [now  registration  certificate  and
residence card respectively] had not been determined  by  the  Secretary  of
State: see regulation 14(3).

47.  As  regards  the  second  appellant's   entitlement   to   confirmatory
documentation of such a family member's right, the position is less clear.

48. As a family member of a qualified person (and there  is  no  dispute  in
this case that the second appellant was a family member within  the  meaning
of the 2000 -  and  2006  -  Regulations),  he  was  entitled  to  have  his
application considered in line with the first appellant's. Although  he  had
only become a family member (just over two years) after the first  appellant
had  been  issued  with  a  residence  permit,  his  position  stood  to  be
considered under regulation 20, read in conjunction with  regulation  15  of
the 2000 Regulations. Regulation 20, we remind ourselves, states that:

    "The family member of an EEA national is entitled to a residence permit
    or residence document of the same  duration  as  the  residence  permit
    granted to the qualified person of whose family he is a member; and the
    family member's residence permit or residence document  is  subject  to
    the same terms as to renewal".

49. Regulation 17 of the 2006 Regulations, although  is  slightly  different
terms, contains similar guarantees.

50. Whilst unlike the first appellant  the  second  appellant  had  no  pre-
existing residence permit, the wording of regulation 20 [see now  regulation
17  of  the  2006  Regulations]  makes  clear  that  the   family   member's
entitlement is purely  derivative  and  that  any  residence  document  [now
residence card] to which he is entitled has to be of the same  duration  and
on the same terms as the EEA national.

51. Regulation 15(2) of the 2000 Regulations state:

    "(2) Subject to regulation 22(1), the Secretary of State must  issue  a
    residence permit to a family member of a qualified  person  (or,  where
    the family member is not an EEA  national,  a  residence  document)  on
    application and production of -


         (a) a valid identity card  issued  by  an  EEA  State  or  a  valid
         passport;
         (b) in the case of a family  member  who  required  an  EEA  family
         permit for admission to the United Kingdom, such a permit; and
         (c) in the case of a person not falling within  sub-paragraph  (b),
         proof that he is a family member of a qualified person;
         ..."
52.  Regulation  17(1)-(2)  of  the  2006  Regulations  similarly   requires
production of a "valid passport".

53. Whilst it is not in dispute that at the  date  of  decision  the  second
appellant remained the family member of the first appellant, we do not  know
if he produced a valid passport as  required  by  Regulation  15(2)(a)  [now
Regulation 17 of the 2006 Regulations]: obviously he did not  have  a  valid
identity card issued by an EEA State. So in  the  second  appellant's  case,
whilst we must find that he has a right to reside, we cannot decide that  he
is entitled to a residence document [now residence card: see regulation  17,
with reference to regulation 3(1) of Schedule 3 of  the  2006  Regulations].
Issue by the Secretary of State of such a document will  depend  on  whether
he can produce a valid national passport.

54. In the light of our  decision  on  both  appellants'  appeals  both  the
principal grounds for reconsideration and the appellant's principal  grounds
of appeal fall away. In particular it is not  necessary  for  us  to  decide
whether the first appellant remained a worker or a student at  the  date  of
hearing. However, it is necessary to address one additional argument  raised
by Mr O'Ryan and to clarify one matter  concerning  the  second  appellant's
right to reside.

The issue of permanent residence
55. Mr O'Ryan argued  that  we  were  required  to  decide  that  the  first
appellant had a permanent right of  residence  since  the  2006  Regulations
require us to give retrospective effect to such a  right.  Although  he  did
not develop it in detail, his argument deserves to be taken  seriously.  The
first appellant's residence permit was valid for five years  and  was  never
revoked prior to its expiry. There is nothing to suggest that her  residence
in the UK during that period was not continuous. At the  time  the  decision
was made (and indeed at the  time  when  the  immigration  judge  heard  the
appellant's appeal) there was  no  EU  legislation  in  force  affording  EU
nationals a right to permanent residence on  the  basis  of  five  years  of
continuous residence (although there were provisions  for  settlement  under
the Immigration Rules HC 395 at paragraph 255).  Such  a  provision  was  an
innovation  introduced  by  the  Citizens'  Directive  (2004/83)   and   was
implemented by the UK in the 2006 Regulations at Regulation 15 and  18  (see
above). However, as already  noted  the  2006  Regulations  contain  deeming
provisions which require us to give retrospective effect to  the  rights  it
enshrines.   Paragraph 6(1) of Schedule 4 provides:

    "(1)    Any period during which a person carried out an activity or was
         resident  in  the  United  Kingdom  in  accordance  with  the  2000
         regulations shall be treated as a period during  which  the  person
         carried out that activity or was resident in the United Kingdom  in
         accordance with these regulations for the purposes  of  calculating
         periods of activity and residence under the regulations."

56. Mirroring Article 16 of the Citizens' Directive, regulation 15 sets  out
that subject  to  meeting  requirements  which  are  specified  (none  being
expressed as requiring application) "[t]he following persons  shall  acquire
the right to reside in the United Kingdom permanently -...".  Regulation  18
places an obligation on the respondent to  issue  an  EEA  national  with  a
permanent right of residence under regulation 15 with a document  certifying
permanent residence as soon as possible  "after an application  for  such  a
document and proof that the EEA national has such a right  is  submitted  to
the Secretary of State."  This too mirrors the provision  in  the  Citizens'
Directive at Article 19: ("Upon application Member States shall issue  Union
Citizens' entitled to permanent residence, after  having  verified  duration
of residence, with a document certifying permanent residence").

57. Thus it can be seen that neither the 2006 Regulations nor  the  (parent)
Citizens' Directive makes acquisition of the right  of  permanent  residence
(as distinct  from  certification  of  the  right  by  way  of  a  document)
contingent upon an application. In this regard there is a  clear  difference
between regulations 15 and 18.

58. Can these provisions be applied by us in the appellant's favour?  To  be
fair to Mr O'Ryan, he only sought that  we  apply  the  former,  but  it  is
important that we clarify the legal position regarding both.

59. We have  no  difficulty  in  treating  the  first  appellant's  original
grounds of appeal against the decision to refuse her a residence  permit  as
including, retrospectively, a ground that she  be  recognised  as  having  a
right of permanent residence: that, it seems to us, is necessitated  by  the
retrospective provisions of the 2006 Regulations. We are  also  prepared  to
accept that the appellant appears to meet  the  requirements  of  regulation
15: she falls within regulation 15(1)(a): " an EEA national who has  resided
in the United Kingdom in accordance with these Regulations for a  continuous
period of five years".

60. However, the question still remains  whether  we  have  jurisdiction  to
decide that the appellant has a  permanent  right  of  residence.   At  this
point is it important to recall the  appeal  structure  in  respect  of  EEA
decisions as provided by the 2006 Regulations is predicated on  there  being
an EEA decision. By regulation 2 "EEA decision":

   "means a decision under these Regulations that concerns a person's -
    a) entitlement to be admitted to the United Kingdom;
    b) entitlement to be issued  with  or  have  renewed,  or  not  to  have
       revoked,  a  registration  certificate,  residence   card,   document
       certifying permanent residence or permanent residence card; or
    c) removal from the United Kingdom".


61. These provision  might  appear  to  mean  that  the  Tribunal  only  has
jurisdiction in respect of an EEA decision regarding a  document  certifying
permanent  residence.  However,  by  virtue  of  Schedule  1  to  the   2006
Regulations certain provisions of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum
Act  2002  are  to  have  effect  in  relation  to  an  appeal  under  these
Regulations "as if it were an appeal against an immigration  decision  under
section 82(1) of that Act". They include section  84(1)  [except  paragraphs
(a) and (f), which  concern  application  of  the  immigration  rules],  and
sections 103A. Section 84(1) states that  "An  appeal  under  section  82(1)
against an immigration decision must be  brought  on  one  or  more  of  the
following grounds-"


62. Section 84(1)(d) states:


    "that the appellant is an EEA national or a member of the family of  an
    EEA national and the decision breaches the appellant's rights under the
    Community Treaties in respect of entry to or residence  in  the  United
    Kingdom;"


63. In the light of these provisions two things are clear.

64. First of all we are obliged by s.84(1)(d) of the 2002  Act  to  consider
whether the decision appealed against breaches the first appellant's  rights
under the Community Treaties in respect of entry  to  or  residence  in  the
United Kingdom. In our view the decision plainly did (and does)  breach  her
right under  the  Citizens'  Directive  to  permanent  residence.  Thus  our
decision has to include a declaration (by which we mean a  determination  of
the matter under s.86(2) of the 2002  Act)  that  the  first  appellant  has
established a right to permanent residence.

65.  Secondly,  however,  although  the  first  appellant  has  a  right  of
permanent residence under  regulation  15,  she  has  never  applied  for  a
regulation 18 document certifying this fact.  Nor can we see that  there  is
any provision in the 2006 Regulations or  anywhere  else   entitling  us  to
treat such an application as having been made merely by the  act  of  having
applied (or, as here, being taken to have applied)  for  a  renewal  of  her
residence permit[registration certificate] . Indeed there are reasons of  EU
public policy why it would be  unwise  to  equate  the  two:  not  every  EU
citizen exercising Treaty rights and  wanting  recognition  of  a  right  to
reside would wish to  avail  himself  of  a  document  certifying  permanent
residence rights in another Member State, even if he has acquired  permanent
residence as a matter of EU law. To do so may have adverse implications  for
personal taxation or a person's business affairs (to take just two  possible
examples). The right was introduced to encourage  integration,  not,  as  we
understand it, to compel it. Hence the issue of whether  this  appellant  is
entitled  to  a  Regulation  18  document  certifying  permanent  right   of
residence cannot arise before us, as it is something  which she is  required
to apply for but has not yet done so.

66. This may seem an oddity, given that, as  Article  25  of  the  Citizens'
Directive highlights, possession of  confirmatory  documents  may  under  no
circumstances be made a precondition for the exercise of a  right.  However,
once an application is made, any adverse decision will attract  a  right  of
appeal. Thus we see no lack of judicial  safeguards.  Further,  as  we  have
seen, we have been able to declare that the first appellant is  entitled  to
permanent residence.

The second appellant's right to reside
67. We have already set out our  reasons  for  concluding  that  the  second
appellant's appeal  (like  the  first  appellant's)  stands  to  be  allowed
because the respondent's decision was unlawful and  the  legal  consequences
are clear at  least  in  respect  of  his  right  to  reside.  He  has  that
entitlement by virtue of Regulation 14(2)  of  the  2006  Regulations.  This
states:

     "A family member of a qualified person residing in the United  Kingdom
    under paragraph (1) ...is entitled to reside in the United Kingdom  for
    so long as he remains the family member of the qualified person or  EEA
    national."


68. We did not hear argument on the issue, but it  is  right  that  we  draw
attention to there being a possible question  of  whether  regulation  14(2)
properly implements the Citizens' Directive. The  Directive's  corresponding
provision, Art 7(1)(d), is in more restrictive terms. It states:

    "All Union Citizens' shall have the right of residence on the territory
    of another Member State for a period of longer  than  three  months  if
    they:
          ...
          (d) are family members accompanying or joining a Union citizen who
         satisfies the conditions referred to in points (a), (b)  or  (c)  [
         subparagraph (1)(a) applies to workers or self-employed persons  in
         the host Member State]." (emphasis added)


69. Regulation 14(2), by contrast, contains  no  "accompanying  or  joining"
requirement. This might seem at  first  sight  to  suggest  that  regulation
14(2) is to be considered as an example of defective implementation  and  so
give rise to a question of whether Article 7 of  the  Directive  has  direct
effect. However, Article 7 has to be  read  together  with  recital  29  and
Article 37. The latter states:

    "The  provisions  of  this  Directive  shall  not  affect   any   laws,
    regulations or administrative provisions laid down by  a  Member  State
    which  would  be  more  favourable  to  the  persons  covered  by  this
    Directive."

70. The  effect  of  Article  37  is  to  permit  a  Member  State  to  pass
implementing legislation which is more generous than the Directive. That  is
what has happened in the  United  Kingdom  in  relation  to  family  members
covered by regulation 14(2).

Conclusions

71. The immigration judge materially erred in law in failing  to  understand
that the decision made by the respondent in respect of both  appellants  was
unlawful  and  in  going  on  to  allow  their  appeals  on  the  basis   of
inapplicable provisions of the EEA Regulations.

72. The decision we substitute in relation to  the  first  appellant  is  to
allow her appeal on the basis that  at  the  date  of  decision  she  was  a
qualified person and so entitled to a  residence  permit  [now  registration
certificate].  She  is  also  entitled   to   a   declaration   (meaning   a
determination of the matter under s.86(2) of the 2002 Act) that  she  has  a
right of permanent residence under regulation 15 of the 2006 Regulations.

73. The decision we substitute in relation to the  second  appellant  is  to
allow his appeal on the basis that at the date of decision he was  a  family
member of a qualified person (the first appellant) and as such  entitled  to
a right to reside. Whether, however, he is also entitled to be  issued  with
a residence document [now residence card] will depend on whether he  had  at
the relevant time a valid passport.



Signed:


         Dr H H Storey, Senior Immigration Judge


         Approved for electronic distribution.





