
ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL


                EA (Timeous appeal treated as late) Ghana [2006] UKAIT 00036

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

                                       Date of Publication: 12 April 2006

                                   Before:

                    Mr C M G Ockelton (Deputy President)
                       Mr J Bailey (Immigration Judge)
                       Mr G Peart (Immigration Judge)


                                   Between


                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, ACCRA
                                                                  Respondent

A decision that an appeal is in time, and a decision on  whether  to  extend
time for appealing cannot be reversed or reconsidered within  the  Tribunal.
But a clearly in-time notice of appeal  gives  rise  to  a  pending  appeal,
which is not brought to an end by an (incorrect) statement that  the  notice
of appeal was out of time.  The Tribunal  therefore  has  power  to  reverse
such a statement if the evidence clearly shows that  the  notice  of  appeal
was in time. (N.B. Such powers are to be exercised only  by  the  member  of
the AIT appointed to have oversight of the Registry at Loughborough.)

                                    NOTE

  1. The Appellant applied for a visitor's visa and was refused,  the  date
     of service of the decision being 22 July 2005.  He had until 28 August
     2005 to lodge an appeal against that decision.  Under  Rule  6(2)  and
     (4) he could chose whether to serve the notice on the Tribunal  or  on
     the Entry Clearance Officer.  It appears that he did both.   The  copy
     of the notice served on the Tribunal arrived on  26  August.   It  was
     seen by an Immigration Judge who decided that it was out of  time  and
     refused to extend time.  Notice of that conclusion  was  sent  to  the
     Appellant.

  2. He replied stating that he had served a notice of appeal on the  Entry
     Clearance Officer by post on 13 July 2005 and that he had  seen  proof
     of delivery signed by Mr E Adayit of the Visa Section in  Accra  dated
     14 July 2005 at 9:09am.  We see no reason to dispute that statement by
     the Appellant.  It follows that his appeal was in time.

  3. Where a notice of appeal is served late, the Tribunal may  extend  the
     time for appealing if it  is  satisfied  that  by  reason  of  special
     circumstances it would be unjust not to do so.  By  Rule  10(6),  "the
     Tribunal must decide any issue as to whether a notice  of  appeal  was
     given in time, or whether to extend the time limit for appealing, as a
     preliminary  decision  without  a  hearing".   That  means  that   the
     Tribunal's decision  on  such  an  issue  cannot  be  the  subject  of
     reconsideration by the Tribunal, because section  103A(7)(a)  excludes
     reconsideration of procedural, ancillary or preliminary decisions.  It
     follows that, under normal circumstances,  such  a   decision  can  be
     challenged only by Judicial Review.  In the case of a notice of appeal
     given out of time,  there  is  no  doubt  about  the  effect  of  that
     restriction.  An appeal can be brought out of time  only  if  time  is
     extended by the Tribunal, and a refusal to extend time cannot  be  the
     subject of any reconsideration  or  review  by  the  Tribunal  itself.
     Similarly, a decision (if the matter is contested) that an appeal  was
     lodged in time cannot be the  subject  of  a  reconsideration  at  the
     instance of the Respondent:  Judicial Review is the only remedy.

  4. The position is, however, rather different in relation to  a  decision
     that an appeal was lodged out of time.  An Appellant whose  appeal  is
     in fact in time needs no permission to pursue it.  By s104(1)  of  the
     2002 Act his appeal is pending before the Tribunal during  the  period
     beginning when  it  is  instituted  and  ending  when  it  is  finally
     determined, withdrawn or abandoned.  There can be no  doubt  that  the
     service of an in-time notice of appeal institutes an appeal for  these
     purposes.

  5. There may be cases in which the facts  are  not  clear,  so  that  the
     question whether the appeal was in time needs a judicial answer.   But
     if it is clear that the appeal was in time a wrong  decision  that  it
     was out of time does  not  "determine"  the  appeal,  which  therefore
     remains pending.  Because no permission is needed to pursue an in-time
     appeal, in a clear case a decision purporting to refuse to allow it to
     proceed is formally of no effect - although, of course, unless  it  is
     queried, the appeal is unlikely ever to be determined.

  6. If a member of the Tribunal is persuaded that a notice  of  appeal  to
     the Tribunal which has been treated out of time was  in  fact  clearly
     given in time, he should ignore the decision that it was out  of  time
     and  give  parties  notice  that  despite  the   Tribunal's   previous
     indication there is an appeal pending before it which will proceed  to
     determination.  That we do in this case.





                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT
                                                             Date:
