

Asylum and Immigration Tribunal

                                 MK (Lesbians) Albania CG [2009] UKAIT 00036


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |
|on 24th, 25th & 26th September 2008           |                             |
|& 26 November 2008                            |                             |


                                   Before

                     SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE GOLDSTEIN
                      SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE SPENCER
                              MRS M PADFIELD JP

                                   Between

                                     MK

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the appellant:     Ms B Asanovic, Counsel and Ms E Daykin, Counsel
                    instructed by Wilson & Co
For the respondent:    Ms E Laing, QC instructed by the Treasury Solicitor



 1) It cannot be said that without more there is a real risk that  a  woman
    without family support in Albania would suffer destitution amounting to
    inhuman or degrading treatment resulting in  a  breach  of  her  rights
    under article 3 of the ECHR or  persecution,  but  each  case  must  be
    determined on its own facts.

 2) Although it  is  no  longer  illegal  for  consenting  adults  to  have
    homosexual relations in private, homosexual men known to be members  of
    gay associations and those who visit cruising areas in  the  centre  of
    Tirana are likely to be harassed and on occasions  ill-treated  by  the
    police and in individual cases homosexual men may be at  risk  of  harm
    from members of their families.

 3) In general terms, lesbian women do not frequent cruising areas  and  do
    not join LGBT organisations. Therefore there is lacking the opportunity
    for them to be harassed or persecuted by the police.

 4) In general terms in Albania women of lesbian orientation  are  able  to
    carry on lesbian relationships discreetly without attracting  the  risk
    of serious harm.  A lesbian woman,  whose  sexual  orientation  becomes
    known, may be at risk of harm from members of her family,  particularly
    if she is from a traditional family from the north of Albania, but each
    case must be determined on its merits. In such a case, however,  it  is
    likely that there would be an adequacy of state protection.

 5) In any particular case where the safety of  the  return  of  a  lesbian
    woman to Albania is in issue, it will have to be determined whether she
    is  likely  to  behave  discreetly  upon  return  and  if  so   whether
    "discretion" is something  that  she  can  reasonably  be  expected  to
    tolerate, in the light  of  all  of  the  circumstances  of  the  case,
    including the social norms  and  religious  beliefs  commonly  held  in
    Albania. Such a person will only establish a right to refugee status if
    she can establish that the apprehended  violation  of  her  fundamental
    rights is likely to attain a substantial level of seriousness.



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The background

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Albania, born on 21st November 1982.  Her
    appeal against the decision of the respondent, made on 21st April 2006,
    to remove her to Albania at a time and date to be  notified,  following
    the refusal of her asylum and human rights  claims,  was  dismissed  on
    asylum grounds but allowed on human rights grounds under article  8  of
    the ECHR after  a  hearing  by  Immigration  Judge  Grant-Duprez  in  a
    determination promulgated on 8th June 2006.

 2.  On  21st  June  2006   Senior   Immigration   Judge   Mather   ordered
    reconsideration on the application of the respondent for the  following
    reasons:

         "The grounds disclose that the  Immigration  Judge  may  have  made
         errors of law for the arguable reasons given in the application."

 3. The grounds for review asserted that the immigration judge  had  failed
    to give good reasons for finding  that  the  appellant's  rights  under
    article 8 of the ECHR  would  be  breached  if  she  were  returned  to
    Albania.  By a reply dated 24th July 2006 the appellant  asserted  that
    the immigration judge should have allowed the appeal on asylum  grounds
    and on human rights grounds under article 3 of the ECHR.

 4. At a first stage  reconsideration  hearing  before  Senior  Immigration
    Judge  Goldstein  on  15th  June  2007  the  Tribunal  found  that  the
    immigration judge had made errors of law in his  determination  of  the
    appeal but said that there should be a second stage reconsideration  of
    the appeal with all issues  at  large  and  by  the  agreement  of  the
    parties' representatives the positive and adverse credibility  findings
    of the immigration judge, save  for  the  single  finding  that  "these
    people (which was a reference to the appellant's  mother,  brother  and
    possibly her father) are highly unlikely  to  have  told  anyone  else"
    (which was a reference to her sexuality),  should  be  preserved.   The
    reasons for the decision that there was a material error of law in  the
    determination are attached to this determination as Annex A.

The hearing before us

 5. Thus the matter came before us for a second  stage  reconsideration  of
    the appellant's appeal.  The hearing had  previously  been  listed  for
    10th, 11th and 12th June 2008 but had been adjourned on the application
    of the respondent.  Shortly before the hearing before us the  appellant
    made an application for an adjournment of the hearing so  that  further
    evidence could be obtained but this had been refused.   No  application
    for an adjournment of the hearing was renewed by  either  party  before
    us.  Ms Asanovic, however, did indicate that she  was  waiting  for  an
    expert report from Mr Adriatik Bicaku which was due to arrive  by  26th
    September 2008.  Ultimately we indicated  that  we  would  receive  the
    report if it arrived by 2pm on  26th  September  but  unfortunately  Mr
    Bicaku sent the wrong report.   In  the  event  we  were  not  able  to
    complete the hearing on 26th September 2008 and had  to  adjourn  part-
    heard so that we were able to make directions in relation to receipt of
    the report from Mr Bicaku together with newspaper advertisements  which
    Ms Laing had sought to invite the appellant's  comments  upon  together
    with any comments that Dr Mai might have upon them.

 6. Ms Asanovic applied to vary the appellant's  grounds  of  appeal  under
    rule 14 of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure)  Rules  2005
    to include allegations of breaches of Articles 5, 10, 11 and 14 of  the
    ECHR.  We pointed out that rule 15 did not apply by virtue of  rule  29
    to a reconsideration of an appeal and  we  were  unable  to  give  such
    leave.  Ms Asanovic suggested that  she  did  not  need  to  amend  the
    appellant's grounds of appeal which stated that the appeal was  brought
    on grounds under section 84(1)(c) and/or (g) in that  the  respondent's
    immigration decision was contrary to the United  Kingdom's  obligations
    under the Refugee Convention and/or Human Rights Convention  by  reason
    of the facts set  out  in  the  SEF  interview  and  documents  already
    submitted.  We indicated that the appeal before the  immigration  judge
    had not been run on the basis that articles 5, 10, 11 and 14  had  been
    infringed and that in any event all issues were likely to be covered by
    the allegations that the appellant's rights under article 3 and/or 8 of
    the ECHR would be infringed if she were returned to Albania.

 7. At the adjourned hearing  on  26th  November  2008  Ms  Laing  produced
    certified translations of job advertisements in the 26th September 2008
    editions of two Albanian newspapers called "Shekulli" and  "Telegazeta"
    together with untranslated copy pages from the Panorama newspaper dated
    26th September 2008.

 8. We also heard further evidence from Dr Mai in relation to the newspaper
    advertisements and received a report from Mr Adratik Bicaku dated  23rd
    November 2008.  Subsequently it was clarified that Mr  Bicaku  had  not
    intended to say that in Albania suicide was the main cause of death.

 9. We also granted leave to Ms Asanovic to recall the  appellant  to  give
    evidence about a recent contact with her mother as a  result  of  which
    the appellant produced a handwritten additional statement.

10. In the absence of objection from Ms Laing, we gave Ms Asanovic leave to
    put in a further report  from  Ms  Schwandner-Sievers,  who  since  the
    appeal had been adjourned had been on a fact finding mission to Albania
    from 28th September 2008 to 2nd October 2008, notwithstanding  that  Ms
    Schwandner-Sievers was not available to give oral  evidence  before  us
    due to a prior commitment.

11. In order  to  accommodate  the  expert  witnesses  the  appellant  gave
    evidence last and the evidence of  one  of  the  expert  witnesses  was
    interposed before that of the other  was  completed.   Nevertheless  in
    order to avoid confusion we set out the evidence of the appellant first
    and that of the expert witnesses one after the other in its entirety.

12. We should also mention at this stage that at the hearing on 26 November
    2008 it was agreed that Counsel should submit their closing submissions
    in writing.

13. Following their receipt, the appellant's representatives applied  by  a
    letter dated 9th January 2009 to  put  in  evidence,  letters  from  Ms
    Schwandner-Sievers and Dr Mai respectively which sought to  respond  to
    what the appellant's representatives said were  criticisms  harmful  to
    their honesty and reputations contained in the written  submissions  of
    Ms Laing,  relating  to  their  lack  of  knowledge  of  the  newspaper
    advertisements of jobs in Albania.  In  our  view  there  could  be  no
    justification for admitting further evidence at such a  late  stage  in
    the proceedings.  It  should  have  been  apparent  to  any  reasonable
    representative that there might be some comment on the failure  of  the
    experts to mention the newspaper advertisements.   Indeed  Dr  Mai  was
    specifically recalled to deal with them and explained why  he  did  not
    know about them. The appellant's representatives had the opportunity of
    recalling Ms Schwandner-Sievers but chose not to do so and instead  and
    without having previous leave successfully  sought  to  adduce  further
    evidence from her in the form of a further statement which showed  that
    she was invited to comment upon the newspaper advertisement that  could
    have dealt with her reasons for not knowing  about  them.   We  gave  a
    considerable amount of latitude to the appellant's  representatives  to
    present further evidence at short  notice  during  the  course  of  the
    hearing, notwithstanding non-compliance with directions  given  by  the
    Tribunal as to the admission of evidence.

14. We set out in Annex B the sources of the evidence and other material we
    have had regard to in determining this appeal.

The appellant's evidence

The appellant's evidence in chief

15. The appellant chose to give evidence before us.  During the  course  of
    her evidence two  different  interpreters  were  used.   The  appellant
    expressed herself able to understand them and to communicate with them.
     She adopted the contents of the four statements which then existed  as
    being true and correct to the best of her knowledge.  She  was  content
    to adopt them as part of her evidence-in-chief.  Her case is  that  she
    was born in Tirana and is of Muslim ethnic origin.  She had one brother
    who was eight years older.  She was single and lived with  her  parents
    and brother in Tirana.  Her parents'  marriage  had  been  an  arranged
    marriage.  Her father was a carpenter by trade and had worked for  many
    years as a backstage assistant at the Academy of Art  in  Tirana.   Her
    father has been an alcoholic ever since she could remember  and  became
    violent when inebriated.  He used to beat all of the family  until  her
    brother was old enough to stand up to him.  It was unthinkable for  her
    mother to leave her father or to complain to the police.  The appellant
    was educated from the age of 7 until 15 but then had  to  leave  school
    because there was not enough money to pay  for  her  tuition  fees  and
    school materials.  She enjoyed going to school and would have liked  to
    become a social worker.  After she left school she remained at home.

16. The appellant's case is that she had felt sexually attracted to  women,
    which were feelings that she fought against for  some  time.   She  had
    known that she was a lesbian since she was 16 years of age.   From  the
    age of 17 her family had tried to marry her off several times  but  she
    refused to marry because she knew that she was  gay.   Her  refusal  to
    marry became a huge issue for her family but they never suspected  that
    she was gay.  When she was 20 she met a woman called  Mira,  with  whom
    she began a lesbian relationship.  She met her when she used  to  visit
    her uncle Pupi near whom Mira lived.  Mira was two years older than she
    was.  They became friends and whenever she visited her uncle she  spent
    time with Mira.  They would go for  sleepovers  at  each  others  homes
    often and were always in contact.  Because friendships among women were
    common their relationship was never suspected.

17. In January 2005 Mira's family arranged for her  to  marry  someone  and
    Mira did not resist.  After the engagement was announced  Mira  started
    to avoid her.  She married in December 2005.  The  appellant  last  saw
    Mira in December 2005.  After Mira's wedding her parents'  pressure  on
    her to get married intensified.  After Mira's wedding she fell  into  a
    deep depression and had thoughts of ending her life.  She  became  very
    withdrawn, started overeating and put on three stones in  weight.   The
    pressure to marry continued.  She started asking about leaving  Albania
    and decided to come to the United Kingdom  because  she  had  a  friend
    here, Esmeralda who was a British citizen of Albanian origin,  who  had
    lived in the United Kingdom for a long time and with whom she had  been
    friends when she lived in the same area.

18. In September 2005, during the course of an  argument  with  her  mother
    about getting married, she told her that she liked women and  not  men.
    She told her about her intimate relationship with Mira.  Her mother was
    horrified and  said  the  best  option  was  for  her  to  get  married
    immediately.  On her brother being informed the following  morning,  he
    came into the appellant's room, called her a whore and beat her  up  by
    kicking and slapping her.  She was very upset and cried  a  lot  during
    the beating because the appellant believed culturally he did  not  know
    how to process the information.  Until then they had been  very  close.
    She remained in her room for a week  with  no-one  talking  to  her  or
    looking after her.  She believed her father did not care to investigate
    because of his alcohol problem.

19. She contacted Esmeralda shortly after her family found  out  about  her
    homosexuality.  Esmeralda agreed to help her.  She  sent  a  letter  of
    invitation for her to  get  a  visitor's  visa  and  some  money.   The
    appellant hired a travel agent to book a flight to the  United  Kingdom
    and also arrange a visitor's visa.  The appellant  was  interviewed  at
    the British Embassy but did not tell them about her problems as she was
    desperate to leave the country.  She obtained a visitor's visa on  20th
    December 2005.  She did not  leave  Albania  until  9th  February  2006
    because she was waiting  for  Esmeralda  to  wire  the  money  for  the
    airfare.

20. In her statement, dated 21st March 2006, she said that she  called  her
    family two days after she arrived in the United Kingdom.   Her  brother
    picked up the phone.  She heard him say  "it's  her".   He  passed  the
    phone to her  mother.   She  said  that  she  had  left  without  their
    permission so she was dead to them.  She could hear her  sobbing.   Her
    mother put the phone down and she had not spoken to her  family  since.
    Subsequently,  and  notably,  the  appellant  told  us  that  she   now
    telephoned her mother every month.

21. It is the appellant's case that she cannot return  to  Albania  because
    she fears for her life.  Although homosexuality in  legal  in  Albania,
    culturally it is unacceptable.  It is seen as  a  vile  and  disgusting
    thing.  Her family would have forced her into an arranged  marriage  if
    they had found a suitor.  If she refused she  feared  they  would  have
    ended up killing her.  Her family had disowned her.  She had nowhere to
    go in Albania.  The authorities  would  not  help  her.   If  she  were
    returned she would be persecuted by both her family and  the  community
    for being gay.

22. In her statement, dated 19 May 2008, the appellant  said  that  if  she
    were returned to Albania she would have to repress her  sexuality.   If
    she were able to live on her own, away from her family in Albania,  her
    life would be miserable.  She believed she would  be  called  names  by
    people once they discovered her sexual orientation and she would suffer
    discrimination and harassment.  With the economic situation in  Albania
    and her lack of any particular skills, the appellant did not think  she
    could a get employment which would permit her to pay for  accommodation
    and have enough money to support herself.  Since being  in  the  United
    Kingdom the appellant has not been ready to join the highly promiscuous
    gay scene but feels ready to enter into a relationship should she  find
    the right person.   She has been visiting a pub in  Southend  which  is
    known for being a place for gay outings.  She has  met  a  lady  called
    "Miriam" at The Cliff.  Although they are just friends, she is open  to
    new developments.

23. In her statement, dated 5th September 2005, the appellant said that she
    had met another friend  called  Linda  at  The  Cliff.   She  was  very
    interested in another girl but they were good friends.

24. In examination-in-chief Ms Asanovic drew the attention of the appellant
    to the discrepancy between  what  she  said  in  paragraph  37  of  her
    statement dated 11th May 2006  about trying to commit suicide  in  2005
    by cutting her wrist and the  absence  of  any  mention  of  a  suicide
    attempt in what she told Dr Bell.  The appellant  initially  said  that
    what she said in her statement was true but then when her attention was
    again drawn to what she told Dr Bell she admitted that what she told Dr
    Bell was true.  She said what she said in her statement  was  what  she
    had in her head, but she did not do anything.

25. Ms Asanovic then drew the attention of the appellant to the passage  in
    paragraph 26 of the statement, dated 19th May 2008, in which  she  said
    that she started going to The Cliff at the end of January of that year.
     She drew her attention  to  what  she  said  in  paragraph  5  of  her
    statement, dated 5th September 2008, namely that she met Linda  at  The
    Cliff last year.  Ms Asanovic asked how it were possible if she did not
    start going to The Cliff until the end of January 2008.  The  appellant
    said that she started going at the end of last year and  the  beginning
    of this year.

26. Ms Asanovic asked the appellant whether, had she  not  broken  up  with
    Mira, she would have left Albania or stayed.  She said she  would  have
    left because she could not see  any  future.   Ms  Asanovic  asked  her
    whether she would have stayed if she could have  continued  with  Mira.
    The appellant said that she would have left.  Ms Asanovic asked her why
    and her reply was that basically they had  no  future.   Mira's  family
    married her and there was no future for her.  Ms Asanovic asked whether
    if she could have continued with Mira she would  have  stayed  and  her
    reply was "no".

27. At that point the appellant said that she felt ill and wanted  to  stop
    giving evidence as a result of which the Tribunal adjourned the hearing
    until the following day.

28. When the hearing resumed the  following  day,  Ms  Asanovic  asked  the
    appellant whether if Mira had not  got  married  and  they  had  stayed
    together she would have stayed in Albania or left.  The appellant  said
    her connection with Mira did not have any future  in  Albania  and  for
    that reason they separated.  The appellant agreed that they carried  on
    their relationship secretly and discretely.  She said that she did  not
    think that they would  have  been  able  to  continue  like  that.   Ms
    Asanovic asked whether she could not go to  Albania  and  have  another
    secret relationship with someone else.  The appellant said it would  be
    difficult to live in secret with someone else because Albanians  judged
    lesbians in a different way.

The appellant's evidence in cross-examination

29. In  cross-examination,  Ms  Laing  asked  the  appellant  a  number  of
    questions  relating  to  her  asylum  interview  in  April  2006.   The
    appellant said that she remembered answering that it was a crime to  be
    a homosexual in Albania in answer to question  10  and  she  remembered
    saying that the penalty was death or life imprisonment.  It was put  to
    her that the answer was not true, but the appellant said that  it  was.
    The  appellant  denied  that  she  had  exaggerated  the  position   of
    homosexuals in Albania.  She said what she said was her  opinion  which
    she believed, and  homosexuals  were  badly  treated  by  everybody  in
    Albania.  She denied that she had  exaggerated  in  saying  during  her
    asylum interview that her life would be in danger because she could  be
    killed for any reason.

30. When the appellant's attention was drawn to her answer to question 7 in
    her asylum interview, in which she said that her father had beaten  her
    three or four times in six years because she  was  gay;  initially  she
    said that it was true and that her father had beaten her but  when  she
    was asked whether he had beaten her because he found out that  she  was
    gay she said she did not remember.  When it was put to her that she had
    never before suggested in her statements that her father had found  out
    that she was gay, she made no  answer.   Her  attention  was  drawn  to
    paragraph 18 of her statement,  dated  11th  May  2006,  in  which  she
    referred to the answer that she had given in her asylum interview, when
    she said that her father had beaten her three or four times  for  being
    gay.  It was pointed out that in  her  statement  she  said  that  this
    answer was not correct and when she disclosed her sexual orientation to
    her family her father did not even get involved.  She then agreed  that
    what she had said in her statement was true; that  her  father  was  an
    alcoholic and did not want to know about it.

31. The appellant agreed that in paragraph 21 of her statement  dated  21st
    March 2006, she said that her family never suspected that she  was  gay
    and that people in her community did  not  even  know  that  lesbianism
    existed.  She also agreed, that in paragraph 31 of that statement,  she
    said that it was easy  to  carry  on  her  relationship  with  Mira  as
    everyone knew that they had been close friends for years.  They did not
    have any trouble seeing each other and sleeping over  at  each  other's
    places all the time.  She agreed that the only people  who  knew  about
    her relationship with Mira were her mother, because she  had  told  her
    and her brother, because her mother had told him.  She agreed  that  it
    had been possible for her to have a three year long relationship in her
    society without anyone suspecting what was going on and she agreed that
    she had no problems from the Albanian authorities.

32. Ms Laing drew the appellant's attention to the statement in  the  first
    report of Dr Bell as follows:

         "From the above I understand that MK left Albania because  she  was
         persecuted because of the fact of being homosexual, and that  since
         coming to the United Kingdom she has 'come out' as a homosexual and
         identified herself with the homosexual community."

    She drew her attention to passages in Dr  Bell's  report.   She  agreed
    that she had told him she did not behave in a particularly "gay way" in
    the way that was common in the gay community  although  she  was  quite
    certain that another gay woman would easily be able to  tell  that  she
    was a homosexual.  She agreed that only her close friends in the United
    Kingdom knew about her sexuality and she agreed that  even  in  England
    she tried to keep her sexuality discreet.


33. The appellant agreed that she was in touch with  her  mother  and  said
    that it was once a month.  When Ms Laing suggested that her mother  was
    concerned about her situation because she loved her, the appellant said
    that maybe inside her she did love her and she agreed that she told  Dr
    Bell that she felt loved by her mother.  She agreed that she  was  able
    to stay at home until she left for England.  She  told  her  mother  in
    September 2005 about her relationship with Mira and did not leave until
    February 2006.  She agreed that her brother had not attempted  to  kill
    her, that after he found out about her relationship with  Mira  he  was
    upset, notwithstanding that she remained at home for several months  he
    had not attacked her in any way.  She said, however, that when he found
    out about her homosexuality he became more aggressive towards her.  She
    agreed that her father did not know about her homosexuality before  she
    left Albania.  She agreed that he was an alcoholic and in a poor  state
    of health and her mother and brother would have no reason to tell him.

34. The appellant said that what she told Dr Bell, namely that  she  helped
    her mother in her work as a seamstress, taking measurements and  making
    deliveries was true.  Later she said she had not done deliveries and Dr
    Bell had got that wrong.  She said that she had been to the  centre  of
    Tirana and knew there were hotels, cafes, bars and  shops  there.   She
    said she did not know whether women worked in those places or not.  She
    said she had been to shops only close at home and did not often  go  to
    the centre.


35. She agreed that in her statement dated 21st March 2006 she said she did
    not want to be trapped with her family.  She wanted to  be  independent
    and not have a life like her mothers.  She agreed that she  was  really
    quite intelligent.  She agreed that Dr Bell was correct  when  he  said
    that she read Albanian books and she told him she was reading the  work
    of the novelist Hadara and another novel called 'Wine' which was  based
    on an individual's odyssey.

36. She agreed that she had said in her statement dated 5th  December  2008
    that she had a few  close  friends  who  were  Albanian  and  she  felt
    comfortable about them knowing about her sexuality.   She  agreed  that
    not all Albanians had bigoted attitudes towards lesbians.

37. The appellant agreed that she had  no  personal  experience  about  the
    police attitude towards domestic violence.  Neither she nor her  mother
    had reported domestic violence to the police.  She said her mother  had
    not reported it because if she had done so she would not have  got  any
    help from them.

38. The appellant was asked about members of her extended family in Tirana.
     She said that she had a maternal uncle called Pupi and  no  aunts  and
    then said that she had an aunt who was the sister of her  father.   She
    said that she was married with two sons aged 20 and 22, who lived  with
    their mother in Tirana.  She said Pupi had one son who was 23 years  of
    age.

39. The appellant was reminded that in her statement dated  11th  May  2006
    she said she had visited a doctor in Albania in 2005 who gave her  some
    medication for her mental health problems which she took over  a  three
    to four month period.  She said those services were  provided  free  of
    charge and she went to a clinic during that period.

40. Ms Laing drew the appellant's attention to a discrepancy  between  what
    she said in her statement dated 11th May 2006 about  trying  to  commit
    suicide once only when she grabbed a kitchen knife and tried to cut her
    left wrist and what she had said to Dr Bell, namely that there had been
    no suicide attempts or episodes of self-harm.  She said what  she  told
    Dr Bell was true.  She said these things were on her mind but she never
    did it.  She then said that she had  started  to  cut  herself  with  a
    kitchen knife but she did not do it.

41. The appellant said her mother sometimes  brought  a  newspaper  to  her
    house.  She said there might be job adverts in newspapers in Tirana but
    it would be difficult to get a job because you had  to  know  somebody.
    She agreed that maybe there were newspaper advertisements for jobs.  Ms
    Laing invited the appellant to  look  at  some  untranslated  newspaper
    advertisements purportedly from Tirana newspapers, to which  there  was
    an objection from Ms Asanovic, which resulted in us giving leave to  Ms
    Laing  to  produce  legible  copies  of  the  newspaper  advertisements
    together with certified translations at a later date.

The appellant's evidence in re-examination

42. In re-examination the appellant said her mother worked on black  market
    contracts for the local factory and did sewing  for  people  who  lived
    near their house.  She said on rare occasions she may  have  undertaken
    deliveries but mostly her mother did it herself.

43. Ms Asanovic asked the appellant why there  was  a  discrepancy  between
    what she was now saying and what  she  said  before  about  her  father
    knowing about her sexuality.  She said what she said was true and maybe
    she was confused.  She said her father was not interested  in  her  and
    did not want to know anything about her.

44. Ms Asanovic asked her whether her mother said that she missed her.  She
    said that she did.  She was asked whether she had  asked  her  to  come
    back.  She said that she did but she told her that she was  not  coming
    back.  She was asked whether she had invited her to come back  home  to
    live with her.  The appellant said that she had but she did not  accept
    because of the situation.  She said that if she went back home she knew
    they would try to marry her to somebody since they knew that she was  a
    lesbian.

The appellant's evidence when questioned by the Tribunal

45. The Tribunal asked the appellant a number of questions.  The  appellant
    said that she had not told her mother she would come back if  they  did
    not try to marry her to somebody because  she  was  certain  that  they
    would try to do so.  She had known her paternal grandparents, the  last
    of which died in 1996.  Her parents were born and brought up in Tirana.
     She did not know whether her father was still working.  He was working
    when she left Tirana, but later he left because of his alcoholism.   He
    worked at the Institute of Arts creating the stages for  meetings.   By
    profession he was a  carpenter  and  he  prepared  the  stage  for  the
    theatre.  He was skilled man.  She said he had been employed for a long
    time at the Institute of Arts, for more than twenty  years.   She  said
    maybe she got her taste in reading from her  father.   She  recollected
    that he read a lot of books and he was of average intelligence.  He was
    a well-read man.

46. The appellant said that her brother was  not  employed  when  she  left
    Tirana although he had worked as a painter and decorator  at  different
    homes.  He worked for himself.  She said that she had not spoken to her
    father since she left Albania.  There  had  been  no  communication  by
    letter.  She had not contacted her brother in any way or her  uncle  or
    aunt or cousins because she did not have their telephone numbers.   Had
    she got them she would have done so.

47. The appellant was asked why it  was  that  Esmerelda  had  not  made  a
    statement or attended to give evidence for the original hearing or this
    reconsideration.  She said she did not want to get too much involved in
    her case.

48. The appellant was then asked a  number  of  questions  by  Ms  Asanovic
    arising out of those asked by the members of the  Tribunal.   She  said
    that her grandparents were born in a village around Tirana.   She  said
    she got the books she read from the library and knew how to choose them
    because she checked what books were there and took what she liked.  She
    had many books at home in Tirana but could not remember the number.  It
    was usual to have books in Tirana houses.  She said it was her  opinion
    that her father was of average intelligence and was  not  able  to  say
    with whom she compared him.  She agreed that he was well-read  but  she
    did not know whether he read books and newspapers every day.   She  did
    not know if he was working now.  As far as  she  remembered  he  always
    went to work even when he was drinking.

The evidence of the appellant in chief when recalled

49. At the adjourned hearing  on  26th  November  2008  the  appellant  was
    recalled to give evidence  and  relied  upon  a  supplementary  witness
    statement dated 26th November 2008 in which she said  that  lately  her
    mother had not wanted to speak to her.  She said she rang  her  several
    times after the last hearing and when she finally got through she spoke
    to her and asked her if she could come back home and  stay  a  lesbian.
    She said her mother said "You are not a  lesbian.  These  things  don't
    exist, only in dreams and fantasies."  She said her mother told her she
    would arrange a marriage for her through her cousins and said  "I  will
    have you live here if you forget those fantasies and get married".  Her
    mother told her she could not help her find a job  until  she  got  her
    feet on the ground.  She asked her mother whether she did not  want  to
    help her or she could not help her and she said she  did  not  want  to
    help her.  She then put the phone down.  She  thought  her  brother  or
    someone else was at home so she would not speak to her.   On  the  last
    occasion she spoke normally as usual.

The appellant's evidence in cross-examination when recalled

50. In cross-examination by Ms Laing the appellant explained that when  she
    said her mother spoke normally she meant  the  way  in  which  she  had
    described when she gave her evidence previously.  She  agreed  with  Ms
    Laing that she wanted the appeal to succeed.  Ms Laing suggested to her
    that she realised that there were a number of things that she needed to
    show in order to succeed and the appellant agreed.

51. Ms Laing separately suggested to the appellant that one thing was, that
    her family had rejected her, another, was that she would not be able to
    get a job if she went back to Albania  and  further,  that  her  family
    would put pressure on her to get married.  The  appellant  agreed  with
    each of those propositions.  The appellant agreed that  she  remembered
    that she had been asked by a member of the  Tribunal  whether  she  had
    telephoned her mother and asked if she could go back.

52. Ms Laing suggested to the appellant that she was aware that some of the
    answers she gave in cross-examination were not  helpful  to  her  case.
    The appellant confirmed that she was so  aware.   She  agreed  with  Ms
    Laing's suggestion that she now had good reason to make good the damage
    and that was the reason she had made her further statement.

The appellant's evidence in re-examination when recalled

53. In re-examination the appellant was asked whether she was aware of what
    it was that she had said, which made  her  case  not  very  good.   The
    appellant said that last time the judge asked her if she had  contacted
    her mother to ask if she could go  back  home,  but  her  mother  never
    replied.  In relation to the appellant agreeing with  the  propositions
    that Ms Laing had put to her, Ms Asanovic asked her  whether  when  she
    said yes she was saying it to show that she  agreed  or  that  she  had
    understood the question.  The appellant said  she  thought  it  was  in
    answer to the question.

54. Ms Asanovic asked if she could explain what she needed to show in order
    for her case to succeed.  The appellant said that she had to show  that
    she would not have any  help  from  her  family  or  anyone  else.   Ms
    Asanovic asked her what made her think that she must  ring  her  mother
    and ask her the questions.  She said the reason was that she wanted  to
    find out whether her mother was going to find a person for her to marry
    as was the tradition and whether she could not be a lesbian.  She  said
    that the telephone call was her idea and no-one else's.

The evidence of Dr D L Bell

The evidence in chief of Dr Bell

55. For the purpose of his  first  report,  Dr  Bell  had  interviewed  the
    appellant on 21st May 2008 and 17th June 2008, having received a number
    of documents from her representatives.

56. Dr Bell first made reference to the report of  Dr  Michael  Seear,  who
    recorded a history of considerable emotional disturbance in the  family
    and the appellant's childhood.  He described her going through a period
    of considerable emotional and mental turmoil when  she  was  trying  to
    adjust in  Albania  to  her  homosexual  orientation.  He  had  made  a
    diagnosis of a major depressive episode and commented on  the  conflict
    and tension  in  her  mind  between  her  desire  to  come  out  (as  a
    homosexual) and also her desire to "remain anonymous and not  to  break
    the unwritten code in Albania".

57. In relation to his interview of the appellant, Dr Bell noticed that she
    was cleanly and casually dressed and obviously overweight.  She  seemed
    depressed and had a typical depressive facial expression  and  posture.
    She told him about her current experiences, namely that she was  living
    in a house with an Albanian friend  whom  she  had  known  in  Albania,
    called Esmeralda, whom  she  regarded  as  her  most  intimate  friend.
    Esmeralda knew that she was gay and had known this for a long  time  as
    she told her over  seven  years  ago.   She  felt  that  Esmeralda  was
    different to other Albanians as she did not have "Albanian  attitudes".
    The appellant had two gay friends; the  one  she  saw  more  often  was
    Mariam, a Portuguese woman whom she met in a pub.   She  told  him  she
    went to a "gay pub" maybe once or twice a week depending on  the  money
    situation.  One of the pubs she went to was a  well-known  gay  meeting
    place called 'The Cliff'.  Her other gay friend was Linda, who was born
    in England.  They found a way of communicating with each other although
    the appellant spoke only broken English.

58. Dr Bell noted  that  it  soon  became  clear  that  the  appellant  was
    overwhelmingly preoccupied with the fear of return.  She told him  that
    she often felt very depressed and suffered from what  she  called  "bad
    thoughts", some of which seemed to circulate around  the  fact  of  her
    gayness and expressed conflict about it.  She dealt with her stress  by
    eating and cut herself off from those thoughts.  She did not  currently
    suffer from suicidal thoughts but when she contemplated going  back  to
    Albania she thought of killing herself.  She had never acted  on  these
    thoughts; that is there had been no suicide  attempts  or  episodes  of
    self-harm.

59. Dr Bell noted that the appellant frequently  felt  very  anxious.   She
    often felt someone was following her.  She had nightmares most  nights.
    She was worried that people would notice that she  was  homosexual  and
    she tended not to look into other women's eyes in  case  she  gave  the
    impression that she was.  She was firmly  identified  as  a  homosexual
    woman who felt truly herself as a result of  living  in  Britain.   She
    told him that she did not behave in a particularly "gay way", in a  way
    that was common in the gay community, although she  was  quite  certain
    that another gay woman would easily  be  able  to  tell  that  she  was
    homosexual.  She had one important sexual  relationship  with  Mira  in
    Albania, but on reflection she thought that perhaps their  relationship
    was more important to her than it was to Mira.

60. Dr Bell noted that the appellant was born in  Tirana  in  Albania.   He
    wrongly noted that her father worked in a factory and her mother stayed
    at home.  She told him of being ill-treated by her father but she  said
    she felt loved by her mother.  She went to school from the age of 6  to
    15 but was always near the bottom of the class.  After  leaving  school
    she stayed at home with her mother who worked as a seamstress from home
    and  the  appellant  helped  her  with  jobs  around   sewing   (taking
    measurements, making deliveries).  She started doing that at the age of
    18 or so until she left Albania at the age  of  23.   She  thought  she
    first became aware that she was homosexual between the ages of  15  and
    16.  She felt ashamed and as she put it "uncomfortable" about this  and
    kept it hidden.  At that time she became depressed.

61. The appellant told Dr Bell that she read Albanian books and was reading
    the work of the novelist Hadara and another novel called  'Wine'  which
    was based on an individual's odyssey.  She tended to go out on  Fridays
    to Saturdays to gay pubs.  She felt that life would be  intolerable  if
    she were to be returned to Albania and the prospect of  return  brought
    suicidal ideation.

62. Under the heading "Opinion and Conclusions" Dr Bell said it  was  clear
    to him that the appellant suffered from a psychiatric disorder,  namely
    a depressive order as diagnosed by Dr  Seear,  of  moderate  intensity.
    She also suffered from anxiety  disorder  which  seemed  to  reach  its
    maximum intensity during the night when she had panic attacks, probably
    related to nightmares.  He understood that  the  paranoid  ideation  as
    deriving from the anxiety disorder and depressive disorder and this did
    not suggest deterioration into a more organised psychotic disorder.  It
    seemed to him that there had been some improvement  in  her  depressive
    disorder since it was diagnosed by Dr Seear.  The  fact  that  she  had
    carried on a sexual relationship in secret and punishment was meted out
    as a result of the discovery of her  homosexuality,  in  terms  of  her
    developing sexuality,  had  had  lasting  effects  and  was  likely  to
    predispose her to some extent to psychiatric disorder.

63. It was clear to Dr Bell that the  appellant  had  derived  considerable
    benefit from being able  to  identify  herself  with  the  context  and
    network of gay women in a culture which did not  condemn  homosexuality
    and which allowed her to  express  herself  more  "comfortably  in  the
    world".

64. Dr Bell expressed the view that the appellant should be under the  care
    of the local  Community  Mental  Health  Team  and  might  derive  some
    benefits and supportive counselling.  Appropriate psychiatric help  was
    not possible when she was under the threat of return.  He expressed the
    view that if the appellant  was  permitted  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom it was likely her condition would gradually  improve.   Removal
    would be to a country where she had suffered very serious psychological
    trauma.   The  defence  of  disassociation  was  a   fragile   defence.
    Returning her to Albania to the context in which she suffered  a  major
    traumatic experience,  would  have  the  effect  of  overwhelming  this
    fragile defendant with the result that her mind would  be  filled  with
    emotions and memories which would overwhelm her, which again  would  be
    sufficient in itself to cause deterioration in her  psychiatric  state.
    Returning her to Albania would mean returning her to a culture in which
    there was not only no tolerance of homosexuality, but  homosexuals,  as
    he understood it, were targeted and she would be under serious  threat.
    Having to live in such an environment would in itself be sufficient  to
    cause deterioration.

65. Dr Bell said that although there had been suicidal ideation in the past
    it was not a major current feature in her mental state  and  should  be
    monitored.  He assessed the current suicide risk as low.  In the  event
    of return, however, the risk of self-harm/suicide lapse would move from
    low, as it was at present, to moderate or high.   He  did  not  believe
    that she would be able to gain voluntarily any  help  from  psychiatric
    personnel in Albania and measures could be taken to  prevent  her  from
    harming herself or making an attempt on  her  life,  such  as  forcible
    restraint or forcible sedation but  they  should  not  be  regarded  as
    psychiatric treatment.

66. In his second report Dr Bell stated that  return  would  precipitate  a
    serious deterioration in the appellant's psychiatric state, which would
    start the moment she knew she was to be returned and  would  remain  so
    during the period  of  waiting,  during  the  deportation  process  and
    indefinitely thereafter.  When she arrived in Albania she would  be  in
    this deteriorated state and as such would be  very  vulnerable.   Given
    the serious condition she would be in, it  was  quite  clear  that  she
    would not have the coping mechanisms for managing  her  new  situation.
    Indeed the likely outcome was that her deteriorated state would lead to
    less capacity to cope, which would result in further  deterioration  as
    her circumstances worsened.  She would not be in a position to properly
    fend for herself; present herself for  employment  etc.   It  was  also
    likely that given her vulnerable state, she would be easy prey to those
    who would wish to exploit her.  He stated that if she were compulsorily
    admitted to hospital in Albania in circumstances where, as described in
    the US State Department  Report  2008,  mentally  ill  persons  without
    family support were hospitalised in psychiatric hospitals for  lack  of
    alternative means, this would have  consequences  for  her  psychiatric
    state that could only reasonably be described as catastrophic.

67. He had been asked to comment, in a hypothetical  situation  of  return,
    upon any impact upon the appellant living in Albania if she returned to
    secrecy in relation to her sexuality.  His opinion was that attempts to
    suppress her sexuality would have very serious  psychological  damaging
    effects.  An attempt to suppress/hide her sexual  identity  would  also
    act as a very potent factor contributing further to her deterioration.

The evidence of Dr Bell in examination in chief

68. In examination-in-chief Dr Bell said that the fact that  the  appellant
    might not be  able  to  hide  sexual  orientation  might  increase  her
    paranoia.  He said that suppressing sexual  identity  meant  living  as
    someone whom you were not,  which  resulted  in  an  anxiety  increase,
    paranoia and disassociation.

69. Ms Asanovic asked Dr Bell what kind of care would be needed, given that
    on return the appellant's condition was likely to deteriorate.  He said
    he would expect the appellant to precipitously fall into a state  where
    her condition deteriorated from the moment that she received  the  news
    that  she  was  to  be  deported.   He  suggested  that   any   adverse
    determination should be served on her legal representatives, who  could
    arrange for a psychiatric assessment to determine whether she should be
    admitted to hospital.  She might require medication but that should not
    be regarded as treatment.  He said other factors would come  into  play
    on arrival which would affect her situation.

70. Ms Asanovic asked Dr Bell what kind of care she should have in Albania.
     Dr Bell said the appellant ought to be under the care  of  expert  and
    specialised psychiatric personnel with knowledge and  an  understanding
    of adolescent breakdown and the effect on personality development  with
    reference to conflicts relating to sexual orientation, the consequences
    for personality development, vulnerability to psychiatric disorder  and
    an understanding of the consequences to the individual of the  familial
    and broader cultural context.  He said he did not think that she  would
    be able to obtain formal psychotherapy, but in the event she were  able
    to, it would require being referred to highly experienced personnel  in
    which medication would be part of the treatment.

71. Ms Asanovic asked Dr Bell whether the appellant should be hospitalised.
     Dr Bell said a judgment had to be made whether  the  cost  of  forcing
    hospital admission would be greater than  continuing  to  treat  as  an
    outpatient.  He said that was especially so if  someone  was  paranoid.
    In some cases admission to hospital would have such grave  consequences
    regarding the patient's ability to trust psychiatric personnel that  it
    would be very much a last resort.

72. Ms Asanovic referred Dr Bell to his reference  to  suicidality  in  his
    report and asked whether the objectivity of the risk was to be borne in
    mind when qualitatively assessing the appellant's  position.   He  said
    that his understanding was that the appellant believed herself to be at
    serious risk by virtue of her sexual orientation, which  was  causative
    of her state and vulnerability.  He said  if  one  posed  the  unlikely
    conclusion that she was at no risk of  discrimination  or  attack  this
    would not remove the problem, since one of the  fundamental  categories
    of psychiatric disorder was  that  the  capacity  to  assess  objective
    reality was impaired and therefore, given her psychiatric disorder, she
    would not be likely to be reassured by her showing her that  her  fears
    were ungrounded.

73. Ms Asanovic drew the attention of Dr Bell to the statement in his first
    report, in which he indicated that the appellant's adolescence would be
    considerably more traumatic living in a culture where homosexuality was
    treated with extreme hostility and low tolerance.   She  asked  whether
    his opinion would be the same if it was merely discrimination.  He said
    that for an adolescent the formation of sexual identity was a  critical
    moment of development and finding one had a sexual orientation at  odds
    with one's culture would be  traumatic.   Discrimination  would  be  an
    external marker of something of the culture.  He said that he was aware
    of the  study  by  Dr  Michael  King,  which  showed  that  psychiatric
    morbidity was consistently higher among gays  and  lesbians  than  non-
    homosexual people.  He said he had reviewed the literature and  studies
    tended to the  conclusion  that  the  important  factor  was  continued
    discrimination even though homosexuality might not be  illegal.   Where
    there was discrimination in schools and  workplaces  homosexuals  still
    suffered considerably.

74. Ms Asanovic asked how effective any treatment would be if  it  did  not
    include issues of  sexual  identity.   Dr  Bell  said  that  the  first
    important thing would be that the person treating the appellant did not
    discriminate against homosexuals.  He said it was  not  a  question  of
    practice but institutionalised discrimination.  That might  occur  when
    any  individual  may  not  regard  themselves  as  racists  but  reveal
    themselves  as  hostile  and  Dr  Bell  said  that  treatment  required
    understanding of the  appellant's  condition.   In  the  example  of  a
    catastrophic bereavement causing anxiety and  a  depressive  state,  he
    asked rhetorically whether there could be treatment by someone who  did
    not understand the consequences of bereavement.

The evidence of Dr Bell in cross-examination

75. In cross-examination Dr Bell was asked whether it would follow from the
    fact that the appellant had shame about her sexual  identity  that  she
    was not wholly comfortable with it.  He  said  they  were  quantitative
    aspects and she was much more at home than she had been  before.   With
    gays who came out in our culture, there was still conflict.   Ms  Laing
    suggested to him that he seemed to be saying  that  the  appellant  was
    worried about giving the impression of homosexuality and yet in another
    part of his report he said she did not behave  in  a  particularly  gay
    way.  Dr Bell said that if it were possible to think that the appellant
    could hide her sexual identity now that would be  a  wrong  conclusion.
    Dr Bell felt that the appellant's fear that people  would  notice  that
    she was homosexual was more than a person having to come to terms  with
    homosexuality and being self-conscious.  He agreed that the  fact  that
    the appellant was anxious about her immigration status might contribute
    to feelings of being followed in the street and it was not possible  to
    disentangle that aspect of the case.

76. In answer to questions about his mention of forcible restraint, he said
    sometimes it was thought that sedation and restraint  would  treat  the
    risk of self-harm.  He said being sectioned, restrained and sedated was
    very much a last resort.  He agreed that his opinion was  the  risk  of
    suicide would rise from low to moderate or high if the  appellant  were
    returned to Albania.  He said the  deterioration  of  her  state  would
    require an evaluation of the risk of suicide.  The  crucial  point  was
    that for similar kinds of psychological disorder, where there is family
    support, the risk might be a low one.  The risk of  return  involved  a
    number of complex features, the appellant  would  be  returned  from  a
    place in which she considers herself safe and could express her  sexual
    identity.  The breaking of that could be sufficient in itself to  cause
    such a deterioration as well as external beliefs and external  factors.
    Psychologically all persons were sensitive to the conditions  in  which
    they were.

77. Ms Laing asked Dr Bell about his reference to the risk of self-harm and
    suicidal acts.  She asked whether he could separate out self-harm.   He
    said he could not.  There would be an elevated risk of suicide  and  of
    self-harm on return.  Ms Laing pointed out that Dr Bell  had  said,  at
    the time of his first report, that suicidal ideation was  not  a  major
    current feature and asked whether the appellant  had  expressed  it  to
    him.  He said that she had told him herself.  It was clear  that  there
    were no instances of self-harm in  the  past.   Whether  she  had  said
    anything to him was something he would have to refer to in  his  notes.
    He was not sure that had something been said he inevitably  would  have
    noted it in his report.

78. He was asked whether the reason for the fact that his recent report did
    not speak of the risk of suicide at all was that he had not been  asked
    to comment on it.  He said that was the reason.  He agreed that it  was
    true that he had no special expertise in the mental health services  in
    Albania but said he had worked in third world countries  where  general
    psychiatric services were minimal and unsophisticated.   He  was  asked
    whether he had picked up the fact that in  Albania  the  appellant  had
    been depressed and went to her GP and got medicine.  He said  he  could
    not recall.

The evidence of Dr Bell when questioned by the Tribunal

79. We asked Dr Bell whether his conclusion would have been the same absent
    any suicidal ideation on the  part  of  the  appellant.   He  said  his
    judgment was based on a number of factors.  For  example,  some  people
    clearly had suicidal ideation  but  in  other  cases  there  was  other
    evidence to show suicidal ideation.  He said what he had suggested  was
    a sort of progressive state of a moderate to high risk of suicide.   He
    was asked whether the  appellant's  paranoia  would  prevent  her  from
    seeking psychiatric help in Albania.  He said in psychiatry one of  the
    important factors was the nature of the relationship.  The  appellant's
    reluctance to discuss her  homosexuality  in  Albania  would  make  her
    reluctant to seek help.

The evidence of Dr Bell in re-examination

80. In re-examination it was pointed out that in his first  report  he  had
    assessed the risk of  suicide/self-harm  as  remaining  high  from  the
    moment she heard that she was to be returned.  Dr  Bell  said  that  he
    meant moderate to high.

The evidence of Ms Stephanie Schwandner-Sievers

Her first report

81. In her first report Ms Schwandner-Sievers indicated that  according  to
    the appellant's solicitor's letter of  instruction  she  was  asked  to
    prepare a joint expert report with Dr Nicola Mai and to liaise with him
    to decide which issues to deal with in their  respective  reports.   He
    and she had agreed that he would deal with the  specific  situation  of
    homosexuals in contemporary  Albania  and  they  would  both  touch  on
    employment and economic survival chances  and  independent  life  of  a
    single  and  unskilled  woman  in  Albania,  as  well  as  the  general
    acceptance of  single  women  in  society  and  her  possibilities  for
    relocation.  She would deal solely with the  possible  assistance  that
    could be expected from the Albanian  authorities  including  issues  of
    welfare benefits, social housing  or  social  service  assistance,  the
    question of whether prostitution would be the appellant's  only  choice
    and the likelihood of persecution by the family in terms of killing  or
    other harm, because of their honour  or  whatever  options  the  family
    might resort to in order to reverse the situation.

82. Ms Schwandner-Sievers stated that the report  including  references  to
    case-relevant academic literature as well as to openly available 'grey'
    literature  (policy  reports  and  publications).   It   further   made
    reference to in-depth research interviews, such as with [a  person  who
    did not wish his identity to be revealed] in October 2007 and with  one
    of the Albanian professors of law, Ismet Elezi, in February 2005.   All
    evidence  presented,  whether  research  (interview)   or   open-source
    evidence,  was  thoroughly  cited  according  to  the   best   academic
    standards.

83. Ms Schwandner-Sievers dealt with a large number of matters that related
    to the general background position in Albania.  She said that Albania's
    self-presentation followed  what  she  called  "image  politics"  which
    entailed  a   significant   gap   between   positive   national   self-
    representation (of progress, including in reforms on paper) on the  one
    hand, and the often appallingly difficult situation of social realities
    on the ground, as well as a notorious lack of implementation  of  legal
    forms on paper.  She gave two examples.  The first related to the  size
    of Albania's shadow economy in relation to  its  GDP.   Officially  the
    figure was given as  31.8%  whereas  Dr  Martr  Muco,  a  professor  of
    economics and the internationally best-known and highly renowned expert
    on Albania's fiscal politics expressed the view that a figure of around
    50% or more would be more accurate.  The  second  example  was  from  a
    progress report regarding  victims  of  trafficking  (VoTs).   Jennifer
    Hollinger,  Fellow  of  Churches  against  Sex  Trafficking  in  Europe
    (CHASTE), discovered during her research on  Albanian  anti-trafficking
    battle, during four months  of  summer/autumn  2007,  that  the  police
    deliberately kept the figures of VoTs down.

84. Ms Schwandner-Sievers' conclusion was that Albania's  problems  on  the
    ground should not be understood by confusing law reforms on paper  with
    social reality and practices as today experienced by common  Albanians.
    She said that this understanding was widely shared in the international
    community.

85. Ms Schwandner-Sievers said that in Albania deeply  rooted  heterosexual
    and particularly patriarchal defined norms still underpin the  attitude
    of both the authorities and society at large.  She quoted sources which
    suggested that homosexuals were particularly vulnerable  to  abuse  and
    discrimination against women and homosexuals  persisted  regardless  of
    the law.  She acknowledged there  was  cultural  change  but  said  the
    younger (mostly urban) generation challenges to patriarchal  traditions
    had produced anxieties among the traditionally-minded generations  and,
    particularly, amongst traditionally-minded men, who felt threatened  to
    lose their particular powers, duties and rights of control  over  women
    accorded to them by patriarchal Albanian  traditions.   Much  of  these
    anxieties  helped  to  explain  why  violence,  particularly   domestic
    violence, and less frequently, honour crimes, had become a  problem  in
    post-socialist Albania.

86. She referred to the US State Department's  Human  Rights  Report  2008,
    which stated that corruption, resource scarcity and the  judiciary,  as
    well as  police  corruption,  unprofessional  behaviour  and  impunity,
    remained problems,  although  it  also  recorded  improvements  in  the
    prosecution of corruption in these fields.  The overall performance  of
    law enforcement remained weak.  Although the overall rate of murder  in
    Albania had been declining  the  total  number  of  females  killed  by
    firearms had increased and  the  local  UN  representative  told  a  UN
    Albania conference in March 2007 that at least one third of  all  women
    in Albania were estimated to experience physical  violence  within  the
    home.

87. Under  the  heading  "Societal  killings/kanun  (limits  and  scope  of
    explanation)" Ms Schwandner-Sievers said reference to an explanation in
    terms of classic  kanun  should  be  restricted  to  northern  mountain
    communities of Albania and to migrants from these  communities.   These
    customs ceased to exist in southern Albanian customary law  already  in
    the 15th century.  On the other hand massive internal  migration  flows
    after the fall of communism meant that there had been repeated Albanian
    press  reports  that  documented  the  transport  of   rural   cultural
    backwardness across the country into the cities and with them the  most
    traditional attitudes towards young women.

88. Ms Schwandner-Sievers said that reference to an explanation of societal
    killing in terms of classic "kanun" should be restricted  for  northern
    mountain communities of Albania and to migrants from these communities.
     These customs ceased to  exist  in  southern  Albanian  customary  law
    already in the fifteenth century but on the other hand massive internal
    migration flows after the fall of communism meant that there  had  been
    repeated Albanian press reports that documented the transport of  rural
    cultural backwardness across the country into the cities and within the
    most traditional attitudes towards young women.  The  State  Department
    Report of 2006 stated that although under "kanun" only adult males were
    acceptable targets in blood feuds, women and children were often killed
    or injured in attacks.

89. In 2003 a new Family Code  was  enacted  which  annulled  all  previous
    legislation relating to family and marriage.  It assisted in  combating
    forced or arranged marriages.  It included article 8 which  conditioned
    the legality of  a  marriage  upon  the  consent  of  the  parties  and
    contained specific provisions prohibiting  domestic  violence.  Amnesty
    International in 2006 found that women felt denied  justice  in  court.
    They felt exposed to socio-cultural pressures not to  divulge  internal
    family problems to the outside world.  She quoted a  passage  from  the
    Amnesty International Report entitled "Albania: Violence Against  Women
    in the Family: 'It is not Her Shame'", dated 2006, to effect that women
    may also be considered as "violating family honour" by  exercising  the
    right of choice in marriage or by trying to leave an unwanted marriage.

90.  Under  the  heading  "Societal  attitudes  towards  homosexuality"  Ms
    Schwandner-Sievers expressed  the  opinion  that  in  the  present  day
    homosexuality in Albania could not be lived or expressed openly because
    there was no societal tolerance at all.  She could  only  theoretically
    imagine such a possibility as an exception among the very thin layer of
    avant-garde and cosmopolitan  elites  in  the  capital.   She  had  met
    hundreds of Albanians over the years and she  had  never  met  any  gay
    people in or from Albania who had openly admitted to their orientation.
     She said the appellant, given her educational and  family  background,
    would not be likely to have any access to the social  group  of  avant-
    garde  and  cosmopolitan  elites  in  the  capital.   She  quoted   the
    experience of an Albanian gay man reported by journalists  in  December
    2007:

         "We were sitting in a park when two police vans pulled  over.   The
         officers got out of the van  and  dragged  us  away.   One  of  the
         drivers came over to me and kicked me repeatedly, his boot  hitting
         my stomach.  When I begged him to stop, he just  shouted  'shut  up
         you  faggot',  and  continued  kicking  me."  S.L,  recalling   the
         incident.

91. Ms Schwandner-Sievers said that the  societal  norm  in  Albania,  both
    patriarchal and heterosexual, was based on the idea of the  family  and
    family life.  The integrity and prospering of a family was at the  core
    of  the  Albanian  concept  of  honour.   Even  among  highly  educated
    cosmopolitan elites she found that particularly male respondents  still
    emphasised the concept  of  Albanian  honour  as  based  on  the  value
    assigned to the family,  being  married,  having  children,  protecting
    one's wife, mother and sister and respecting the parents.   To  a  much
    deeper, culturally-embedded degree than in our post-modernist  society,
    men and women in Albania were expected to marry and have  children  and
    any diversion from  this  convention  was,  at  best,  not  understood,
    ridiculed and pitied (by family outsiders), and,  at  worst,  violently
    persecuted (by those who felt ashamed).  It was significant to remember
    that within a traditional context there existed no notion of a  woman's
    individual decision making and her transgression of the  norm  was  not
    just her but the family's shame.  By the same token a man and a woman's
    reproductive capacities were at the core of his or  her  assessment  as
    being a 'proper man'  and  a  'proper  woman'.   For  the  majority  of
    Albanian men of the  socially  underprivileged  classes,  control  over
    woman was still commonly perceived as an indicator of family honour and
    their value as a man, and it was exactly the challenges  to  this  role
    which  seemed  to  explain  the  rise  of  domestic  violence  and  the
    revitalisation  of  pre-communist   traditional   orientations,   which
    justified even honour crimes against women in  post-communist  Albania.



92. Ms Schwandner-Sievers said that a lesbian orientation  "misfitted"  the
    traditional socio-cultural norms of family  life,  family  reproduction
    and male dominance to such an extent that simply no space was  provided
    in society, yet, which would allow free living such  orientation.   She
    was not surprised that the appellant's mother could neither  comprehend
    nor accept her daughter's admission.  It was also an indication of  the
    typical  traditional  orientation  that  the  appellant's  mother  took
    recourse to the traditional meta-physical explanation  that  the  'evil
    eye' was responsible for it.  Her brother regarded her admission as  an
    offence against the family, his honour and that of his family, which in
    turn provoked physical and psychological violence in the form  of  name
    calling, as well  as  disavowal  and  attempts  at  coercing  her  into
    marriage. The matter appeared as a typical reaction of a  traditionally
    minded man who felt severely challenged in  his  duty  to  protect  and
    control the women of the house and safeguard the family's honour.

93. Ms Schwandner-Sievers said that according to  the  latest  EU  Progress
    Report (2007) and other specialist reports the  underdeveloped  systems
    of social security  and  pensions  in  Albania  were  ameliorated  only
    through the fact  that  the  state  comprehensively  relied  on  family
    cohesion and support.

94. Under the heading "Income and employment chances" Ms Schwandner-Sievers
    said that the current  average  annual  Albanian  per  capita  GDP  was
    US$5,500 (2007 estimate) compared to the UK's per capita annual GDP  of
    US$35,300 (2007 estimate).  The grey economy was said to account for up
    to 50% of the official GDP.  The rate of employment  officially  stated
    at 13% might informally exceed 30% due to  the  preponderance  of  near
    subsistence farming.  According to the most recent EU  Progress  Report
    there  existed  a  particular  problem  of  high  youth  and  long-term
    unemployment and women and young people under  25  years  of  age  were
    disproportionately affected by unemployment.

95. Under the heading "Finding work and housing without family support"  Ms
    Schwandner-Sievers said that an unskilled woman without family networks
    of support, which would help her enter  the  labour  market,  would  be
    highly  disadvantaged  in  finding  employment,  housing  and   had   a
    particular risk of exploitation.   Because  of  housing  shortages  and
    prices many young people found themselves forced  to  live  with  their
    parents for a long time even after marriage.  There existed  no  openly
    accessible employment  possibilities  for  young,  unskilled  women  in
    Albania, such as were taken for granted in the  United  Kingdom  and  a
    woman seeking employment without  pre-existing  family  contacts  would
    make herself conspicuous for being a "kurva" (whore) inviting abuse  in
    any employment  context.   One  would  normally  always  expect  to  be
    introduced to an  employer  through  a  close  relation,  normally  the
    family, close relatives or family friends and this would  be  true  for
    any low skilled (factory, restaurant, etc)  or  any  other  employment.
    Culturally such a social intermediary served both as a point  of  first
    contact as well as a security guarantee for both employer and employee.
     It would normally be a family's  family  friend's  bar  or  restaurant
    where a woman would find work as a waitress.

96. Under  the  heading  "Adult  orphans  -  family  rejection  and  social
    consequences" Ms Schwandner-Sievers referred to adult  orphans,  namely
    those whose parents had abandoned them, who were not necessarily  dead,
    as well as those who lost  only  their  father.   She  said  they  were
    rejected by their families and were too old to be allowed to  live  any
    longer in an orphanage; these people lived in dire poverty.  Regardless
    of legislation they were denied basic rights such as  adequate  housing
    and many  ended  up  sleeping  rough  and  faced  utter  isolation  and
    destitution, although some had experienced NGO support, which, wherever
    available, was always only ever temporary.

97. Under the heading "Life outside the family (for  a  single  woman")  Ms
    Schwandner-Sievers  said  that  the  Amnesty  International  Report  on
    Albania entitled ""No Place to Call Home": adult orphans and the  right
    to housing")), dated 21st November 2007, emphasised  the  link  between
    the denial of the right to adequate, secure and affordable housing  and
    the vulnerability, particularly of  young  orphan  women,  to  possible
    sexual exploitation and abuse.  She said that it reported numerous such
    girls and young women who had simply gone missing  in  past  years  and
    presumed that at least some of these had fallen victim to  traffickers.
    The young women saw no alternative but to leave the country  for  Italy
    and Greece given their situation in Albania facing the societal  stigma
    of being an orphan after being abandoned by their families,  living  in
    appalling conditions and surviving on a quite inadequate monthly  state
    assistance.

98. Ms Schwandner-Sievers said that early  (1993)  donor-driven  and  well-
    funded social housing policies  resulted  in  the  building  of  public
    housing in Albania which, however, was allocated according to political
    rather than economic consideration and needs.  A 2000 study found  that
    90% of the beneficiaries held an above-average income.  Moreover  as  a
    result of the privatisation of state property  in  1993  there  was  no
    state housing for rental, probably the most realistic option  for  many
    of Albania's most vulnerable.

99. Ms  Schwandner-Sievers  said  that  there  were  114,000  families  who
    benefited from social assistance at present  in  Albania.   There  were
    impressive rules regarding standards and licensing criteria for  social
    service providers and the law on social services was amended to  remove
    the age limit for  financial  support,  however,  in  terms  of  actual
    alleviation  of  poverty  and  survival  chances  state   support   was
    inadequate.  In April 2007  a  family  on  social  assistance  received
    between 1,500 leks (12 euros) and a maximum 7,000 leks (57  euros)  per
    month; in practice, depending on  local  government  budgets,  families
    could receive less than these sums.

100. Under the heading "Relocation/internal flight options"  Ms  Schwandner-
    Sievers said that in the event of her  brother  wishing  to  pursue  an
    honour killing of the appellant, she would not be likely to be able  to
    hide from him in Albania.  Notably Ms Schwandner-Sievers told us in her
    evidence that she concluded that the honour killing  of  the  appellant
    would be most unlikely.

101. In concluding that section of her report,  Ms  Schwandner-Sievers  said
    she believed that total family rejection and  subsequently  social  and
    economic destitution was the most likely and a substantial risk,  which
    the appellant would face on return.  If the family did not  reject  her
    she would be very likely to be coerced into  marriage.   There  was  no
    chance to publicly admit her sexual identity in Albania and  she  would
    always be forced to keep this a  secret.   The  possibility  of  honour
    killing through her brother (possibly with the help of a hired  killer)
    could not be excluded, but it was not as  likely  for  someone  from  a
    Tirana family or the south of the country as it would  be  for  someone
    originating from the north.  By analogy with repeated interviews in the
    United Kingdom with Albanian women asylum seekers who were forced  into
    prostitution and thus became a shame to  their  families,  the  brother
    would try to encourage the appellant to commit suicide if she would not
    obey.  She believed the most likely risk was that if the appellant were
    to be accepted back into the family she  would  face  coercion  into  a
    forced marriage.  Otherwise she would be disowned and ejected from  her
    family home.  If the appellant continued to challenge her brother's and
    mother's perception of honour and reputation, such as  by  refusing  to
    marry, they would be most likely not to want to  have  anything  to  do
    with her anymore, thus leaving her to  social,  cultural  and  economic
    destitution.

 Ms Schwandner-Sievers' second report

102. In her second report dated 21st September  2008  Ms  Schwandner-Sievers
    said that the democratisation process in Albania continued to be highly
    problematic.  According to the last Economists' Intelligence Unit Index
    of Democracy for 2007, which measured democracy in terms  of  electoral
    process   and   pluralism,   functioning   of   government,   political
    participation, democratic and political culture and civil liberties, it
    was defined as a  hybrid  regime  including  elements  of  both  flawed
    democracies and authoritarian regimes.   It  ranked  83rd  out  of  167
    assessed countries, which was  lower  than  Malaysia  and  Bolivia  and
    higher than Singapore and Madagascar.

103. Figures on economic growth  were  notoriously  unreliable  in  Albania.
    According to the latest EU Progress Report (November  2007)  regardless
    of the existence of the national  anti-corruption  strategy  and  anti-
    corruption laws and reforms, corruption was widespread and continued to
    be a serious problem in Albania.  In 2007 according to the most  recent
    Transparency International Global  Corruption  Barometer  2007  Albania
    lost its first place of 2006 as the most corrupt country in the  world,
    66% of respondents having paid bribes  during  the  year  in  order  to
    obtain public services to Cameroon (79%) and Cambodia (72%),  with  71%
    Albanian respondents  found  to  have  paid  bribes  to  obtain  public
    services.  The figure for Albania even though overtaken  in  the  world
    ranking, presented in fact an increase in incidence of  bribery  by  5%
    since the 2006 ranking.

104.  Ms  Schwandner-Sievers  said  it  was  noteworthy  that  even   though
    according to the US State Department Report on Human  Rights  Practices
    2008 (relying on the Albanian human  rights  group  AHRG),  homosexuals
    (equally as members of the Roma and Balkan/Egyptian  communities)  were
    particularly vulnerable to police abuse and subject  to  discrimination
    regardless of the law, the Ombudsman made no mention of their plight.

105. Ms Schwandner-Sievers said that in her opinion,  which  was  shared  by
    other experts on the subject, lesbianism was a  comprehensive  cultural
    taboo which explained the specific reason why lesbians could  not  come
    out and were not known of or talked about in  wider  Albanian  society.
    She quoted an article by Antonio Young entitled "Women who Become Men",
    published in 2000, which said that the idea of lesbianism was not  just
    'completely taboo' but when  put  to  respondents  they  were  'utterly
    uncomprehending' and it was 'viewed partly with abhorrence  and  partly
    with a disbelief that  any  pleasure  could  be  associated  with  such
    activities'.  She expressed the view that partly both male  and  female
    forms of homosexuality were seen  to  stand  in  contradiction  to  the
    cultural norms associating sex with procreation only that should  occur
    only in  wedlock  and  that  these  cultural  perceptions  and  taboos,
    particularly in traditional and marginalised contexts, were not  likely
    to change as quickly as legal reforms as the  result  of  international
    pressures and facilitation.

106. She had never heard  any  young  Albanian  refer  to  lesbian  love  or
    relationship and she could only imagine such discourse or even an  open
    display of such a relationship in the  closed  and  socially  protected
    spaces of  the  cosmopolitan,  avant-garde  and  arty  circles  of  the
    capital.   At  the  same  time  Albanian  society  had   experience   a
    pornographisation of the public space (TV, journals, open  prostitution
    in the cities) in recent years.

107. Ms Schwandner-Sievers went on to say  that  it  appeared  important  to
    know  that  unemployment  affected  women  and  young   people   to   a
    disproportionately high degree and that  discrimination  against  women
    prevailed in the employment sector with  particularly  low  chances  of
    inclusion in the employment market for those of little education.   The
    level of employment benefit and social assistance was so  low  that  it
    was not a disincentive to work and unemployment was a cause of poverty.
     The inadequacy of benefits was a stimulus for  unemployed  persons  to
    seek additional income in the informal sector and avoid turning to  the
    public employment services.

108. Ms Schwandner-Sievers commented on the assertion that there were state-
    run employment programmes, one of which was  targeted  specifically  at
    unemployed women, in paragraph 29 in the skeleton argument submitted on
    behalf of the respondent.  She said that the paragraph quoted from  the
    2004 International  Labour  Organisations  "Employment  Policy  Review,
    Albania"  which  discussed  state-run  employment  promotion  practices
    (EPPs).  She said that  firstly  the  quotation  omitted  two  relevant
    critical sentences which immediately followed the  quoted  part,  which
    read: "However, there is a lack of monitoring, evaluation and follow-up
    of these programmes.  This is an important shortcoming since it impairs
    their assessment and future improvement".  The lack of transparency and
    unaccountability of these programmes stated in these crucial  sentences
    must also be related to the all-pertaining  problem  of  corruption  in
    Albania.  There was little insight into the success of  these  policies
    and their implementation, except that some of  the  earlier  programmes
    were no longer operating due to lack  of  funds,  while  some  of  them
    appeared to be pilot programmes only.

109. Regarding the EPP programmes for specifically marginalised  women,  the
    categories eligible for specific support included  Roma,  ex-trafficked
    women, older women  and  women  with  disabilities.   Equally  the  new
    national strategy  on  gender  equality  and  domestic  violence,  when
    describing the current problems  the  country  faced  and  proposing  a
    strategy to change these, employed a similar category of women in need,
    women who were household heads, raped  women,  trafficked  women,  Roma
    women, Egyptian women, disabled women and  mothers  of  many  children.
    Homosexuality in the situation of single women without  family  support
    was not mentioned, although the social background to specific risks  in
    her opinion applied in similar  ways  to  such  women  equally  as  for
    example the  victims  of  trafficking  or  Roma  women.  The  ILO  also
    mentioned as characteristic  problems  those  in  underpaid  employment
    usually in the private or informal sector, lack  of  job  security  and
    lack of social or health insurance and it was  her  understanding  that
    these problems and risks could be transferred to a woman in a situation
    such as that of the appellant.

110. The trafficking topic referred to in her previous report seemed  to  be
    an important example for this case as a specific  social  vulnerability
    of such victims - typically  including  mental  health  issues,  social
    shame, family rejection and subsequent need for single young  women  to
    fend for themselves and  on  their  own  in  Albania  compared  to  the
    situation in which the appellant was, in her opinion,  likely  to  find
    herself and thus might be valuable in any risk assessment.

111. Ms Schwandner-Sievers expressed the  view  that  her  understanding  of
    image manipulation had now been verified since in the  most  recent  US
    Trafficking Persons Report Albania was demoted from rank tier 2 to tier
    2 WL (Watch List) recognising that previous governmental  promises  and
    action plans had not translated into  sustained  action,  admitting  to
    failure to protect in this case victims of trafficking.  Ms Schwandner-
    Sievers suggested that  Albanian  new  patrimonialism  and  politically
    motivated "rotations" (i.e. sackings) provided a systematic explanation
    how it could  be  that  the  Albanian  police  had  received  years  of
    international training  yet  unprofessional  behaviour,  ill-treatment,
    corruption and impunity in the police remained a problem.

112. She noted that none of the Albanian  counselling  centres  and  women's
    organisations, listed in paragraph  27  of  the  skeleton  argument  on
    behalf of the Secretary of State,  offered  any  targeted  support  for
    specifically lesbian concerns and needs but domestic violence  was  the
    core issue of concern.  No doubt some excellent work  and  support  had
    been provided by NGOs in this field, mainly in the field  of  awareness
    raising  and  prevention  regarding  domestic  violence  and  practical
    support for  predominantly  victims  of  trafficking  (on  problems  of
    fostering family reintegration).  In fact critics had noticed that  the
    government over-relied on NGO work in this field and that there were no
    special units (or responsible  persons)  in  law  enforcement  agencies
    dealing with cases of violence against women.

113. There were also further important issues that  needed  to  be  kept  in
    mind when assessing the support offered through NGOs.  First  sheltered
    support was only ever offered on a temporary  basis  in  order  not  to
    "imprison" the victims rather than the  perpetrators  of  violence  and
    crime. Lesbians were not mentioned in  any  of  the  documents  or  NGO
    programmes, consistent with wider societal denial of  their  existence.
    Regarding employment programmes provided by  anti-trafficking  shelters
    Jennifer Hollinger of CHASTE observed in 2007 that there  were  success
    stories but these appeared to be more the result of personal effort and
    coping mechanisms than from rehabilitation programmes as  such.   Women
    at  these  centres  did  receive  occasional  training,  which  usually
    involved hairdressing, sewing and perhaps small  business  loans.   The
    same was true for other women's NGO  initiatives  such  as  Useful  for
    Women, which in text or pictures suggested women-specific  training  or
    employment possibilities in the field  of  social  care  and  household
    duties.  Critical observers had, however, suggested that an  initiative
    fostering traditional female skills only could not offer  remedies  for
    the fundamental economic or  security  problems  which  victimised  and
    disadvantaged women faced in Albania.

114. Ms Schwandner-Sievers said it was important to understand  that  Tirana
    had more than tripled in size since the end of communism because of the
    huge influx of internal migrants from the rural and mostly conservative
    areas since the regime change in the early 1990s.  It was these  people
    who had contributed to both the traditionalism and  criminalisation  of
    the population in the socially excluded settings of the capital.  There
    existed an abundance of studies which suggested that even Balkan cities
    like Belgrade, which had always been much more  cosmopolitan  and  open
    than  Albania's  capital  Tirana,  housed  semi-rural   spaces   during
    communism   and   experienced   ruralisation,    re-ruralisation    and
    cosmopolitanisation processes simultaneously in subsequent  periods  of
    state disintegration and state building.

115. Ms Schwandner-Sievers said that today  there  existed  a  comparatively
    thin layer of urbanite cosmopolitan, often old, elites in  the  capital
    and in terms of size and education a still underdeveloped middle  class
    and these groups had quasi-monopolised  the  transnationally  available
    access to education for their children and they  provided  the  leaders
    and  staff  for  most  internationally  funded  NGO  initiatives.    In
    conjunction with the  nouveau  riche,  i.e.  successful,  transnational
    businessmen of  both  the  formal  and  informal  (including  criminal)
    trades, these elites controlled and shared among themselves  access  to
    power positions  (including  jobs  supplied  through  the  presence  of
    various international agencies)  and  access  to  the  newly  available
    wealth and transnational connections.  On the other side  of  the  coin
    there existed a large, socially and economically disadvantaged part  of
    the  population  both  in  the  cities  and  in  the  countryside  who,
    marginalised from such access chances and  general  opportunities,  had
    found dignity, pride, respect and perhaps other forms  of  satisfaction
    in the context of their socio-economic exclusion in taking recourse  to
    indigenous traditions (sometimes crime)  which  included  control  over
    women and the right to violence in  order  to  assert  conformity  with
    these traditions.

116. In her opinion  in  order  to  establish  whether  culturally  informed
    honour codes were likely to  guide  the  response  of  the  appellant's
    family (father and brother) it was important to establish the degree of
    traditionality  of  the  family.    Important   indicators   would   be
    educational   background,   work   and   income,   social    relations,
    neighbourhood and peer groups, evidence of  traditional  practices  and
    values (i.e.  taking  arranged  marriage  for  granted;  references  to
    propriety of conduct in terms of honour and  shame).   It  was  thought
    further important to understand that traditionalism could displace  and
    integrate modern influences.

The evidence of Ms Schwandner-Sievers in examination in chief

117. In examination-in-chief Ms Asanovic  asked  Ms  Schwandner-Sievers  how
    she viewed the suggestion by the  appellant  and  the  finding  by  the
    immigration judge that she would be disowned by her brother.  She  said
    that the violence used by the appellant's  brother  and  the  assertion
    that she was socially dead would be  high  psychological  pressures  in
    terms of marriage in the case of a conditional disowning, on the  basis
    that if she wanted to be part of the family she would  have  to  marry,
    otherwise she did not exist for them.

118. She was asked to elaborate on her suggested  potential  for  an  honour
    killing.  She said that she suggested the  possibility  was  very  low.
    She said it was quite likely the appellant's brother would ask  her  to
    commit suicide herself.  She  thought  that  he  would  put  her  under
    pressure in various ways.  On the other hand it  was  more  likely  she
    would be forced into marriage.  She was asked what was likely to happen
    if the appellant returned.  She said it was a matter  of  psychological
    terror and physical violence.  The family had a specific trajectory  of
    violence and Albanian domestic violence was prevalent.   One  in  three
    Albanian women experienced domestic violence.

119. Ms Asanovic asked Ms Schwandner-Sievers to comment on  the  publication
    entitled "Ministry of Labour, Social Affairs and Equal Opportunities in
    Directive  Policies,  Directory  of   Equal   Opportunities"   document
    contained in the respondent's bundle.  She said that was a statement of
    ministerial programmes and  policies  which  informed  them  about  the
    existing laws and  the  national  strategy.   She  said  she  would  be
    interested to know to what extent these laws and strategies were  being
    implemented  on  the  ground.   She  said  the  document  claimed  that
    implementation had started and referred to a  monitoring  report.   She
    said she would like to see the monitoring report.  She said the  reason
    for having a highly sceptical approach  to  ministerial  or  government
    sources was the image politics which she had mentioned in  her  report.
    She said the country was under tremendous pressure to confirm  with  EU
    legislation.  She said it had to the present day been lauded repeatedly
    for its excellent legal reforms and national strategies but at the same
    time their implementation had been  a  great  problem  and  the  social
    reality had not changed in any comparative way to  the  change  in  the
    law.

The evidence of Ms Schwandner-Sievers in cross-examination

120. In cross-examination Ms Schwandner-Sievers  agreed  that  she  had  not
    interviewed the appellant or her brother and that she was not qualified
    in psychiatry or psychology.  When it was put to her that she  was  not
    in a position to speculate upon whether the appellant  would  be  under
    high psychological pressure to get married she said that her conclusion
    was not speculation but a deduction from the  fact  that  most  of  the
    violence experienced in Albanian families was  psychological  and  that
    the fact that encouragement to commit  suicide  was  not  physical  but
    psychological.  She denied that it was speculative for her  to  suggest
    that there would be pressure on the appellant by her brother to  commit
    suicide.  She said she commented in terms of likelihood in  consistency
    with the socio-cultural background but did not know the family.

121. In relation to her statement that the family had a  special  trajectory
    of violence, Ms Laing suggested to Ms Schwandner-Sievers that according
    to the appellant's statement her father beat her when she  was  growing
    up because of his alcoholism and the only other incident was  when  her
    brother beat her up on the occasion  when  he  discovered  her  lesbian
    relationship and was upset.  She asked whether that was the  trajectory
    of violence upon which she relied.  She said that it was a family where
    the mother did not complain about violence and  accepted  the  violence
    when she was beaten.  The brother  rose  against  the  father  on  some
    occasions.  She said the violence referred to by Ms Laing was  not  the
    only violence which occurred.  The mother surrendered to violence  from
    her alcoholic husband.

122. Ms Schwandner-Sievers agreed that Ms Laing had  been  right  about  the
    violence  that  the  appellant  had  suffered.   She  agreed  that  the
    appellant's description of her father as a non-person  was  because  of
    alcoholism.  She said she spoke in terms of the family trajectory.  She
    said she was interested in the family.  The brother had taken over  the
    patriarchal function.  She said that was consistent with what  happened
    in similar cases.

123. Ms Laing drew the attention of Ms Schwandner-Sievers to the passage  in
    her  first  report  in  which  she  said  the  younger  (mostly  urban)
    generation's  challenges  to  patriarchal   traditions   had   produced
    anxieties among the  traditionally  minded  generations.   That  was  a
    reference to Annex 1 of her report  which  exhibited  a  news  item  on
    honour crime in Albania which contained an account of the  difficulties
    of immigrants to Tirana in adapting to their new freedoms.

124. Ms Laing asked Ms Schwandner-Sievers if she accepted that there was  an
    assumption by the writer that what happened in urban centres and in the
    south  was  very  different  from  what  happened  in  the  north.   Ms
    Schwandner-Sievers said that the article talked about newcomers and one
    had to look at social stratification and marginalisation  in  the  city
    which was discussed in her second report.  Ms Schwandner-Sievers agreed
    that Professor Eglantina Gjermeni was  a  woman  and  commentator  from
    Albania. This was a reference  to  her  comment,  referred  to  in  the
    article, that refugees came from the north in search of a  better  life
    but they never expected such unbridled freedoms in the urban  south  of
    Albania.  Ms Schwandner-Sievers said that she said later that sons were
    allowed to enjoy their new freedom but that was forbidden to daughters.
     In reply to a question from a member of the  Tribunal  Ms  Schwandner-
    Sievers said that she was not sure that  there  was  a  difference  for
    those who were already there.

125. Ms Laing drew the attention  of  Ms  Schwandner-Sievers  to  a  further
    passage in the article which  quoted  a  young  novelist,  Agron  Tufa,
    stating that today in Albania taboos were breaking down.  She was asked
    whether she agreed that that demonstrated social change.  She said  one
    had to look at the social  change  and  speed  according  to  different
    social classes and backgrounds. Ms Laing suggested that Agron Tuta  was
    not writing about the urban elite. Ms Schwandner-Sievers said he was  a
    member of the urban elite.   She  agreed,  however,  that  he  was  not
    expressly dealing with the urban elite.

126. She agreed with a member of the Tribunal that the  country  was  coming
    out of a  time  warp  into  the  present  century.   She  said  that  a
    patriarchal mentality was still pretty pervasive.   Her  attention  was
    drawn to the part of the article entitled "The one who loves you, beats
    you" in which a psychologist, Elida  Rrapti,  spoke  about  the  father
    leaving his village behind but not his world view.  To survive he  must
    allow his daughters to work but he wants to control the family  through
    violence while the girl realises she can be  independent.   She  agreed
    that Elida Rrapti was a woman.  She was asked whether  she  knew  about
    the book written by Elida Rrapti.  She said that she did not.  She said
    there were other books and she did not deny social change.

127. Ms Laing asked whether what was important was that it was possible  for
    girls to find work and lead independent lives.   Ms  Schwandner-Sievers
    said that she had spoken  about  pornography.   It  was  like  Franco's
    Spain.  When values were being renegotiated, they went over the top  on
    the other side.  She said there was this negotiation  going  on  as  to
    what the right values were.  She said there were fathers who were  more
    or less tolerant.  She said the article  did  not  suggest  that  these
    girls lived on their own. She said she had listed those who  did,  such
    as students, but normally you would  have  to  have  a  family  in  the
    background.

128. In answer to a question from the Tribunal, she said she  accepted  that
    there was enlightenment but it was uneven in terms of social spread and
    was particularly among the cosmopolitan elite in Tirana for  whom  life
    and choice was not different from here.

129. She was asked whether the appellant was  not  from  Tirana.   She  said
    that she was, but the population of Tirana had tripled since the end of
    the communist government.  Ms Laing suggested  there  was  no  evidence
    that the appellant's family were part of a recent influx.  She said she
    had not investigated.  Ms Laing asked whether  the  appellant  was  not
    born in Tirana.  Ms Schwandner-Sievers said  that  maybe  she  was  and
    asked where her parents were born.  She said it was necessary  to  look
    at their social background.  She  said  social  stratification  was  an
    element they needed to look at.

130. She  agreed  that  there  women  holding  positions  of  power  in  the
    government and that the speaker of the Albanian parliament was a woman.
     This was a reference in one of the documents to which  Ms  Schwandner-
    Sievers referred which showed that the deputy minister of the  interior
    was a woman.

131. Ms Schwandner-Sievers' attention was drawn to paragraph  1.1.2  of  the
    Ministry of Labour, Social  Affairs  and  Equal  Opportunities  Natural
    Strategy on Gender Equality and Domestic Violence 2007-2010, which said
    that women had started businesses mainly in economic activities such as
    trade, wholesale, shops  and  various  services,  dentistry,  notaries,
    advocacy,  hairdressing,  agricultural  businesses,   industry,   dairy
    production,  textiles,  book  publishing,  tailoring  and  handicrafts.
    According to statistics published  by  INSTAT  women  made  up  17%  of
    private business leaders.  The largest registered number of  businesses
    run by women was concentrated in Tirana (31%).

132. Ms Laing suggested that that showed that the role of women in  Albanian
    society was changing.  Ms  Schwandner-Sievers  responded  that  it  was
    important to look at social stratification and  the  communist  legacy.
    She said there was a boost in education for women in communist time and
    there was an element of elite continuation.  Women holding positions in
    government or leaders of communist women's organisations tended  to  be
    concerned in government, and in charge of NGOs.  She said that they had
    this continuation on the one hand and on the other hand women of  lower
    strata were excluded from the workforce.

133. In answer to a question from the Tribunal, she said she was not  saying
    that they were all from the elite.  She said that she thought that  for
    many women society was changing to  their  advantage.   She  was  asked
    whether more women were enrolled in universities in  men.   She  agreed
    that that was the case.

134. Ms Laing referred Ms Schwandner-Sievers to paragraph 11  of  her  first
    report.  She had given statistics for the GDP  in  Albania  which  said
    that the grey economic accounted for up to 50%  of  the  official  GDP.
    She agreed that there was a large inconsistency about the size  of  the
    grey economy.  She agreed that the Albanian government had  a  tendency
    to understate the grey economy.  She was asked  whether  it  was  right
    that the grey economy provided opportunities for employment  which  did
    not figure in official statistics.   Ms  Schwandner-Sievers  said  that
    they had to juxtaposition different sources.  She said she did not know
    where they got their data  from.   Ms  Laing  referred  Ms  Schwandner-
    Sievers to paragraph 4 of her report in which she referred  to  figures
    put forward by Dr Marta Muco and  asked  whether  there  were  not  two
    separate sources for the figures.  Initially Ms Schwandner-Sievers said
    that Dr Marta Muco was putting forward figures from the ministry.   She
    then said that she was a professor in the United States, therefore  her
    figure was accepted in US reports.

135. Ms Laing drew the attention of Ms Schwandner-Sievers  to  the  Ministry
    of Labour, Social Affairs and Equal Opportunities General Directive  of
    Policies document and suggested that  the  government  was  taking  the
    issue of gender and the  need  for  powerful  institutional  mechanisms
    seriously.  She said that she was interested in  the  impact  of  these
    policies.  Ms Laing asked her whether in relation  to  her  mention  of
    image politics she was suggesting that the Albanian government had  the
    incentive to make things look better than they were because they wanted
    to join the EU.  She suggested that not only there was an incentive  to
    appear to be making things better but also to carry them out  in  fact.
    Ms Schwandner-Sievers said that that should happen.

136. She was asked whether it was right to say that the EU did not  take  it
    on trust but monitored  what  was  happening.   She  agreed.   She  was
    referred to the Commission's Albania 2007  Progress  Report  and  asked
    whether that did not examine the progress in the  previous  year.   She
    said that it did and she had quoted from it a lot.  Ms Laing  suggested
    the fact that the EU monitored the situation meant that  not  only  did
    Albania appear to comply with the EU requirements but also complied  in
    fact.  Ms Schwandner-Sievers said that she  was  looking  at  the  real
    impact on the ground.  She could not judge the question of  willingness
    or ability.  She could only observe the rate  of  social  change.   She
    said the report gave an insight into significant  problems.   She  said
    the EU not only monitored but also attempted to facilitate change.

137. Ms Laing drew the attention of Ms  Schwandner-Sievers'  to  a  list  of
    women's organisations in Albania and suggested  that  they  and  others
    assisted women and provided them with  opportunities.   She  said  that
    that was correct.  She said that the problem was that some commentators
    said that the government relied too much on  NGOs  who  made  temporary
    provision.  She said government funding was lacking and there had  been
    a drop in international funding.  She said that lesbians as a  category
    were not catered for  by  NGOs,  as  for  example  in  Hungary  another
    transitional country.  She said other critiques said the government was
    trying to reinforce gender stereotypes.  She referred to the  statement
    by Jennifer Hollinger of CHASTE, in paragraph 22 of her second  report,
    which suggested that the typical NGO training for victimised women  was
    linked more to traits that were easy  to  learn  and  to  an  extent  a
    continuation of the stereotypical roles of women in Albania.

138. Ms Laing asked whether the assertion that no programmes  were  directed
    at lesbian women was consistent with the approach of  Albanian  society
    that meant lesbians were not recognised  as  existing.   She  said  she
    thought that there was a denial of this problem.  She said NGOs were no
    different.

139. Ms Laing suggested that what was important was  that  there  should  be
    training for women  for  the  work  opportunities  which  existed.   Ms
    Schwandner-Sievers said that was not for her to say.   In  relation  to
    the list of women's  organisations  in  Albania  Ms  Schwandner-Sievers
    conceded that most of them were based in  Tirana.   She  had  not  been
    aware of the organisation called "Useful to Albanian Women"  until  the
    previous Friday.  She accepted that it existed and had the project  set
    out in the document to which she had been referred.   She  pointed  out
    that Elbasan in which there were some projects was in the south, across
    the mountains from Tirana.

140. Ms Laing asked  Ms  Schwandner-Sievers  a  number  of  questions  about
    Tirana.  She agreed that it was a large city with  600,000  to  800,000
    inhabitants in which there was industry and a  large  banking  section.
    She agreed that there were many shops, hotels, cafs,  restaurants  and
    businesses.

141.  Ms  Laing  asked  whether  or  not  there  were  a  large  number   of
    organisations in which there were opportunities for unskilled work.  Ms
    Schwandner-Sievers said that as an anthropologist she had  to  look  at
    how you gained access to employment.  She said Albanian society  worked
    along family lines which was different from going  along  with  a  c.v.
    She said that a  personal  connection  was  required  which  served  as
    protection for both sides.  She said that  these  considerations  might
    have an impact on a person's ability to obtain  employment.   Ms  Laing
    suggested that if one was looking for work one did not go with  a  c.v.
    Ms Schwandner-Sievers said that she suggested that a person  needed  an
    introduction.  Ms Laing asked  her  whether  she  was  sceptical  about
    whether the appellant would get  somewhere  to  live.   Ms  Schwandner-
    Sievers said that she was not excluding the possibility but there  were
    risks involved without the appellant having family  support,  with  the
    employment situation being quite insecure and women  without  a  family
    being seen as ambiguous.

142. Ms Laing referred Ms Schwandner-Sievers to Annex 3 of her first  report
    which contained notes from an interview undertaken on 9th May 2008 with
    Nasser Almalak, in which he was asked whether a  woman  away  from  her
    family could live independently, that is to say with a home by  herself
    and work independently in Tirana, to which he replied that it was not a
    problem.  He said the woman could rent an apartment or work if  it  was
    not known that she was so (that is to say a homosexual) although if her
    employer was a man and he knew, he would abuse her for sure.

143. Ms Laing asked her whether Mr Almalak  was  not  saying  that  provided
    that a woman's employer did not know she was a lesbian she  could  live
    and work in Tirana.   Ms  Schwandner-Sievers  said  that  there  was  a
    difference of opinion.  She said she thought there were risks  involved
    in approaching an employer and asking  for  employment  without  family
    support or personal connections.

The evidence of Ms Schwandner-Sievers in re-examination

144. In re-examination Ms  Schwandner-Sievers  was  asked  if  any  research
    other than her own had been undertaken on which the conclusion that was
    a need for family support  was  based.   She  said  that  research  was
    undertaken by Austrians with whom she cooperated a lot.  She said there
    were a lot of articles published on the subject.   She  was  asked  how
    recent was the most recent article she had read.  Initially she said it
    was early 2000 but she did not recall the exact date.   She  then  said
    that the last article she had read was last year (2007).  She was asked
    what the conclusion of the latest article was.   She  said  it  was  an
    article on blood feuds and  migration  to  the  city.   She  was  asked
    whether she was aware of the  types  of  employment  which  existed  in
    Albania.  She said that they had discussed them.

145. Ms Asanovic asked Ms  Schwandner-Sievers  whether  in  the  appellant's
    case there were factors other than social  strata  which  predetermined
    the reaction of a family to social change.  She said she  did  identify
    indicators of traditionality, such  as  the  narrative  of  her  mother
    referring to the evil eye and an arranged  marriage.   She  said  there
    were other indicators one would look at.  There were peer pressures  on
    the brother who had taken on the role of the  father.   That  suggested
    traditionalism on the part of someone whose peers were northerners  but
    she did not know.  She was asked whether  there  was  anything  in  the
    family history other than this.  She said that domestic violence  could
    or could not be.  She said it  would  involve  an  examination  of  the
    social strata.  One had to ask what were the employment  conditions  of
    the father and brother.  Another factor was the conduct of  the  mother
    in keeping quiet about the violence.

146. She was asked what place domestic violence had had in regard  to  other
    indicators.  She said that was a  possibility  but  it  also  could  be
    attributed to alcoholism.  The brother appropriating the  head  of  the
    household could also be but that could also be due  to  a  pathological
    state.  Ms Schwandner-Sievers was asked what her views were of the risk
    on return having regard to these indicators.  She said she  made  broad
    comparisons  with  adult  orphans,  people  coming  from  the  northern
    villages and trafficked women.  It was quite evident that the mentality
    associated with family rejection contributed to  particular  risks  and
    vulnerability and it was quite evidence  that  mentality  issues  shone
    through NGO policies.

Ms Schwandner-Sievers' third report

147. In her latest report dated 22nd  November  2008  Ms  Schwandner-Sievers
    said that the opportunity given to her by the appellant's solicitors to
    comment upon the newspaper adverts containing Albanian job offers  gave
    her the opportunity to reveal her modified opinion of  the  appellant's
    case, having recently returned from research in  Albania  on  an  anti-
    trafficking fact-finding mission.

148. She said that she had followed up the specific question  regarding  the
    chances of a young low-skilled woman finding employment without  family
    support through newspaper advertisements and had interviewed Dr  Rigels
    Halili of University College  in  London,  an  Albanian  colleague  and
    anthropologist.  Her modified opinion was  that  although  Albania  had
    been undergoing an accelerated modernisation process  in  recent  years
    including, for example, a jump from severely underdeveloped  media  and
    communication  technology  to  global   internet   and   mobile   phone
    technology, familism still remained the core value  of  orientation  in
    society; gender relations were only slowly changing,  and  the  gap  in
    development between the rich and the poor, those left behind and  those
    participating in progress, had  significantly  widened.   At  the  same
    time, quoting her colleague Halili,  particularly  in  the  capital  of
    Tirana (and one should add, the nearby  coastal  city  of  Durres)  the
    shift from almost exclusively oral, to written, or  printed,  forms  of
    inter-social communication  could  increasingly  be  observed  in  most
    recent years, and this affected the contemporary means  of  recruitment
    for the job market.  She said that as a consequence of  the  prevailing
    cultural familism, a young woman without a network of family  or  other
    social support still remained at  considerable  risk  similar  to  that
    described in her previous report, and this included specific,  possibly
    even heightened, safety risks in attempting to find work in  responding
    to anonymous advertisements for low-skilled jobs, as this was  possible
    now.

149. She said her recent research in Albania  suggested  that  the  risk  of
    sexual abuse for a young  woman  without  family  support  may  now  be
    heightened.  All international sources and local NGO respondents agreed
    that the internal trafficking market had exorbitantly increased in  the
    last year or two, even though precise figures were not  known.   Tirana
    continued to flourish as a centre of internal trafficking  of  Albanian
    girls and women. They were attracted to Tirana by  different  means  of
    recruitment and were later  exploited  in  selected  settings  such  as
    hotels, motels, street corners etc.  She noted an advertisement  for  a
    manageress for a sex shop in one of  the  advertisements  provided  and
    stated that there were now Albanian girls who themselves chose to enter
    the prostitution trade and many  university  students  on  campus  were
    believed to be involved. False promises of employment were according to
    the NGO Different and Equal the second largest means of recruitment  of
    young women under its care into the forced prostitution trade in  2007.



150. She suggested the risk was heightened because of the generally  limited
    opportunities for the employment of girls and women, limited employment
    which did not pay for taxes and  social  security  and  such  sub-legal
    conditions appeared more likely to be related to  private,  low-skilled
    jobs than  legally  demanded  and  prestigious  adverts  that  formally
    tendered for high-skilled jobs in the  public  sector,  for  which  the
    appellant did not seem to qualify professionally.  She said  that  Vera
    Lesko of Vatra also mentioned typical low-salary jobs  such  as  dress-
    making in factories as  an  available  option  for  low-skilled  single
    women, with specific reference to victims  of  trafficking  (VoTs)  but
    also pointed to specific  risk  in  potential  traffickers  frequenting
    these venues to identify potential victims.

151. Ms Schwandner-Sievers  went  on  to  express  the  view  that  Albanian
    employers who placed both the formal-tender type of  advertisements  as
    well as the  others  were  still  likely  to  favour  those  candidates
    responding to whom they had already or  could  identify  some  personal
    links through the network of  social  relations.   She  said  that  the
    reintegration shelter Vatra which aimed to place former VoTs in jobs in
    local government and targeted employment programmes found that the main
    beneficiaries of these programmes  (and,  presumably  advertised  jobs)
    were local government employees who employed their own relatives.   She
    suggested that because of strong support and lobbying and reminding the
    local government repeatedly of the law, six former VoTs were eventually
    placed in 2007.  She said that this NGO might  be  unlikely  to  extend
    support to the appellant who was not a VoT.

152. Ms Schwandner-Sievers said that  Dr  Rigels  Halili  thought  that  the
    written  (printed)  publication  of  job  adverts  was  a  very  recent
    phenomenon although some low-skilled job adverts could now be found  in
    the weekly "Gazetia" and another weekly called "Celesi", which could be
    described as a small  version  of  London's  "Loot".   When  she  asked
    whether a young, single woman could answer a job advert he replied that
    she could, but it depended on her qualification but  there  were  still
    issues of ties and relationships  particularly  if  they  were  private
    businesses.

153. When asked whether it would make any difference if she  had  no  family
    support at all and whether there would be possibly any security  issues
    he said it was the family that  helped  a  lot.   They  called  it  the
    "database of connections" which was a concept that worked  in  everyday
    life and through which as a person one was in  society.   If  she  were
    alone she might face threats, especially if  she  was  a  girl.   There
    could be sexual harassment,  mobbing,  getting  used  for  trafficking.
    Without a family she would also  face  miserable  poverty.   Without  a
    family she might not find a flat and might even  starve.   He  said  of
    course there were changes and it was changing rapidly.  He  said  there
    were now young girls who found a flat or a job but in  such  cases  you
    could still assume that they still had the tutorship of their  families
    and relatives.

154. In the final paragraph of her report Ms Schwandner-Sievers  said  there
    were risks arising for a single young woman without family support from
    this further entrenched criminal economy which she  would  particularly
    highlight now if she were to write a new report in the appellant's case
    after her  recent  visit  to  Albania  and  having  learned  about  the
    existence of public low-skilled job adverts.

The evidence of Dr Nikola Mai

His first report

155. We have set out the details which Dr Mai related of his  experience  in
    Annex C.

156. Dr Mai said he had read the report by Ms Schwandner-Sievers and  agreed
    with her conclusions as well as endorsing her reasoning.

157. The first part of his report dealt with  the  situation  of  homosexual
    men and women in contemporary Albania.  He said that as was shown by  a
    report published in July 2004 by the Albanian Human Rights Group, being
    homosexual in Albania was an acute  dilemma  both  for  the  individual
    involved and for his or  her  family  and  society.   Common  reactions
    ranged from silence and marginalisation to disgust, open discrimination
    and often maltreatment and abuse.  The present  situation  of  Albanian
    gay  people  could  only  be  described  as  extremely  vulnerable  and
    dangerous.  Because of the dramatic level of unemployment  and  of  the
    housing situation in the country, almost all Albanian gay  people  were
    forced to live with their families and were dependent on  them  in  one
    way or another.  Most did not reveal their sexual orientation to  their
    families for fear of being rejected by them and disowned.  As employers
    reacted very negatively towards homosexuals in view of  public  opinion
    not only were they forced to hide their homosexuality but  most,  being
    unemployed without any income or social assistance,  were  forced  into
    illegal activities such as sex work in order to survive.

158. While  there  was  one  informal  meeting  place  in  Tirana  very  few
    homosexual men dared to  go  there  for  fear  of  being  targeted  and
    harassed by the police.  None of the gay men he spoke to knew more than
    an average of about five to ten other gay persons in Albania.   A  2006
    survey of 86 homosexual people (of which only three women participated)
    undertaken in Albania concluded that  the  LGBT  community  in  Albania
    constituted a  highly  marginalised  and  stigmatised  minority  group.
    Albanian society was patriarchal and extremely  homophobic.   Therefore
    LGBT people could only exist in secret.  They did not feel accepted  by
    society because of their sexual orientation and  even  their  relations
    with their family and friends were problematic.

159.  Dr  Mai  stated  that  before  1995,  homosexuality  was  illegal  and
    punishable by up to ten years' imprisonment but  from  1995  consensual
    homosexual acts between adults became legal, although under Article 116
    of the current Criminal Code the age of consent  for  same  sex  sexual
    acts was still set at 18, the maximum penalty  for  infringement  being
    five years imprisonment.  The age of consent for  people  of  different
    sex was set at 14.  Until the present times, the most  common  term  to
    designate gay people in Albania was  still  'pederast'  or  'bythqir'.
    The fact that de jure homosexuality was a legal  condition  in  Albania
    had not meant the end of de facto harassment and abuse against gays and
    lesbians.  Given the social, rather than legal, nature the  persecution
    Albanian homosexuals were subject to and the  level  of  the  isolation
    they endured,  the  legislation  did  not  translate  into  changes  of
    attitude in the police or the general population.

160. Dr Mai dealt with the circumstances in which  the  first  Albanian  Gay
    Association (AGA) was founded in March 1994.  At the time it  had  some
    ten members, none of whom were willing to allow their names to be  used
    and it announced its formation to the ILGA through a fax from  Germany.
    Nevertheless the news of the establishment of the gay organisation soon
    spread also in Albania and on the night of 14th October  three  members
    were picked up by the police in Tirana, beaten severely  for  hours  by
    the police who demanded that they reveal the names of the president and
    other members of the group.  Due to the fact that  one  person  did  in
    fact name names, the police were able to pick up other gay men at their
    homes.  Among these was the president of the group.   In  interrogation
    sessions these people were warned that  they  belonged  to  an  illegal
    organisation and accused of having "foreign  contacts".   One  man  who
    admitted to homosexuality faced criminal charges  under  Albania's  law
    against homosexuality.  Others were released but subject to  being  re-
    summoned  for  further  interrogation  and  investigation.   A   second
    incident was reported later by the president of  AGA,  who  sought  and
    received asylum in the United States.  In  1995  he  was  kidnapped  by
    armed men, blindfolded, held at gunpoint and threatened.  His abductors
    struck him and warned him he would be killed unless he named both other
    members of the group and the group's supposed sources of foreign money.
     With the departure of  the  president  of  AGA  there  was  confusion,
    disorientation and disagreement between  members  of  the  association.
    After the political crisis of 1997 the leading group of SGA decided  to
    break away and form the ALGA association which retained the most active
    elements of the previous experience and was currently cooperating  with
    local NGOs as well  as  with  international  donors  and  organisations
    mainly within AIDS prevention programmes.

161. Dr Mai stated that in 1998, a group of about  30  Albanian  gay  people
    was arrested, interrogated and detained for  hours  by  the  police  in
    Elbasan, in relation to a case of child abuse.  Many of  them  reported
    having suffered mistreatment and endured psychological  violence.   The
    person responsible for the crime was later found to be an elderly  man,
    totally unrelated to the gay scene in the town.  Similar cases of abuse
    and ruthless arrest, interrogation and detention of Albanian gay people
    by police forces in relation to cases of paedophilia or other  sexually
    related crimes were extremely frequent.

162. However, very often  crimes  committed  against  gay  people  were  not
    prosecuted according to the law and easily dismissed as accidents.  For
    instance in April 2001 the drowning of Ilir Belliu, a 21 year  old  gay
    poet in the Tirana Lake, an informal gay meeting point, was immediately
    filed as suicide against evidence of physical  struggle  and  violence.
    Gay people were subjected to  other  humiliating  behaviour  by  police
    officers.  For instance in September 2003 eleven people hanging  around
    in a park in central Tirana were detained  arbitrarily  in  undignified
    conditions until the following day without being given any reason.

163. The secretary of ALGA had repeatedly informed  him  that  in  the  last
    three years many gay people from Tirana  had  been  stopped  by  police
    officers as they  were  walking  home  at  night.   Whenever  found  in
    possession of condoms they were immediately suspected of being gay  and
    were sometimes subjected to anal inspection in the police  street  unit
    car as a means of verifying their sexual orientation.

164. In August 2005 the director of Gay Albania, a gay  rights  association,
    was arrested, together  with  three  others  on  prostitution  charges.
    According to an investigation  carried  out  by  ARHG  (Albanian  Human
    Rights Group), while in detention  the  four  were  mistreated  by  the
    prisoners and insulted by prison forces.  The facts  were  reported  in
    the US Department of State 2006 Albania Country Report on human  rights
    practice.

165. Dr Mai stated that in February 2006 AHRG issued a statement in  support
    of  the  asylum  application  of  Altin  Aliu,  an  ALGA   member   who
    subsequently was offered asylum in Sweden, to the effect that AHRG  had
    made public several cases of maltreatment of homosexuals  by  community
    and police forces.  Homosexuals in Albania had  been  harassed  several
    times by the police in various forms.  The police  had  been  searching
    their houses without having search warrants only because  of  the  mere
    fact that these persons were homosexual and during these  searches  the
    police would exercise psychological and physical pressure.

166. Dr Mai expressed the view that the level of discrimination,  abuse  and
    marginalisation  of  Albanian  gay  people  was  acknowledged  by   the
    Responses to Information Requests of the Immigration and Refugee  Board
    of Canada of 8th September 2006 summarising information available  from
    a number of organisations and statutory bodies including  the  EU,  the
    Home Office, the US Department of State, ILGA and various international
    and  Albanian  human  rights  groups.   The  situation  was   partially
    acknowledged in the 2007 Operational Guidance Note  issued  by  the  UK
    Home  Office.   And  these  considerations  were  mirrored  in  the  US
    Department of State 2007 Albania Country Report which stated:

         "As  in  previous  years,  NGOs  claim  that  police  targeted  the
         homosexual community for abuse.  According to the Albanian Gay  and
         Lesbian Association, the police  arbitrarily  arrested  homosexuals
         and then physically and verbally abused them  while  they  were  in
         detention.  The Albanian Human Rights Group reports that during the
         year police harassed  members  of  the  Albanian  Gay  and  Lesbian
         Association and other known homosexuals, sometimes searching  their
         homes without a warrant."

167. Dr Mai said it was important to underline that  the  expression  "known
    homosexuals" needed to be interpreted according to the everyday reality
    Albanian gay people lived in.  It referred to people who were known  to
    be gay because they were members of gay  associations,  to  people  who
    were seen hanging around the few existing informal gay  meeting  places
    (parks and cruising areas)  and  to  people  who  could  be  identified
    according to arbitrary factors such as being "effeminate" (in the  case
    of gay men) or "butch" (in the case of lesbian women), being unmarried,
    or living with a person of the same sex who was not  a  member  of  the
    family.  He said that in Albania a lesbian woman did not need  to  lead
    an openly gay lifestyle to attract attention and raise suspicion.

168. In dealing with the specific condition of lesbian women,  Dr  Mai  said
    that while there were recorded incidents against gay men there were  no
    recorded incidents against lesbian women and as a result he was  forced
    to speculate on the actual condition of lesbian  women  in  Albania  by
    elaborating on his knowledge of gender relations in Albania and of  the
    condition of homosexual men.

169. In the context of general stigmatisation and marginalisation  that  all
    homosexuals were subject to, lesbian women were  likely  to  endure  an
    even higher level of invisibility because  of  enduring  prevalence  of
    conservative and patriarchal moral  values.   This  could  be  seen  as
    corroborated by the fact that there were no lesbian members in Albanian
    gay associations.  From this perspective, the fact that there  were  no
    reported cases of violence expressed against  lesbians,  did  not  mean
    that lesbians were not subject to violence and discrimination from  the
    police, their families or in social  relations.   It  would  mean  that
    within the dramatic  situation  Albanian  homosexuals  had  to  endure,
    lesbian women might be subject to an even higher level of  invisibility
    and marginality.  This condition of  heightened  invisibility  did  not
    protect lesbians, but made them even more vulnerable to abuse and  less
    likely to receive appropriate protection.

170. In a private email exchange with Ms Elsa Ballauri,  director  of  AHRG,
    on 11th April 2008, she confirmed that the considerations made  in  the
    2000 report about the conditions homosexuals were subject to in Albania
    applied to lesbian women too.  Dr Mai  believed  that  the  appellant's
    perception that there were no places in Albania where  she  could  live
    safely as an  open  homosexual  was  fully  consistent  with  what  was
    objectively known about gay Albanian women.

171. In dealing with the possibility of single  women  living  independently
    in Albania, Dr Mai expressed the opinion that it was very difficult for
    a young woman to lead an independent life without the approval  of  her
    family, not only  for  economic  reasons  but  mostly  because  of  the
    endurance of patriarchal values and practises  regimenting  the  social
    mobility of women in contemporary Albania.  He quoted a UN agency  IFAD
    (International Fund for Agricultural Development) statement as saying:

         "With  a  transition  to  a  market-based  economy,  many  of   the
         principles  of  equality  enforced  during  communism   have   lost
         strength, employment is no longer guaranteed.   In  addition,  more
         women than men lost their jobs during  structural  adjustment,  and
         formerly state-owned assets were generally granted to  men.   As  a
         consequence,  women  increasingly  depend  on  their  husbands  and
         extended families for  survival  (....)  Women  have  more  limited
         access than men to assets that  could  help  them  earn  a  living,
         adding  to  their   vulnerability.    For   example,   women   face
         discrimination in owing property and in starting a business.   Even
         gaining access to credit could be  difficult  for  women,  not  for
         legal reasons but because banks prefer lending to men."

172. Dr Mai said that because of the realignment of Albanian  society  along
    more traditional values and practises in the post-communist period, the
    possibility for young women to live independently from  their  families
    and not be married, mainly students or work colleagues, was conditional
    on the  approval  of  their  family  members,  who  acted  as  informal
    guarantors with their employers and landlords.  However only a minority
    of families were available to grant their daughters  this  possibility,
    usually those from the social and cultural elites of  the  country,  to
    which the appellant's family did not seem to belong.   Although  Tirana
    could be seen as the most liberal of Albanian cities, being the capital
    and  the  largest,  different  neighbourhoods  and  families  harboured
    different  understanding  of  gender  politics   and   entitlement   to
    individual affirmation.

173. In his opinion, the view of Ms Schwandner-Sievers in  relation  to  the
    presence of systematic issues underlying  the  difficulty  of  Albanian
    government implementing the various initiatives taken as  a  result  of
    pressure from the EU, was an accurate interpretation of the  causes  of
    the present situation as well as presenting difficulties in relation to
    the future development of the country.  In consequence even to this day
    the state was still unable to guarantee  its  citizens  sufficient  and
    adequate protection in the capital as  well  as  in  the  rest  of  the
    country.   This  happened  because  the   interconnection   between   a
    personalistic and corrupt political  order  and  local  power  brokers,
    controlling strategic resources and trafficable  goods  (mainly  drugs,
    people and weapons),  had  had  an  almost  complete  monopoly  on  the
    legitimate use of force.  He quoted  from  the  Albania  2007  Progress
    Report of the European Commission as re-iterating these  considerations
    in particular as they affected homosexuals, which stated that:

         "However, allegations of ill-treatment of suspects by police during
         arrest or questioning are still frequent.  There  has  been  little
         progress on application of basic safeguards  against  ill-treatment
         during pre-trial detention, such as access to a lawyer  and  doctor
         and notification of detention to relatives.  Prosecutions for  ill-
         treatment do not always make reference to an appropriately  serious
         offence.  Legislation setting criteria for compensation to  victims
         is not yet in place.  Amendments to  the  law  on  the  rights  and
         treatment of inmates are delayed.   The  Code  of  Ethics  for  the
         prison system is not always followed.  Training for business  staff
         on  the  European  Convention  on  Human  Rights  is  needed.   The
         Supervisory Commission for the Execution of Imprisonment Sentences,
         which is intended to advise the Minister of Justice on  enforcement
         issues and protection of the rights of prisoners and detainees,  is
         still not operational.  Cases of arbitrary arrest in the street  of
         homosexuals by the police still occur."

174. Dr Mai stated that in the  light  of  all  the  considerations  he  had
    mentioned and of his direct experience of the condition  of  homosexual
    people  in  Albania  and  of  the  advancement  of   the   process   of
    democratisation and strengthening of the Albanian  state,  he  believed
    that the appellant was right in fearing that the police could not offer
    her sufficient protection in the whole of the Albanian  territory.   He
    did not believe the  appellant  would  be  able  to  enjoy  her  sexual
    identity, relocate from her family, get a job and live independently if
    she were to be returned to Albania.

His second report

175. The supplementary report of Dr Mai was  based  on  recent  research  he
    undertook  between  7th  and  11th  May  2008,  in  which  he  met  and
    interviewed Mr Nasser Almalak, the secretary of AGA (the  Albanian  Gay
    Association) and he met Mr SF secretary of ALGA.   Besides  these  more
    formal meetings he spoke to a few gay people and met two  gay  friends,
    to whom he referred as  O  and  F,  who  updated  him  on  the  general
    situation of the gay  and  lesbian  community  and  on  their  personal
    circumstances  more  specifically.   It  was  of  note  that  all   his
    interlocutors, but for Nasser Almalak, refused to be identified in  any
    other way except for their initials.  He was able to have  a  telephone
    conversation with Jim Kreider, an American/Dutch  colleague/facilitator
    and representative of GISH Albania, an LGBT human rights  organisation.
    He was unable to meet Ms Elsa  Ballauri,  the  director  of  AHRG,  the
    Albanian Human Rights Group, during his visit because  she  was  abroad
    but he was able to talk to her by telephone.

176. Dr Mai's overall understanding was that the conditions  of  homosexuals
    had not improved but actually had worsened  since  his  last  visit  to
    Albania in 2006.  His informers and friends reported a  change  in  the
    attitude of the police, which led to  more  arbitrary  inspections  and
    searches in places associated with sexual activities which fell outside
    the norms of heterosexual family formation and lifestyles.  One of  his
    Albanian gay friends associated  the  worsening  of  the  condition  of
    Albanian homosexuals with the return to power of  Sali  Berisha.   This
    informant said that whereas with the socialists you  were  stopped  but
    usually released after some arbitrary questioning and  abuse,  now  the
    police took you and kept you overnight  so  that  the  abuse  was  much
    greater.

177. In the capital Tirana, one of the main areas of  informal  meeting  for
    homosexual  people,  the  small  park  between  the   socialist   party
    headquarters and the Ministry of  Defence,  was  now  occupied  by  the
    construction site of the country's new  Christian  Orthodox  Cathedral,
    which meant that the few gay and lesbian individuals that took the risk
    to go out and meet other people in informal settings  (local  "hanging-
    out" places), were forced to resort  to  a  recently  refurbished  park
    behind the opera.  Until recently this area was known as "the hole"  as
    it was occupied by the  very  deep  foundations  of  a  huge  (illegal)
    construction, which was surrounded by unauthorised kiosks.  "The  hole"
    for a long time had  been  the  place  of  prostitution  for  extremely
    marginalised groups  such  as  the  Roma  and  drug-injecting  (heroin)
    populations. Sex workers hanging out around "the hole" included  (Roma)
    transgendered people, some of whom were drug users and sold sex to feed
    their heroin addiction,  while  others  simply  sold  sex  to  maintain
    themselves.  The closure of  the  park  next  to  the  Socialist  Party
    headquarters led to the concentration in the same marginalised place of
    a wide range of stigmatised groups, including those whose sexual  needs
    and desires did not comply with the descriptions of heterosexual family
    formation in Albania.  "The hole" had been  attracting  regular  police
    raids for a while and the accumulation and de  facto  concentration  of
    stigmatised people in the same marginalised place had heightened  risks
    of police abuse in the last few years.

178. Dr Mai suggested that although sexual relations between people  of  the
    same sex were no longer criminalised per se since 1994, they were still
    addressed in the penal code under  the  "Crimes  against  Morality  and
    Dignity"  together  with  prostitution   and   its   exploitation   and
    pornography which  suggested  a  prevailing  legal  understanding  that
    homosexuality was at odds with the dominant norms of society.

179. The review which was annexed to his report undertaken  by  GISH,  about
    the way the current penal code addressed the issue of sexual  relations
    of particular people of the same sex, underlined  how  only  homosexual
    relations accomplished with violence, with  minor  persons  or  persons
    unable to protect themselves, were punished  with  up  to  five  years'
    imprisonment.  The legal  review  undertaken  by  GISH  underlined  the
    existence of a differential treatment of violence  in  the  context  of
    homosexuality (defined in the code as anal intercourse  between  males)
    when compared to the  way  this  was  dealt  with  in  the  context  of
    heterosexual  relations,  given  that   according   to   the   Albanian
    legislation the age of consent for sexual relations between  people  of
    the same sex was the same as for sexual relations between men and women
    (14 years of age).

180. In dealing with  de  facto  stigmatisation,  Dr  Mai  referred  to  his
    interview with Nasser Almalak who said that if you were homosexual  no-
    one gave you work as they did not accept you.  Often  when  they  found
    out  about  you  they  abused  you  and  threw  you  out.   The  formal
    authorisation of homosexuality was a problem, as in  the  eyes  of  the
    world it seemed as if there is  no  discrimination  while  in  fact  no
    judge, no policeman, no-one was going to be  willing  to  protect  you.
    Almalak said he had been living in Albania for fourteen years  and  had
    applied repeatedly  for  Albanian  citizenship,  and  although  he  was
    entitled to it, he had been told he was homosexual  and  he  would  not
    receive it.  Nasser Almalak was the only interlocutor who  was  willing
    to talk in depth and at length about the treatment of homosexuals.  His
    friend O, by contrast, lived a live plagued by secrecy  and  isolation.
    Apart from an inability to live  openly  he  also  found  it  extremely
    difficult to be in any relationship because he simply  could  not  meet
    gay persons or someone he trusted sufficiently to disclose his identity
    to them and he would not take the risk of frequenting "the hole".

181. Dr Mai pointed to the differences between the old and new penal  codes.
      He  stated  that  by  the  decriminalising  homosexual  acts  between
    consenting  adults,  the  new  penal  code   represented   a   dramatic
    improvement on the previous penal code which was adopted in 1977 during
    the communist rule and which criminalised homosexuality per se  but  he
    pointed to continuity in the use of terminology  and  language  in  the
    contemporary Albanian legal code, such as  "pederast"  and  "bythqir",
    which gave away persistent and  culturally  deep-rooted  discriminatory
    moral attitudes towards homosexuals which mirrored wider  attitudes  in
    society.

182.  The  review  undertaken  by  GISH  underlined  how  homosexuality  was
    understood and described in the current penal code as "sexual relations
    against nature" while active and passive homosexuals were described  as
    "pederasts" in the Code.  These considerations had direct  implications
    for the lives of Albanian gay and lesbian  people,  since  they  placed
    them on a vulnerable position.  They were relevant to the specific case
    of the appellant as Mr Nasser Almalak of AGO mentioned that "the  hole"
    had always become a reference point for the few Albanian  lesbians  who
    ventured out at night in search for some  form  of  socialisation  with
    other gay people.   He  showed  that  at  "the  hole"  one  could  find
    anything, prostitutes, transgendered people, lesbians and gay men.   He
    said you could go there for a walk as you were dressed now and  because
    of the fact that you were there  they  (the  police)  could  decide  to
    arrest you, take you in, insult you, beat  you,  leave  you  there  all
    night, release you the next day or keep you some more time just as they
    wished because you were there.

183. Dr Mai went on to deal with the arrest and charging of  Nasser  Almalak
    in 2006 at "the hole" when he was distributing condoms as part  of  the
    regular outreach activities of the Albanian Gay Association.  There was
    a   group   of   five   people   comprising   one   gay   man,    three
    transvestites/transgendered people  and  a  lesbian  woman  undertaking
    outreach work and/or meeting in a public place, who were all accused of
    conducting sexual relationships in public premises without  any  actual
    evidence of flagrancy which  was  prescribed  by  the  law  to  justify
    arrest.  According to Nasser Almalak the police were actively trying to
    curb the emergence  of  any  form  of  LGBT  movement  by  deliberately
    attacking the heads of the movement.  For this reason  he  now  avoided
    undertaking outreach activities at  "the  hole"  in  the  first  place.
    Nasser Almalak explained to Dr Mai that the main source  of  contention
    between the three main LGBT NGOs currently active in Albania in  Tirana
    was the different attitudes they held towards the  marginalised  strata
    of the population and in particular towards the Roma  with  which  ALGA
    always refused  to  work,  whereas  AGA  regularly  conducted  outreach
    activities with all the  different  sexually  deviant  groups  in  "the
    hole", including Roma people selling sex.

184. Dr Mai said that as a consequence of the interiorisation  of  different
    types of degrees of stigmatisation and of the necessity to compete  for
    funding, the LGBT environment was  very  fragmented  and  hostile.   Ms
    Ballauri said that there was no gay community and even the  few  people
    who tried to do something to improve the situation of gay people in the
    past had turned more into themselves.  For example S the  secretary  of
    ALGA was now involved in projects about HIV/AIDS prevention and did not
    want to fight for gay rights directly.

185. In his conclusions regarding the appellant's  case,  Dr  Mai  expressed
    the view that if the appellant were to be repatriated  to  Albania  she
    would probably have to choose between befriending  the  people  hanging
    around "the hole", thus putting herself  at  risk  of  abuse  from  the
    police and extreme marginalisation, or  living  a  life  of  isolation,
    dissimilation  and  fear  as  she  did  not  seem  to  have  the  class
    credentials to enter the very secretive world of the very few  Albanian
    lesbians still living in Tirana.  Mr Nasser Almalak had indicated  that
    it would be very hard for the appellant to lead a gay lifestyle.

186. Dr Mai went on to express the view that Albania was a very  closed  and
    tightly knit society of less than 4 million people where the  condition
    of anonymity could not be endured or guaranteed by anybody.  On the one
    hand, it was very likely that even if a landlord did not ask  too  many
    questions  about  a  tenant  for  reasons  of   economic   opportunism,
    neighbours' curiosity would eventually expose people who  did  not  fit
    the conditions of heterosexual family formation.  On  the  other  hand,
    the high degree of corruptibly of the police exacerbated the  condition
    and vulnerability of people who, for different reasons, must keep their
    identities secret for the sake of their survival.  Should the appellant
    be forced to move back to Albania  she  would  be  very  likely  to  be
    eventually traced by her family.

187. Dr Mai stated that the level of  stigmatisation  of  Albanian  gay  and
    lesbian people was evident in the fact that  no  LGBT  association  had
    openly recognised premises and all its  members,  save  for  Mr  Nasser
    Almalak, refused to be identified by  name,  in  public  documents  and
    circumstances.

188. In dealing with the updated information on the  specific  condition  of
    lesbians in Albania, Dr Mai indicated that  all  of  his  interlocutors
    agreed  that  they  would  be  subjected  to  a  level  of  abuse   and
    discrimination similar or  superior  to  that  targeting  gay  men,  if
    discovered, with the only advantage  of  being  less  identifiable  and
    visible in the short-term.  Nasser Almalak  said  from  a  sociological
    point of view it was true that gay men were more  noticeable  and  were
    targeted by their families and society in general.  Women tended to  be
    more hidden and less visible so they were less struck by public opinion
    but when they were recognised they were still discriminated and  abused
    while at work and in  society.   That  was  why  they  kept  very  much
    themselves to themselves and did not tend to go out for risk  of  being
    exposed. There were also lesbians enthusiastic about their identity who
    did not like to stay hidden all the time.  They wanted to be  open  but
    they could not be as when they were recognised they were  insulted  and
    discriminated.  He said it was difficult to see lesbian  women  in  the
    park.  They usually kept well hidden at home.

189. In dealing with  risks  arising  from  family,  Dr  Mai  quoted  Nasser
    Almalak who recounted the story  of  an  activist  lesbian  friend  who
    originally wanted to found a lesbian  movement.   Her  brothers  learnt
    about her as a result of which she left the family and the  country  in
    order to live a more fulfilling and safe life  in  Greece.   Mr  Nasser
    Almalak said that if the brothers of a lesbian women found out about it
    and did not accept it they could kill her, even in Tirana, if that  was
    their mentality.  All of Dr Mai's  other  Albanian  gay  informers  and
    friends, including the secretary of ALGA, agreed on the  likelihood  of
    the appellant being forced to marry if she were to  be  repatriated  to
    Albania, given that her  family  already  knew  she  was  lesbian.   In
    addition the  isolation  and  fear  shared  by  Albanian  lesbians  was
    compounded by the fact that even the secretary of ALGA  was  unable  to
    convince the few lesbians he knew to  meet  him  or  talk  about  their
    lives.  Ms Elsa Ballauri said she was not at all surprised that he  was
    unable to have a first-hand conversation with lesbian women  in  Tirana
    as it was very difficult even for her.

190. Dr Mai said that one thing that had changed since he had last  been  to
    Albania in September 2006 was a deepening of the income gap between the
    rich and the poor and the enduring  unavailability  of  both  work  and
    housing.  As a result it was much more possible for two women to  share
    an apartment without any informal endorsement from the family  provided
    it was not known that they were lesbians.  However, the availability of
    a landlord/landlady renting his or her property to women who would  not
    be seen to fit within the standards of  heterosexual  family  formation
    would not stop neighbours from being curious  and  therefore  enquiring
    about their family background, which would eventually be  exposed.   In
    this situation particularly stigmatised people  such  as  gay  men  and
    lesbian women were more vulnerable to accepting and enduring abuse  and
    discrimination in the workplace (when they were lucky to be  offered  a
    job) in order to maintain themselves.

191. In relation to an example of a gay returnee from  the  United  Kingdom,
    Dr Mai said he had the opportunity of meeting a  gay  male  friend  who
    used to live in London who returned to Albania a year ago to  be  close
    to his family.  He told him that  he  was  forced  to  dissimilate  his
    sexual identity completely for the sake of the reputation of his family
    in order not to lose their love and respect.  He was himself unable  to
    express his own identity  and  was  considering  returning  to  London.
    Another gay Albanian friend from Shkodr who returned home as  he  could
    no longer endure living in the United Kingdom as a failed asylum seeker
    on the basis  of  sexual  orientation,  felt  completely  isolated  and
    deprived of his family and was also planning to return  to  the  United
    Kingdom.

192. Dr Mai stated that the fact that he was unable to contact  any  lesbian
    while he was in Tirana (although he used all the reasonable contacts he
    had) was very telling of the situation of isolation and  fear  Albanian
    lesbian people found themselves in.  Some of his gay  and  one  of  his
    heterosexual friends had known lesbians in the past, but they also knew
    that they had emigrated to the EU to  escape  discrimination  and  live
    their (sexual) identities.

193. In conclusion, Dr Mai expressed the view that the  appellant  would  be
    at great risk of being isolated and vulnerable in Albania  as  she  did
    not have the social, economic and cultural capital to access the  elite
    lesbians mentioned by the unavailable GISH member nor did she have  the
    support of her family which would  greatly  facilitate  her  access  to
    independent work and housing.  It was very unlikely she would not  have
    a chance of  not  being  traced  by  her  family  if  she  were  to  be
    repatriated in Albania due to  the  close-knit  nature  and  relatively
    small size of Albanian society, the corruptibility of public  officials
    and the degree of informal social control exerted  by  neighbours.   If
    she were to be returned to Albania she would  also  have  to  fend  for
    herself in a society which was increasingly polarised between the  very
    rich and the very poor, where independent affordable housing  and  work
    were very scarce resources, where it was impossible to live openly as a
    lesbian and where cases of discrimination and abuse both by the  police
    and society against the homosexual population, including lesbians,  was
    on the increase both at work and in the very  few  marginalised  spaces
    gay and lesbian people were cornered into.

The evidence of Dr Mai in examination in chief

194. In examination-in-chief Dr Mai said it was easier for men to find  jobs
    in the grey economy as it was  largely  to  do  with  construction  and
    agriculture and involved manual labour.  Women did not  have  the  best
    conditions in those jobs.   Image  exploitation  was  more  likely  for
    everybody.  He said many of these jobs were temporary so they  may  not
    be able to sustain people who were alone.

195. Ms  Asanovic  asked  Dr  Mai  whether  the  suggestion  that  employers
    understated their employees in order to avoid taxes  meant  there  were
    more opportunities for employment.  Dr Mai said there were in any event
    limited job opportunities and he did not think that there  would  be  a
    greater opportunity for the appellant since it usually assisted  people
    who had the right connections through family or friends.

196.  Dr Mai was asked whether he meant that it  was  impossible  to  obtain
    employment in Albania without this assistance of family or friends.  Dr
    Mai said that that was not true so much for  the  skilled  market,  for
    example in banking a person needed a formal qualification, but  it  was
    at the lower end of the unskilled market where it  was  vital  to  have
    such connections.  It would be awkward for a woman to go  un-introduced
    to an employer.  People would be surprised  and  unwelcoming  and  that
    there was such a pressure on jobs.  People needed a personal liaison.

197. Dr Mai was asked how significant the family was in the context  of  the
    appellant's case. He said members of the family could phone and talk to
    an employer, ask neighbours about jobs and find opportunities.  He said
    that the family sanctioned the morality of the person  concerned.   The
    importance of the family was  not  comparable  to  the  family  in  any
    western country.  He said the values of family substituted the  sacred.



198.  Dr  Mai  was  asked  about  the  ability  of  the  appellant  to  find
    accommodation.  He said the same applied.  People would ask  about  her
    family.  The expression they would use was "whose are you?"  Explaining
    one's relationship to a family was a way of introducing  oneself  to  a
    landlord.  It would be a surprise to have an unmarried  woman  who  was
    not a student not supported  by  her  family.   The  vast  majority  of
    landlords would think twice or three times.  Dr Mai was  asked  whether
    he thought that there was  any  difference  if  the  accommodation  the
    appellant was looking for was cheap.  Dr Mai said it  was  less  likely
    such people would be elite and detached from  traditional  values.   If
    one offered $1,000 then fewer questions would be asked.

199. Ms Asanovic asked Dr Mai whether he agreed with the Secretary of  State
    that there was no evidence regarding the  incidence  of  harm  for  the
    lesbian population.  He said he could not, because of the  occasion  of
    the arrest of Nasser Almalak when a  woman  was  present  and  she  was
    involved in the whole issue and the development of the  situation.   He
    said people repeatedly said that lesbians were subjected  to  the  same
    situation, the need to hide,  discrimination  and  the  adoption  of  a
    discreet demeanour meant being invisible.

200. Ms Asanovic asked Dr Mai whether he had met any  lesbians  in  Albania.
    He said he met several but he was not on a  fact-finding  mission.   He
    met people he understood to be clearly lesbians.  It was  in  a  social
    circle where it was not appropriate to discuss it.  He was able to tell
    that they were lesbians because of  they  way  there  were  introduced,
    their demeanour and the way they reacted to the other  members  of  the
    group.  He mentioned that the woman who had been arrested with  Almalak
    was present when he saw him.  He said she was there  but  kept  looking
    around.  She was introduced as a member of the  association.   He  said
    she did not speak English, which he was speaking with Almalak.  He said
    that she nodded, agreeing with Almalak was saying.  He said it was  not
    appropriate to prompt her.

201. Ms Asanovic asked Dr Mai how he could draw these conclusions  as  there
    were no records of incidents involving the police.  He said he did  not
    think that in a situation where there was stigmatisation of  women  and
    widespread homophobia because there was  no  reporting,  there  was  no
    problem.  On the contrary one had to think about the issue of  domestic
    violence which existed despite the lack of expected reporting.  He said
    the rest of the context gave evidence of the strong likelihood  that  a
    situation might develop that way.  He said women were respectable  only
    if honourable according to a particular code.  Any lack  of  conformity
    put a woman in danger where the police could not control the situation.



202. The Tribunal asked Dr Mai whether what he said applied to any woman  in
    Albania.  He said that when a woman was found  out  as  a  lesbian  she
    would be regarded as an unworthy woman with a lack  of  respectability.
    The only terms in which he had heard lesbians  spoken  of  was  in  the
    context of being up for grabs.  A member of the Tribunal asked  Dr  Mai
    whether what he said applied to male homosexuals.  He  said  that  they
    were still men and still had a role.  Dr Mai  said  that  when  he  was
    working on a youth project in Durrs the local group was headed by a 55
    year old woman teacher.  The builder wanted him to  sign  the  contract
    rather than the female.  He  thought  homosexuality  carried  a  higher
    degree of stigma.  Admitting to being gay was one of the most difficult
    things to cope with due to the abuse that homosexual men were subjected
    to constantly which had been observed by international bodies.  He said
    it was the tip of the iceberg.  When his gay friends met him they would
    ask whether he was going to be alone or with a woman and if he was  not
    with a woman they would provide one.

203. Dr Mai was referred to  Annex  7  to  his  supplementary  report  which
    contained an AHRG Report for the American Embassy in which it was  said
    that AHRG had not reported any human rights violations against gays and
    lesbians in 2007.  He said that according to the  US  State  Department
    Report there were cases of violations.  AHRG one of  the  bodies  which
    had information was linked to some groups.  It was likely that AHRG did
    not know exactly what was going on.

204. Dr Mai was asked about  pestering  and  harassment.   He  said  that  a
    friend was walking in the park.  The police stopped  him  and  found  a
    condom.   They  suspected  he  was  gay.   They  carried  out  an  anal
    inspection in the van.  They detained him arbitrarily.  He  was  beaten
    up, insulted but not charged.  He was released the following day.   His
    arbitrary detention and beating was standard.  He said it was in  2003.
    He was asked what type of place this took place in.  He said it was  in
    the inner centre of Tirana which  was  quiet  after  11pm  to  11:30pm.
    There was a park which was the place where men  and  friends  could  go
    looking for friends or sex.  He said it was not safe so women were  not
    likely to go there.  It was  where  Fatbardha  went  with  Nasser.   By
    "friends" he said he meant homosexual partners.  Some conversation  was
    carried on  which  could  be  seen  as  the  beginnings  of  an  embryo
    community.

205. Ms Asanovic asked Dr Mai whether it could be said that the police  were
    involved because people were looking for sex.  He said  that  that  was
    not forbidden but they were always under surveillance.  The police were
    not at a high level.  They  were  not  a  trained  force  with  a  good
    standard of education.  It was the nightshift and they were often drunk
    and picked on a gay to keep going through the night.  Ms Asanovic  said
    that the 2004 US State Department  Report  suggested  that  the  police
    explained the arrests by reason of breaches of public order.   He  said
    the police could not say that they arrested people  because  they  were
    gay.  When asked they probably would say that they did so for  breaches
    of public order.  They could think that deviance was a threat to public
    order.  The park had very low vegetation and the  vegetation  was  well
    lit.  If cars passed around it then he could not see how  people  could
    have sex in the park.  Dr Mai said he knew  that  if  he  walked  alone
    there he might be stopped by the police.

206. Ms Asanovic asked him if there was a visible presence  of  lesbians  in
    these organisations.  He said he met Fatbardha on his  last  visit  and
    both secretaries of the NGOs said that there had been  lesbian  members
    but most had migrated.  He said Jim Kreider, the spokesperson for GISH,
    had told him that GISH knew of a group of lesbian  women  who  met  but
    were closed and elite.  Ms Asanovic mentioned that Mr  DK  referred  to
    the fact that he knew three lesbians and Dr Mai said  it  was  probably
    the same group of people.  He said  that  Nasser  referred  to  members
    going to the park and sometimes doing outreach in the park.

207. Ms Asanovic asked Dr Mai  whether  he  could  draw  conclusions  as  an
    anthropologist.  He said when he heard these  accounts  he  found  them
    coherent with how things were working at a higher level.  He said  that
    everyone acknowledged that the family was at the centre of society.  He
    said the family was a key institution  everywhere  in  the  world.   In
    Albania it was fundamental for  advancement  to  have  family  support.
    State institutions were understaffed and under resourced.

208. Action Plus was  an  HIV  and  AIDS  organisation.   Because  of  their
    mandate they knew gay people.  They  gave  out  condoms  and  organised
    projects which gave them an excuse to be involved in gay affairs.

209. He was asked about the list of women's organisations  provided  by  the
    Secretary of State and asked what impact they had.  He said that it was
    not a structural one.  He did not want to be  negative  but  they  were
    micro-interventions,  usually  funded   through   foreign   aid   which
    determined the agenda.  The length  of  their  projects  depended  upon
    funding, which usually was in the short-term, for four or  five  years.
    He said it might be possible to place a woman in a textile workshop for
    the short-term, but that did not explain how long-term  employment  was
    possible.  While he was there two cooperatives folded.  He said it  was
    about the funding and survival of the project.  From what he  had  seen
    these projects did not have a structural effect

210. Dr Mai was asked about the EPP project referred to by the Secretary  of
    State.  He said he was not in a position to comment  on  this  specific
    project but he did not believe the level of support had been  adequate.
    There was a relationship between this process and membership of the EU.
     The initiatives were prompted from elsewhere and were short-term.   He
    was asked whether or not Albanians would be  likely  to  sustain  these
    projects for EU purposes.  He said he did  not  think  that  the  state
    would sustain them after funding had been removed.  It was  hoped  that
    by manufacturing dialogue, Albania would enter the  EU  and  the  money
    then would be there.

211. Dr Mai was asked whether since 1998 he  had  noticed  any  change  with
    respect to women.  He said that he had.   It  was  in  the  context  of
    individualisation,  which  impacted  differently  on  different  social
    classes.  Whereas for elite people it had put better chances  with  the
    family and personal liaisons attached to it.  For the working class and
    people without means things had not changed.  He  said  the  widespread
    immigration of women had allowed women to witness different  lifestyles
    abroad.  In Albania that was a privilege of the few.   It  was  a  more
    polarised country in terms of money.  Those who had, had more but those
    who did not have, had less.

212. He was asked whether the cultural predicament  of  women  had  changed.
    He said it had not.  The majority were at a lower level of society.  He
    was asked whether he thought that girls could be independent.  He  said
    because of the changes there  was  a  widespread  anticipation  of  the
    possibility but when they tried to change there  was  a  conflict  with
    their fathers  and  brothers.   They  felt  under  pressure.   What  he
    described as their "levers of power" were under threat and violence was
    often the result.  He said that Agron Tufa, the novelist,  spoke  about
    the disappearance of the taboos around women.  He was  an  intellectual
    who defended people  like  himself.   He  said  some  people  wanted  a
    different  outlook  but  settled  for  less.   After  the  collapse  of
    communism and the fragmentation of society people were more questioning
    but now there was more settlement in the old ways.   The  gender  norms
    and roles were most resilient.

213. Dr Mai was  invited  to  comment  on  the  reforms  undertaken  by  the
    Albanian government.  He said that they were very good news, but  given
    the recent nature of these provisions his  understanding  was  that  it
    remained to be seen what opportunities the programme would provide.  He
    said it was part of EU negotiations.  It was a positive sign but  there
    was no evidence that it  would  be  delivered  better  than  any  other
    programmes had been.

The evidence of Dr Mai in cross-examination

214. In cross-examination, Ms Laing suggested to Dr  Mai  that  he  had  not
    said that a landlord would not give a flat to a  single  woman  without
    family support.  Dr Mai explained that he was not saying was  not  that
    all landlords would be unavailable, but the possibilities were  greater
    if the premises were let at a higher rental and in the medium term  the
    neighbours would be alerted to people who did not reproduce.  He said a
    level of gossip would feed back to the landlord.  Ms Laing referred  Dr
    Mai to the passage in his  first  report  in  which  he  mentioned  the
    possibility that a landlord might not ask too many  questions  about  a
    tenant for reasons of economic opportunism and suggested  that  at  the
    lower end of the market people would take lodgers.  He said there would
    be more scrutiny.

215. Ms Laing drew his attention to the notes of  his  meeting  with  Nasser
    Almalak in which Mr Almalak had expressed the view that it would not be
    a problem for a woman to rent an apartment or work if she was not known
    as a homosexual.  Dr Mai said that when he asked the question he  tried
    to find out whether the main problem would be financial or gender.   He
    said the second thing was that if people did not  know  the  woman  was
    lesbian there would be less reason to abuse her.  The question was  how
    long that information could be withheld.  He said a woman was  expected
    to marry and her demeanour might arouse suspicions.

216. Ms Laing asked Dr Mai whether he was aware that the appellant  used  to
    help her mother as a seamstress.  She suggested that what the appellant
    told Dr Bell suggested she had been dealing with  clients  outside  the
    home.  Dr Mai said he understood that this had happened before she  had
    revealed that she was a homosexual and he said it was conditional  upon
    her relationship with her mother.  Ms Laing said  that  her  point  was
    that the appellant would have  made  contacts  with  clients.   Dr  Mai
    agreed that that was so, but said that they had been authorised by  her
    mother.  He questioned what the appellant would do if  her  mother  was
    not available.  Ms Laing suggested that she could go to  those  clients
    and it was unlikely that her mother would reveal her homosexuality.  Dr
    Mai agreed with that proposition on the basis, as he put it, that dirty
    clothes would be washed at home.

217. Ms  Laing  asked  Dr  Mai  whether  newspapers  in  Albania  advertised
    situations which were vacant.  He said that they did but they were  for
    the higher skilled and for internal candidates.   He  said  there  were
    some regulations that public jobs had to be advertised.  There had been
    some improvement but it was unequally distributed.  He said  there  had
    been economic growth but it was uneven.  He  was  asked  whether  there
    were any newspapers in Albania, like the Evening  Standard  in  London,
    which had pages of adverts for low skilled jobs.  He  said  that  there
    were not.

218. In answer to a question from the Tribunal about the  "grey  market"  he
    said he had never heard of anyone going and asking for work directly.

219.  In  relation  to  the  situation  of  homosexual  men  and  women   in
    contemporary Albania, he was asked whether the reality was that all  of
    the references were to what happened to gay men.  He said some were and
    some were not.  Gay people meant both.  He said there was  a  reference
    to cruising areas which related to men, since they  tended  to  be  the
    vast majority there.  He was asked whether he was inferring that  women
    went there because Fatardha went there.  He said that was one  item  of
    evidence.  Nasser Almalak told him that women went with him.

220. Ms Laing drew Dr Mai's attention to  the  fact  that  he  said  in  his
    report that there were no recorded incidents  involving  lesbian  women
    and that thus he was forced to speculate.  He said that there  was  one
    and he had referred to it, so there was one  recorded  incident.   From
    conversations he had he gained the information that their position  was
    similar.

221. Ms Laing referred Dr Mai to the report of the arrest of Nasser  Almalak
    and asked him who put the report together.  He said that  Jim  Kreider,
    the spokesperson for GISH, did so.  Ms Laing suggested  that  the  fact
    that Almalak and his friends were charged with violating  Article  107,
    which prohibited sexual acts in public places and  Article  113,  which
    related to prostitution, rather suggested that the  police  might  have
    been justified.  He said he was not in the business of  justifying  the
    police.   He  said  Nasser  Almalak  had  been  criticised  for  having
    relations with gypsies and people who sold sex.  He said people in ALGA
    and GISH saw him as  bad  news.   He  brought  to  the  fore  the  less
    respectable aspects which shamed them all.

222. Ms Laing suggested that there was a point of view in the gay  community
    that what might have been going on was unlawful.  He said he  had  said
    earlier how the police regarded lawful behaviour.  They used  the  word
    "whore" and the situation was very fluid.  Ms Laing suggested that  the
    article did not contain comments from the  police.   Dr  Mai  suggested
    that it was a situation whereby groups internalised.

223. Ms Laing asked Dr Mai whether he agreed that the  appellant's  evidence
    was that most people in Albania did not know that  lesbianism  existed.
    He disagreed because he thought that Albania was exposed to  the  media
    and all sorts of images and knowledge rose as  a  result.   He  thought
    that was illustrative of the appellant's experience.

224. Ms Laing suggested to Dr Mai  that  he  had  not  spoken  to  a  single
    lesbian.  He disagreed.  He said that  Fatbardha  was  present  at  the
    Almalak interview.  He had spoken to lesbian women but  was  not  in  a
    position to expose issues.  Ms Laing asked Dr Mai  whether  unlike  the
    position with Mr Almalak he had no material which came from lesbians in
    Albania.  Dr Mai said it was unfortunately so.  Ms Laing asked  how  he
    could call the occasion when Fatbardha was  present  at  the  interview
    with Mr Almalak an interview with a lesbian.  He said she kept  nodding
    but deferred to Almalak.  He said he asked all of  his  friends  if  he
    could talk to lesbians.  He said most knew one who had emigrated.

225. Ms Laing  suggested  to  Dr  Mai  that  the  impression  given  by  his
    evidence, was that it would not be acceptable in the  police  hierarchy
    for a policeman to say he had arrested someone because he was gay.   Dr
    Mai said that he thought there was a level of implicit  approval  at  a
    higher level.  He agreed that he did say that they could not  say  that
    they had arrested someone because they were gay, because  they  had  to
    account to their supervisors.

The evidence of Dr Mai in re-examination

226. In re-examination Ms Asanovic asked Dr Mai whether the  fact  that  the
    appellant had been in the United Kingdom for two and a half years would
    help if she were to go to clients that she had met through her mother's
    work.  He said he thought it was unlikely that the appellant  would  be
    able to seek work from her mother's former clients since  the  job  had
    been mediated by her mother.  They would ask about her mother  and  the
    appellant would find herself in an awkward position because  previously
    she was helping with a family business.

The evidence of Dr Mai in examination in chief when recalled

227. At the adjourned hearing on 26th November 2008, Ms  Asanovic  asked  Dr
    Mai whether as a result of seeing the advertisements from the  Albanian
    newspapers his opinion about the employability  of  the  appellant  had
    changed.  He said he had become more aware of the fact that there  were
    more opportunities to look for work through  formal  channels,  but  he
    said they had to be  balanced  against  family  liaisons  and  personal
    connections which still played an  important  role  in  a  decision  to
    employ one person over another  and  the  existing  prejudices  against
    homosexuals, which remained.

228. He said that over  the  last  two  months  he  had  been  checking  the
    websites of the newspapers  from  which  the  advertisements  had  been
    extracted and others. He  thought  the  newspaper  advertisements  were
    quite representative of what was on offer.  The majority of the adverts
    referred to medium skilled jobs.  The  adverts  that  referred  to  low
    skilled jobs, suitable for the appellant, required previous  experience
    and often indicated an age limit usually below 25 to 30.   He  said  it
    was important to take  into  account  that  there  were  two  types  of
    advertisement.  In  newspapers  like  "Panorama",  which  was  a  daily
    newspaper, there were advertisements which were compulsory  for  public
    bodies and NGOs, who used public money and were required  to  advertise
    in specific ways.  He said they were not  in  the  usual  advertisement
    sections of the newspaper but followed the public  notices.   The  same
    applied to tenders, which in many cases, were by businesses  and  firms
    that were certified to European standards.   These  were  usually  very
    skilled jobs.  He said Albanian law also provided that all jobs  needed
    to be notified to the local job centre, where they  could  monitor  the
    work market and assist the employed in accessing them.  They had to  be
    notified within seven days of the job coming into existence.   He  said
    it  did  not  mean  that  they  had  to  hire  through  the   newspaper
    advertisement.

229. Dr Mai said that as a matter of fact, advertisements  were  present  in
    most Albanian daily newspapers but were not used to  advertise  private
    jobs until 2000 and this reflected an element of the Albanian  economy.
    There was a wider trend towards a written form of communication,  which
    coincided with a higher circulation of Albanian newspapers.   Different
    daily newspapers had different advertisements.  Panorama  had  official
    ones.  "Telegazeta" was a weekly edition of "Gazetia Shqiptare",  which
    was a daily.  It advertised all sorts of things like houses,  cars  and
    had been online since 2004.  It had  the  same  advertisements  as  the
    daily paper but there was a delay of a week.  The "Shekulli"  (Century)
    was another daily paper which started publishing adverts in 2007.   The
    "Celesi" (Key)  was  another  weekly  for  advertisements  only,  which
    started in 1997.  It contained mainly advertisements to  do  with  cars
    and property and then started to be used for  job  offers  increasingly
    since 2000.  He had reviewed the website the day before and  found  360
    advertisements, of which  there  were  75  offers  of  employment,  the
    remainder being from  people  looking  for  work.   The  vast  majority
    looking for work were men.  He focused on jobs  on  offer  rather  than
    people  looking  for  work.   The  knowledge  that   he   obtained   in
    conversation with the director of  "Telegazeta"  was  that  there  were
    twice as many men looking at advertisements than women.  He  said  that
    matched existing research  from  the  Tirana  Regional  Council,  which
    agreed that 70% were men and 30% were women.  This was reflected in the
    high internal migration to Tirana since the end of communism  in  1991.
    He said it involved a lot of educated women with titles  (degrees)  and
    skills.  There was a pool of skilled labour that  the  market  was  not
    capitalising on.  On the "Key" website there were two to three new jobs
    everyday of all categories and 200 hits per job.

230. Dr Mai also  looked  at  the  online  version  of  "Celesi",  where  he
    restricted his search to  waiters'  jobs.   He  said  there  were  nine
    entries, of which one was a person looking for work and one  was  where
    they wanted a person below 25 and another where they  wanted  a  person
    below 30 and in two  cases  they  wanted  prior  experience.   He  said
    advertisements reflected the high unemployment rate in  Albania.   They
    reflected the particular gender factor.  Most of the  jobs  which  used
    the feminine form  were  usually  very  low  skilled  jobs.   From  his
    conversation with the director of "Telegazeta" he  learned  that  there
    was a prejudice in favour of jobs more suitable for women such as  shop
    assistant, waitress, bar woman or cleaner but not much more.

231. In answer to a question from the Tribunal he said that at  the  skilled
    level there were nursery jobs, opportunities to  work  in  the  textile
    industry and seamstresses.  In relation  to  the  textile  industry  he
    contacted a person working for the IOM, which promoted  programmes  for
    the reintegration of the victims of trafficking, which encompassed  job
    placements and assistance with employment.  He  said  she  pointed  out
    that the textile industry had suffered, particularly in  the  last  two
    years.  It was  a  strategic  section  for  many  women  who  had  been
    repatriated.  People with permanent positions were being laid off.   In
    general they required people with  previous  experience  working  in  a
    firm.  They would invest in apprentices when there  were  bulk  orders.
    There was not a lot of work at the moment.

The evidence of Dr Mai in cross-examination when recalled

232. In cross-examination, Ms Laing suggested that when  in  earlier  cross-
    examination in September she asked whether there were  newspapers  like
    the Evening Standard  in  London  with  lots  of  adverts  Dr  Mai  was
    categorical in saying the only jobs which  were  available  were  as  a
    result of EU transparency requests.  He agreed.

233. Ms Laing asked Dr Mai  whether  it  was  the  case  that  he  had  been
    completely unaware of the jobs that he had now  become  aware  of.   He
    said it was something that he had overlooked, but wanted to add that he
    had been involved in several research  projects  regarding  the  labour
    market but no respondent said that they used advertisements.  He agreed
    that he had previously answered "no" because it was the  case  that  he
    did  not  know.   He  agreed  that  since   becoming   aware   of   the
    advertisements he had done a lot of research.  Ms Laing suggested  that
    when he was first asked to provide a report one of  the  issues  to  be
    addressed was whether a person in the  appellant's  position  would  be
    able to find a job.  He said he concentrated on whether a lesbian would
    find it difficult.

234. Ms Laing drew his attention to paragraph 8  in  his  first  report,  in
    which he acknowledged that he  and  Ms  Schwandner-Sievers  would  both
    comment on questions  5,  6  and  7,  which  concerned  employment  and
    economic survival chances and independent life of  an  independent  and
    unskilled woman in Albania as well as a general  acceptance  of  single
    women in a society and her possibilities for  relocation.  He  said  he
    concentrated on the appellant as a lesbian.

235. Ms Laing pointed to paragraph 9  of  his  first  report,  in  which  he
    pointed to the difficulties  the  appellant  would  have  in  accessing
    independent accommodation and work.  Ma Laing reminded Dr Mai that  his
    evidence was that the main way  of  obtaining  employment  was  through
    family connections.  Dr Mai said  that  he  had  replied  that  he  had
    overlooked the advertisements.  He said the fact that he was not  aware
    of the job advertisements did not detract from the  fact  that  Albania
    was a homophobic society and there were strong prejudices  against  the
    employment of  women.   He  said  it  was  his  understanding  that  Ms
    Schwandner-Sievers would have covered the issue of the advertisement of
    jobs and their reports would have complemented each other.  He said  he
    worked with the issue of Albanian homosexuals.

236. Ms Laing took Dr Mai through a number  of  job  advertisements  in  the
    Telegazeta and suggested that there were a number of low  skilled  jobs
    advertised.  She  suggested  that  in  many  cases  there  was  no  age
    restriction that would exclude  the  appellant  and  not  all  required
    previous experience.  He said he did not agree entirely.  He had to say
    that there were prejudices at work so when one  turned  up  if  someone
    stood out in a physical way that  would  influence  employability.   He
    said it could happen that a woman who was a lesbian was going to  stand
    out.

237. In reply to a question from the  Tribunal  Dr  Mai  said  that  it  did
    happen that there were notes advertising jobs in shops and attached  to
    doors.  He said he had seen adverts such as those for waiters  and  for
    shop assistants.  Those that he had seen did not say that no experience
    was required.

238. Dr Mai was asked by the Tribunal whether his report was to be  read  in
    a way that suggested that if a woman was single it would be  impossible
    without family support to get a job or accommodation.  He said  he  was
    not saying that it was not possible.  He said  he  was  saying  it  was
    possible for an independent woman to find work  and  accommodation  but
    very very difficult and it was quite a  recent  development  which  was
    connected with the expansion of Tirana into a metropolis.  He  said  an
    informal count showed that it had a million inhabitants.  He  said  the
    fact that many people had migrated abroad and had come  back  and  that
    there had been a developing urbanisation  produced  an  appearance,  in
    relative terms, of a mentality in favour of the possibility for  single
    women to get jobs.  He said the development  of  the  economy  and  the
    widening of the gap between rich and  poor  had  encouraged  people  to
    overcome their moral objections.

239. Ms Laing asked Dr Mai whether he was suggesting that if  the  appellant
    responded to an advertisement someone was going  to  look  at  her  and
    deduce that she was gay.  He said he thought she might not fit  into  a
    vision of an employable woman and therefore would be unfairly  treated.
    He said that if she were to get the job it would be more difficult  for
    her sexual identity not to emerge.  He said it was not impossible  that
    people would assume that she was a lesbian.  He said it may be  because
    of his experience he would think about it.  There were different  kinds
    of lesbians, butch and femme and she was more the butch type.

The evidence of Dr Mai in re-examination when recalled

240. In re-examination, Ms Asanovic asked  Dr  Mai  whether  there  was  any
    concerted effort to offer jobs to women.  He said  the  government  had
    programmes to promote employment in relation to specifically vulnerable
    groups.  He said NGOs and cooperatives  tried  to  cater  for  specific
    needs for women in accessing the labour market, for  example  Roma  and
    VOTs.  It was because women found  it  more  difficult  to  access  the
    labour marked that the projects exited. The projects had to  cope  with
    the Albanian economy and produce results.  In  many  cases  women  were
    trained and work opportunities were found through the personal contacts
    of the director of the NGO; whether they were sustainable over time was
    a difficult question.  He said sometimes it was a question of a bit  of
    "box ticking".  He said  the  economy  made  enterprises  difficult  to
    sustain.  When the economy wound down women were more vulnerable unless
    in a very high skilled position.

241. Dr Mai said that in relation to the  appellant's  appearance,  that  it
    was a paradox in that Tirana, as people would be more tolerant  towards
    homosexuality, they therefore would be able to identify and marginalise
    her.  He said it would be less so in rural areas,  where  homosexuality
    did not feature in people's imagination.  The attitude in Tirana  would
    be similar to the attitude here but less so in rural areas.

The statement of Mr DK

242. The statement of Mr DK was dated 20th September 2008.  He said  he  was
    one of the founding members of the  executive  board  of  GISH  Albania
    (Group for Social Integration in  Albania,  alias  Grupi  per  Integrim
    Shoqeror), a human rights not for profit organisation based  in  Tirana
    in Albania.  The organisation aimed to change the current situation  as
    to the stigmatisation and fear within the LGBT community itself and the
    general view of the social minority in the Albanian  public  at  large.



243. Mr DK had been involved with  GISH  since  its  foundation  in  October
    2004.  He had a law degree from the University of  Tirana.   After  his
    graduation and until he moved to the United Kingdom in March  2008,  he
    worked for the largest cement  production  company  in  Albania  in  an
    important position which we will not describe lest it might lead to his
    identification.  He himself is a gay man and has lived most of his life
    in Albania.  He  had  a  good  knowledge  of  the  historical,  social,
    cultural and economic background of his country and a good knowledge of
    LGBT issues in Albania as a result of his involvement with the work  of
    GISH.

244. GISH was established in  October  2004.   The  board  members  of  GISH
    consisted of five people, as required by Albanian  law.   Some  of  the
    members left Albania for their own personal and  professional  reasons,
    and the membership changed.  Altogether there had been eight members at
    various times, only he and one other having been there permanently from
    the beginning.  Only one of these people permanently lived  in  Tirana.
    Others had left to live abroad or, having held a post temporarily, they
    left because of the workload of their permanent  jobs.     By  November
    2005 GISH had acquired offices and 2006 was  a  boom  year  insofar  as
    activity was concerned.  Nevertheless many  things  they  started  then
    were never quite completed.  GISH did not provide legal assistance  nor
    systematically monitor human rights violations as they did not have the
    capacity or funding.  Since February 2008 GISH has been inactive.

245. In dealing with employment prospects in Albania, Mr DK said that  there
    were high levels of  unemployment  and  the  official  statistics  were
    unreliable for a number of reasons. In addition the unemployment levels
    were difficult to calculate because there was  a  large  grey  informal
    economy that  was  estimated  to  reach  50%  of  official  GDP.   Many
    businesses declared a very low number of employees so  they  could  pay
    lower  taxes,  which  left  many  of  their  employees  without  social
    insurance, especially unskilled ones, and most of them worked with  the
    fear of being fired at any time.

246. On the  collapse  of  the  regime  in  1991,  every  citizen  gained  a
    constitutional right of freedom of movement.  As  a  consequence  there
    was massive migration within the country from the rural and  provincial
    areas towards the biggest urban cities  as  well  as  abroad.   It  was
    estimated that at least 30% of the whole population  changed  residence
    within Albania and almost  another  30%  of  the  population  emigrated
    abroad.  This caused very high levels of urban chaos especially in  the
    two main cities of Tirana and Durrs.

247.  The  Albanian  government  and  the  authorities   completely   lacked
    experience,  expertise,  financial  resources  and  proper  functioning
    institutions to cope with these massive  and  consistent  and  constant
    challenges.  They were unable to  provide  their  citizens  with  jobs,
    shelter and services.  There  was  a  high  level  of  corruption  that
    remained considerably high to this day.  Most of  the  people  who  had
    newly migrated to the urban  areas  had  low  skills  which  made  them
    unattractive in an uncompetitive job market.

248. Family and social ties were  indispensable  to  individuals  when  they
    needed to find a  job.   If  the  appellant  returned  to  Albania  her
    employment  chances,  as  a  low  skilled  jobseeker   without   proper
    connections and ties, would be extremely limited, if any.

249. In relation to housing in Albania, Mr DK said that  while  most  people
    who were housed lived in abodes which were usually owned by their elder
    family  members,  because  of  historic  privatisation,  this  was  not
    sufficient to  cover  the  demand.   The  lack  of  affordable  housing
    remained an acute problem.  After the big financial collapse few people
    and businesses had the chance to buy immoveable property  and/or  build
    houses and dwellings.  Given the average monthly wages,  the  price  of
    commodities and the level of rent for essential properties, it was very
    unlikely that a single person would be able to afford to  rent  a  flat
    and live on his/her own.  For the unskilled low paid employees this was
    simply impossible.  The majority of the adult people still lived in the
    family home, even after marriage.  If the appellant were  lucky  enough
    to find employment somewhere, with her salary as a low skilled  worker,
    she  could  afford  most  of  her  basic  living  expenses  except  her
    accommodation costs.

250. In dealing with family attitudes Mr DK said that in 2006  GISH  carried
    out research within the LGBT community.  One of the conclusions of  the
    survey was as follows:

         "...LGBT persons have a  very  difficult  relationship  with  their
         families: these relations are insincere or aggressive.   They  have
         the same kind of relations with their relatives or social  circles.
         The LGBT  persons  are  afraid  that  admittance  of  their  sexual
         orientation to their families may ruin  their  relations  with  the
         other members of  the  family.   They  believe  that  this  may  be
         followed by extreme measures  by  their  family  members,  such  as
         psychological and physical violence,  a  severe  control  on  their
         lives; meanwhile most of them live within the family.   There  have
         been cases of LGBT persons forced by their family  to  get  married
         without their consent or even cases of persons kicked  out  of  the
         house and disinherited.  So the relations of the LGBT persons  with
         their families are relations filled with fear.  Fear prevents these
         persons from having an open and  sincere  relationship  with  their
         families.  The fear also causes inferiority  complexes  and  a  low
         degree of awareness and self-esteem  that  conditions  their  whole
         life, as well as the life of persons related to them."

251. Mr DK said that the appellant could not live with her  family  and  she
    would have to obey its rules and demands.  Like every other low  income
    traditional Albanian family members of the family may  think  that  the
    appellant should be married and not be living  in  the  parental  home.
    One of their most natural preoccupations would be to find male  suitors
    for her.  According to  both  Albanian  society  and  her  family,  the
    appellant's destined role was to play the  dutiful  wife  to  a  future
    husband and be the mother of her future children.  This would,  in  the
    eyes of her family and society, offer her certain economic security and
    social status that her family and Albanian society  at  large  demanded
    and hoped.

252. He said that women were expected to be married between the ages  of  20
    and 25.  After this age, women  were  considered  less  attractive  for
    marriage and it became harder for the family to find suitors for  their
    daughters.

253. In traditional Albanian society, having a single lesbian  daughter  who
    refused to find or build a shelter in a new family, would be seen as  a
    big  disgrace,  'unnatural'  and  'unacceptable'.   In  such  cases  an
    individual would find that her immediate family and often  other  close
    family  relatives  might  very  likely  feel  'obliged'  to  'undertake
    measures' which  would  translate  into  constant  physical  abuse  and
    psychological pressure to make her 'change her mind for her own good'.

254. Mr DK said that the alternative option was for the  appellant  to  move
    and live on her own in some other province, away from  Tirana  and  her
    family.  If the appellant moved into a small provincial town she  would
    find cheap accommodation, as rents were much  lower  in  the  provinces
    than in Tirana and Durrs, but she would have even  less  chances  then
    than in Tirana to find employment on her own.  Normally anyone who  was
    unemployed would be local  and  would  get  employment  through  either
    family or social connections or a combination of both.  It  was  highly
    unlikely that a provincial business would employ a  single  unconnected
    woman from Tirana who for 'inexplicable' reasons moved to a small town.
     Many people would be suspicious of such a single  woman,  particularly
    as she would aim to live on her own.

255. If the appellant obtained social support she needed  to  bear  in  mind
    that in 2007 the poverty level in Albania was  estimated  to  be  three
    times above the level of social support at least.  Nobody could survive
    with that amount of money.  Family and social ties proved essential  in
    the country where institutions and state welfare were so weak.

256. In dealing with attitudes towards lesbians, Mr DK  said  that  lesbians
    were in a much more vulnerable situation than gay men.  There  were  no
    bars or any other places whatsoever for LGBT in  Albania  to  socialise
    and meet each other.  Tirana had three meeting places for gay men - the
    little park next to the Parliament (a small park which he believed  was
    still in use), the park behind the opera house (used to be "the  hole")
    in the heart of the city and in the big park with the artificial  lake.
    Apart from the area near the big park, which was  basically  trees  and
    shrubs, the other areas were well lit, small parks, much  smaller  than
    Parliament Square  in  London.   This  was  where  people  were  mostly
    arrested on  allegations  of  being  engaged  in  public  indecency  or
    disturbing the "public peace".  The safest way for LGBT people to  find
    each other and to date was via the internet.  Albania  had  the  lowest
    possession of personal computers and  internet  access  per  capita  in
    Europe.

257. Mr DK said that in a questionnaire they made with  the  LGBT  community
    in Tirana, they only managed to get participation  from  three  lesbian
    women in the overall total of 86 people.  In a traditional  patriarchal
    society where women were generally seen as  being  daughters,  sisters,
    wives or mothers, lesbians had no public presence in Albania.   It  was
    not in their interest to be known as the risks were too great.  Thus he
    did not know any lesbian or gay couples living together in Albania.  If
    an Albanian lesbian couple did decide to live together and could afford
    to do so, in theory they could only do so in Tirana.  They  would  have
    to keep their relationship secret and be extremely discreet.   If  they
    could be sure that their  social  status  would  permit  them  to  live
    outside the family (which he guessed would  apply  to  highly  educated
    women with their businesses or employment  with  foreign  employers  or
    institutions) and  they  managed  to  keep  their  sexual  identity  an
    absolute secret, life for a lesbian might be just about possible.   For
    anyone outside that elite, the choice was not possible.

258. Two and a half years ago a local human rights  organisation,  with  the
    assistance  of  the   Swedish   Helsinki   Committee,   started   anti-
    discrimination legislation and submitted it to the Albanian parliament,
    the draft of which was still pending for approval.  The use of language
    in the penal code was very archaic and was a clear  reflection  of  the
    patriarchal mentality of contemporary Albanian  society.   The  archaic
    use  of  language  was  codified  in  law  and  translated   into   the
    stigmatisation and discrimination  of  the  LGBT  people  as  a  social
    minority.  The penal code made no mention of female same sex relations.



259. In relation to LGBT rights NGOs there used to be  three  organisations:
    GISH, Albanian Gay Association (AGA) and ALGA,  all  based  in  Tirana.
    AGA was run by Mr Almalak which was a very small  organisation  without
    premises.  He believed that the  membership  (if  any)  were  Roma  and
    transvestites.  He did not really know very much about  AGA  and  never
    heard about anyone other than Mr Almalak.  He was aware of  two  people
    involved in ALGA but not aware of their funding or the extent of  their
    activities.  Apart from AGA distributing condoms, he did not know  what
    these  people  did.   He  was  aware  that  ALHG  was  a  human  rights
    organisation with an interest in gay issues.

260. Mr DK said that none of the Albanian political parties had LGBT  issues
    on their political programmes  and  agendas.   The  proposal  from  the
    Council  of  Europe  to  the  Albanian  parliament  in  2003  for   the
    legalisation of same sex partnerships was  rejected  by  all  the  main
    political parties and their representatives, who  participated  in  the
    debate,  used  openly  homophobic  language.    Politicians   portrayed
    homosexuality in the media as a threat to traditional family values.

261. The police  had  undertaken  some  raids  against  homosexuals  in  the
    meeting areas in Tirana.  In April 2005 several  gay  men  reported  to
    GISH one  particular  police  raid  at  a  cruising  area,  when  seven
    homosexual men were arbitrarily taken and driven from the park  to  the
    police station and held without charge  for  almost  the  whole  night.
    They were kept in the police station cell without having the  right  to
    call family members or attorneys.  After  their  names  and  additional
    data were filed, they were released without charge.

262. Since the beginning of 2006 the police raids in the cruising  areas  in
    Tirana seemed not to target groups  of  homosexuals.   Now  the  police
    mainly targeted single  gay  individuals,  sometimes  sending  them  to
    police stations.  These cases were difficult to identify and often went
    unreported.  The most notorious case was the arrest and imprisonment of
    four transvestites in August 2006 in the centre of Tirana.   They  were
    mistreated by the police, the custody/prison guards  and  discriminated
    against in the court's procedure and decision.

263. The  weekly  magazine  MAPO  gave  a  recent  report  in  August  2008,
    denouncing the case of a transvestite who was  clearly  beaten  in  the
    centre of Tirana by a young gang  with  sticks.   Two  police  officers
    watched from their police  car  without  interfering.   Many  incidents
    which involved casual police abuse were not  reported  or  recorded  by
    anybody.  While he was aware of many accounts involving gay men at  the
    hands of the police, the accounts of societal abuse and discrimination,
    assaults or false accusations of paedophilia, although a real risk  and
    a part of Albanian reality, were difficult to document.

264. Mr DK said that in the Faculty of Social Sciences  in  the  subject  of
    psychology, at the time GISH conducted research, there were  paragraphs
    that still considered  homosexuality  as  a  "psychological  disorder".
    There was very limited information on LGBT as a social minority and its
    characteristics.  In the Faculty of Medicine  and  in  the  Faculty  of
    Nursing there was a similar situation and same sex relations were  seen
    as an abnormality.  The Ministry of Employment and Equal  Opportunities
    for several years had had an annual strategy of social  inclusion,  but
    up to now this strategy had not included the LGBT community.   A  major
    problem  was  the  prejudice  towards  LGBT  people   in   the   health
    institutions in  Albania.   LGBT  persons  faced  homophobic  views  by
    doctors during medical examinations.

265. Mr DK said he had been asked to include in the report  something  about
    his personal experiences of gay men in  Albania.   He  understood  that
    this was because he was not prepared to come to court.  He said in  his
    case he had never experienced problems.  It was important that  he  was
    part of the privileged social class in Albania.  He was "out" to people
    generally.  He was "out" to his good friends and also his  doctors  and
    his mother.  His father knew but his other relatives did not know.

266. He knew about twenty, maybe thirty, gay men in  Albania  who  had  good
    jobs and were highly educated.  They  had  good  incomes  and  had  the
    resources to have a computer at home.  They met people on the  internet
    and travelled abroad a lot.  From the privacy of their own homes and by
    virtue of having access to the internet, they  could  meet  other  like
    minded people.  Like him they tended not to have problems.

267. It was right to describe them as an  elite,  as  Ms  Schwandner-Sievers
    had done.  This did not necessarily mean that they had been born  rich,
    but they all had very good jobs, normally as professionals and lived on
    their own, rather than with their parents.  It was  important  to  note
    that there were  only  two  people  that  he  knew  of  who  were  ever
    completely "out".  They were Altin Aliu (mentioned in Dr  Mai's  second
    report) and perhaps Mr Almalak.  They  were  very  frequently  arrested
    (obviously Altin was not now in Albania).

The report of Mr Adrian Bicaku

268. In his report dated 23rd November 2008 Mr Bicaku said  that  he  was  a
    psychiatric social worker, having been certified in 1993 in the  Social
    Sciences Faculty of Tirana University and he was the  director  of  the
    first and only comprehensive community care rehabilitation  centre  for
    mental health called "Alternativa", which was a non profit organisation
    registered in 1997  as  a  local  NGO.   He  divided  his  report  into
    sections, the first of which described the mental  health  services  in
    Albania.  He  said  that  psychiatric  services  were  organised  on  a
    regional basis around the main hospitals in the urban centres  of  four
    districts out of twelve, namely Tirana, Elbasan, Vlora and Skodra.  The
    public perception was  that  mental  health  illness  led  to  hospital
    admission.  That not only carried stigma but also psychiatric hospitals
    had been known to be under-resourced and kept patients  in  humiliating
    conditions.

269. In dealing with inpatient care in hospitals, Mr Bicaku  said  that  the
    provision of inpatient psychiatric care was  low,  given  that  50%  of
    inpatients were long-term residents, the standard of care on the  wards
    was extremely bad and the new generation of  medicines  were  in  short
    supply in Albania.  The only  treatment  for  inpatients  was  medical:
    there was no psycho-social or occupational therapy. In many cases there
    was a lack of medication.  The only treatment in psychiatric wards  was
    medical.  There were no alternative treatments, like  psycho-social  or
    occupational therapy.  Conditions within the wards were extremely  bad.



270. In  dealing  with  outpatient  care  in  Tirana,  Mr  Bicaku  said  the
    achievement of the WHO was that they had facilitated the  establishment
    of multi-disciplinary community teams of psychologists, social workers,
    psychiatric nurses and psychiatrists, in line with  national  strategy.
    The aim was to have such a team in every town, not only the four  major
    urban centres.  These teams had been established at the  level  of  the
    four  districts,  comprising  seven   teams,   with   human   resources
    concentrated in Tirana, where three teams were  based.   He  said  that
    additional centres had been established in Korca, Peshkopi  and  Berat.
    He had been told by a  member  of  staff  that  counselling  was  being
    offered.  The multidisciplinary teams did not offer a  service  outside
    working hours so as to be  able  to  cover  a  suicide  emergency,  but
    Alternativa,  which was the  only  NGO  which  provided  rehabilitation
    care, education, training  and  occupational  therapy  for  outpatients
    living in Tirana and their families, was able to respond on  an  around
    the clock basis.  Community centres did have a degree of flexibility in
    frequency  of   contact   and   counselling,   which   in   exceptional
    circumstances could be up to twice per week.

271. In dealing with the suicide phenomenon in Albania, Mr Bicaku said  that
    the suicide rate was increasing more than had been foreseen and was now
    the leading cause of death.  He later indicated  that  that  expression
    was a result of mistranslation and he  meant  an  increasing  cause  of
    death.  He suggested that in six months only there were 300 people  who
    committed  suicide  and  there  was  twice  that  number  of  attempts.
    Psychologists  and  analysts  attributed  the  phenomenon  to  economic
    problems, stigma and lack  of  strategies  for  preventing  suicide  by
    government and other alternatives.  He said there was no crisis  centre
    in Tirana which would help people who wished to  commit  suicide  which
    was accessible at all  hours.   The  only  emergency  service  was  the
    psychiatric hospital.   It  was  envisaged  originally  that  community
    centres would offer a stay in their inpatient facilities (they normally
    had a few beds) for two to three days but the pilot no longer existed.

272. In describing the availability of services on return to the  appellant,
    Mr Bicaku said that the appellant was  likely  to  require  out-patient
    care should she not  deteriorate,  particular  care  being  taken  with
    counselling.  If  she  were  returned  to  Albania  and  her  condition
    deteriorated so as to require anti-psychotic medication, what could  be
    offered to her was typical old generation anti-psychotic (haloperidol).
     She would not be taking more advanced drugs  because  they  were  very
    expensive.  She was not likely to be  considered  insured  as  she  had
    never been employed or self-employed so as  to  pay  contributions  for
    national health and social security, as she would  have  lived  in  the
    United Kingdom for two years.  In some two months time, after  the  new
    bill on social insurance had been passed, she would  certainly  not  be
    eligible to receive any services free of charge.  Even if she were  not
    an inpatient she would have to become one  for  a  period  of  20  days
    minimum,  in  order  for  a  psychiatrist  to  conduct  a   psychiatric
    assessment for her to be able to claim  state  benefits  to  which  she
    would be entitled in spite of not having paid insurance, but by  virtue
    of being mentally ill.  There were basic benefits amounting to 60 euros
    per month as opposed  to  the  state  pension  (similar  to  disability
    benefit) which was 200 euros.  She would have  professional-psychiatric
    support once or twice a week for counselling but that was not enough.

273. Mr Bicaku said  that  psychiatrists/psychologists  in  Albania  had  no
    experience and no special training for coming out issues.  Whether  the
    appellant would come across one of the more open  minded  psychiatrists
    who may have some knowledge  of  issues  of  homosexuality  or  someone
    sympathetic and professional, but untrained, or a person who saw it  as
    an illness, was a question of luck.  Being a homosexual  was  a  "black
    taboo" for Albanian society.  Homosexuality was viewed as a  mental  or
    hormonal  disorder  by  the  community.   Professionals  of   the   new
    generation  considered  it  an  individual  preference,  but  the   old
    generation over 50, considered it mental and hormonal  disorder.   This
    new view was reflected in the new revised version of the  psychological
    textbook DSM IV used by the Faulty of Social  Sciences,  in  use  since
    2004/2005, which viewed it as an issue of individual  preference  which
    had to do with personal identity.  If  the  appellant  were  not  in  a
    dramatically poor mental state of health on arrival  she  would  simply
    see her GP and may or may not be referred to a community centre.   They
    in  turn  might  simply  treat  her  with  medication  and   occasional
    supervision, perhaps even counselling, or if need be, refer  her  to  a
    psychiatric hospital.  If she was unable to work due to  her  condition
    she would in any event have to be assessed in  a  psychiatric  hospital
    for twenty days to receive social benefits and he had already described
    the conditions in the psychiatric hospitals.

Our conclusions

The legal framework

274. We have approached the issues in this appeal from  the  perspective  of
    the  Refugee  or   Person   in   Need   of   International   Protection
    (Qualification) Regulations 2006 and in  particular  have  applied  the
    definitions contained there, in deciding whether  the  appellant  is  a
    refugee under the 1951 Geneva Convention.  We  have  also  applied  the
    amended immigration rules.  These have permitted us to consider whether
    the appellant is in need of humanitarian protection as being at a  real
    risk of serious harm, as defined in paragraph 339C of HC 395.   Finally
    we have gone on to consider, inter alia, whether the  appellant  is  at
    real risk of a breach of her human rights under the provisions  of  the
    ECHR. The burden of proof is upon the appellant to show to the standard
    of reasonable degree of likelihood or substantial grounds for believing
    there is a real risk of serious harm on return to Albania for a Refugee
    Convention reason or alternatively so as to entitle her to humanitarian
    protection or protection under article 3 of ECHR.   Our  decision  must
    and will be based on the totality of the evidence.

275. In approaching our task we will deal with the appeal under a number  of
    headings but before doing that, we wish to consider the  law  which  is
    applicable to the circumstances of this case so far as the  appellant's
    claim to refugee status on the grounds of  her  sexual  orientation  is
    concerned.

276. In AN v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2000]  Imm  AR  76
    Schiemann LJ said:

      "As it seems to me there is now a broad international consensus  that
        everyone has the right  to  respect  for  his  private  life.   The
        person's private life includes his sexual life, which thus deserves
        respect.   Of  course  no  person  has  the  right  to  engage   in
        interpersonal  sexual  activity.   His  right  in  this  field   is
        primarily not to be interfered with by the  state  in  relation  to
        what he does in private at home, and to an effort by the  state  to
        protect him from interference by others.  That is the  core  right.
        There are  permissible  grounds  for  state  interference  of  some
        person's sexual life - e.g. those who  most  easily  express  their
        sexual desires in sexual activity with small children, or those who
        wish to engage in sexual activities in the  unwilling  presence  of
        others.   However,  the  position  has  not   been   reached   that
        criminalisation of homosexual activity between consenting adults in
        private is not regarded by the international community at large  as
        acceptable.  If a person wishes to engage in  sexual  activity  and
        lives in a state which enforces a  criminal  law  prohibiting  such
        activity, he may be able to bring himself within the definition  of
        a refugee.  That is one end of the continuum.

      The other end of a continuum is the person who lives in  a  state  in
        which such activity is  not  subjected  to  any  degree  of  social
        disapprobation and is free to engage in it as he is to breathe.

      In most states, however, the position is somewhere between these  two
        extremes.  Those who wish to  engage  in  homosexual  activity  are
        subjected to various pressures to discourage them  from  so  doing.
        Some pressures may come  from  the  state,  e.g.  state  subsidised
        advertising or teaching to discourage them  from  their  lifestyle.
        Other pressures may come  from  other  members  of  the  community,
        without those members being subjected to effective sanctions by the
        state to disclose them.  Some pressures are  there  all  the  time.
        Others are merely spasmodic.  An occasional interference  with  the
        exercise of a human right is not necessarily  a  persecution.   The
        problem which increasingly faces decision-makers is when to ascribe
        the words 'persecution' to those pressures on the continuum."

277. In paragraph 16 of his judgment in J v Secretary of State for the  Home
    Department [2006] EWCA Civ 1238 in which the Court of  Appeal  remitted
    an appeal for reconsideration by the Tribunal, Maurice Kay LJ said that
    the Tribunal:

      "... will have to address questions that were not considered  on  the
        last occasion, including the reason why  the  appellant  opted  for
        "discretion" before his departure from Iran  and,  by  implication,
        would do so again on return.  It will have to  ask  itself  whether
        "discretion" is something that the appellant  could  reasonably  be
        expected to tolerate, not only in  the  context  of  random  sexual
        activity but in relation to "matters following from,  and  relevant
        to, sexual identity", in the wider sense  recognised  by  the  High
        Court of Australia (see the judgment of Gommow and Hayne JJ at para
        83) [5395/0022003 HCA71].  This requires consideration of the  fact
        that homosexuals living in a stable relationship will wish, as this
        appellant says, to live openly with each other and the "discretion"
        which they may feel constrained to exercise as a price to  pay  for
        the avoidance of condign punishment  will  require  suppression  in
        respect of many aspects of life that are "related to or informed by
        their  sexuality"  (Ibid,  paragraph  81).   This  is  not   simply
        generalisation; it is dealt with in the appellant's evidence."

278. In paragraph 20 of his judgment in the same case Buxton LJ said:

      "The question that will be  before  the  AIT  on  remission  will  be
        whether the  applicant  can  reasonably  be  expected  to  tolerate
        whatever circumstances are likely to arise were  he  to  return  to
        Iran.  The applicant  may  have  to  abandon  part  of  his  sexual
        identity, as referred to in the judgment of Gommow and Hayne JJ  in
        S, in circumstances where failure to do that  exposes  him  to  the
        extreme danger that is set out in the country guidance case  of  RM
        and BB [(Iran)  CG [2005] UKAIT 00117].  The Tribunal may  wish  to
        consider whether the combination of  these  two  circumstances  may
        have an affect on their decision as to whether the applicant can be
        expected to tolerate the situation he may find himself in  when  he
        returns to Iran."

279. The reference to S was to the decision of the High Court  of  Australia
    in S395/02 [2003] HC A71, [2004] INLR 233.

280. The appeal was reconsidered  by  the  Tribunal  in  HJ  (homosexuality:
    reasonably tolerating living discreetly) Iran [2008] UKAIT  00044.   In
    paragraph 39 of their determination they said this:

      "We take as out starting point that when assessing whether  a  person
        who is a homosexual would face risk of persecution or serious  harm
        on return to his  own  country  we  must  take  a  factual,  not  a
        normative, approach.  That is to say we must focus on  the  factual
        issue of how it is likely he will behave given the evidence we have
        about how and why he has behaved up to now.   It  is  wrong  for  a
        decision-maker to apply a normative approach which focuses  on  how
        it is thought an applicant should behave.  However,  we  take  from
        the way in which the Court of Appeal has formulated  its  questions
        that in examining how such a person will behave we have to  examine
        whether that will entail for him having to live  a  life  which  he
        cannot reasonably be expected to tolerate because to  do  so  would
        entail suppression of many aspects of his sexual identity.  We  are
        confident that when referring to what an appellant can  "reasonably
        be expected to tolerate"  the  Court  of  Appeal  had  in  mind  an
        objective, not a subjective test."

281.  The determination of the Tribunal in HJ was considered  by  the  Court
    of Appeal in XY (Iran) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2008] EWCA Civ 911.  In paragraph 10 of the judgment; it was said:

      "Whether the issue whether an appellant can reasonably be expected to
        tolerate his personal or family circumstances if he is returned  to
        his country of nationality is more appropriately  considered  under
        the Asylum Convention or under Articles 3, and more  particular  8,
        of the European Convention on Human Rights is something that it  is
        unnecessary  to  decide.   So  far  as  the  Asylum  Convention  is
        concerned, however, I would  place  emphasis  on  paragraph  11  of
        Maurice Kay's judgment and the requirement of persecution."

282. That was a reference to paragraph 11 of Maurice Kay  LJ's  judgment  in
    J, in which he said:

      "...If there is one thing upon which all the authorities are  agreed,
        it is that persecution is, in the words of Lord Bingham of Cornhill
        in Sepet and Bulbul [2003] 1WLR 856 at paragraph 7, "a strong word"
        requiring a high threshold.  It has been  variously  expressed  but
        the language of McHugh and Kirby JJ to which I have referred -  "it
        would constitute persecution only if by reason of its intensity  or
        duration, the person persecuted cannot reasonably  be  expected  to
        tolerate it' - has been adopted in a number of  recent  authorities
        including Z [Z v SSHD 2005 Imm AR 75] (at paragraph 12) and Amare v
        SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 1600, paragraph 27, and RG (Colombia)  v  SSHD
        [2006] EWCA Civ 57, paragraph 16".

283. The Court of Appeal in XY (Iran) commented on the determination  in  HJ
    without expressing any disagreement with the Tribunal's  approach.   In
    paragraph 14 of the judgment it was said that it was for the  appellant
    to establish that he could not reasonably be expected to  tolerate  his
    condition if he were to return to Iran.

284. It was submitted on behalf  of  the  appellant,  by  reference  to  the
    acceptance by the House of Lords in Fornah [Secretary of State for  the
    Home Department v K  [2006]  UKHL  46]  of  the  proposition  that  all
    Convention  grounds  should  be  treated  with  equal  parity  and  the
    statement by the Court of Appeal in Hysi v Secretary of State  for  the
    Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ 711, that an individual was entitled to
    "express, proclaim or take pride in his own ... racial origins",  that,
    by analogy, a failure to prevent discrimination against a person  which
    prevented  him  from  expressing  his   sexuality   would   amount   to
    persecution.

285. In fact, a careful reading of the judgement of Judge  LJ,  as  he  then
    was, who delivered the judgement, shows that the  statement  attributed
    to the Court of Appeal was not in fact made by  the  Court.   What  was
    said was more accurately set out in the  appellant's  response  to  the
    skeleton argument on behalf of the Secretary of State in which  it  was
    said that in Hysi the Court of Appeal accepted that:

      "To compel an individual to disown his origins  interfered  with  the
        fundamental rights.  If the consequences of exercising the right to
        declare your race would lead others to subject you to  severe  ill-
        treatment, the consequences would be discrimination on the  grounds
        of race, and persecution."

286. The importance of that passage in our view lies  in  the  reference  to
    "severe   ill-treatment,   the   consequence   of   which...would    be
    persecution".  The appellant sought to distinguish XY (Iran) which  was
    relied upon by the respondent, on the  basis  that  the  appellant  was
    disbelieved about the basis of his alleged fear.  Although there may be
    a factual distinction to be drawn, in our view there is  no  difference
    in the principle that has to be applied.


287. In her response, Ms Asanovic also relied upon what Baroness  Hale  said
    in Hoxha and Anor v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2005]
    UKHL 19 but she omitted the passage in paragraph 34 of her  opinion  in
    which she said:

      "However, whether  feared  ill-treatment  is  sufficiently  grave  to
        amount to persecution has  to  be  seen  in  the  context  of  each
        individual case.  Gender is an important component of that context.
         The San Remo Round Table concluded that there was no need  to  add
        sex or gender to the Convention grounds, because "the text,  object
        and purpose of the Convention require a gender-inclusive and gender-
        sensitive interpretation". (See Feller, Turk and Nicholson, op cit,
        Chapter 5.2,  "Summary  Conclusions:  gender-related  persecution",
        p351)."

288.  Baroness Hale was concerned to underline the fact that  to  amount  to
    persecution the ill-treatment envisaged had to be not  only  grave  but
    sufficiently grave.

289.  Since receiving the final submissions of counsel, the Court of  Appeal
    has dismissed the appeal against the decision of the  Tribunal  in  HJ.
    In paragraph 31 of his judgement in HJ (Iran) v Secretary of State  for
    the Home Department [2009] EWCA Civ 172, which was agreed by the  other
    members of the court, Pill LJ said:
        "In my judgment the test stated in paragraph 16 of the judgment  of
        Maurice Kay LJ in J, by reference  to  S395/2002,  [2003]  HCA  71,
        complies with the standard required by the Refugee  Convention.  We
        are, in any event, bound by it. It is an appropriate  and  workable
        test. It was sufficiently stated by the Tribunal at  paragraph  39,
        recited at paragraph 17 above. In reaching their  conclusions,  the
        Tribunal in HJ plainly understood the  test.  They  considered  the
        evidence with great care and in detail. They applied  the  test  to
        the evidence and the facts as they  found  them  to  be.  I  cannot
        accept the submission  that  the  findings  at  paragraph  42  were
        perverse. They were findings the Tribunal were entitled to make  on
        the evidence. Their conclusion that HJ could reasonably be expected
        to tolerate conditions in Iran was firmly based on the evidence  in
        the case, considered in the context of the in-country evidence. "
290.  In paragraph 32 he went on to say:
       "I would dismiss the appeal of HJ on that ground but add comment  on
       the relevance in cases such as this of the views about homosexuality
       and its practice held and emerging from the in-country evidence in a
       particular state. The  need  to  protect  fundamental  human  rights
       transcends national boundaries but, in assessing whether  there  has
       been a breach of such rights, a degree of respect for  social  norms
       and religious beliefs in other states is  in  my  view  appropriate.
       Both in Muslim Iran and Roman Catholic Cameroon,  strong  views  are
       genuinely held about homosexual practices. In  considering  what  is
       reasonably tolerable  in  a  particular  society,  the  fact-finding
       Tribunal is in my view entitled to have regard to the  beliefs  held
       there. A judgment as to what is reasonably tolerable is made in  the
       context of the particular society. Analysis of  in-country  evidence
       is necessary in deciding what an applicant can expect on return  and
       cannot, in my view, be ignored when considering that issue. "
291.  In paragraph 33 of his judgement he  touched  upon  the  point  relied
    upon by Ms Asanovic.  He had already referred to the judgement  of  the
    Court of Appeal in Hysi.  He said:
       "In Amare v Secretary of State [2005] EWCA Civ 1600  Laws  LJ,  with
       whom Mummery LJ and Wall LJ agreed, stated, at paragraph 31:
            "The  Convention  is  not  there  to   safeguard   or   protect
            potentially affected persons from having  to  live  in  regimes
            where purists' liberal values are  less  respected,  even  much
            less respected, than they are  here.  It  is  there  to  secure
            international  protection  to  the   extent   agreed   by   the
            contracting states. While, as I certainly accept, the sense  to
            be accorded to persecution  might  shift  and  stretch  as  the
            International consensus develops, the  Convention's  guarantees
            remain limited by the two conditions I have described."
       Laws LJ's second condition, which he had set out  at  paragraph  27,
       was that  "the  violation,  or  rather  prospective  or  apprehended
       violation, must attain a substantial level of seriousness if  it  is
       to amount to persecution". That echoes Lord Bingham's  finding  that
       persecution is a "strong word" requiring a high threshold (Sepet and
       Bulbul) and requiring a degree of "intensity" (S395/2002, [2003] HCA
       71). Citing  other  authorities,  Buxton  LJ,  in  RG  (Colombia)  v
       Secretary of State [2006] EWCA Civ 57, referred, at paragraph 16, to
       the high level of distress that must be reached before a  denial  of
       freedom can be said to be persecutory.
292.  We take the view that these pre-9 th October 2006 statements  relating
    to the meaning of persecution are consistent  with  the  definition  of
    persecution set out in  Article  9  of  Council  Directive  2004/83/EC,
    implemented  by  the  Refugee  or  Person  in  Need  of   International
    Protection (Qualification) Regulations 2006.  In these circumstances we
    take the view that there is nothing in the  opinion  of  Baroness  Hale
    which detracts from the approach that we must take in the light of  the
    authorities quoted above and that the approach of the Tribunal in HJ is
    the correct one.

Change in Albania

293. We have heard a considerable amount of expert evidence in this  appeal.
     We are particularly grateful to Ms Schwandner-Sievers and Dr  Mai  for
    their written reports and also their oral evidence.

294. In her second  report  Ms  Schwandner-Sievers  drew  attention  to  the
    Economists Intelligence Unit Index of Democracy for 2007 which measures
    democracy in terms of electoral process and pluralism,  functioning  of
    government, political participation, democratic and  political  culture
    and civil liberties, Albania was  defined  as  a  hybrid  regime  which
    included elements of both flawed democracies and authoritarian regimes.
     It ranked in 83rd place out of 167 assessed countries,  it  was  lower
    than Malaysia and Bolivia.  The gap  between  the  rich  and  poor  had
    widened.  According to the latest EU Progress Report of  November  2007
    regardless of anti-corruption strategy  and  anti-corruption  laws  and
    reforms, corruption was  widespread  and  continued  to  be  a  serious
    problem in Albania.  In 2007 Albania lost its first place as  the  most
    corrupt country in the world  but  the  figures  for  Albania  in  fact
    presented an increase in the instances of bribery by 5% since the  2006
    ranking.  The grey economy was said to account for up  to  50%  of  the
    official GDP which per capita was $5,500 in 2007 compared with  the  UK
    per capita annual GDP of $35,300.  According  to  the  most  recent  EU
    Progress Report there exists a particular problem  of  high  youth  and
    long term unemployment, women and young people under 25  years  of  age
    were disproportionately affected by unemployment.


295. The general picture of Albania painted by the expert evidence is  of  a
    country in which significant changes have occurred since the  overthrow
    of the Communist regime in 1991.   Ms Schwandner-Sievers expressed  the
    view that Albania was undergoing an accelerated  modernisation  process
    involving  a  jump  from  a  severely   under   developed   media   and
    communication  technology  to  a  global  internet  and  mobile   phone
    technology.  There was a shift in almost exclusively oral to written or
    printed forms of inter-social communication.  Since  the  overthrow  of
    communism there have  been  massive  internal  and  external  migration
    flows.  It was estimated that 30% of  the  population  of  Albania  had
    migrated to the capital Tirana and 30% had left the country.

296.  Patriarchal  and  heterosexually-defined  norms  still  underpin   the
    attitude of the authorities and of society at large.  These  are  based
    on the idea of the family and family life, the integrity and prospering
    of which was at the  core  of  the  Albanian  concept  of  honour.   In
    Albanian society honour is based on the value assigned to  the  family,
    being married, having  children,  protecting  one's  wife,  mother  and
    sister and  respecting  parents.  It  is  plain,  however,  that  these
    traditional values are undergoing some  change.   The  younger,  mostly
    urban, generation  challenge  patriarchal  traditions.   This  is  most
    markedly so in Tirana, although the enormous migration  to  Tirana  has
    also  transported  rural  cultural  backwardness  together   with   the
    traditional attitudes towards family and women.   In  Tirana  there  is
    what was described as a very thin layer of avant-garde and cosmopolitan
    elites, but also a new and growing, if  still  underdeveloped,  middle-
    class.  Ms Schwandner-Sievers laid emphasis upon the other side of  the
    coin, which was a large, socially and economically  disadvantaged  part
    of the population both in the cities and in the countryside which  took
    pride in having recourse to indigenous traditions, but  she  said  very
    little about  those  who  might  occupy  a  position  in  between  both
    extremes.

297. The picture of Albanian society sought to be painted on behalf  of  the
    appellant was of a society that clung to traditional values, apart from
    a small elitist minority.   The  article  entitled  'Honour  Crime'  in
    Albania, dated 5th January 2005, at Annex 1 to the first report  of  Ms
    Schwandner-Sievers, however, describes the case of the  Quinami  family
    who moved from the northern countryside to the village  of  Burxell  in
    the area of Tirana.   According  to  Eglantina  Jermeni,  Professor  of
    Social Sciences at Tirana University, the change was  like  entering  a
    whole new world.  She said:

         "Refugees come from the North in search of a better life, but  they
         are (sic) never  expected  such  unbridled  freedom.   They  cannot
         adjust to this reality; they have other  habits,  they  have  lived
         differently".


    The article went on to say these new freedoms, coming  at  the  end  of
    Albanian isolation and up to now most  realised  in  the  urban  south,
    undermined the basis of the patriarchal condition.   The  article  also
    quoted psychologist Elida Rrapti, author of a book on the change at the
    heart of the Albanian family, which illustrates the tension between the
    father of a family which had migrated to Tirana, who wanted to continue
    to control the family through violence, while  his  daughters  realised
    that they could be independent.  The article said that Tirana and other
    Albanian cities showed the image of independent women, wearing  low-cut
    tops and mini-skirts.  The article also  quoted  Agron  Tufa,  a  young
    novelist, who said that in  Albania  taboos  were  breaking  down.   Ms
    Schwandner-Sievers  agreed  in  cross-examination  that  although   she
    described Agron Tufa as a member of the elite, he  was  not  especially
    dealing with the urban elite.

298. This change in our view,  is  illustrated  by  a  statement  by  Nasser
    Almalak in the interview undertaken on 9th May 2008, reported in  Annex
    3 of Dr Mai's report of 6th June 2008, in which he said it would not be
    a problem for a woman who is not known to be a  lesbian  to  live  away
    from her family independently.  He said that she would be able to  rent
    an apartment and work.


299. In cross-examination, when he was recalled,  Dr  Mai  acknowledged  the
    fact that many people had migrated abroad and had come back  and  there
    had been a developing urbanisation which produced a mentality in favour
    of the ability of single women  to  obtain  employment.   He  said  the
    development of the economy and the widening of the gap between rich and
    poor encouraged people to overcome their  moral  objections.   When  he
    gave evidence on that occasion he also said that in Tirana people would
    be more tolerant towards homosexuality, although they would be less  so
    in rural areas where it did not feature in  people's  imagination.   He
    said the attitude in Tirana would be  similar  to  the  attitude  here,
    meaning in the United Kingdom. This in our view was  extremely  telling
    as an indication of change.

300. We readily accept the evidence  of  Ms  Schwandner-Sievers,  that  with
    massive  internal  migration  it  may  well  be  that  rural   cultural
    backwardness has been imported into the  cities  and  that  traditional
    customary practices, for example of marriage arrangements and exclusion
    of girls at home and the denial of higher education  to  girls  in  the
    name of kanum are now practices commonly encountered  among  the  North
    Albanians settled in the suburbs of the capital of  Tirana.   What  she
    says, however,  in  itself  suggests  that  such  practices  would  not
    normally be encountered by the ordinary inhabitants of Tirana  who  are
    not themselves immigrants from the north or family  members  of  recent
    immigrants.

301.  We  are  prepared  to  accept  that  the  challenges  to   patriarchal
    traditions have produced anxieties among traditionally minded men whose
    authority has been threatened.  That  arguably  helps  to  explain  why
    domestic violence and less  frequently  honour  crimes  have  become  a
    problem in post-socialist  Albania.   Nevertheless  in  our  view,  the
    background  material  which  we  have  quoted  indicates  that  a  more
    enlightened approach to life is not merely the province  of  an  avant-
    garde elite.  In our view the background material to which we have just
    referred demonstrates the danger of generalisation.

302. We take the view that in determining whether  a  particular  individual
    would be subjected to a patriarchal and heterosexual approach in his or
    her family depends upon the circumstances of the particular  case.   As
    Ms Schwandner-Sievers  herself  said,  in  such  a  case  it  would  be
    important to establish the degree of "traditionality" of the family.

303. A further factor which demonstrates change in Albania is the fact  that
    according to Mr Bicaku, the new revised version  of  the  psychological
    text book DSM IV which has been in use since 2004/2005 in  the  Faculty
    of Sciences views homosexuality as a matter  of  individual  preference
    which has to do with personal identity  rather  than  as  a  mental  or
    hormonal disorder.  In our view this renders  the  evidence  of  Mr  DK
    unreliable, since he gave the impression that when GISH  conducted  its
    research,  which  was  in  2006,  homosexuality  was  regarded   as   a
    psychological disorder in the Faculty of Social Sciences.  Mr  DK  said
    that often in the past various media carried  reports  which  contained
    discriminatory or anti-LGBT content using offensive/insulting  language
    and in the past from time to time some newspapers published articles by
    so-called specialist denigrating homosexuality.  In our view his use of
    the phrase "in the past" is significant and in itself an indication  of
    at least the beginning of a change in attitude.

The position of lesbians in Albania

304. There is an almost complete absence of evidence about the  position  of
    lesbians in Albania.

305. Ms Schwandner-Sievers expressed the opinion, which she said was  shared
    by other experts, that lesbianism was a  comprehensive  cultural  taboo
    which explained why lesbians could not come out and were not  known  of
    or talked about in wider Albanian  society.    She  herself  had  never
    heard any young Albanian refer to lesbian love or relationship and  she
    could only imagine such a course or even an  open  display  of  such  a
    relationship in the closed and socially protected spaces of avant-garde
    society in Tirana. Lesbians as a category were not catered for by  NGOs
    as they were for example in Hungary.

306. Dr Mai's  evidence  initially  was  that  while  there  were  recorded
    incidents against gay men there  were  no  recorded  incidents  against
    lesbian woman and as a result he was forced to speculate on the  actual
    condition of lesbian women in Albania.  He later modified his  evidence
    in examination in chief, when he said there was one recorded  incident,
    which was a reference to the arrest of Fatbardha, a woman whom  he  met
    but did not speak to on an  occasion  in  May  2008  when  he  met  and
    interviewed Nasser Almalak.  She had been arrested with him  and  three
    transvestites/transgendered people in  2006  at  "the  hole"  while  Mr
    Almalak was distributing  condoms  as  part  of  the  regular  outreach
    activities of the Albanian Gay Association.  They were all  accused  of
    conducting  sexual  relationships  in  public  premises.  The  lack  of
    reported cases of violence expressed against lesbians  led  Dr  Mai  to
    speculate it could mean that they might be subject to  an  even  higher
    level of invisibility and marginality than homosexuals which made  them
    more vulnerable  to  abuse  and  less  likely  to  receive  appropriate
    protection.

307. While Dr Mai indicated that those with whom  he  communicated  were  of
    the view that lesbians were treated in the same way as homosexuals  and
    therefore his speculation was reasoned speculation because it was based
    on the wider context, we take the view that what he  said  does  remain
    speculative.  Dr  Mai  reported  that  Nasser  Almalak  told  him  that
    lesbians could not openly express their lesbian identity  without  fear
    of discrimination and  abuse  and  they  kept  it  hidden,  so  it  was
    difficult to see lesbian women in the park as they  were  usually  kept
    well hidden at home.  Dr Mai's evidence  was  that  he  was  unable  to
    contact any lesbian, apart from meeting  Fatbardha,  while  he  was  in
    Tirana, although one of his heterosexual friends had known lesbians who
    had emigrated to the EU in the past to escape discrimination and to  be
    able to live their sexual identities openly.

308. The Canada Country of Origin  Responses  to  Information  Requests,  at
    item 9 of the respondent's bundle, quotes the Director of  the  Tirana-
    based  Human  Rights  and  Democracy  Centre   (HRDC)   agreeing   that
    homosexuals were reluctant  to  reveal  their  sexual  orientation  and
    therefore an openly homosexual community did not exist in Albania (HRDC
    26 June 2006).  It said furthermore, the lesbian  and  gay  communities
    did not mix, and organisations  dealing  with  homosexual  issues  were
    mainly for gay men, not lesbians.

309. Dr Mai quoted Mr Jim Kreider, the spokesperson of GISH,  who  told  him
    that GISH knew of a group of lesbian women who met but who were  closed
    and elite.  Mr DK  mentioned  that  in  a  questionnaire  of  the  LGBT
    community in Tirana they managed to  obtain  participation  from  three
    lesbian women only out of a total of 86 participants.  He did not  know
    of any lesbian or gay couples  living  together  in  Albania.    If  an
    Albanian lesbian couple did decide to live together and could afford to
    do so in theory they could only do so in Tirana.  They  would  have  to
    keep their relationship secret and be extremely discreet.

310.  As  it  is  suggested  that  lesbian  women  would  be  persecuted  as
    homosexual men are in Albania, it is necessary to look at the  position
    of homosexual men.  The starting point must be the determination of the
    Tribunal in IM (Risk-objective evidence-homosexuals) Albania CG  [2003]
    UKIAT 00067 in which it was held that there was no  country  background
    evidence which supported a reasonable likelihood  that  homosexuals  as
    such in Albania were subject to any action on the part  either  of  the
    populace or the authorities which would amount to persecution  for  the
    purposes of the Refugee Convention or  would  be  in  breach  of  their
    protected human rights.  The  Tribunal  was  invited  to  consider  two
    incidents only of ill-treatment of  homosexuals  by  the  police.   The
    first related to an incident in March 1994 before the decriminalisation
    of homosexual relations between consenting adults in 1995,  when  three
    of the members of Showqata Gay Albania (SGA) were detained and severely
    beaten in Tirana Police Station.  The second was  an  incident  on  7th
    April 2001 when a Jordanian citizen, who was Secretary General  of  the
    SGA, which was clearly a reference to Mr Nasser  Almalak,  although  he
    was not named and a friend, who was a transvestite, were  assaulted  in
    Tirana by four members of the Republican Guards  on  an  occasion  when
    they went to their barracks in order to meet a friend who  was  serving
    there as a conscript.  They were attacked by four men in plain  clothes
    and no one  would  come  to  their  assistance.  They  were  eventually
    permitted to make a formal complaint.  One of the  two  then  left  the
    country and the other was able to successfully engage the attention  of
    the Albanian Human Rights group who issued a statement  condemning  the
    ill treatment they had suffered and called on public  opinion  for  the
    authorities to show tolerance and put aside homophobic  prejudices  and
    discrimination.

311. Ms Laing, in her  skeleton  argument,  suggested  that  the  background
    material appeared to document only two  recent  specific  incidents  of
    police harassment of gay men, in August 2006 when the secretary general
    of Gay Albania and three other were arrested  on  prostitution  charges
    and in  June  2005  when  the  Tirana  police  detained,  insulted  and
    physically mistreated a member of Gay Albania.

312. Ms Asanovic, however, relies upon eighteen  specific  incidents,  seven
    general comments and a report on the trial of Nasser Almalak,  set  out
    in a schedule attached to her closing submissions.

313. The first reference, to three men severely  beaten  by  the  police  in
    October 1994 is the same incident as that related by Dr  Mai  following
    the establishment of the Albanian Gay Association in  March  1994.   It
    clearly is a reference to the same incident referred to in IM.

314. The second item, which relates to  an  incident  in  which  a  man  was
    kidnapped in 1995, seems to have been connected to the  first  incident
    in which the president of the SGA was abducted and warned that he would
    be killed unless he named both other  members  of  the  group  and  the
    group's supposed sources of foreign money.   He later left and obtained
    asylum in the United States.

315. The third item relates to a group of 30 Albanian gay  people  who  were
    arrested, interrogated and detained for hours by police in  Elbasan  in
    central Albania, in relation to a case of child abuse in 1998.  Dr  Mai
    reported that the person responsible for the crime was later  found  to
    be an elderly man totally unrelated to the gay scene of the town.

316. The fourth item relates to the drowning, in April 2001, of the 21  year
    old gay poet, Ilir Bellru, in the Tirana lake, an informal gay  meeting
    point, which was immediately recorded as "suicide" against evidence  of
    a physical struggle and violence.

317. The fifth item relates to the detention by police in September 2003  of
    eleven people hanging around in a park in central Tirana.

318. The sixth item relates to the arrest of the director of Gay Albania,  a
    gay rights association, with three others in August 2005 on charges  of
    prostitution.  It was alleged by AHRG that the four were mistreated  by
    other prisoners and insulted by prison officials.

319. The seventh item relates to  an  advisory  opinion  by  Elsa  Ballauri,
    Executive Director of AHRG, dated 3 February 2006, which said  that  Mr
    Altin Aliu of ALGA had been a victim of police violence  and  community
    discrimination several times.  He had been detained and tortured by the
    police.

320. The eighth item relates to SL, a member of  ALGA,  referred  to  in  an
    article entitled "Albania's Gay Flight" by Ben Andoni in Tirana dated 5
    December 2007, which described how they were sitting in a park when two
    police vans pulled over.  The officers got out of the van  and  dragged
    them away.  One  of  the  drivers  came  over  to  SL  and  kicked  him
    repeatedly shouting "shut up you faggot".

321. The ninth item in the schedule is a reference in the  same  article  to
    the first case registered by ALGA in 2002 when one of its  members  was
    granted asylum in the Netherlands through the assistance of AHRG, after
    being subjected to repeated psychological and  physical  violence  from
    police officers.

322. The tenth item relates to AA who clearly is the  same  person  referred
    to in the seventh item.

323. The eleventh item relates to a person mentioned in  the  same  article,
    ML, of whom it was said he was applying for asylum because his life was
    in danger as he had to leave Albania.  His family rejected him  totally
    after finding out that he was gay and had used violence against him and
    were now a threat to his life.   The reporter was Ms Ballauri.

324. The twelfth item relates to an undated report entitled "State  Violence
    in Albania" presented in part by the Albanian Human Rights Group  which
    mentioned that on 30th August 2003 AHRG  received  information  that  a
    group of homosexuals had been detained in the police station in  Tirana
    overnight.  When the AHRG co-ordinator went to the police  station  the
    following  day  the  individuals  were  released  immediately.   Police
    officials at the police station were heard to use foul language towards
    the individuals and openly displayed prejudicial attitudes.   According
    police records the eleven individuals who were in  the  vicinity  of  a
    park close to the Ministry of Defence at 10.40 pm on 29th  August  2003
    were taken to the police station for verification.

325. The thirteenth item which alleges police harassment of  people  at  the
    "hole" is the item referred to in Dr  Mai's  supplementary  report  and
    relates to an interview with Mr Almalak on 9th May 2008.  That was  the
    occasion when he said that in Albania there were  no  gay  venues  only
    parks and in Tirana the park now was the  one  behind  the  opera,  the
    "hole", where you could  find  everything,  prostitutes,  transgendered
    people, lesbians and gay men.

326. The fourteenth item relates to an OSCE trial report  contained  in  the
    GISH report on the arrest of Mr Nasser  Almalak  annexed  to  Dr  Mai's
    supplementary statement.  The report is dated 14th  December  2006  and
    describes Nasser Almalak, Fatbardha Doku and three  others  with  being
    charged with sexual intercourse in public places and prostitution in co-
    operation with others.

327. The fifteenth item, which refers  to  an  AHRG  investigation  of  30th
    August 2003, is a repetition of the matter contained at item twelve.

328. The sixteenth item which relates to two men attacked  by  two  vanloads
    of policemen, is a repetition of the item number eight.

329. The seventeenth item relates to a statement by  Mr  NK  that  in  April
    2005 several gay men reported to GISH a particular  police  raid  at  a
    cruising area when seven homosexual  men  were  arbitrarily  taken  and
    driven from a park in Tirana to  a  police  station  and  held  without
    charge for almost the whole  of  the  night.   After  their  names  and
    additional data were recorded they were  released  without  charge  and
    sent home.  Mr NK went on to say, and  this  is  listed  as  a  general
    comment in the schedule, that since the beginning of 2006 police  raids
    in the cruising  areas  of  Tirana  seemed  not  to  target  groups  of
    homosexuals but they targeted single gay individuals sometimes.

330. The eighteenth specific item relates to transvestites  severely  beaten
    while police watched in August 2008.  The source for that was Mr NK who
    stated that the weekly magazine MAPO gave a  recent  report  in  August
    2008 denouncing the case of a transvestite who was severely  beaten  in
    the centre of Tirana by a young  gang  with  sticks  while  two  police
    officers watched from their police car without interfering.

331. It can be  seen  from  this  analysis,  that  the  incidents  involving
    misbehaviour by the police involved homosexuals who were  known  to  be
    members of gay associations or who were detained by the police at known
    homosexual cruising areas in Tirana.

332. There were fourteen  separate  specific  incidents  over  a  period  of
    approximately fourteen years.  Leaving aside the death of Ilir  Belliu,
    the responsibility for which remains a mystery, in  only  one  instance
    were the police not involved, that relating  to  ML  whose  family  had
    discovered he was a homosexual and sought to kill him.

333. Although Dr Mai's evidence was that his informants told  him  that  the
    situation had worsened since 2006, the only specific incidents reported
    since then relate to the arrest on 17th August 2006 of  Nasser  Almakak
    and his companions, the attack on the  transvestite  while  the  police
    looked on in the centre of Tirana and the two men attacked by police in
    a park in Tirana.

334. As well as  these  specific  incidents  there  are  numerous  anecdotal
    accounts of the arrest of homosexuals.  Mr NK listed the three  meeting
    places for gay men in Tirana and made the point that the big park  with
    the artificial lake which contained trees and shrubs was  where  people
    were mostly arrested on the pretext that they  had  engaged  in  public
    indecency or disturbing "public peace".

335. What is a little surprising is that in Appendix B to  the  GISH  report
    on the arrest of Mr Nasser Almalak, which reports interviews  with  him
    in January 2007, Mr Almalak is reported as  saying  that  when  he  was
    arrested on 16 August 2006 he had gone to the area behind  the  culture
    palace to distribute condoms, which was an activity he had  been  doing
    for several years approximately three or four days a  week.   It  seems
    remarkable that given the alleged persecution of homosexuals in Albania
    by the police, he should have been permitted to carry out this activity
    for so long.

336. The article entitled "Albania's Gay Flight" contains a  quotation  from
    a lawyer with the Albanian Human Rights Group, AHRG, to the effect that
    they knew from the data they had that there was a community  of  nearly
    3,500 homosexuals in Tirana.  The author stated that repeated cases  in
    the past had taught the homosexual  community  that  in  a  traditional
    society like Albania going public with their sexual  orientation  meant
    losing their jobs, risking threats  and  possible  rejection  by  their
    families.

337. Dr Mai relied upon a statement in the US  State  Department  Report  on
    Albania dated 2007 that the Albanian human rights group  reported  that
    during the year, police  harassed  members  of  the  Albanian  Gay  and
    Lesbian Association and other known homosexuals searching  their  homes
    without a warrant.

338. Dr Mai said it was important to underline that  the  expression  "known
    homosexuals" needed to be interpreted according to the everyday reality
    Albanian gay people lived in.  It referred to people who were known  to
    be gay because they were members of gay  associations,  to  people  who
    were seen hanging around the few existing informal gay  meeting  places
    (parks and cruising areas) and to people who  could  be  identified  as
    such according to arbitrary factors such as being "effeminate" (in  the
    case of gay men) or "butch" (in  the  case  of  lesbian  women),  being
    unmarried, or living with a person of the same sex who was not a member
    of the family.

339. In our view the evidence  supports  the  proposition  that  homosexuals
    known to be members of gay associations and those  who  visit  cruising
    areas in the centre  of  Tirana  are  likely  to  be  harassed  and  on
    occasions ill-treated by the police  but  we  are  not  satisfied  that
    merely being effeminate or butch, being  unmarried  or  living  with  a
    person of the same sex who was not a member of  the  family,  would  in
    itself attract the risk of serious harm from the police for reasons  of
    sexual orientation.

340. We therefore take the view that it can be  said  generally  that  those
    women who carry on lesbian relationships in Albania do so privately and
    without any public advertisement of their sexual orientation. Some  may
    do so out of respect for the views of  their  family  members  and  the
    social norms accepted and valued by Albanian society generally.  Others
    may do so out of fear of discrimination  if  their  sexual  orientation
    were disclosed. Others may be motivated by a mixture of both  elements.



341. What is clear is that in general terms, lesbian women do  not  frequent
    "the hole" and do not  join  LGBT  organisations.  Therefore  there  is
    lacking the opportunity for them  to  harassed  or  persecuted  by  the
    police.

342. Moreover, although there is anecdotal evidence of  lesbians  emigrating
    from Albania so as to be able to openly live  a  lesbian  lifestyle  in
    countries where such is accepted, there is no evidence of  any  lesbian
    woman in Albania, apart from Fatbardha  Doku,  suffering  any  harm  on
    account of her sexual orientation.  Even in her case it is likely  that
    her ill-treatment was as  a  result  of  her  association  with  Nasser
    Almalak and the others with whom she was arrested at the "hole".

Sufficiency of protection

343.  Ms  Schwandner-Sievers  said  it  was  noteworthy  that  even  though,
    according to the US State Department Report on Human  Rights  Practices
    2008 (relying on the Albanian human  rights  group  AHRG),  homosexuals
    were (as were members of  the  Roma  and  Balkan/Egyptian  communities)
    particularly vulnerable to police abuse and subject  to  discrimination
    regardless of the law, the Ombudsman made no mention of  their  plight.
    Dr Mai said that very often crimes committed against  gay  people  were
    not prosecuted according to the law and easily dismissed as  accidents.
    He gave as an example the drowning of Ilir Belliu, a 21  year  old  gay
    poet in the Tirana Lake, an  informal  gay  meeting  point,  which  was
    immediately filed as suicide despite evidence of  a  physical  struggle
    and violence.  He relied upon the US Department of State  2007  Albania
    Country Report which repeated claims by the Albanian  Gay  and  Lesbian
    Association that the police arbitrarily arrested homosexuals  and  then
    physically and verbally abused them while they were  in  detention  and
    that during the year police harassed members of the  Albanian  Gay  and
    Lesbian Association and other known  homosexuals,  sometimes  searching
    their homes without a warrant. He quoted the views  of  Nasser  Almalak
    that the police were actively trying to curb the emergence of any  form
    of LGBT movement by deliberately attacking the heads of  the  movement.
    Although many of the incidents which occurred in this context  happened
    a considerable length of time ago, nonetheless there is evidence before
    us of fairly contemporary incidents involving the police taking  action
    against the leaders or members of Gay rights associations.

344. We recall that Ms Asanovic asked Dr Mai whether it could be  said  that
    the police were involved in arresting people in the  vicinity  of  "the
    hole" because people were looking for sex.  He said  that  despite  the
    fact that doing so was not forbidden, those who did were  always  under
    surveillance.  He attributed the behaviour of the police to their  lack
    of education and training, to the fact that they were on night duty and
    often drunk and to the fact that  they  often  picked  on  gays  as  an
    activity to help them pass the night away. When Ms Asanovic put to  him
    that the 2004 US State Department  Report  suggested  that  the  police
    explained the arrests by reason of breaches of public  order,  he  said
    the police could not say that they arrested people  because  they  were
    gay and they might think that deviance was a threat to public order. He
    did, however express the view  that  there  was  a  level  of  implicit
    approval at a higher level

345. The reply of Dr Mai raises the issue whether it can be  said  that  the
    misbehaviour of the police is at a low level and carried on without the
    approval  of  higher  ranking  officers  and  not  tolerated   by   the
    authorities generally

346. In Bagdanavicius & Anor, R (On  the  Application  of)  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2003] EWCA Civ 1605  the Court of Appeal
    held that sufficiency of state protection, whether from state agents or
    non-state actors, meant a willingness and ability on the  part  of  the
    receiving state to provide through its legal system a reasonable  level
    of protection from ill-treatment of which the claimant for asylum had a
    well-founded fear and the effectiveness of the system provided  was  to
    be judged normally by its systemic ability to deter and/or  to  prevent
    the form of persecution of which there is a risk, not  just  punishment
    of it after the event.

347. In paragraph 37 of his judgement in Svazas v  Secretary  of  State  For
    the Home Department [2002] EWCA Civ 74 Sedley LJ said:
           "Whether singling out Communist prisoners for  assault  (and  no
           doubt other types of prisoner too) is  systemic  or  endemic  or
           sporadic,  it  necessarily  represents  an  initial  failure  of
           protection on the  part  of  the  state.  If  so,  the  critical
           question - adopting Lord Hope's approach - will be whether  what
           the state does to stop it happening reaches a practical standard
           appropriate to  the  duty  it  owes  all  of  its  citizens.  If
           discriminatory brutality is found to be  too  widespread  to  be
           written off as delinquent activity of the sort that could  occur
           in any system, the paradigm will shift away from the Horvath end
           of the spectrum towards the less explored class of state  agents
           who take advantage of their power but do not act  on  behalf  of
           the state: in ordinary parlance, a police  force  whose  members
           are out of control. Even in such a context a practical  standard
           of protection  does  not  require  a  guarantee  against  police
           misconduct, but it does, as Professor Hathaway  says,  call  for
           timely and effective rectification of  the  situation  which  is
           allowing the misconduct to happen. For reasons given earlier  in
           this judgment - essentially because it has a different  starting
           point - this is a different model of protection from that  which
           on authority is called for by the Convention when the source  of
           the fear of persecution is people whom the state has  to  police
           but who themselves do not deploy or therefore abuse the  state's
           own power. How different will depend on  the  state  of  affairs
           disclosed by the evidence."
348. Although the report  of  the  Commissioner  for  Human  Rights  to  the
    Council of Europe makes it plain that there is a draft law  before  the
    Albanian Parliament explicitly outlawing discrimination on the  grounds
    of sexuality and although some progress  has  been  made  in  combating
    corruption in the police, we have not seen evidence to  show  any  such
    timely and effective rectification of the situation which  is  allowing
    the misconduct to happen. We take the view that attempts to prevent the
    emergence of an effective LGBT movement cannot  be  said  to  lack  the
    knowledge and approval of the authorities and the misbehaviour  of  the
    police towards those apprehended at known cruising areas is designed to
    discourage those apprehended  from  frequenting  those  areas,  and  is
    likely to be condoned by those in authority,  given  the  incidents  of
    mistreatment of those in custody.

349. In relation to the adequacy of state  protection  from  the  threat  of
    violence from a member of a woman's own family the starting point  must
    be the determination of the Tribunal in DM (Sufficiency of Protection -
    PSG - Women -Domestic Violence) Albania CG [2004] UKIAT 00059, in which
    the Tribunal held that there was adequate state protection against  the
    threat of violence from the appellant's former  boyfriend.   Since  the
    determination in  that  appeal  the  Albanian  authorities  have  taken
    further steps to deal with the incidence of domestic violence.  In 2003
    a new Family Code  was  enacted  which  contained  specific  provisions
    prohibiting  forced  marriage  and  domestic  violence.   Although   Ms
    Schwandner-Sievers drew  our  attention  to  an  Amnesty  International
    report which found that women felt exposed to socio-cultural  pressures
    not  to  divulge  internal  family  problems  to  the  outside   world,
    nonetheless it is clear that with the possible exception of traditional
    families in and from the north of Albania, Albanian societal  attitudes
    are undergoing considerable change for the better and no  evidence  has
    been drawn to our attention which demonstrates that if the police  were
    involved in a situation of domestic violence, they would failed to take
    appropriate action.  We take the view  that  no  member  of  a  woman's
    family, against whom a complaint was made, would  wish  to  reveal  the
    woman's sexual orientation to the police, so that a woman under  threat
    of violence from a member of her family would  not  have  to  fear  the
    revelation of that orientation to the police by making a complaint.  In
    these circumstances we take the view that there would be an adequacy of
    state protection available to a woman  who  was  at  risk  of  domestic
    violence on account of her sexual orientation.

Particular social group

350. An issue has been raised between the parties as to  whether  membership
    of a particular social group should be  decided  before  or  after  the
    issue of persecution.  If as it appears, lesbianism is a  comprehensive
    cultural taboo in Albania, then it would appear that lesbian  women  in
    Albania would be regarded as sharing  a  common  characteristic  and/or
    would be perceived as a group by society and so satisfy the  definition
    provided in the UNHCR Guidelines on International Protection,  approved
    by the House of Lords in Fornah.

351. Membership of a particular social group, however,  in  the  absence  of
    persecution on that  account  cannot  attract  the  protection  of  the
    Refugee Convention.  As Lord  Bingham  said  in  paragraph  17  of  his
    opinion in Fornah, the Refugee Convention makes plain that a person  is
    entitled to claim recognition as a refugee only where  the  persecutory
    treatment of which the claimant has a well-founded  fear,  is  causally
    linked with the Convention ground on which the claimant relies.

352. Therefore, in view of our conclusion about the lack of  a  well-founded
    fear of serious harm on the part of lesbians in  Albania,  a  concluded
    finding on this issue would not be constructive, despite it having been
    thought desirable by the Tribunal which found a material error  of  law
    in the determination of the immigration judge.

The possibility of a single woman living without family support in Tirana

353. So far as the risk of a single woman without  family  support  returned
    to Albania facing persecution or serious harm by virtue of facing  poor
    socio-economic conditions  is  concerned,  we  have  no  difficulty  in
    accepting that claims of this kind can in principle succeed.

354. We do not accept the  submission  of  Ms  Laing,  put  forward  in  her
    skeleton argument, that as a matter of principle, the appellant's claim
    that she would be  returned  to  destitution  cannot  fall  within  the
    Refugee  Convention.  Her  argument  in  this  respect  was  worded  in
    identical terms to the argument rejected by the tribunal in its  recent
    determination in AM & AM (armed conflict: risk categories)  Somalia  CG
    [2008] UKAIT 00091 in paragraph 79 of which the Tribunal observed:

         "We disagree, at least insofar as this argument is directed at  the
         meaning of persecution, rather than the requirement under the  1951
         Convention to show a convention ground or reason.  The  meaning  of
         persecution is set out in Reg 5 of the 2006 Protection  Regulations
         and (we repeat) in terms which  in our view can be taken broadly to
         mirror that which has been accorded  by  the  UK  courts  and  this
         tribunal  (and  its  predecessor)  since  Horvarth  [2000]  Imm  AR
         552(HL). Given that persecution must be seen, therefore, as harm in
         the form of severe violations of basis human rights, it could  only
         be right "as a matter of principle"  to  exclude  claims  based  on
         forced subsistence in an IDP camp if human rights law precluded it.
          But, as we shall go on to  explain,  human  rights  law  does  not
         preclude it.  Albeit holding that  claims  for  protection  against
         refoulement based on dire socio-economic circumstances are normally
         not  decisive  when  considering  Article  3   ill-treatment,   the
         Strasbourg  Court  has  not  excluded  that  in   certain   extreme
         circumstances, such circumstances could give rise to a violation of
         a nonderogable right: see below paras 86-88. Further, as  has  been
         made clear by the Court on many occasions (e.g.  in  Kalashnikov  v
         Russia  [2002] ECHR 596) and by UK courts and the Tribunal, for ill-
         treatment to arise under Article 3, it does not necessarily have to
         be intentional or deliberate: see R (On the application of Adam)  v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005] UKHL 66; [2006] 1
         AC at [55]. Hence,  whilst  there  will  always  be  heavy  factual
         obstacles in the way of a finding that socio-economic circumstances
         can constitute persecution, there is no reason of principle  why  a
         claim of this kind cannot succeed. " (emphasis added).

355.  The  high  threshold  for  success  in  such  a  claim,  however,  was
    highlighted by the Court of Appeal in 'Q' & Ors, R (on the  application
    of) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2003] EWCA  Civ  364.
    In paragraph 54 of his judgement Lord Phillips MR said:

         "As the Attorney-General pointed out,  decisions  of  the  European
         Court  of  Human  Rights,  typically  O'Rourke  v  United   Kingdom
         (39022/97, 23 June 2001), make it clear that the state's failure to
         provide shelter does not by itself amount to inhuman  or  degrading
         treatment. But, as he himself accepted, it does not follow that  in
         a  case  of  sufficiently  acute  individual  need  -  perhaps,  as
         suggested in argument, that of a person who is not  only  destitute
         but blind - no positive obligation can arise; and such cases as D v
         United Kingdom (1997) 24 EHRR 423 clearly establish that  a  breach
         of the constant negative obligation can occur where an  affirmative
         act of the State is such as to result, indirectly,  in  inhuman  or
         degrading consequences for the individual."

356.  In paragraph 59 he said:

         "Destitution is an emotive  word,  and  it  might  be  argued  that
         denying  support  to  the  destitute  is  necessarily  inhuman  and
         degrading treatment. Such an argument has not been advanced  before
         us, and for good reason. Mr Blake has  accepted  that  there  is  a
         margin  between  the  condition  that  renders  an  asylum   seeker
         destitute for the purposes of the Asylum Support  Regulations,  and
         section 95  of  the  1999  Act,  and  the  condition  to  which  an
         individual must sink before he can contend that he is a victim of a
         breach of Article 3. As to  the  former,  an  individual  will,  by
         virtue of section 95(3), be deemed to be destitute  if  his  living
         accommodation is not adequate and the  regulations  provide  for  a
         minimum sum of money or money's worth which must be provided by way
         of subsistence. The degree of degradation that must be demonstrated
         to engage Article 3 falls significantly below  this  definition  of
         destitution. This can be illustrated by reference to  the  decision
         of the Strasbourg Court in O'Rourke v United Kingdom. The applicant
         was evicted from temporary accommodation provided for him  when  he
         came out of prison. He lived on the streets, to the detriment of an
         asthmatic condition and a chest infection from which  he  suffered.
         The Strasbourg Court held that this experience did not  attain  the
         requisite level of severity to engage Article 3."

357. So far as the issue of whether it would be possible for a  young  woman
    to lead an independent life in Albania  without  the  approval  of  her
    family is concerned, Dr Mai expressed the opinion that it would be very
    difficult for her to do so not only for  economic  reasons  but  mostly
    because  of  the  endurance  of  patriarchal   values   and   practices
    regimenting the social mobility of women in contemporary Albania.   For
    the reasons given in the section of  this  determination  dealing  with
    change in Albania  we  cannot  accept  this  statement  as  of  general
    application.

358. Although Ms Schwandner-Sievers' opinion was  that  an  unskilled  woman
    without a family network of support would be  highly  disadvantaged  in
    finding employment, housing and at  particular  risk  of  exploitation,
    Nasser Almalak, in the interview of 9 May 2008, referred to in Annex  3
    to Dr Mai's second report, suggests the contrary, at least  so  far  as
    Tirana was concerned.  When asked whether it would be  possible  for  a
    woman to live and work independently of her family he said that it  was
    not a problem if it were not known she was a lesbian. Nasser Almalak is
    likely to be  a  person  knowledgeable  about  the  recent  changes  in
    Albanian society, particularly in Tirana and we think that his view can
    be relied upon.

359. The fact that jobs are advertised in Albanian newspapers disproves  the
    assertion of Ms Schwandner-Sievers that there are no openly  accessible
    employment possibilities for young unskilled women in Albania.

360. Although the UN agency IFAD stated that women faced  discrimination  in
    owning property and starting a business, Ms Schwandner-Sievers did  not
    dispute the statistics published by Instat that women made  up  70%  of
    private  business  leaders  and  the  largest  registered   number   of
    businesses run by women was concentrated in Tirana (31%).  Although she
    explained those statistics by saying there  was  an  element  of  elite
    continuation, she had to concede that not  all  were  from  the  elite.
    Moreover it is evident from her answer in cross-examination that  there
    are a greater number of women enrolled in universities in Albania  than
    men.

361. A point of concern to us is that both Ms Schwandner-Sievers and Dr  Mai
    were ignorant of the existence of newspapers advertising unskilled jobs
    for women in reaching their conclusions  as  to  the  opportunities  of
    employment for women without family support in Albania.

362. The appellant herself, before being shown the newspaper  advertisements
    which the respondent relied upon, conceded that  newspapers  in  Tirana
    might have job adverts.

363. When Dr Mai  was  initially  asked  by  Ms  Lang  in  cross-examination
    whether the newspapers in  Albania  advertised  situations  which  were
    vacant, he said that they did but they were for the higher skilled  and
    they were for internal candidates.   When  specifically  asked  whether
    there were any newspapers in  Albania  like  the  Evening  Standard  in
    London which had pages of adverts for low skilled jobs,  he  said  that
    there were not.  He had never heard of anyone going and asking for work
    directly.

364. In her latest report dated 22nd  November  2008  Ms  Schwandner-Sievers
    explained that her recent research enquiries revealed  that  Dr  Rigels
    Halili thought that the publication of job adverts was  a  very  recent
    phenomenon.

365. This would not appear to be the case since when Dr  Mai  gave  evidence
    on 26th November 2008 he said that such job advertisements were present
    in most Albanian daily newspapers but the newspapers were not  used  to
    advertise private jobs until 2000.  He gave the example of the "Celesi"
    weekly paper which was used increasingly for job offers after 2000.

366. It may very well be that job advertisements in some  newspapers  are  a
    recent phenomenon but the advertisement of jobs  in  our  view  in  any
    newspaper in Tirana cannot be said to be of recent origin.

367. We entirely accept the reason why Dr  Mai  was  unaware  of  these  job
    advertisements, namely, that he had been involved in  several  research
    projects regarding the labour market but no respondent said  that  they
    used newspaper advertisements.  Although in his curriculum vitae Dr Mai
    claims an ability to read Albanian at a level of 4 on a scale of  1  to
    5, it is plain that he had not,  prior  to  the  hearing,  familiarised
    himself with the contents of newspapers in Tirana.

368. We are also prepared to accept that Ms Schwandner-Sievers  was  unaware
    of such newspapers.  The fact that  both  Dr  Mai  and  Ms  Schwandner-
    Sievers were unaware of them, however, necessarily  detracts  from  the
    value of the opinions which they have expressed about the employability
    of women without family support in Tirana.

369. We accept the point made on behalf of the respondent, that there  would
    be little point in advertising jobs which do not need to be  advertised
    if they could be filled by contacts made through family networks.

370. In  view  of  the  fact  that  Dr  Halili  wrongly  believed  that  the
    publication of job adverts was a very recent  phenomenon,  we  have  no
    confidence in his assertion, relied upon by  Ms  Schwandner-Sievers  in
    her latest report, that without family connections a young single woman
    would be deprived of the only tools to get a job.

371. We also bear in mind the evidence given by Dr Mai on 26  November  2008
    that all jobs have to be advertised in local job centres  within  seven
    days of becoming available and that establishments  such  as  factories
    and bars have notices  displayed  outside  their  premises  advertising
    available jobs.

372. We therefore take the view that there are opportunities for  employment
    for skilled, semi-skilled and unskilled women in Tirana without  family
    contacts.  The question about whether a particularly  individual  would
    be likely to be able to obtain such employment is a matter which has to
    be decided on the individual facts of each particular case.

373. So far as the question of  the  ability  of  a  person  without  family
    support to obtain accommodation is concerned we have taken into account
    the Amnesty International  paper  dated  21st  November  2007  entitled
    "Albania 'No place to call home' -  adult  orphans  and  the  right  to
    housing" as it has been suggested that a person without family  support
    may be likened to an orphan. It was said  that  although  Albanian  law
    recognised the particular vulnerability of orphans and guaranteed  them
    a range of rights including  the  right  to  priority  of  housing,  in
    reality their rights were rarely fulfilled.  The report shows that  the
    state makes adequate provision for orphans up to the age of 14 or 15 in
    orphanages and  thereafter  in  the  Halls  of  Residence  attached  to
    secondary schools, which in practice are attended by most children  who
    have been in orphanages.

374. Although the picture  painted  by  the  report  of  adult  orphans  was
    bleaker, with  examples  given  of  adult  orphans  living  in  squalid
    conditions, on a more positive note the report stated that a list of 52
    orphans living in residence halls or in temporary rented  accommodation
    in Shkodr compiled in 2005 showed that only one was under 20  years  of
    age at the time and most were 25 years of age or older.  The fact  that
    there were none younger appeared to be due  in  part  to  the  work  of
    certain NGOs which offered  temporary  accommodation  or  training  and
    employment programmes, which in some cases enabled  orphans  and  other
    young people at risk eventually to earn enough  to  rent  on  the  open
    market.

375. We take the view that the evidence  of  Mr  DK,  that  considering  the
    average monthly wages, the price of commodities and the level  of  rent
    for residential properties, it was very unlikely that a  single  person
    would be able to afford to rent a flat and live on his/her own,  cannot
    be relied upon having regard the success of the NGOs referred to in the
    report in helping orphans to the extent  that  they  were  able  to  be
    economically independent.  It is also apparent that the opinion  of  Mr
    DK was based on the cost of renting an  unfurnished  flat  rather  than
    lodgings.

376. As well as NGOs, there are a number of women's organisations in  Tirana
    who offer help to women, eight of which were listed in paragraph 27  of
    Ms Laing's skeleton argument, the last of which offered  an  employment
    agency for women, and there are state run employment programmes, one of
    which is targeted specifically  at  unemployed  women.  This  programme
    aimed to integrate  marginalised  women  such  as  Roma,  ex-trafficked
    women, older women and women with disabilities.

377. Although Ms Schwandner-Sievers expressed the view that the  success  of
    these programmes was not effectively monitored  and  none  specifically
    targeted lesbian women and although Dr Mai suggested that they were not
    viable in the long term, nonetheless  there  is  no  doubt  that  these
    programmes exist and in  view  of  the  fact  that  lesbianism  is  not
    acknowledged in Albania,  it  is  not  surprising  that  there  are  no
    programmes which specifically target lesbian women.

378. In our view taking account of the totality of the  evidence  before  us
    it cannot be said that there is a real risk that a woman without family
    support in Albania would suffer destitution  amounting  to  inhuman  or
    degrading treatment resulting in a breach of her rights under article 3
    of the ECHR or persecution.

A summary of our general conclusions


379. While in general terms although patriarchal and heterosexually  defined
    norms still underpin the attitude of the authorities and of society  at
    large towards lesbians in Albania, in Tirana, where the younger, mostly
    urban,  generation  challenge   patriarchal   traditions,   there   are
    indications of change in the attitude of ordinary inhabitants of Tirana
    who are not immigrants from the  north  or  family  members  of  recent
    immigrants.

380. A lesbian woman, whose sexual orientation  becomes  known,  may  be  at
    risk of harm from members of her family, particularly if she is from  a
    traditional family from the north of Albania, but  each  case  must  be
    determined on its merits. In such a case, however, it  is  likely  that
    there would be an adequacy of state protection.

381. Although it  is  no  longer  illegal  for  consenting  adults  to  have
    homosexual relations in private, homosexual men known to be members  of
    gay associations and those who visit cruising areas in  the  centre  of
    Tirana are likely be harassed  and  on  occasions  ill-treated  by  the
    police and in individual cases homosexual men may be at  risk  of  harm
    from members of their families.

382. In general terms, lesbian women do not frequent cruising areas  and  do
    not join LBTG organisations. Therefore there is lacking the opportunity
    for them to be harassed or persecuted by the police.

383. There are few, if any, recorded incidents  of  harm  befalling  lesbian
    women. Those women who carry on lesbian relationships in Albania do  so
    privately  and  without  any  public  advertisement  of  their   sexual
    orientation. Some may do so out of  respect  for  the  views  of  their
    family members and the social norms accepted  and  valued  by  Albanian
    society generally.  Others may do so out of fear of  discrimination  if
    their sexual orientation were disclosed. Others may be motivated  by  a
    mixture of both elements.

384. In general terms in Albania women of lesbian orientation  are  able  to
    carry on lesbian relationships discreetly without attracting  the  risk
    of serious harm.  In any particular case where the safety of the return
    of a lesbian woman  to  Albania  is  in  issue,  it  will  have  to  be
    determined whether she is likely to behave discreetly upon  return  and
    if so whether "discretion" is something  that  she  can  reasonably  be
    expected to tolerate, in the light of all of the circumstances  of  the
    case, including the social norms and religious beliefs commonly held in
    Albania. Such a person will only establish a right to refugee status if
    she can establish that the apprehended  violation  of  her  fundamental
    rights is likely to attain a substantial level of seriousness.

385. It cannot be said that without more there is a real risk that  a  woman
    without family support in Albania would suffer destitution amounting to
    inhuman or degrading treatment resulting in  a  breach  of  her  rights
    under article 3 of the ECHR or  persecution,  but  each  case  must  be
    determined on its own facts.

The position of the appellant

386. So far as the appellant herself is concerned, our starting  point  must
    be the credibility findings of the immigration judge, some positive and
    some negative, which were ordered to be preserved.

387. In paragraph 19 of her determination  the  immigration  judge  accepted
    that the appellant was a lesbian.  She accepted that it was likely that
    she had been disowned by her family  but  she  discounted  her  alleged
    suicide attempts.

388. In paragraph 20 of her  determination,  by  implication,  she  accepted
    that the appellant had a secret three year relationship  with  a  woman
    called Mira and that no one knew of or suspected  the  relationship  at
    the time which was conducted discreetly and secretly.   She  said  that
    the only people who knew of her sexuality were  Mira,  her  mother  and
    brother (and possibly by now her father).  The immigration judge  found
    there was no reason to  think  that  the  appellant  would  behave  any
    differently than discreetly in the future.

389. Before moving on, it  is  appropriate  to  deal  with  the  unpreserved
    finding that Mira, the appellant's mother and brother and possibly  her
    father, who knew about her sexuality were highly unlikely to have  told
    anyone else.  Given the shame which it is said that the  revelation  of
    lesbianism would bring with it in  society  in  Albania  and  given  in
    particular Dr Mai's evidence that it  was  unlikely  that  dirty  linen
    would be washed in public, we form the view that it  is  indeed  highly
    unlikely that the appellant's homosexuality would have been related  by
    any of those mentioned to anyone else.


390. In paragraph 21 of her determination the immigration judge  found  that
    there was a reasonable likelihood that the appellant's brother beat her
    when he first found out about the relationship with Mira, but  she  did
    not suffer "three or four" beatings by her father because of this.  The
    immigration judge found that she remained living at  home  for  several
    weeks after this without being assaulted or  disowned.   There  was  no
    suggestion that the appellant had ever been threatened with  death  for
    dishonouring her family.  She said that indeed she had decided to leave
    for the United Kingdom before she told her mother what the problem  was
    and before her brother beat her.

391. The immigration judge's conclusion therefore was that when she  decided
    to leave Albania, the appellant  did  so,  not  because  she  had  been
    persecuted for her sexuality or because she had  been  the  subject  of
    domestic violence, but because she feared  being  married  against  her
    will.  We acknowledge that such was capable of amounting to a  fear  of
    persecution and we bear in mind paragraph 339K of HC 395,  as  amended,
    which provides that the fact that a person has already been subject  to
    persecution or serious harm, or to direct threats of  such  persecution
    or such harm, will be regarded as a serious indication of the  person's
    well-founded fear of persecution or  real  risk  of  suffering  serious
    harm, unless there are good reasons to consider that  such  persecution
    or serious harm will not be repeated.

392. In assessing the issue of  whether  there  would  be  a  real  risk  of
    serious harm to the appellant if she were returned to Albania, we think
    it important to make findings on the type  of  family  from  which  the
    appellant comes and about the appellant herself.

393. Mr DK's  view  was  that,  like  every  other  low  income  traditional
    Albanian family, members of the appellant's family may think she should
    be married and not be living in the parental home.  One of  their  most
    natural preoccupations would be to find  male  suitors  for  her.   His
    opinion was based on the premise that the appellant comes  from  a  low
    income traditional Albanian family.   In her first report Ms Schwandner-
    Sievers expressed the view that the appellant's  mother's  recourse  to
    the traditional  metaphysical  explanation  that  the  'evil  eye'  was
    responsible for her daughter's sexuality and her brother's physical and
    psychological violence, were  indications  of  a  traditionally  minded
    family.  She also expressed  the  view  that  the  appellant's  parents
    arranged marriage was  an  indication  of  "traditionality".   In  oral
    evidence she said that it was important  to  establish  the  degree  of
    "tradtionality"  of  the  family  and  important  indicators  would  be
    educational   background,   work   and   income,   social    relations,
    neighbourhood, peer groups and evidence of  traditional  practices  and
    values.

394. In cross-examination it was apparent Ms Schwandner-Sievers knew little
    about the background of the appellant's family which she said  she  had
    not  investigated.   In  re-examination  she  said  that  the  domestic
    violence by the appellant's father could be attributed  to  alcoholism.
    She  also  said  that  her  brother's  approach  could  be  due  to   a
    pathological state.

395. The appellant was born in Tirana.  Her parents were  born  and  brought
    up in Tirana.  Her father was a skilled man.  By profession  he  was  a
    carpenter, preparing sets for the theatre at  the  Institute  of  Arts,
    where he had been employed for more than  20  years.   The  appellant's
    evidence was that her father read a lot of books  and  was  of  average
    intelligence.  Books were things which were found  in  her  home.   She
    said that there were many books there and it was usual to have books in
    Tirana houses.  She herself had a taste for reading books.  She  agreed
    with Dr Bell that she read Albanian books, that  she  was  reading  the
    work of the novelist Hadare and also another novel called "Wine"  which
    was based on an individual's odyssey.  In the United Kingdom  she  read
    books in Albanian which she got from the library.   Her  mother  was  a
    seamstress and she helped in taking measurements  and  possibly  making
    deliveries, although her evidence was contradictory on this.   She  had
    aspirations for her future.  She wanted to be independent and not  have
    a life like her mother's.  She agreed with Ms Laing that she was really
    quite intelligent.  She had an extended family whose members also lived
    in Tirana.

396. We are therefore  satisfied  that  the  appellant's  family  cannot  be
    likened to a typical low class  and  underprivileged  family  from  the
    north. Although the appellant's family cannot be described as  part  of
    the Tirana elite, nonetheless the family  roots  are  in  Tirana.   The
    appellant's father has had an occupation in which he certainly may have
    encountered members of the elite.  The fact that he is  well  read  and
    has passed his liking of reading onto the appellant is a sign that  the
    appellant's family is not from the lower orders of society.  Indeed  it
    was suggested by the appellant that her father was indifferent  to  her
    confession that she was a lesbian. The fact that the appellant's mother
    had it in mind that her daughter should marry, in our view  is  not  an
    indication of traditionalism nor is the outburst  of  violence  by  her
    brother.  We find it to  be  significant  that  she  remained  at  home
    without any further incidents of violence by her brother.  We also take
    the view that set  against  the  family  circumstances  which  we  have
    described above, the reference to the "evil eye" by her mother  is  not
    an indication of the family's traditionalism. Nor is the fact that  the
    appellant's parents' marriage was arranged.

397. Although the news that the appellant had a  lesbian  affair  with  Mira
    and she did not want to marry because she was a lesbian was not welcome
    news and was a shock to her mother and brother, we find that  there  is
    no real risk that any member of the appellant's family would do her  or
    cause to have done to her serious harm.  We take the view that had  the
    appellant remained at home attempts would have been  made  to  persuade
    her to marry but we are not persuaded that if she had refused she would
    have been subjected to further physical  violence  or  indeed  that  an
    attempt would have been made to persuade her to kill  herself.   We  do
    think it likely,  however,  that  she  would  have  been  disowned  and
    required to leave the family home, just as  now  her  return  has  been
    refused unless she were to agree to abandon her lesbianism  and  marry.
    We take the view that if she were to return  to  a  different  area  of
    Tirana and live away from home no member of her family would  show  any
    adverse interest in her.

398. In paragraph 1 of her closing submissions, Ms Laing submitted that  the
    Tribunal should reopen the issue of whether the appellant's family  had
    disowned her.  It was suggested that there were a  number  of  features
    which justified this approach.  She had not  been  turned  out  of  the
    family home immediately after having been  assaulted  by  her  brother.
    She lived in the family home without further  incident  from  September
    2005 until February 2006.  Moreover, there was evidence, not before the
    immigration judge, which stated  that  the  appellant  was  in  regular
    telephone contact with her mother.  Furthermore, it was  unlikely  that
    any members of her extended family knew of the  fact  that  she  was  a
    lesbian.  It was also suggested that she had been more  forthcoming  on
    some issues to Dr Bell than to her advisers, for example the fact  that
    she worked at home with her  mother  for  five  years,  which  was  not
    mentioned in any of her earlier statements.

399. At the beginning of the second stage reconsideration  before  us,  both
    parties  were  aware  of  the  fact  that  the  positive  and  negative
    credibility findings were to be preserved, with one exception,  and  it
    was not suggested during the course of the hearing on behalf of  either
    party that preserved findings ought to be re-opened.  It  seems  to  us
    that it would be wrong at this stage to reopen any  of  those  findings
    and this includes  the  finding  by  the  immigration  judge  that  the
    appellant had made no attempt at suicide, unless there had  been  post-
    hearing developments which justified so doing.

400. In any event although the immigration judge found  that  the  appellant
    had not been disowned while she remained at home  after  revealing  her
    sexual orientation, she found that she had been disowned at the date of
    the  hearing.   This  finding,  expressed  in  paragraph  19   of   the
    determination, seems to have been  based  on  the  background  material
    relating to attitudes in Albanian society and the appellant's  evidence
    that when she telephoned her  mother  her  mother  told  her  that  the
    appellant was dead to them.

401. Although it is evident that since the hearing, the appellant  has  been
    in regular contact with her mother by telephone,  so  that  it  clearly
    cannot be said that she is dead to her mother, her account is that  she
    would not be  accepted  back  home  unless  she  abandoned  her  sexual
    identity and agreed to marry.  This is what Ms  Asanovic  described  as
    "conditional disowning".  Even if the appellant was  astute  enough  to
    realise that the question whether her mother would accept her back home
    needed to be asked, her account remains that she has been conditionally
    disowned and there is in our  view,  no  proper  evidential  basis  for
    setting aside the finding of  the  immigration  judge.    We  therefore
    approach the issue of the risk to the appellant on return on the  basis
    that unless and until she were prepared to agree  to  be  married,  she
    would not be permitted to return to her family home.

402. It is in this context that we consider the issue  of  forced  marriage.
    We appreciate that there  is  legislation  in  Albania  which  prevents
    forced marriage but the appellant's marriage would be  forced  only  in
    the sense that she would be obliged to agree to marry as the  price  of
    returning to the family home.

403. In examining the issue whether  the  appellant  could  be  expected  to
    tolerate whatever circumstances are likely to arise were she to  return
    to Albania, we have to take account of the evidence before  us,  as  to
    how the appellant would be likely to behave, which necessarily includes
    the evidence as to how she has behaved up to now.

404. It is perfectly plain that  the  appellant  was  able  to  conduct  her
    lesbian relationship  with  Mira  in  Albania  without  attracting  any
    adverse attention to herself or Mira whatsoever.  She said  that  since
    friendships among women were  common,  it  was  regarded  as  perfectly
    normal for them to sleep over at each others homes.  Her refusal to  be
    married never attracted the suspicion that she was  gay.   It  was  she
    herself who revealed her lesbian relationship with Mira to her  mother.
    As she told Dr Bell her desire was to remain anonymous and not to break
    the unwritten code in Albania.

405. The appellant told Dr Bell that  she  did  not  behave  in  the  United
    Kingdom in  a  particular  "gay  way"  which  was  common  in  the  gay
    community.  She said in  evidence-in-chief  that  since  being  in  the
    United Kingdom she had not been ready to join  the  highly  promiscuous
    gay scene but she felt ready to enter into a  relationship  should  she
    find the right person.  By the 26th November 2008 she had been  in  the
    United Kingdom just over two and a half years.  In that  time  she  had
    not formed a lesbian relationship and although it  is  plain  that  she
    visits a public house in Southend, which is known as gay meeting place,
    that apart, she has not conducted herself  in  the  United  Kingdom  or
    sought to do so in a way which would attract attention if she  were  to
    do the same in Albania.  She has not joined any LGBT  organisation.  It
    is plain that while in Albania the appellant revealed  to  her  friend,
    Esmeralda, who is not a lesbian, that she was a lesbian.   It  is  also
    the case that in the United Kingdom she has Albanian friends  who  know
    about her sexuality and she was comfortable with that.  She agreed with
    Ms Laing that even in the United Kingdom she  was  discreet  about  her
    homosexuality.

406. Although it was the appellant's claim that if she  were  to  return  to
    Albania she would have to repress her sexuality, we take the view  that
    apart from not being able to visit gay cafs, since there are none, she
    would not have any desire to express her sexuality in any way different
    from the way in which she has expressed it in the United Kingdom.   The
    appellant was concerned that if she were able to live on her own,  away
    from her family in Albania, life  would  be  miserable,  she  would  be
    called names by people if they realised what her sexual orientation was
    and she would suffer discrimination and harassment, but  in  our  view,
    just as there was no reason for anyone to suspect that she was carrying
    on a lesbian relationship with her friend Mira, there is nothing  about
    her which in itself would reveal  to  others  her  sexual  orientation.
    Even her mother, who knew her best and who clearly loved  her,  had  no
    inkling that her daughter was a lesbian until she revealed it to her.

407. We do not share Dr Mai's view that the appellant's appearance  is  that
    of a butch lesbian.  We do not accept that the fact that the  appellant
    is unmarried would lead her being identified as a lesbian.

408. Mr DK said that women were expected to be married between the  ages  of
    20 and 25 and that after this age women were considered less attractive
    for marriage and it became harder for the family to  find  suitors  for
    their daughters.  Based on this evidence it must be the case that there
    are many women in Tirana who have not married  because  they  or  their
    parents have not found suitable husbands.  It defies reason to  suppose
    that they are all regarded as lesbians.  We  take  the  view  that  the
    appellant would conduct herself discreetly as a lesbian in Albania  and
    that it would be entirely reasonable in the circumstances to expect her
    so to do.

409. We have taken into account the submission contained  in  Ms  Asanovic's
    closing submissions, based upon  the  evidence  of  Dr  Bell,  that  on
    account of her paranoia, the appellant would not be able  to  keep  her
    sexual orientation a secret.  The position is that  the  appellant  was
    able to keep her lesbian relationship  with  Mira  a  secret  while  it
    continued over a lengthy period in  Albania.   It  was  only  when  her
    mother pressured her into considering marriage that she revealed it  to
    her and no-one else.  There is no evidence that anyone  suspected  that
    she was a lesbian.  There is no  evidence  that  while  in  the  United
    Kingdom, where the appellant is able to be more open about  her  sexual
    orientation, she has been obliged by her condition to reveal her sexual
    orientation to anyone to whom she did not wish to reveal it.   Dr  Bell
    conceded in cross-examination that the expression  of  the  appellant's
    paranoia  in  feeling  that  she  was  being  followed  could  not   be
    disentangled from her anxiety about her immigration status.   In  these
    circumstances we are not satisfied that the appellant would not be able
    to continue to be discreet about her sexual orientation in Albania.

410. It is also the appellant's case that with  the  economic  situation  in
    Albania and her lack of any particular skills, she does not  think  she
    could obtain employment which would permit her to pay for accommodation
    and have enough money to support herself.   Before  dealing  with  this
    aspect of her claim  we  think  it  right  to  deal  with  her  medical
    condition which was dealt with at length by Dr Bell in his report.

411. Just as the respondent is bound by  the  findings  of  the  immigration
    judge that the appellant had been disowned by her  family,  so  is  the
    appellant bound by the immigration judge's findings that  she  had  not
    attempted suicide.

412.  In  this  regard  there  has  been  no  change  in   the   appellant's
    circumstances since the finding of the immigration  judge.   We  merely
    observe that the appellant's evidence in this regard before us has been
    characterised  by  contradictions  just  as  it  had  been  before  the
    immigration judge.

413. In answer to question 90 in her asylum interview, which took  place  on
    9th February 2006, she said that she had tried  to  commit  suicide  in
    many ways by taking pills or hanging herself.  In answer to question 92
    she said the first time she took an overdose of  medication,  then  she
    tried to commit suicide using a  knife  and  then  she  tried  to  hang
    herself.  In answer to question 96, in relation to the attempt to  harm
    herself with a knife, she said she used a bandage to stop the bleeding.
     In relation to the attempt to hang herself she said she tied up a rope
    at home and put her head through the loop  but  was  disturbed  by  her
    mother's arrival.  It is the case that the appellant did  not  tell  Dr
    Bell of any of these suicide attempts when he saw her on 21st May  2008
    and 17th June 2008.  On the contrary he recorded that there had been no
    suicide attempts or episodes of self harm.  By then, in  her  statement
    dated 11th May 2006, the appellant had said it was not  true  that  she
    tried to commit suicide on several occasions and there may have been  a
    misunderstanding during her asylum interview.   In  her  statement  she
    said that she tried to commit suicide once, when she tried to  cut  her
    left wrist with a kitchen knife.

414. When the appellant was asked by Ms Asanovic whether what she  had  said
    in her statement of 11th May 2006, namely  that  she  tried  to  commit
    suicide by cutting her wrist, was true, the appellant insisted that she
    had told the truth.  When Ms Asanovic pointed out to her that  she  had
    not told Dr Bell of any suicide attempt and asked whether what she  had
    told Dr Bell was true, the appellant said that she had told  the  truth
    to Dr Bell.

415. The appellant gave almost identical answers when these two  conflicting
    accounts were put to her by Ms  Laing  but  this  time  when  asked  to
    explain the discrepancy she said that she started to cut her wrist  but
    did not continue.   When  cross-examined  by  Ms  Laing  the  appellant
    insisted that the  answer  she  gave  to  question  27  of  her  asylum
    interview, that her father had beaten her  because  she  was  gay,  was
    true. When questioned further she said that when her father  found  out
    he beat her. She changed her account, however, when her  attention  was
    drawn to her statement dated 11th May 2006, in which she said that  her
    answer in interview was not true and  when  she  disclosed  her  sexual
    identity her father did not even get involved.

416. It is also the  case  that  the  appellant  gave  further  inconsistent
    answers on this topic in re-examination. Initially she  said  that  she
    thought that her father knew about her homosexuality because her mother
    may have told him.  When Ms Asanovic asked her if her mother  had  ever
    said anything to her about what her father knew she said she  told  her
    that he was not interested in what  she  was.   Ms  Asanovic  drew  her
    attention to her statement dated 5th September 2008 in which  she  said
    that her father now knew about her sexuality as her mother told him but
    she did not know when.

417. When asked to explain the discrepancy the  appellant  said  that  maybe
    she was confused.  It is also the case that according to  Dr  Bell  the
    appellant told him that from the age of 18 until she  left  Albania  at
    the age of 23 she helped her mother in her work as a seamstress, taking
    measurements and making deliveries.  When asked about this by Ms Laing,
    she said it was true but when re-examined by Ms Asanovic she said  that
    she did not help with deliveries.

418.  It  is  also  the  case  that  in  cross-examination   the   appellant
    exaggerated the way in which homosexuality  was  regarded  in  Albania,
    asserting that it was punishable by  death  or  life  imprisonment  and
    asserting in effect that this was her honest opinion.

419. Moreover, there have been times when on any view,  the  appellant  must
    have been under considerable stress when she made no attempt at suicide
    or self herm.

420. Although when Mira married, the appellant fell into a  deep  depression
    and obtained medication she made no attempt at suicide.   She  made  no
    attempt at suicide or self harm  after  she  had  revealed  her  sexual
    orientation to her mother and after she had been beaten by her brother.
     When her claim for asylum was refused and a decision was made  by  the
    Secretary of State to remove her from the United Kingdom  she  made  no
    attempt at suicide or self harm.  When her appeal against that decision
    was dismissed she made no such attempt. At a time when on  the  account
    of Dr Bell her condition was worse that when he  saw  her,  Dr  Seear's
    view was only that an episode of self harm  or  suicide  was  feasible,
    which in our view does not amount to a real risk.

421. Dr Bell's evidence that at present there was a low  risk  but  that  it
    would increase to moderate or high if she  were  to  be  returned,  was
    predicated on his view that she had been persecuted in Albania  by  her
    family and that Albania was a culture where homosexuals  were  targeted
    and she would be under serious threat. In  cross  examination  Dr  Bell
    conceded that the persecution he was referring to was the  one  episode
    of violence visited upon  her  by  her  brother.  The  finding  by  the
    immigration judge, however, was that the appellant  left  Albania,  not
    because she had been persecuted for her sexuality or  because  she  had
    been the subject of domestic violence  but  because  she  feared  being
    married against her will.

422. In relation to his view that  the  appellant  would  be  under  serious
    threat as a lesbian we do not accept that this view is justified either
    by the objective material to which we have  referred  in  dealing  with
    lesbians in Albania or by the evidence as  to  the  appellant's  likely
    behaviour in Albania.  We do not ignore the fact that it was  suggested
    by Dr Bell that the appellant believed herself to be at a serious  risk
    of harm but we do not share his view.  The appellant has shown  herself
    to be an intelligent person who is well read and who was astute  enough
    to appreciate a lacuna in the evidence, which she took  the  initiative
    in filling, by her enquiry of her mother as to  whether  she  would  be
    allowed to return home.

423. We have considered, without listing them, the six factors  set  out  by
    the Court of Appeal in J v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
    [2005] EWCA Civ 629.  In the light of  the  preserved  finding  of  the
    immigration judge and for the reasons which we have  mentioned  we  are
    not satisfied that there is a real risk that the appellant would commit
    suicide if returned to Albania.

424. We  do,  however,  accept  that  the  appellant  is  suffering  from  a
    depressive disorder. The source of this was clearly attributed  to  the
    inner conflict between her desire to "come out" and her feeling that it
    would be wrong to do so by Dr Seear.  That diagnosis was  confirmed  by
    Dr Bell  who  said  that  the  appellant  suffered  from  a  depressive
    disorder, as diagnosed by Dr Seear, of moderate intensity. His  opinion
    was that she also suffered  from  anxiety  disorder  paranoid  ideation
    deriving from the anxiety disorder and depressive  disorder  which  did
    not suggest deterioration into a more organised psychotic disorder.

425. In his first report Dr Bell spoke of an improvement in the  appellant's
    condition and stated that the appellant  was  firmly  identified  as  a
    homosexual woman, that living in Britain had resulted  in  her  feeling
    truly herself in that she could be in possession of her entire identity
    and that she had adapted to fully being  able  to  express  her  sexual
    identity.  We find it  difficult  to  accept  that  the  appellant  can
    properly be said, as Dr Bell also stated in his first report,  to  have
    identified with the homosexual community on account of two  visits  per
    month to a public house frequented by lesbian women,  where  she  meets
    two gay friends with neither of whom she has a lesbian relationship. It
    seems to us that the very limited involvement by the appellant  in  the
    homosexual community and the fact that  she  has  not  engaged  in  any
    lesbian relationship since she has  been  in  the  United  Kingdom  may
    demonstrate some ambivalence in her position arising from a  continuing
    inner conflict.

426. In relation to the appellant's paranoid ideation, in cross  examination
    Dr Bell agreed that the fact that the appellant was anxious  about  her
    immigration status might contribute to feelings of  being  followed  in
    the street and said it was not possible to disentangle that  aspect  of
    the case.

427. The real issue for us to decide, therefore, is whether  on  account  of
    not being able to return to  her  parents'  home  and  because  of  her
    psychological condition the appellant  would  be  unable  to  fend  for
    herself adequately in Albania so as to lead to a  situation  where  she
    would suffer serious harm.  Ms Asanovic suggested that the  appellant's
    home should be regarded as the appellant's own home area of Albania, so
    that if she were not able to return there the  issue  of  internal  re-
    location was raised, so that we would need to consider the issue of the
    appellant living elsewhere on the basis of whether it would  be  unduly
    harsh to expect her to do so, in accordance with the considerations set
    out in the decision of the House of Lords in Secretary of State for the
    Home department v AH (Sudan)  &  Ors  [2007]  UKHL  49,  in  which  the
    decision of the House in Januzi v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2006] 2 AC 426, was adopted and explained. We do not  think
    that it can  be  right,  however,  to  equate  the  appellant's  family
    relationships in her former family home, with  her  own  home  area  of
    Albania.  Ms Asanovic produced no authority to this effect and  in  the
    absence of any authority to the contrary, we regard the appellant's own
    home area of Albania as Tirana.

428. We bear  in  mind  that  Dr  Bell's  opinion  that  there  would  be  a
    spiralling deterioration in the appellant's  condition,  but  that,  in
    part, was predicated on the basis that the  appellant  would  be  under
    serious threat, which we find not to be the case.

429. We also bear in mind that although the appellant  was  able  to  obtain
    and take medication in Albania, without paying for it or having to  pay
    a bribe to obtain it, there  is  no  evidence  that  she  has  required
    medication or any other form of treatment in the United Kingdom  during
    the two years or so that she has been here.

430. In relation to the availability of treatment for the  mentally  ill  in
    Tirana, it is apparent from the report of  Mr  Bicaku  that  in  Tirana
    Alternativa is able to offer rehabilitation care, educational  training
    and occupation therapy on an out-patient basis.  It is  also  the  case
    that medicine and counselling is available on an out patient  basis  in
    Community Centres in Tirana where multi-disciplinary teams operate.

431. In paragraph 37 of his report Mr Bicaku stated that  community  centres
    had a degree of flexibility in frequency  of  contact  and  counselling
    which in exceptional  circumstances  could  be  up  to  twice  a  week.
    Moreover, while Mr Bicaku stated that the psychological text book  used
    by the psychology branch of the faculty of Social Sciences up  to  2004
    described homosexuality as a mental disorder,  the  text  book  in  use
    thereafter described it as an issue of individual preference which  had
    to do with personal identity.  It can be deduced from his report,  that
    only the older generation of practitioners aged 50 or over  would  view
    homosexuality as a mental and hormonal disorder.

432. It is significant in our view that Dr Bell's prognosis did not  require
    the appellant to  be  treated  in  a  psychiatric  hospital  where  the
    conditions  the  appellant  would  be  likely  to  encounter  might  be
    described as likely to amount to degrading treatment.

433. We take the view that there exists the likelihood of the  appellant  of
    obtaining employment.  We notice for example that in  the  "Telegazeta"
    of 26th September 2008 there was an advertisement for a seamstress with
    or without experience.  Helping her mother with measurements  and  just
    being around her mother while she carried on the work of  a  seamstress
    would have given the appellant some aptitude for such  employment.   We
    are satisfied that there are other possibilities for  employment  as  a
    cleaner and waitress which do not require previous experience,  without
    having to use family connections.

434. We take the view that in all the circumstances there  would  not  be  a
    real risk that the appellant would become so destitute as to be  forced
    to live in intolerable and inhuman conditions, which would amount to  a
    breach of her rights under article 3 of the ECHR.

435. We have considered the risk of the appellant being trafficked  for  the
    purposes of prostitution.  She clearly does not fall into the  category
    of women, such as university students, for whom prostitution  might  be
    regarded favourably as a  way  of  economic  advancement,  since  as  a
    lesbian she very likely regards the idea of sex with men as  abhorrent.
    Therefore the risk to be considered is of being trafficked against  her
    will.  Just as she has passed the optimum age for marriage, so has  she
    past the optimum age for trafficking.  She is an intelligent woman  who
    would be alive to the risks involved in  responding  to  advertisements
    which offered unrealistically high levels of remuneration.  We are  not
    satisfied that any risk that there might be in her case would be a real
    risk.

436. So far as the appellant's grounds of appeal  under  article  8  of  the
    ECHR are concerned in his opinion in EM (Lebanon) v Secretary of  State
    for the Home Department [2008}  UKHL  64  Lord  Hope  referred  to  the
    decisions of the Strasboug court in three cases,  N  v  United  Kingdom
    [2008] ECHR 453, F v United Kingdom [2004] ECHR  723  and  Z  and  T  v
    United Kingdom (unreported).  He said that N was a case  about  article
    3, not one of the qualified Convention rights.  Even in  such  a  case,
    where there was a very real risk that the harm that would  result  from
    the applicant's expulsion to the inferior system of health care in  her
    country of origin would reach the severity of treatment  prescribed  by
    that article, the court held  that,  other  than  in  very  exceptional
    cases, there was no obligation under the Convention  to  allow  her  to
    remain here.  In paragraph 13 of his opinion he said this:

         "Running through these three recent cases is a recognition  by  the
         Strasbourg court that, while the Contracting States are obliged  to
         protect those from  other  jurisdictions  who  can  show  that  for
         whatever reason they will suffer persecution or are at real risk of
         death or serious ill-treatment or will face arbitrary detention  or
         a flagrant denial of a fair trial in the receiving country,  limits
         must be set on the extent to which they  can  be  held  responsible
         outside the areas that are prescribed by articles 2 and  3  and  by
         the fundamental right under article 6 to a fair trial. Those limits
         must be seen against the background of  the  general  principle  of
         international law that states have the right to control the  entry,
         residence and  expulsion  of  aliens.  In  N  v  United  Kingdom  a
         distinction was drawn between civil and political rights on the one
         hand and rights of a  social  or  economic  nature  on  the  other.
         Despite  its  fundamental  importance  in  the  Convention  system,
         article 3 does not have the effect of requiring a Contracting State
         to guarantee free and unlimited health care to all aliens  who  are
         without a right to stay within its  jurisdiction.  In  F  v  United
         Kingdom, an article 8 case, a distinction of a different  kind  was
         drawn. On the one hand there are those guarantees  which,  as  they
         are of fundamental importance, must always be rendered effective in
         practice. On the other there are the qualified rights of a civil or
         political  nature  which,  on  a  purely   pragmatic   basis,   the
         Contracting States cannot be required to guarantee for the rest  of
         the world outside the umbrella of the Convention."

437.  In paragraph 35 of his opinion Lord Bingham said:
         "In adopting and endorsing  the  test  formulated  by  the  AIT  in
         Devaseelan I did not in para 24 of my opinion in Ullah [2004] 2  AC
         323 understand that  tribunal  to  be  distinguishing  a  "flagrant
         denial or gross violation" of a right from  a  complete  denial  or
         nullification  of  it  but  rather   to   be   assimilating   those
         expressions. This was how the point had been put to  the  House  by
         the Attorney General for the Secretary of State,  as  is  evidenced
         from the report of his argument (p 337D):
              "If other articles can be  engaged  the  threshold  test  will
             require a flagrant breach of the relevant right, such as  will
             completely deny  or  nullify  the  right  in  the  destination
             country: see Devaseelan v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
             Department [2003]  Imm  AR  1.  A  serious  or  discriminatory
             interference with the right protected would be insufficient."
              It is difficult, with respect, to see how the point  could  be
              put more clearly, and any attempt at paraphrase runs the  risk
              of causing confusion."
438.  Applying this test we are not satisfied, for the  same  reasons  which
    apply to her article 3 grounds of appeal, that if  the  appellant  were
    returned to Albania there would be a flagrant breach of  her  right  to
    respect for her moral and physical integrity under  article  8  of  the
    ECHR.
439.   The  immigration  judge  made  a  material  error  of  law   in   her
    determination  of  the  appeal  which  therefore  cannot   stand.    We
    substitute a decision  dismissing  the  appellant's  appeal  on  asylum
    grounds, on humanitarian protection grounds and on human rights grounds
    under articles 3 and 8 of ECHR.


Signed



Senior Immigration Judge Spencer
Senior Immigration Judge Goldstein

                                   Annex A


REASONS FOR THE DECISION THAT THERE IS AN ERROR OF LAW IN THE DETERMINATION


1.     The  Respondent  sought  and   was   granted   an   order   for   the
    reconsideration of the determination of Immigration Judge  Grant-Duprez
    who, sitting at Taylor House on 25 May 2006, dismissed  the  appeal  of
    the Appellant, a citizen of Albania, on asylum grounds but allowed  her
    appeal on human rights grounds.

2.     Senior  Immigration  Judge   Mather   in   ordering   reconsideration
    considered that the Respondent's grounds disclosed that the Immigration
    Judge may have made errors of law for the arguable reasons given in the
    application.

3.    The Tribunal was subsequently served with the Appellant's Reply  dated
    24 July 2006 submitting that the Immigration Judge should have  allowed
    the Appellant's asylum appeal.

4.    The issue for the Tribunal was whether the Immigration  Judge  made  a
    material error of law, that being an error of  law  that  affected  her
    decision on the appeal.

5.    It was the basis of the Appellant's claim to asylum  that  she  was  a
    lesbian and likely to be persecuted for  this  reason  if  returned  to
    Albania.

6.    The Appellant's account was summarised by  the  Immigration  Judge  at
    paragraphs 8, 9 and 10 of her determination as follows:

            "The basis of the Appellant's claim to asylum is that she is  as
        lesbian and that she is likely to be persecuted for this reason  if
        she is  returned  to  Albania.   Her  evidence  in  her  SEF  form,
        Interview notes and  her  statements  of  21.3.06  and  11.5.06  as
        supplemented by oral evidence can be summarised as follows:

        8. The  Appellant  comes  from  Tirana,  Albania.   Her  father  is
           alcoholic and used to beat  his  family  when  drunk.   Domestic
           violence is very common and the  police  do  not  get  involved.
           After the Appellant left school, she stayed at home.  She  never
           worked.  Her family tried to arrange a marriage for her, but she
           refused two suitors.  She  had  realised  at  16  that  she  was
           lesbian.  She could not tell her family because it was a  social
           taboo.  When she was 20, she started a relationship with someone
           called Mira whom she had met when visiting  her  uncle.   No-one
           suspected them.  However, in January 2005 Mira's family arranged
           a marriage for her because she was  already  25.   She  did  not
           resist.  Mira started to avoid the Appellant as she had  to  get
           on with her new life.  After Mira's marriage, the Appellant  was
           pressurised to get married also. She was depressed  and  started
           to put on weight.  She made enquiries about leaving Albania  and
           decided to come to the  UK  because  she  had  a  friend  called
           Esmeralda here.  She had a big row with her mother in  September
           2005 and told her the truth.  Her mother was horrified and  told
           her brother, who beat her up.  She realised that she would  have
           to leave to avoid being married off at  the  first  opportunity.
           She says  her  family  would  have  considered  killing  her  to
           preserver their honour.  Esmeralda sent her  an  invitation  and
           some money and the Appellant obtained a visitor visa.  She  left
           the house on some excuse and flew to  the  UK  on  9.2.06.   She
           telephoned her family when she arrived but her mother  said  she
           was dead to them.  She cannot return to Albania, because  it  is
           culturally unacceptable to be lesbian and she has been  disowned
           by her family.


        9. In interview, the  Appellant  said  that  she  thought  she  was
           lesbian because her father had beaten her as  a  child  and  she
           hated men.  She said it was illegal to be homosexual in  Albania
           and the penalty was death or  life  imprisonment.   However  she
           also  said  that  the  authorities  don't  care  if  people  are
           homosexual as they are just not interested.  She had decided  to
           associate herself with lesbians because her father was alcoholic
           and ill-treated her and her mother (Q15).  She had  been  beaten
           up three or four times by her father because she was  gay  (Q21-
           27).  She had been treated by a Doctor for depression  in  early
           2005 and  again  in  December.   She  told  him  she  was  being
           mistreated by her father and he advised her to seek  help.   Her
           lesbian relationship had lasted three years and  she  had  lived
           with her partner for that time (Q66).  People had known she  was
           gay because she had a girlfriend who lived near her uncle (Q81).
            They would know by the way she communicated  with  them  (Q85).
           She described three suicide attempts at Q92.  Firstly,  she  had
           taken an overdose, then tried to cut her wrists and  then  tried
           to hang herself.  Her mother had found her with her  wrists  cut
           and saved her.  She gives a detailed description of her  hanging
           attempt at Q100 but her mother had arrived in time.  None of the
           suicide attempts appear in the original statement.


        10.      In her supplementary statement of 11.5.06,  the  Appellant
           admits that most of her interview account is untrue.  There  was
           only one suicide attempt, which she had  not  mentioned  in  her
           first  statement  because  she  was  ashamed.   She   had   been
           misunderstood and had been explaining things which went  through
           her mind.  Her father had not beaten her at all because  of  her
           lesbianism and she  had  not  sought  medical  advice  for  that
           reason.  She had been very confused and nervous at interview."


7.    The Immigration Judge continued over paragraphs 11 and 12 as follows:

        "11.     In evidence, it was pointed out to the Appellant that  she
             had continued to live with her  family  for  some  weeks  after
             confessing to her mother and had come to  no  harm.   She  said
             that would have forced her to marry  or  killed  her.   It  was
             difficult to leave and find somewhere else to go.  Tirana was a
             small town.  Life was much better and  easier  in  the  UK  and
             safer for lone gay women.   Under  cross-examination  she  said
             there was only one suicide attempt but it was the hanging which
             she tried and not the wrists.  She had been  aware  that  there
             were gay associations in Albania, but  she  had  not  tried  to
             contact them.  As to shelters for domestic violence, they would
             be very difficult to find and her family  would  probably  find
             her.  She would be forced to return to her family for  lack  of
             resources.  Eventually they would find her.  She could  'maybe'
             find a job.


        12.      A medico-psychological report from Mr M Seear is submitted
             in evidence.  He  describes  the  Appellant  as  showing  acute
             shame.  His opinion is that the Appellant is suffering a  Major
             Depressive  Episode  and  that  return  would  be   likely   to
             exacerbate this".


8.    The Immigration Judge proceeded to consider the  background  material.
    In that regard at  paragraphs  14  and  15  of  her  determination  the
    Immigration  Judge  noted  inter  alia  that  violence  against   women
    especially spousal abuse remained a serious problem and was  culturally
    accepted.  Further:

            "Many men, especially those from the  north-east  still  follow
        the traditional code - the Kanun  -  dating  from  medieval  times.
        They regard women as chattels...   However,  the  Family  Code,  in
        force since 2003 provides for the protection of female  victims  of
        domestic violence and it is possible for domestic  violence  to  be
        prosecuted under general assault laws.  There are said to  be  NGOs
        which offer counselling and aid to abused  women.   Women  are  not
        excluded by law or  in  practice  from  any  occupation  or  higher
        education but are often discriminated against in their careers".

9.    The Immigration Judge noted that since  the  return  of  democracy  to
    Albania blood feuds had reappeared, especially in the north of Albania.
     These were part  of  the  Kanun.   There  had  been  several  thousand
    honour/revenge killings since 1991 although the killing  of  women  was
    prohibited by the code.

10.   The Immigration Judge turned  to  her  consideration  of  an  expert's
report provided by     Mr Alex Standish who was  described  as  an  academic
specialising in Balkan studies    and specifically  the  Kanun  in  Albania.
He had lived in Albania while  working  as  an   economic  consultant.   The
Immigration Judge summarised Mr Standish's conclusions   as follows:

        "He goes so far as to say that it would be extremely unlikely  that
        an unmarried female would be able to live an  independent  life  in
        Albania.  A woman is expected to marry around the  age  of  20  and
        those perceived to have dishonoured their families face significant
        risk of violence and even murder.  He says there is an almost total
        lack of social mobility for women  in  practice.   A  single  woman
        cannot simply relocate to another area and set  up  home.   Renting
        property would be almost impossible because she would be assumed to
        be not respectable.  Owing to social  pressures,  he  says  that  a
        respectable employer would not entertain the idea of employing  her
        and the most likely outcome would be destitution on the streets for
        a woman who had been expelled from her family home".

11.   In considering the report of Mr  Seear  and  his  description  of  the
    Appellant's physical and mental symptoms of  conflict  and  shame,  the
    Immigration Judge stated that she accepted the Appellant  was  lesbian.
    The Immigration Judge continued:

        "In light of the objective evidence as  to  attitudes  in  Albanian
        society, I accept that it is likely that (the Appellant)  has  been
        disowned by her  family.   In  her  interview  the  Appellant  gave
        detailed accounts  of  incidents  which  she  later  admitted  were
        fabrications, or what she had  been  imagining.   I  think  she  is
        clearly  a  disturbed  young  woman,  but  in  view  of  her   many
        inconsistencies, I must treat the  details  of  her  evidence  with
        caution.  In particular, I discount her alleged  suicide  attempts,
        which were not mentioned at all in her first statement."

12.   The Immigration Judge continued:

        "20.     The core of the Appellant's case is that she had a  secret
             three year relationship with a  woman  called  Mira,  that  she
             confessed this to her mother who was  horrified  and  that  she
             left Albania to avoid being married off.  I find that  she  did
             not live with Mira for this period (as she  originally  claimed
             but then retracted).  I find indeed  that  no-one  knew  of  or
             suspected this relationship at the time,  which  was  conducted
             discreetly and secretly.  I find that the only people who  know
             of her sexuality are highly unlikely to have told anyone  else.
             I find therefore that if the Appellant returns she would not be
             persecuted for her sexuality, as no-one would  know  about  it.
             It is not an  illegal  activity.   She  has  conducted  herself
             discreetly in the past and there is no reason to think that she
             would behave differently in future".  (The  typed  emphasis  is
             mine - see post).


13.   The Immigration Judge continued:

        "21.     As far as her fear of  violence  is  concerned,  I  accept
             there is a reasonable likelihood that her brother beat her when
             he first found out about the relationship with  Mira.   However
             she did not suffer 'three or four'  beatings  from  her  father
             because of this.  She retracted this claim and it appears after
             all that her father was not informed of  her  sexuality  before
             she left.  She remained living at home for several weeks  after
             this  without  being  assaulted  or  disowned.   There  is   no
             suggestion that she has ever been  threatened  with  death  for
             dishonouring her family.  Indeed, she had decided to leave  for
             the UK before she told her mother  what  the  problem  was  and
             before her brother beat her (Q46 ff).  My conclusion  therefore
             is that when she decided to leave Albania,  the  Appellant  did
             so, not because she had been persecuted for  her  sexuality  or
             because she had been the  subject  of  domestic  violence,  but
             because she feared being married against her will."


14.   In considering the relevant case law the Immigration Judge had  before
    her Country Guidance decisions of  the  Tribunal  in  IM  (Albania)  CG
    [2003] UKIAT 00067 and DM Albania CG [2004] UKIAT 00059.  It was  noted
    that IM found no evidence  to  support  a  reasonable  likelihood  that
    homosexuals  in  Albania  were  subject  to  persecution  and  that  DM
    established that women were not a particular social group in Albania.

15.   The Appellant's Counsel submitted that IM related to male  homosexuals
    and that in any event the Tribunal  had  not  had  the  benefit  of  Mr
    Standish's  report.   The  Appellant  would  be  obliged  to  hide  her
    sexuality which would be a denial of  her  nature.   It  was  submitted
    before the Immigration Judge that lesbians  were  a  particular  social
    group in Albania suffering discrimination and lack of protection.

16.   The Immigration Judge found that she could distinguish the case of  DM
    from that of Shah and Islam [1999] IAR 283, on the  basis  "that  there
    was not any  active  undermining  of  the  position  of  women  by  the
    provisions of the law in Albania and therefore women were not a  social
    group for Refugee Convention purposes".

17.   The  Immigration  Judge  concluded  that  the  problem  faced  by  the
    Appellant "seems to be  a  social  and  cultural  problem  rather  than
    persecution or discrimination by the State".

18.   The Immigration Judge in  considering  the  Appellant's  human  rights
    appeal accepted:

      "...that if the Appellant were to be forced into  a  marriage  against
        her will, that would amount to  inhuman  and  degrading  treatment.
        However, I have to consider  whether  this  would  actually  occur.
        Apart from the culture, in particular those who  follow  the  Kanun
        tradition, I find no guidance in the Country Report as  to  whether
        fathers have an legal right to force a marriage  on  a  girl.   The
        social pressures would no doubt be enormous for someone  living  at
        home and wishing to maintain a relationship with her family, but in
        the case of the Appellant who has already broken with  her  family,
        the risk of actually being forced into a  marriage  must  be  quite
        small.  In theory any occupation or higher  education  is  open  to
        women and therefore there is no legal bar to a woman making her own
        way in the world.  The Appellant's family would be unaware that she
        had returned.  There would be  no-one  to  force  her.   There  are
        women's groups to which she could turn for help".

19.   In further referring to the report  of  Mr  Standish  the  Immigration
    Judge expressed her concern as to "the extent of the social  prejudice"
    described by him in his report.  The Immigration Judge continued:

      "It does seem almost incredible that a single woman  would  be  unable
        to rent a room  or  get  a  job  because  of  prejudice,  and  that
        therefore the most likely outcome  for  a  single  woman  would  be
        destitution on the streets.  However, this is what he says at paras
        43, 82 and 83.  If true, it  means  that  no  woman  can  exist  in
        Albania outside her family  group  (even  though  she  may  not  be
        actively persecuted) and therefore she cannot relocate to avoid any
        problems she may have had.  This would certainly breach  her  right
        to physical and moral integrity under Article 8 and would make  the
        means to a normal life impossible.  On the face  of  it,  it  seems
        absurd that someone should be  entitled  to  sanctuary  in  another
        country because they have fallen out with their  family.   However,
        Mr Standish appears to be well qualified to make his report  and  I
        feel I am obliged to accept his advice.  The circumstances of  this
        Appellant are truly exceptional in the light of  what  Mr  Standish
        identifies as the  consequences  of  (the  Appellant's)  return  to
        Albania as a single woman abandoned by her family.   The  House  of
        Lords reaffirmed in Januzi and others [2006] UKHL 5 that an  asylum
        seeker cannot be expected to relocate to a  place  within  his  own
        country where the quality of life does not meet the basic norms  of
        civil,  political  and  socio-economic  human  rights.   The   same
        principle must apply to someone who does not qualify as  a  refugee
        but nevertheless faces the absence of such basic norms.   It  would
        be wholly disproportionate to return her to a life of  destitution.
        I  therefore  find  that  to  return  (the  Appellant)   in   these
        circumstances would place the UK in  breach  of  its  international
        obligations under Article 8 ECHR".

  20. The Appellant's challenge to the findings of the Immigration Judge was
      predicated on the claim that the  Immigration  Judge  failed  to  give
      proper weight to the fact that  the  Appellant  was  a  lesbian.   The
      Appellant's grounds maintained that as  a  consequence,  there  flowed
      failures to:


         . Properly identify the fact that the Appellant  had  demonstrated
           the  Refugee  Convention  reason  of  particular  social   group
           resulting  from  and  further  exemplified  by  the  persecutory
           treatment that she suffered from her family and the police;
         . The risk of societal ostracism, exclusion and attack and;
         . An insufficiency of  protection  available  to  her  in  Albania
           and/or an inability to safely relocate within the country.
         . On the same  basis,  the  Immigration  Judge  should  also  have
           allowed the Appellant's appeal under Article 3 of the ECHR and;
         . The failure to give proper weight to the fact that the Appellant
           was a lesbian resulted in  failures  to  properly  identify  the
           nature of risk to her and the nature of her likely treatment  on
           return to Albania.

21.   In relation to the Immigration  Judge's  findings  under  the  Refugee
    Convention, it was contended that it was an error of  law  for  her  to
    conclude as she did at paragraph 21, that the Appellant's departure was
    unrelated to her being persecuted because of her sexual orientation but
    solely because she feared the arranged marriage.   Once  accepted  that
    the Appellant was a lesbian, her flight from treatment that was  caused
    by her sexual orientation was inseparable from why that treatment  took
    place and what effect it had on a person of such characteristics.

22.   Further, the Immigration Judge had examined  the  separate  issues  of
    membership of a social group, the issue of persecution and the issue of
    sufficiently of protection in that order to ascertain  whether  or  not
    there was persecution for a Refugee Convention reason.  In that  regard
    it was said that the Immigration  Judge's  reasoning  at  paragraph  22
    disclosed a confusion of those issues, first flowing from a failure  to
    properly determine the issue of social group.  The Appellant's  grounds
    maintain that on the issue of  social  group  the  following  questions
    should have been addressed:

        "1.      Was the Appellant a member of a social group as  a  result
             of sexual orientation, alternatively;


        2. Was the Appellant a member of a social group by virtue of  being
             a woman;


        3. Was the Appellant a member of a social group as a result of  her
             having refused a forced marriage?


23.   It was contended that the Immigration  Judge  failed  to  examine  the
    first of those issues and that her consideration of the remaining above
    mentioned issues were thus confused.

24.   The  Respondent's  challenge  was  predicated  on  a  claim  that  the
    Immigration Judge had failed to  explain  why  she  believed  that  the
    Appellant's Article 8 rights would be breached if returned to  Albania.
    In allowing the appeal on human rights grounds, the  Immigration  Judge
    erred in effectively concluding that Mr  Standish's  report  was  proof
    enough to show that the Appellant would be destitute if returned.   For
    the Immigration Judge to  attach  weight  to  this  assertion  from  Mr
    Standish there was a failure to give clear and  detailed  reasons.  The
    Immigration Judge failed to address this issue in the  context  of  the
    high threshold necessary to breach Article 8.  Inadequate  reasons  had
    been given as to why the Immigration Judge attached such weight  to  Mr
    Standish's report.

25.   On the Respondent's reading of the determination it appeared that  the
    Immigration Judge's only reason for attaching such weight to the report
    was because of Mr Standish's qualifications and the  Immigration  Judge
    failed to provide any further rationale behind her  decision  to  allow
    the case on Article 8.

26.  The Respondent's grounds cited the  decision  of  the  Tribunal  in  BK
    [2004] UKIAT 00156 (Serbia and Montenegro)  CG  that  explicitly  dealt
    with reports from Mr Standish and the reliance that  should  be  placed
    upon them.  Although that case  concerned  a  Kosovan  blood  feud  the
    principles remained the same.  It was a  decision  where  the  Tribunal
    concluded  that  "the  Adjudicator's  unexplained  preference  for   Mr
    Standish's  report  over  the   other   objective   evidence   ...   is
    unsustainable on the  evidence".   The  Appellant  had  herself  broken
    contact with her family.  She was an independent adult who had come  to
    the United Kingdom of her own accord.  The fact that  Mr  Standish  had
    written the report to suggest  the  Appellant  would  be  destitute  on
    return was not upheld by any references to objective evidence  or  case
    law and was based merely upon his own opinion.  It was therefore deemed
    unsafe for the Immigration Judge to allow the appeal on  the  basis  of
    the report in view of her concerns with Mr Standish's conclusions.

27.   In that regard, the  Respondent  had  in  mind  paragraph  23  of  the
    Immigration Judge's determination where she had expressed concern as to
    the extent of the social prejudice described  by  Mr  Standish  in  his
    report.

28.   The Respondent's  grounds   further  contended  that  the  Immigration
    Judge had in any event, failed to establish why social prejudice  would
    lead to total destitution and thus breach  the  Appellant's  Article  8
    rights.  The Immigration Judge had  failed  to  give  adequately  sound
    reasons  for  concluding  that  the  Appellant's   circumstances   were
    exceptional.

29.   In particular the Immigration Judge failed to consider the  guidelines
    as laid out in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27.

30.   The Respondent's grounds concluded that in order to succeed  with  the
    claim that the Appellant faced destitution on return to Albania it  was
    necessary to demonstrate  that  it  was  made  out  by  clear  evidence
    explained and developed in detail and this had not been  done  in  this
    case.

31.   The Respondent contended that the Appellant's  circumstances  did  not
    have any of the exceptionally  compelling  and  compassionate  features
    that  would  be  necessary  to  show  that   her   removal   would   be
    disproportionate to the proper course of enforcing immigration control.



32.   At the outset of the  hearing  before  me,  I  drew  to  the  parties'
    attention the following cases:

      Fornah [2006] UKHL 46; and

      J [2006] EWCA Civ 1238

33.   In Fornah it was held that  "the  family  was  the  archetypal  social
    group and where one member of a family was persecuted albeit not for  a
    'Convention reason' persecution meted out because  of  him  or  her  to
    other members of his/her family might be 'for reasons of ... membership
    of a particular social group'.  The Court  of  Appeal  in  Quijano  was
    wrong to hold otherwise.  However, where some  members  of  the  family
    face persecution and not others the issue of causation would need to be
    closely scrutinised."  In Fornah their Lordships had  referred  to  the
    definition in Article 10(d) of the  European  Union  Council  Directive
    2004/83/EC that a group was to  be  considered  to  form  a  particular
    social group where, in particular;

        "(i)     Its members shared an innate characteristic, or  a  common
             background  that  could   not   be   changed   or   shared,   a
             characteristic so fundamental to identity or conscience that  a
             person should not be forced to renounce it and


        (ii)     That group had a distinct identity in the relevant country
             because it was perceived as being different by the  surrounding
             society".


34.    Their  Lordships  continued  that  read  literally   that   was   not
    inconsistent with the trend of international  authority;  a  particular
    social group  would  be  established  where  (i)  and  (ii)  were  both
    satisfied.  But if both (i) and (ii) had to be satisfied the  test  was
    more stringent than was  warranted  by  international  authority.   The
    UNHCR, Comments on the Directive adhered to its view that the  criteria
    (i) and (ii) were alternatives, providing recognition of  a  particular
    social group where either criterion was met and not requiring  both  to
    be so.

35.   In J it was held that in determining whether an  asylum  seeker  faced
    persecution as a member  of  a  particular  social  group  in  his  own
    country, that he had hitherto  avoided  persecution  by  modifying  his
    behaviour so as to disguise  his  membership  of  that  group  did  not
    necessarily mean that he could be expected to avoid the risk in  future
    by continuing to modify his behaviour.  The question  was  not  whether
    the Appellant could live in his own country without attracting  adverse
    attention, but what was likely to happen if he returned.  To  say  that
    he was likely to live discreetly as a homosexual was not  the  same  as
    expecting him/her to live discreetly.

36.   In fact, Ms Asanovic for the Appellant was ready with a transcript  of
    the decision in Fornah, whilst Ms Kiss provided me  with  a  bundle  of
    case law that included the decision in J as well as the earlier Country
    Guidance decisions in Albania to which I have earlier referred.

37.   I was informed by the parties and indeed agreed  with  them,  that  in
    the circumstances the Immigration Judge's conclusion at paragraph 20 of
    her determination that if  the  Appellant  conducted  herself  and  her
    sexuality with discretion upon return to Albania she would  not  be  at
    risk on return, was a material error of law.

38.  Ms Kiss indeed argued that  the  Immigration  Judge's  Article  8  ECHR
    findings were almost exclusively based upon what Ms Kiss submitted were
    no more than the opinions of Mr Standish that were  hardly  if  at  all
    sourced by  relevant  background  material  and  without  any  apparent
    consideration of the 5 questions posed in Razgar.

39.   Ms Asanovic submitted that the material error  of  law  identified  in
    the Immigration Judge's reasoning  of  the  Appellant's  asylum  appeal
    could not possibly be isolated from her failure to adequately consider,
    if at all, whether or not the Appellant engaged Article 3 of the  ECHR.



40.   I agreed with the parties and for like reasons  that  the  Immigration
    Judge had materially erred in law and  that  there  should  thus  be  a
    second-stage reconsideration of the appeal on all issues at large.

41.   Ms Asanovic accepted that the  adverse  credibility  findings  of  the
    Immigration Judge had not been challenged in the Appellant's Reply.  By
    the same token, Ms Kiss confirmed to me that the Respondent  raised  no
    challenge to the Immigration Judge's positive credibility findings.

42.   However, the Immigration Judge after finding at paragraph 20 that  the
    only people who would know of the Appellant's sexuality were Mira,  her
    mother and brother, and possibly  her  father,  had  continued:  "These
    people are highly unlikely to have told anyone else". I agreed with the
    parties that this sentence  within  paragraph  20  of  the  Immigration
    Judge's findings should not be  preserved.  It  was  no  more  than  an
    expression of speculation on the  part  of  the  Immigration  Judge.  I
    agreed that in all other  respects,  both  the  positive  and  negative
    credibility findings of the Immigration Judge should be preserved.

43.   I shared the concern of the  parties,  that  the  Immigration  Judge's
    task had not been made any easier by the fact that she had to  rely  on
    arguably outdated Country  Guidance  decisions  in  IM  promulgated  in
    September 2003 and DM promulgated  on  1  April  2004.   The  issue  of
    whether there was a sufficiently of protection in Albania in particular
    to single women and to homosexuals and as to whether they constituted a
    particular social group in Albania was a matter  that  arguably  needed
    revisiting and updating.  Of particular concern was  the  issue  as  to
    whether lesbians in  Albania  formed  a  particular  social  group  and
    whether or not a sufficiency of protection was available to them.  This
    was a discrete issue that did not appear  to  have  been  addressed  in
    either IM or DM.

44.   I therefore informed the parties that I  would  refer  the  matter  to
    Senior Immigration Judge Gleeson the appropriate Country Group Convenor
    to consider whether this matter was appropriate  for  Country  Guidance
    and if so as to the terms of reference and as regards further  listing.



45.   Ms Kiss for the Respondent informed me that she would wish to  consult
    her Country Information Unit should Senior  Immigration  Judge  Gleeson
    consider this appeal for possible Country  Guidance  and  in  terms  of
    whether or not the  Respondent  would  intend  to  instruct  their  own
    country expert for the purposes of a report and possibly to  give  oral
    evidence.  In any event a decision would not be  made  in  this  regard
    unless and until the Respondent had the  opportunity  to  consider  any
    updated country expert report served upon them  by  those  representing
    the Appellant.

46.   I  was  informed  by  Ms  Asanovic  that  the  Appellant's  solicitors
    intended to instruct Dr Stephanie Schwandner-Sievers for  the  purposes
    of a country expert  report.   Ms  Asamovic  described  Dr  Schwandner-
    Sievers as an "Albanialyst" and an Associate Fellow of  the  School  of
    Slavonic and East European Studies at University College.  In  addition
    an updated report from Mr Standish was to be obtained.

47.   Ms Asanovic further informed  me  that  there  was  likely  to  be  an
    attempt to contact what she described as two specialists from the  ILGA
    (International Gay and Lesbian  Association)  to  provide  reports  and
    possibly give oral evidence.

 48. The Appellant would intend to give oral evidence for which  purpose  an
    Albanian interpreter would be required. I informed the parties that  in
    the circumstances they would be advised in due course by the  Tribunal,
    as to whether this case was to be listed initially For Mention Only.

49.   I informed the  parties  that  in  the  circumstances  they  would  be
    advised in due course by the Tribunal, as to whether this case  was  to
    be listed initially For Mention Only."





                                   Annex B


In determining this appeal we have had regard to:

 . the oral evidence of the appellant,

 . the  oral  evidence  of  Ms  Stephanie  Schwandner-Sievers  MA,  honorary
   research affiliate at the Centre for South  Eastern-European  Studies  of
   the School of Slavonic and East European Studies at University College in
   London and a visiting professor at the University of Bologna,

 . the oral evidence of Dr Nicola Mai PhD research fellow in migrations  and
   immigrations at the Institute for the Study of  European  Transformations
   of the London Metropolitan University

 . the oral evidence of Dr D L Bell, BSc MB MRCP  FRC  Psych,  a  consultant
   psychiatrist,

 . the appellant's asylum statement dated 21st March 2006,

 . a supplementary witness statement from the appellant dated 11th May 2006,



 . a second supplementary statement from the appellant dated 19th May 2008,

 . a third supplementary statement from the appellant  dated  5th  September
   2008,

 . a psychiatric report from Dr Bell which  was  unsigned  and  undated  but
   which Dr Bell subsequently indicated was signed in August 2008,

 . a supplementary report from Dr Bell dated 9 September 2007,

 . a report from Dr Mai dated 28th April 2008,

 . a report from Ms Schwandner-Sievers dated 6 May 2008,

 . a report from Mr Alex Standish dated 14th May 2006,

 . a skeleton argument dated 10th September 2008

 . an appellant's notice under rule 32,

 . an appellant's notice under rule 14,

 . the appellant's schedule of essential paragraphs in the experts' reports,



 . items of background material and copies of various authorities,

 . a list of essential reading passages,

 . further background material,

 . a supplementary statement from Ms Schwandner-Sievers dated 21st September
   2008,

 . a further schedule of essential paragraphs,

 . a report on the  appellant  by  Mr  NK  dated  20th  September  2008  and
   appendices,

 . a report from Mr Adratik Bicaku dated 23rd November 2008,

 . a statement from the appellant dated 26th November 2008,

 . a further report from Ms Schwandner-Sievers dated 22nd  November 2008 and
   attachment,

 . a schedule of essential paragraphs  in  Ms  Schwandner-Sievers's  further
   report dated 22nd  November 2008,

 . a skeleton argument in response to the  skeleton  argument  submitted  on
   behalf of the respondent dated 24th September 2008,

 . the Home Office bundle in which there is to be found the notice of appeal
   and the report of Dr Michael Seear, dated 7th March 2006,

 . a bundle of objective material submitted on behalf of the respondent,

 . a skeleton argument on behalf of  the  respondent  dated  16th  September
   2008,

 . translated copies of Albanian newspapers,

 . the written closing submissions made on behalf of both parties and

 . the authorities mentioned in this determination.




















                                   Annex C

    In his first report Dr Mai said that although his work addressed social
    change in post-communist Albania in general, such interest  focused  on
    the relation between the emergence of new youth and  gender  identities
    and roles, migration and the justification of violence and criminality.
     He had a good and updated knowledge of  the  condition  of  homosexual
    people in Albania in many different respects.

    From July 1993 to January 2000 he worked in Albania as the director  of
    a development project aimed at setting up a network of youth centres as
    a way to foster the process of democraticisation in Albania, which  was
    based  in  Tirana,  Berat,  Gjirokastr  and   Durrs.    The   Italian
    association he used to work for while in Albania, ARCI, was part  of  a
    wider network of Italian  cultural  and  political  associations  among
    which was also Italy's main gay and lesbian association, ARCIGAY.

    Their Albanian partner association was the Albanian  Youth  Council,  a
    network of different Albanian NGOs, amongst which  was  ALGA  (Albanian
    Lesbian and Gay Association) which was still operating away from public
    visibility and in conditions of the utmost secrecy, in order  to  avoid
    suffering abuse by  both  police  officers  and  homophobic  groups  or
    individuals.  He had also cooperated with the members of  ALGA  in  the
    development and carrying out of activities in the  preparation  of  two
    projects, which were  submitted  to  international  donors  present  in
    Albania.  He had known most of the members of ALGA as  both  colleagues
    and friends and their professional and personal relations  enabled  him
    to understand the condition of Albanian  homosexual  people  in  depth.
    Since his last visit to Albania in December 2006 he had been  in  touch
    with members of ALGA and AHRG (the Albanian Human Rights  Group)  on  a
    regular basis.

    From July 2001 to July 2003 he was involved in  two  parallel  research
    projects  on  the  conditions  of  social   inclusion   and   exclusion
    experienced by Albanian migrants living in Italy,  Greece  and  in  the
    United Kingdom, which projects were based at the University  of  Sussex
    in Brighton.  In 2003 and 2004  he  undertook  research  exploring  the
    relations between  Albanian  and  Romanian  cultural  constructions  of
    masculinity, sex work and the risk of HIV/AIDS diffusion both  at  home
    and among migrants.  From January to December  2004  he  was  the  main
    researcher for the European Network on Male Prostitution underlying the
    findings of a pilot survey undertaken  by  the  network  and  aimed  at
    understanding the migratory patterns and conditions and  socio-economic
    vulnerability of male sex  workers.   In  2005  and  2006  he  was  the
    principal investigator within a research project funded by  the  French
    region BACA, exploring the relation between male prostitution  and  the
    mobility of young people and unaccompanied minors from the Balkans  and
    North Africa, including Albania.  Between 2006  and  2007  he  was  the
    principal investigator of a project funded by  the  Save  the  Children
    Italy  on  young  migrants  involved  in  criminal  behaviour.   Before
    undertaking that research he contacted and got to  know  many  Albanian
    gay people  and  activists  and  he  became  even  more  aware  of  the
    discrimination, marginalisation and  abuse  they  were  subject  to  in
    Albania.  In September 2006 he was invited to participate  in  a  round
    table "Making Prevention of  Trafficking  in  Human  Beings  Effective:
    Building Regional and Local Capacity of Roma Communities" organised  by
    the Contact Point for Roma Issues and the Anti-Trafficking Programme of
    the OSCE Office  for  Democratic  Institutions  and  Human  Rights,  in
    cooperation with the OSCE presence in Albania.  Although this  was  his
    last visit to Albania he had befriended Albanian gay people  living  in
    London and was in regular contact with gay activists and friends living
    in Albania.





                                   Annex D

               LIST OF BACKGROUND MATERIAL BEFORE THE TRIBUNAL


|    |Undated *         |  |Report on State Violence in Albania      |
|    |Undated *         |  |GISH Albania: Research and opinions on   |
|    |                  |  |the Albanian situation in relation to    |
|    |                  |  |LBGT rights                              |
|    |Undated *         |  |GISH: Report on the arrest of Mr Nasser  |
|    |                  |  |Almalak                                  |
|    |Undated *         |  |AHRG report: The American Embassy        |
|    |Undated           |  |Regional Declaration on Cooperation      |
|    |                  |  |between Gender Mainstreaming             |
|    |                  |  |Instructional Mechanisms in the Western  |
|    |                  |  |Balkan Countries, Ministry of Labour,    |
|    |                  |  |Social Affairs & Equal Opportunities     |
|    |Undated           |  |Website: Wikipedia Tirana Report         |
|    |Undated           |  |Website: NGO and Government Profiles     |
|    |Undated           |  |Website: Women's Organisation Albania    |
|    |Undated           |  |Website: Useful to Albania Women         |
|    |August 2003 *     |  |AHRG report on the arrest of a group of  |
|    |                  |  |homosexuals: "Police actions turn to be  |
|    |                  |  |"homophobia"                             |
|    |2004              |  |International Labour Organisation:       |
|    |                  |  |Employment Policy Review, Albania        |
|    |26 February 2004  |  |Law "On An Equal Gender Society"         |
|    |28 February 2005  |  |US Department of State Country Reports:  |
|    |                  |  |Human Rights Practices 2004              |
|    |18 April 2005 *   |  |OMCT report: State violence in Albania   |
|    |2005-2006 *       |  |Canadian Immigration Refugee Board:      |
|    |                  |  |Country of Origin Research: Albania      |
|    |2006              |  |US Social Security Programs throughout   |
|    |                  |  |the World: Europe, 2006                  |
|    |1 February 2006 * |  |Ms Elsa Ballauri, Secretary Director of  |
|    |                  |  |AHRG: Advisory Opinion                   |
|    |March 2006 **     |  |Amnesty International Report: Albania:   |
|    |                  |  |Violence against women in the family:    |
|    |                  |  |it's not her shame                       |
|    |26 June 2006 *    |  |www.stophonourkillings.com: Honour crimes|
|    |                  |  |in Albania                               |
|    |8 September 2006  |  |Canada Country of Origin: Responses to   |
|    |                  |  |Information Requests                     |
|    |25 September 2006 |  |Canada Country of Origin: Responses to   |
|    |                  |  |Information Requests                     |
|    |2007              |  |The Commission of the European           |
|    |                  |  |Communities: Progress Report on Albania  |
|    |2007              |  |Violence Against Women: Does the         |
|    |                  |  |Government Care in Albania?              |
|    |3 April 2007      |  |UK Operational Guidance Note: Albania    |
|    |3 June 2007 **    |  |Sunday Telegraph: Thousands fear as blood|
|    |                  |  |feuds sweep Albania                      |
|    |August 2007       |  |Canada Country Fact Sheet                |
|    |1 October 2007    |  |Canada Country of Origin: Responses to   |
|    |                  |  |Information Requests                     |
|    |3 October 2007 ** |  |Summary transcript of telephone interview|
|    |                  |  |with representative of OSCE.             |
|    |25 October 2007 **|  |Telephone conversation/interview with Ms |
|    |                  |  |Jennifer Hollinger                       |
|    |13-14 November    |  |Interview/email correspondence with Prof.|
|    |2007 **           |  |Wolfgang Stoppal                         |
|    |21 November 2007  |  |Amnesty International Report: Albania: No|
|    |**                |  |place to call home - adult orphans and   |
|    |                  |  |the right to housing                     |
|    |5 December 2007 * |  |Balkan Albania's Gay Flight              |
|    |11 March 2008 **  |  |US Department of  State: Country Reports |
|    |                  |  |on Human Rights Practices 2006: Albania  |
|    |May 2008          |  |Canada Issue Paper: Albania Blood Feuds  |
|    |9 May 2008 *      |  |Note of interview with Mr Nasser Almalak |
|    |12 May 2008       |  |UKBA Country of Origin Information for   |
|    |                  |  |Key Documents: Albania                   |
|    |2 June 2008 *     |  |Note of telephone conversation with Ms   |
|    |                  |  |Elsa Ballauri; AHRG                      |
|    |July 2008         |  |National Strategy on Gender Equality and |
|    |                  |  |against Domestic Violence, OSCE          |

*   appended to Dr Mai's reports
** appended to Ms Schwandner-Sievers' reports

