


                       ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL



   EY (Asylum determinations - date of service) Democratic Republic of Congo
                                                          [2006] UKAIT 00032


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Field House                                   Determination
Promulgated:
On 14th February 2006             On 28 February 2006


                                   Before

                       Mr Justice Hodge OBE, President
                Mrs J A J C Gleeson, Senior Immigration Judge
                    Mr P D King, Senior Immigration Judge


                                   Between


                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:           Mr P Jorro, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr J Gulvin, Senior Presenting Officer

The date and means of service by the Home Office  of  asylum  determinations
is rarely clear.  This creates difficulties in cases  where  an  application
for reconsideration is made when any  question  arises  as  to  whether  the
application is in time.  A  standard  letter  giving  the  date  of  posting
should be sent by the Home Office with every  determination  they  serve  by
post.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1. The appellant is a citizen of  the  Democratic  Republic  of  Congo.   He
   arrived in the United Kingdom on 7th April 2005 using a  false  passport.
   He claimed asylum the following day.  His claim was refused on  12th  May
   2005 and a Decision to Remove an Illegal Entrant  -  Asylum/Human  Rights
   Claim Refused Notice was issued on 16th June 2005.   His  appeal  against
   that decision was dismissed both on asylum and human rights grounds by Mr
   P F Hague, Immigration Judge in a determination signed  by  him  on  23rd
   July 2005.  The appellant applied for a review of  that  decision  and  a
   reconsideration was ordered by a senior immigration judge on 31st  August
   2005.

Service of asylum determinations

2. The senior immigration judge in his reasons for decision  indicated  that
   this appeal "will provide an opportunity for the Tribunal to express  its
   opinion on promulgation/service as well as  what  amounts  to  reasonably
   practicable".  These matters are not strictly an issue  in  this  appeal.
   They are however of importance to all  parties  to  appeals  within  this
   jurisdiction and to the Tribunal itself.  We have the benefit of  helpful
   submissions on the issue from counsel for the appellant.  We  thought  it
   right to indicate our views.

3. It is common place in most jurisdictions where a court  or  tribunal  has
   responsibility to serve judgements or orders for those  documents  to  be
   served on all parties at the same time.  That is  not  the  position  for
   claimants who have been refused an  application  for  asylum  and  appeal
   against that refusal to this Tribunal.

4. The Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rule  [2005]  SI  230
   provides for special procedures and time limits in asylum appeals.   Rule
   23 of those rules provides so far as relevant as follows:

   23  (1) This rule applies to appeals under section 82 of the 2002 act
         where:-


            a) the appellant is in the United Kingdom; and
            b) the appeal relates,  in  whole  or  in  part,  to  an  asylum
               claim...


      (4) the tribunal must serve its determination on the respondent:-


            a) if the appeal is considered at a hearing, by sending  it  not
               later that 10 days after the hearing finishes; or
            b) or if the appeal is determined without a hearing  by  sending
               it not later than 10 days after it is determined

      (5) the respondent must:-


            a) serve the determination on the appellant:-


            i) if the  respondent  makes  a  section  103A  application  or
               applies for permission to appeal under section 103B or  103E
               of the  2002  Act,  by  sending,  delivering  or  personally
               serving the determination not later than the date  on  which
               it makes that application; and
           ii) otherwise  not  later  than  28  days  after  receiving  the
               determination from the Tribunal; and

            b) as soon  as  practicable  after  serving  the  determination,
               notify the Tribunal on what date and by  what  means  it  was
               served

      6) if the respondent does not give the  Tribunal  notification  under
         paragraph (5)(b) within 29 days  after  the  Tribunal  serves  the
         determination on it, the Tribunal must serve the determination  on
         the appellant as soon as reasonably practicable thereafter.

5.  Hence  when  the  Tribunal  decides  an  asylum  case  it   serves   the
   determination  only  on  the  respondent  in  the  first  instance.   The
   respondent is then required to serve the determination on the  appellant.
   Rule 55 (3) of the AIT Procedure Rules also provides:-

      "If a document is served on the appellant, a copy  must  also  at  the
      same time be sent to the appellant's representative".

6. The Tribunal's decision may be challenged by either party on the  grounds
   that the Tribunal made an error of law.  An application must be  made  to
   the appropriate court for an order requiring the Tribunal  to  reconsider
   its decision on the appeal (Section  103A  Nationality,  Immigration  and
   Asylum Act 2002).  There are very tight time  limits  in  which  such  an
   application can be made.  Section 103A (3) provides:-

      (3)  An application... must be made:-


             a) in the case of an application by the appellant  made  while
                he is in the United Kingdom, within the period of five days
                beginning  with  the  date  on  which  he  is  treated,  in
                accordance with  rules  under  section  106,  as  receiving
                notice of the Tribunal's decision...


            c) in the case of an application  brought  by  a  party  to  the
               appeal other than the appellant, within the  period  of  five
               days beginning with the date  on  which  he  is  treated,  in
               accordance with the rules under  section  106,  as  receiving
               notice of the Tribunal's decision.


   The time limits for applications by appellants outside the United Kingdom
   are 28 days from the date in which the appellant is treated as  receiving
   notice of the Tribunal's decision.(Section 103A (3) (b) 2002 Act)

7. Section 103A (4) provides that rules of court  may  specify  days  to  be
   disregarded in calculating the five day time limit.  The Civil  Procedure
   Rules 1998 as amended are the relevant rules.   Rule  2.8  provides  that
   Saturdays, Sundays, bank holidays, Christmas Day and Good Friday  do  not
   count in the five day calculation.  Nor do days on which the Court Office
   is closed.

8. Rule 55 of the AIT Procedure Rules makes provision  for  the  filing  and
   service of documents within this jurisdiction.  Personal service must  be
   by "leaving" the document with the individual (Rule 55  (2)).   Documents
   served on a person who has notified the Tribunal that he is acting as the
   representative of a party are deemed to have been served  on  that  party
   (Rule 55 (4)).

9. There are provisions for calculating the  date  of  service  when  appeal
   determinations are served by post or  document  exchange.   Rule  55  (5)
   provides as follows:-

        5) Subject to paragraph (6) [which deals with personal service] any
           document that is served on a person in accordance with this rule
           shall, unless the contrary is proved, be deemed to be served:-


             a) where the document is sent by  post  or  document  exchange
                from and to a place  within  the  United  Kingdom,  on  the
                second day after it was sent;
             b) where the document is sent by  post  or  document  exchange
                from or to a place  outside  the  United  Kingdom,  on  the
                twenty-eighth day after it was sent; and
             c) in any other case, on the day on  which  the  document  was
                sent or delivered to, or left with, that person.

10. Where an asylum appeal determination has been served by the AIT  on  the
   Secretary of State that determination may be served by the  Secretary  of
   State on the appellant either personally or by  post.   But  it  must  be
   served within 28 days of its receipt from  the  AIT  (Rule  23  (a)  (ii)
   above).

11.  It  is  of  the  first  importance,  given  the  time  limits  in  this
   jurisdiction that the date of service by the Secretary of State is clear.
    Where asylum appeal determinations are served by post by  the  Secretary
   of State it is consistently the  case  that  the  date  of  posting  such
   determinations is unclear.

12. Such lack of clarity adversely affects any appellant or any  appellant's
   representatives who wishes to challenge the determination of the Tribunal
   on the basis of error of law.  They cannot be sure as to  when  the  five
   day time limit ends.  The senior immigration judges within  the  Tribunal
   who consider review application equally cannot be sure  as  to  when  the
   determination was served by post.  This presents significant difficulties
   in deciding whether the review application was received in time.

13. Subject to the CPR the five days will run from the  day  after  personal
   service.  Where the determination is served by post five days will  begin
   to run, again subject to the CPR, from after the second day on which  the
   document was sent.  If an appellant was personally served on  Monday  1st
   October five days starts to run on Tuesday 2nd October.  His  time  limit
   to make a review application ends  on  Monday  8th  October.   Where  the
   determination is served by post on Monday 1st October its deemed  receipt
   will be Wednesday 3rd October.  The time  limit  for  making  the  review
   application will expire on Wednesday 10th October.  This is  irrespective
   of the fact that the determination sent by post might well be received on
   Tuesday 2nd October.

14. The Immigration Advisory Service who  act  for  the  appellant  in  this
   matter represent a substantial number of applicants  claiming  asylum  in
   any one year.  In their submission it is commonplace for them to  receive
   asylum appeal determinations from the Home  Office  virtually  invariably
   with an accompanying letter from the  Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal.
   That letter is in a standard form and is numbered AIT75.  It is generally
   dated with the date on which the determination has been sent to the  Home
   Office by the AIT.  The Home Office at some  stage  thereafter  post  the
   determination with the AIT75 letter to  the  appellant  and  his  or  her
   representatives.  We were told that in some cases, but certainly not all,
   the Home Office place a stamp on the determination itself indicating  the
   date on which it is sent to the representatives.  They do not  include  a
   covering letter.  We were  also  told  that  as  a  general  rule  it  is
   impossible to identify any postage date from the envelope  in  which  the
   determination is received.

15. In this case the IAS date stamped the standard  letter  AIT75  with  the
   date on which it and the Tribunal's determination was received  by  them.
   They queried the relevant dates with the AIT.  They were told  that  they
   should take the date of deemed service in accordance with Rule 55 (5)  as
   being the date on which they received  the  document.   This  was  wrong.
   Because of the failure by the respondent to indicate the  date  on  which
   the determination had  been  posted  it  was  in  fact  not  possible  to
   calculate the proper deemed date of receipt in accordance  with  Rule  55
   (5).

16. These failures are of  great  significance  where  the  time  limit  for
   challenging the decision of this Tribunal are as restricted as they  are.
   There are further difficulties for  the  Tribunal  operating  the  review
   procedure.  It is within the  knowledge  of  the  Tribunal  that  in  the
   majority of asylum cases  the  respondent  does  not  give  the  Tribunal
   notification on what date and by  what  means  determinations  have  been
   served. This is breaching Rule 23 (5)  (b).   Senior  immigration  judges
   considering time issue limits  are  not  assisted  by  this  failure.   A
   standard  letter  to  the  appellant  with  copies  to  the   appellant's
   representatives and the AIT all dated and sent on the day of  posting  of
   the determination would remove most of the difficulties.

17. In this case the five day time limit was  not  met  by  the  appellant's
   representatives.   The  Senior  Immigration  Judge  concluded  that   the
   appellant could not reasonably practicably have made the  application  in
   time, he extended time and granted the application  for  reconsideration.
   It was agreed by all parties before us that the  reconsideration  hearing
   was now properly before us.

18. In his reasons for decision the Senior Immigration Judge said  "The  IAS
   has advanced pressure of work and staff shortages as the reason  why  the
   application could not reasonably practicably have been made  within  time
   but, in my judgement, that reason (along with the simple  assertion  that
   the application was overlooked)  is  the  almost  invariable  reason  why
   delays occurred.  If these satisfy the reasonably practicable  test,  the
   threshold is rendered so low as to afford no effective  bar".   We  agree
   with that view although the matter was neither subject to submissions nor
   argument and so remains a matter which may be raised in the future.

19. The word "Promulgation"  has  been  used  for  many  years  within  this
   jurisdiction.  It appears on the front sheets of all determinations.   It
   was traditionally  completed  by  the  administrative  staff  within  the
   Tribunal with a date stamp.  That stamp was the  same  date  as  that  on
   which the determination was served by post on  the  parties.   Where  the
   determination is served by the Tribunal on the respondent alone the  date
   is left  blank.   In  asylum  cases  any  date  placed  beside  the  word
   promulgation on the determination of the Tribunal is unlikely  to  be  of
   great assistance in deciding when the document was served.  It is  not  a
   matter for the respondent to add dates  to  determinations  made  by  the
   Tribunal.

The appellant's claim

20. The factual basis for the appellant's claim is set out in  the  main  in
   his witness statement and his Home Office interview.  In  brief  he  says
   that he sold pharmaceutical supplies for the use of a rebel group  within
   the DRC led by  Thomas  Lumbala.   This  rebel  group  was  in  the  main
   supported by Lendu people and they operated in Ituria.  Because  of  this
   he was  arrested  by  the  authorities  in  Kissingani,  ill-treated  and
   threatened with execution.  Bribes were paid.  He was able to escape.  He
   fled to Kinshasa.  He went in to hiding and was eventually  smuggled  out
   of the DRC.  He went to South Africa, stayed the  night  there  and  then
   came to the United Kingdom where  he  claimed  asylum.   The  immigration
   judge did not believe the appellant's story.  He dismissed the appeal.

21. The appellant's case was that he was  at  risk  of  persecution  by  the
   authorities in the DRC because he was seen as  supplying  a  rebel  group
   under the control of Thomas Lumbala.  In political terms this  group  was
   against the government.  He was he said at risk of persecution because of
   his political involvement with the group.

22. The appellant was insistent at all  stages  that  the  rebel  group  his
   goods were sold to was one led by Thomas Lumbala.  They were he told  the
   home  office  "everywhere  in  the  forests  of  Ituria."   He  told  the
   immigration judge "Thomas Lumbala had appeared on television and that the
   authorities were targeting anyone with links with Lumbala".

23. The immigration judge "formed the view  that  Thomas  Lumbala  does  not
   exist".  His name was not known to news gathering  organisations.   There
   is no reference in the objective evidence to any such group.

24. The immigration judge doubted the appellant's history  of  trading  with
   any rebel group.  He considered the  alleged  arrest  improbable  on  the
   basis of evidence he heard.  He did not believe the story of  the  escape
   from custody by the appellant.  He considered the appellant's failure  to
   stay in South Africa and to come to the UK suggested a motive other  than
   a simple desire for safety.  Overall he regarded the  appellant's  claims
   as a fabrication.

25. It is clear that the objective evidence  available  to  the  immigration
   judge did not establish the existence of either a person  called  Lumbala
   or a group led by him.  There was no objective evidence  to  support  the
   existence of this person or group.

26. Counsel submitted that the immigration  judge  ignored  the  established
   legal principle in asylum cases that the absence  of  objective  evidence
   does not negate the existence of a person or group.  Put another  way  it
   was counsel's submission that the adjudicator rejected the  existence  of
   Thomas Lumbala and his rebel group because there was no corroboration  of
   that claim.  There were, it was submitted, several armed groups of  Lendu
   in Ituria of the DRC.  The background country  information  showed  that.
   The implication was that the Thomas Lumbala group might be one  of  those
   armed groups of Lendu.

27. It is clear in our judgement that the appellant's claim was that  Thomas
   Lumbala was not unknown and not the leader of an unknown  group.   It  is
   clear from his evidence the group had existed for  at  least  two  years.
   They were, he said, everywhere in the forests  of  Ituria.   Lumbala  was
   hated by everyone.  Anybody like himself as he claimed who was associated
   with a man such as Thomas Lumbala would be killed.  The appellant said "I
   don't know if you are following the news but he cuts people's heads so if
   returned to my country I will be killed and even my mum will  die".   The
   leader had apparently appeared on television.

28. The adjudicator was in our judgement entitled to decide that the  Thomas
   Lumbala group does not exist.  There was clearly  no  objective  evidence
   that the group or the leader existed and given the  prominence  contended
   for if true there would be some reference to Thomas Lumbala.  We  do  not
   agree that the immigration judge disbelieved the appellant because of any
   lack of any corroborative evidence.

29. We accept and adopt the reasons  given  by  the  immigration  judge  for
   finding this appellant not credible.  We do not see that there  has  been
   any error of law in the way in which the immigration judge  has  analysed
   the position.  We regard the challenges to the determination in this case
   as set out in the grounds for reconsideration as largely challenging  the
   fact finding made by the immigration judge.  He gave clear reasons as  to
   why he regarded the appellant's claim  as  not  credible.   He  expressed
   doubts about a series of aspects of the appellant's claim.  It would have
   been better had he considered those aspects of the matter more precisely.
     But  the  views  he  expressed  particularly  concerning  the  lack  of
   credibility about the Lumbala group are in our view  wholly  sustainable.
   We do not regard the immigration judge as having made any error of law.




Decision

30. For the reasons given the decision of  the  immigration  judge  in  this
   matter dismissing the asylum appeal and the human rights appeal  of  this
   appellant stands.









Mr Justice Hodge OBE
President
16 February 2006
