
MH (Working holidaymaker: intention to support) Bangladesh [2008] UKAIT
00039

                       ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at:  Manchester                                    Date of Hearing: 7
December 2007


                                   Before:


 Mr C M G Ockelton, Deputy President of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
                    Designated Immigration Judge McClure

                                   Between


                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                The Entry Clearance Officer Dhaka Bangladesh
                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the Appellant:           Mr. D. Marrington of Alam Ahmed Ltd
For the Respondent:          Mr C. Wood, Home Office Presenting Officer

The intention required by para  95(v)  of  HC  395  must  be  realistic  and
genuine and sufficient resources must be  available  (see  TS  [2008]  UKAIT
00024).  The intention does not, however, need to be  comprehensive  and  an
acknowledgement that other hospitality will be available  is  not  therefore
fatal to an application.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, a  citizen  of  Bangladesh,  appealed  to  the  Tribunal
    against the decision of the Respondent on 25 February 2007 refusing him
    Entry Clearance  as  a  working  holidaymaker.   An  Immigration  Judge
    dismissed his appeal.  The appellant sought and obtained an  order  for
    reconsideration.  Thus the matter comes before us.

 2.  The  question  at  issue  in  this  reconsideration  is  whether   the
    Immigration Judge erred in his interpretation and  application  of  the
    provisions of para 95(v) of the Statement  of  Changes  in  Immigration
    Rules, HC 395, which requires a person seeking  Entry  Clearance  as  a
    working holidaymaker to show that he:

      "is able and intends  to  maintain  and  accommodate  himself  without
        recourse to public funds".

 3. Before the Immigration Judge the appellant established his  ability  to
    maintain and accommodate himself without recourse to public funds.   In
    fact it is clear that the appellant is unusually wealthy for  a  person
    proposing a working holiday.  We observe in  passing  that  since  this
    appeal was heard the Court of Appeal has in  MW (Liberia) v SSHD [2007]
    EWCA Civ 1376 endorsed the Tribunal's reading of the requirement  in  a
    number of rules that an applicant be able to maintain  and  accommodate
    himself,  and  the  Tribunal  has  applied  that  reading  to   working
    holidaymakers (TS [2008] UKAIT  00024)  and  to  the  dependent  family
    members of students, as distinct from students  themselves  (PA  [2008]
    UKAIT 00016).

 4. The appellant's difficulty is that at the hearing his sister, who lives
    in the United Kingdom, gave evidence that during his working holiday he
    would be staying either with her or with another sister in  London  and
    that his hosts would provide all his accommodation  and  food  free  of
    charge.  In those circumstances the Immigration  Judge  concluded  that
    the requirement that the appellant intend to maintain  and  accommodate
    himself had not been  made  out.   It  was  for  that  reason  that  he
    dismissed the appeal.

 5. The rules relating to working holidaymakers are not  entirely  easy  to
    interpret.  In attempting to do so we have  to  look  at  them  in  the
    context of the Immigration Rules as a whole.   It  would  obviously  be
    absurd if a person claiming to seek a  working  holiday  could  thereby
    obtain exemption from the restriction to six months and the prohibition
    on working that apply to a person taking an ordinary  holiday.   But  a
    working  holidaymaker  is  different  from  an  ordinary  holidaymaker,
    because he has to be self-sufficient (TS, above) and he has to have  an
    intention to work, although the intention must be to do  work  that  is
    merely incidental to a holiday (NS [2007] 00090).  The question here is
    whether the Rules allow a person who is unlike an ordinary holidaymaker
    in those respects to be sufficiently like an ordinary  holidaymaker  as
    to be able to accept offers of accommodation from relatives and friends
    during his visit.

 6. It seems to us that the requirement of intention  in  this  element  of
    para 95 needs to be read quite broadly.   To  begin  with,  suppose  an
    Entry Clearance Officer, satisfied that  an  applicant  met  all  other
    requirements of para 95,  asked  whether  the  applicant  would  accept
    hospitality in the United Kingdom if  it  were  offered  to  him.   The
    applicant might say that he hoped or knew that it would be  offered  to
    him, and that if it was he would accept it.  We doubt if  it  could  be
    said that the application should be refused on that ground alone.   And
    it is difficult to see that  the  wording  of  the  rule  itself  would
    justify any difference between a person who would accept hospitality if
    offered and a person who knows it will be offered; or between a  person
    who will benefit from the hospitality of others for part  of  his  stay
    and a person who will benefit from the hospitality of others during the
    whole of his stay.

 7. The requirement of intention coupled with ability to maintain is  found
    in other parts of HC 395, sometimes in the form 'can and will be'.   It
    is, for example, in that form in paras  197  and  297,  both  of  which
    relate to the admission of children, so that the intention in  question
    is not that of the applicant.  Each requires that  the  applicant  'can
    and will' be maintained adequately without recourse  to  public  funds.
    It is clear in that context that the 'will'  implies  (by  way  of  the
    addition to 'can') that the funds must not merely be available but that
    the existence of the funds must go to securing the adequate maintenance
    of the child in question.  That is to say, it is not sufficient to have
    the funds but to propose to spend them on something else entirely.

 8. Although the parallel is far from exact we find here some assistance in
    deciding the question before us.  It is not sufficient for an applicant
    under para 95 merely to have funds.  He must also show that those funds
    are available for his use during the holiday: that is to say that  they
    are sufficiently liquid and disposable to secure all  his  needs  on  a
    working  holiday  lawfully  conducted  (and  therefore  including  only
    incidental work); and that he intends to have them available to  devote
    to his needs on the holiday.  Provided that he can show that, we do not
    think that he has to show, by way of  intention,  that  all  his  needs
    during the working holiday will be met from those funds.  The intention
    has to be realistic: the funds must be genuinely available  to  him  in
    the sense we have indicated and not for example committed  or  intended
    to be committed to something or somebody else.  The intention  must  be
    genuine: if any proposed hospitality does not materialise,  or  ceases,
    he must intend to maintain and accommodate himself.  But this  word  in
    the rule should not be interpreted to  require  more  than  that.   The
    intention does not, in other words, need to be comprehensive.

 9. In the present case the evidence established that at the  date  of  the
    decision  the  appellant  was  able  and  intended  to   maintain   and
    accommodate himself without recourse to public funds.  The  Immigration
    Judge materially erred in law in interpreting the intention requirement
    of para 95(v) in  the  way  he  did.   We  substitute  a  determination
    allowing the appellant's appeal.












                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT
                             Date:
