

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

      Philipson (ILR - not PBS: evidence) India [2012] UKUT 00039(IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London                  |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 19 December 2011                           |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |




                                   Before

                         MR JUSTICE BLAKE, PRESIDENT
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT


                                   Between

                           MERCY SUSAN PHILIPSON
                       PHILIPSON PULIMOOTEL PHILIP
                               MISS JEMI PHILIPSON
                              MISS JAMIE PHILIPSON
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellants:        Ms Anna Watterson instructed by Joseph Thalian
and Co
For the Respondent:    Mr Peter Deller, Senior Home Officer Presenting
Officer

     i) A decision on an application under  rule  134  of  the  Immigration
        Rules for indefinite leave  to  remain  is  a  not  a  points-based
        decision to which s.85A of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum
        Act 2002 as amended by s.19 of the UK Borders Act 2007 applies.
    ii) Post decision evidence of a back-dated wage increase is  admissible
        on appeal to demonstrate compliance with rule 134(iv).
   iii) It is doubtful whether rule 134(iv)  applies  to  those  who  never
        needed a certificate of sponsorship with a salary level  identified
        in guidance relating to such certificates.
    iv) If such a person could not comply with the rules on settlement  for
        reasons of a new salary level, there was a strong claim that  leave
        to remain was required to respect the private life  established  in
        the reasonable expectation of  settlement  if  the  conditions  for
        settlement applicable on arrival were adhered to, and a  relatively
        weak case for justifying interference with  such  private  life  to
        promote a legitimate public interest  recognised  by  Article  8(2)
        ECHR.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1.   The first appellant is a citizen of India who  came  to  the  United
      Kingdom in May 2006 with a five year work permit to  work  as  a  care
      assistant with her present employers.  We shall refer to  her  as  the
      claimant. The other appellants are her husband and two  daughters  who
      are her dependents. Her husband came to the United Kingdom at the same
      time as the claimant and her daughters were  born  here  in  2008  and
      2010.


   2.   On 5 May 2011 the claimant applied for indefinite  leave  to  remain
      here under rule 134 of the Immigration Rules,  as  she  had  completed
      five years residence in the  same  capacity  and  her  employer  still
      wanted her to work for them.

   3.    On 18 June 2011 this application was refused by reference  to  rule
      134 (iv) that had been inserted into the Immigration Rules by  HC  863
      as from 6 April 2011.  This rule  required  the  claimant  to  provide
      evidence from her employer that her rate of pay was equal to the  sums
      set out in the Tier 2 guidance[1]  for  the  occupation  in  question.
      Although she had been given a wage  increase  since  arrival  here  in
      2006, the rate of pay identified in the application was less than  the
      rate in the guidance.

   4.    The claimant appealed on 23 June and attached  to  the  grounds  of
      appeal was a letter from the employer dated 18 June 2011 awarding  the
      claimant a pay increase to a level that met the Tier  2  guidance  and
      backdating this to 23 May 2011.

   5.    It was agreed by the parties that if  this  letter  was  admissible
      evidence in the claimant's appeal, then she met all  the  requirements
      of rule 134 and she and her dependants should  be  granted  indefinite
      leave to remain.

   6.    The evidence would plainly be admissible  under  s.  85(4)  of  the
      Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  (NIAA)  2002,  as  it  was
      relevant to the substance of the  refusal  decision  even  though  the
      evidence came into existence post decision.

   7.    Judge Vaudin D'Imcourt sitting in the First-tier  Tribunal  decided
      that the evidence was not admissible in the appeal before him. He  did
      so by reason of his interpretation of s. 85A of NIAA 2002.

   8.   On 23 May 2011 s. 19 of the UK Borders Act  2007  came  into  force,
      enacting s. 85A of the 2002 Act. This section amended s.  85  by  dis-
      applying s.85(4) where three cumulative conditions are made  out:   i)
      the immigration decision is a refusal of leave to enter or remain; ii)
      the decision concerned an  application  identified  in  the  rules  as
      requiring to be considered under the  Points-Based  System  (PBS)  and
      iii) the appeal relies wholly or partly on the  proposition  that  the
      decision was not in accordance with the rules, or the law  or  that  a
      discretion under the rules should be exercised differently.

   9.  The judge  was  correct  in  concluding  that  the  first  and  third
      requirements were applicable. However,  he  also  concluded  that  the
      second requirement was met. He gives no reason for this conclusion and
      we were informed by Ms. Watterson who appeared both below  and  before
      us that he did so without having raised the matter with her or hearing
      any argument on the point. Her argument was clear and  relied  on  the
      document  being  admitted.  If  the  judge  had  doubts  as   to   its
      admissibility  he  should  have  raised  it  with  counsel  who  would
      doubtless have provided him with the assistance she has given  us.  As
      it is, this failure to act fairly has caused him to make an  error  of
      law requiring the claimant to incur the time and expense of a  further
      appeal to us with the assistance of counsel, for which she  cannot  be
      compensated.

  10.  It was common ground before us that the second  requirement  did  not
      apply to this case. This was an application for  indefinite  leave  to
      remain and not an application for leave to enter or remain  under  the
      PBS.  The mere fact that rule 134(iv) refers to  the  Tier  2  sponsor
      guidance does not make it a PBS application. We agree with these joint
      submissions. Indeed we fail to understand how the judge got this wrong
      even when acting without assistance. It follows that the Judge made  a
      material error of law in this case. We set aside his decision and will
      re-make it.

 Re-making the decision

  11.  In our judgment the evidence of the wage increase is admissible under
      s. 85(4) because it is relevant to  the  substance  of  the  decision,
      namely whether the claimant met the earning condition set out  in  the
      Tier 2 guidance. Before the First-tier judge, it was submitted that as
      the wage increase was backdated it  informed  the  respondent  of  the
      actual position of the claimant's wages at the date  of  the  decision
      under appeal.


  12.  We agree and since it is also agreed that if the evidence of the wage
      increase can be taken into account the appeal should  be  allowed,  we
      reverse the decision of the judge and allow the appeal.

  13.  There are other aspects of the decision of the decision maker and the
      judge that concern us.  We address them here in  case  they  arise  in
      other decisions of this kind.

  14. First, although we will assume for present purposes, without deciding,
      that there is an appropriate salary rate for the claimant's job issued
      under the Tier  2  guidance  on  6  April  2011  because  transitional
      arrangements D applies to her, we are far from convinced that this  is
      the case. Transitional arrangement D refers to those who hold a Tier 2
      certificate of sponsorship and the certificate of sponsorship confirms
      that the holder will be working as a senior care assistant  (SOC  code
      6115). As we understand it the claimant never needed a certificate  of
      sponsorship because she came under the old system and not the new  PBS
      one and accordingly never held one.  If there was no  guidance  as  to
      the salary level applicable to her, then rule 134(iv) would not  apply
      and her claim to settlement should have been granted without more.

  15. Second, the decision-maker went on to consider  discretionary  factors
      to warrant any further leave to remain.  A one stop notice was  served
      but  no  removal  decision  was  taken  engaging  rule  395C  of   the
      Immigration Rules before the case came to the judge on  appeal.  There
      is therefore a degree of segregation of the decision that the Court of
      Appeal has recently affirmed to be unfair in the decision of Sapkota v
      Secretary of State for the Home Department [2011] EWCA Civ 1320.  That
      is significant because if consideration had been given to  Immigration
      Rule 395C there were in our judgment compassionate reasons to conclude
      that the appellants should have been allowed  to  remain  rather  than
      require them to leave the United Kingdom and the judge on appeal could
      have concluded that the discretion should  be  exercised  differently.
      Indeed we would have found there to be very compelling reasons  indeed
      to allow her to remain for reasons we set out below.


  16. This was a claimant who was admitted under a  work  permit  valid  for
      five years when at the time of her admission and throughout nearly the
      entirety of her stay here the Immigration Rule 134 indicated  that  if
      she abided by the terms of the work permit and did not act in a manner
      contrary to public policy she would be entitled to indefinite leave to
      remain at the end of the five  year  period.   One  month  before  the
      conclusion of the five year period, the settlement  requirements  were
      amended to impose a novel requirement of a wage that met  the  minimum
      set out in guidance to Tier 2 sponsors.

  17. The intrinsic lack of justice in this case comes from the  attempt  at
      the 59th month of her 60 month stay, to impose wage conditions on  her
      that were irrelevant to the original grant of the work permit. She was
      unaware of  the need to comply  with  these  conditions,  although  we
      recognise that the application form rule 10  B  does  alert  the  keen
      reader to a footnote 9 on page 37 from which a reference to  the  UKBA
      website and the codes of guidance can be  obtained.  Her  employer  on
      whom the responsibility for certification rests was  unaware  of  this
      wage requirement, which suggests that notice of this recent change  of
      practice had not been disseminated widely to those organisations  that
      employed foreign work permit holders.

  18. We recognise that the general rule is that decisions on variations  of
      leave are decided under the terms of the Immigration Rules in force at
      the time of the decision, and to that extent no one can have  complete
      confidence that they will succeed in  an  application  for  indefinite
      leave to remain as they cannot know what the Rules will  be  and  what
      transitional provisions are made.  However, the claimant was  admitted
      in a class of migrants who were eligible for settlement at  the  time,
      and transitional provisions ensured that  work  permit  holders  could
      obtain indefinite leave to remain.

  19.  Third, the judge dismissed the Article 8 appeal. He concluded that so
      far as the minor appellants were concerned returning the whole  family
      to India would not be contrary to their best interests. He  considered
      the decision of CDS (PBS: "available": Article 8) Brazil  [2010]  UKUT
      00305 (IAC) and concluded that a failure to comply with the Rules  was
      the decisive  consideration  in  this  case.  The  appellants  had  no
      expectation of being allowed to settle in the United Kingdom.  Article
      8 cannot be used a general waiver of the immigration rules.

  20. We are surprised by this decision.  While the judge  might  well  have
      been entitled to  conclude  that  the  immigration  decision  did  not
      interfere with the right of respect for family life, because there was
      no question of the family members being separated, there  was  in  our
      judgment private life established in this country  when  the  claimant
      and her family had relocated  from  India  on  the  understanding  and
      belief that she was being admitted under a rule that would allow  them
      to remain indefinitely in the United Kingdom. She had  an  expectation
      of permanent residence  in  the  UK  if  she  continued  to  meet  the
      conditions of the work permit. In our judgment that was  a  legitimate
      and reasonable one having regard to the nature of the rules throughout
      her stay. Although it  was  not  a  legal  right  or  an  indefeasible
      expectation because policy could  always  change,  we  would  normally
      expect transitional provisions to be made in  the  in  cases  where  a
      person is encouraged to leave their own country to take on a demanding
      and very low paid job as a care assistant. In our judgment, there  was
      private life deserving of respect. The question  then  arises  whether
      interference with it is justified and proportionate.


  21.  The judge's reasoning on this aspect of the decision is  summary  and
      given at [40] of his decision.  He relied on CDS for  the  proposition
      that Article 8 does not give judges a general discretion to  dis-apply
      the provisions of the Immigration Rules if they are considered to have
      a harsh impact.  He concluded that the Secretary  of  State's  aim  to
      control immigration is to be given  considerable  weight  and  in  the
      event the interference was proportionate.

  22. In our judgment, the judge has not directed himself  properly.  If  he
      had adopted a structured approach  of  human  rights  adjudication  he
      would have looked for a legitimate aim within the meaning  of  Article
      8(2) and asked whether refusal of the application was a  proportionate
      measure to pursue that legitimate aim in the factual context  of  this
      case. Controlling immigration is not a legitimate aim in itself but is
      certainly a means to protecting the economic and social order and  the
      rights of others. However there was nothing in the  immigration  rules
      or generally to suggest that the claimant  or  her  family  threatened
      economic or social disorder or did not qualify for settlement.

  23. The reason why the judge found that the claimant could not  meet  rule
      134  was  because  he  excluded  (albeit  wrongly)  the  evidence   to
      demonstrate that she  could.   However  in  the  Article  8  case  the
      evidence was clearly admissible for another reason as it was not going
      to a points based system application  but  a  human  rights  claim  to
      remain and so it was admissible under s. 85A(4)(b) and (d) even if  it
      were to be excluded under s. 85A(4)(a) on the basis of  s.  85A(3)(b).
      Having received the evidence under this provision he should then  have
      considered what legitimate  aim  could  conceivably  be  furthered  by
      refusing  this  family  who  in  fact  met  the  wage  conditions  for
      settlement.

  24. Even if her employer had refused a wage increase or refused  to  back-
      date it to the period before the decision of the Secretary of State in
      question, we would have wanted to explore with some care whether there
      was a legitimate  aim  for  refusing  her  application.  She  met  the
      statutory  minimum  wage  conditions.  She  had  performed   and   was
      continuing to  perform  a  valuable  social  service  in  a  field  of
      employment in which there are labour force  shortages  given  the  low
      level of wages. Having admitted her at a certain wage  level  and  led
      her to believe that settlement was probable at the  end  of  the  five
      year period, it is very harsh to refuse her because of a recent change
      of policy that  operated  on  employers  and  not  employees.  A  less
      intrusive  means  of  promoting  the  legitimate  aim  of  maintaining
      reasonable wage levels  in  the  industry  would  be  to  require  the
      employer to improve the wage or to permit the appellant to move to  an
      another employer willing to pay the increased wage. It  is  trite  law
      that a measure may be a disproportionate  interference  with  a  human
      right if the decision maker has not adopted an  alternative  means  of
      promoting the aim that is less intrusive on the right: see for example
      SSHD v Daly [2001] UKHL 26; [2001] 2 AC 532 at [27].

  25. It is important that where human rights issues are to  be  adjudicated
      on, the judge understands the  principles  to  be  applied  justifying
      interferences with Article 8 rights in the light of the  evidence  and
      the issues.

Conclusion

  26. For the reasons given above we are satisfied that  the  judge  made  a
      material error of law  in  considering  this  appeal  both  under  the
      Immigration Rules and under Article 8. We set aside the decision.


  27. We re-make it by allowing the appeal under the Immigration  Rules  and
      direct that indefinite leave to remain be granted to  the  appellants.
      In those circumstances there is no need to make any  decision  on  the
      Article 8 claim.






                               Signed




                               Mr Justice Blake
                               President of the Upper Tribunal
                               Immigration and Asylum Chamber




                               Date: 21 December 2011



-----------------------
[1] Rule 134(iv) states that indefinite leave to remain may  be  granted  on
application to a person provided that his  employer  certifies  that  he  is
paid at or above the appropriate rate for the job as stated in the codes  of
practice for Tier 2 sponsors published by the UK Border Agency.

