
MA (Illegal entrants - not para 395C) Bangladesh [2009] UKAIT 00039

Asylum and Immigration Tribunal


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Procession House                     |                             |
|On 7 August 2009                              |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                       SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE ALLEN

                                   Between

                                     ma

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Dr F Chaudhry, of IAS (Manchester)
For the Respondent:    Mr J Parkinson, Home Office Presenting Officer


Section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 has no application  to  an
    illegal entrant
to the United Kingdom and hence, as a consequence,  neither  does  paragraph
395 of HC 395.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant  is  a  national  of  Bangladesh.   He  appealed  to  an
    Immigration Judge against the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  of  29
    October 2007 to remove him as an illegal entrant.

2.    It is  not  necessary  to  go  into  the  substantive  issues  of  the
    appellant's claim since  there  is  no  challenge  to  the  Immigration
    Judge's adverse  credibility  findings  and  his  conclusion  that  the
    appellant would not be at risk on return to Bangladesh.   At  issue  is
    the matter considered by the Immigration Judge at paragraphs 27  to  29
    of  his  determination.   It  is  perhaps  helpful  if  I  quote  those
    paragraphs in full as they appear in the determination  promulgated  to
    the parties:

        "27.     As a starting point it is perhaps appropriate  to  address
             the concern  expressed  by  Dr  Chaudhry  with  regard  to  his
             reliance on paragraph 395(C).  I have heard the representations
             on this aspect from both Dr Chaudhry and from Mr Burns,  and  I
             conclude that I agree  with  the  interpretation  of  the  Home
             Office.  Dr Chaudhry contends that the wording on a  Notice  of
             Immigration Decision  to  be  found  on  Form  IS151B  requires
             consideration of paragraph 395 and thereafter paragraph 364  of
             the Immigration Rules.  In this case, I am quite satisfied that
             that is not the case.  The wording grammar is of relevance.  It
             states:


                 'Decision to remove an illegal  entrant/person  subject  to
                 administrative removal under Section 10 of the  Immigration
                 and Asylum Act 1999 - Asylum/Human Rights Claim Refused.'


        28. Dr Chaudhry submits that the reference to  Section  10  of  the
             Immigration Act and Asylum Act 1999 requires the Home Office to
             consider paragraph 395 of  the  Immigration  Rules.   The  Home
             Office indicate that they do not agree and I support  the  Home
             Office contention.  The Home Office case is based on  the  fact
             that there is a difference between taking  relief  pursuant  to
             Section 10 on the grounds that the Appellant is an  overstayer,
             as against the appellant being an illegal immigrant pursuant to
             Section 33 of the 1971 Immigration Act.  Mr Burns submits,  and
             I agree, that Section 395 does not apply if the appellant is an
             illegal entrant under the 1971 Act.


        29. Much is placed by Dr  Chaudhry  on  the  fact  that  the  above
             paragraph recites both  reference  to  illegal  entrant  and  a
             person subject to administrative removal under  Section  10  in
             the same sentence.  With respect to Dr Chaudhry's  analysis,  I
             prefer the interpretation as  submitted  by  the  Home  Office,
             namely that that title an IS151B sets out the circumstances  in
             the alternative and you have to look at  the  various  type  of
             removal that is sought.  This is not a case for removal on  the
             grounds that the appellant is an overstayer.  This  is  a  case
             for removal where the appellant is an illegal  immigrant.   The
             relevant law is Section 33 of the 1971 Act and I conclude  that
             the  Home  Office  are  right  in   stating   that   para   395
             considerations do not apply."

3.    The appellant sought reconsideration solely on the basis that, as  was
    argued by Dr Chaudhry before the Immigration Judge, removal  directions
    had been issued  under  Section  10  of  the  1999  Act  and  therefore
    paragraph  395C  was  said  to  be  patently  applicable.    A   Senior
    Immigration Judge ordered reconsideration on the basis that  the  point
    was arguable.

4.    The hearing before me took place on 7 August 2009.  Dr F  Chaudhry  of
    the IAS (Manchester)  appeared  on  behalf  of  the  appellant.   Mr  J
    Parkinson appeared on behalf of the Secretary of State.

5.    Dr Chaudhry relied on the grounds.  He argued that removal  directions
    had been made under section 10.  He  referred  to  a  decision  he  had
    submitted of TE (Eritrea) [2009] EWCA Civ 174 and argued  that  it  was
    relevant to the issue.  There  had  been  a  failure  to  consider  the
    paragraph 395C criteria  and  the  decision  was  therefore  materially
    flawed.

6.    Mr Parkinson referred to what apparently used to be known as  the  PF1
    and is now the form with the reference number 9836329, the front  sheet
    to the Secretary of State's bundle to the Tribunal.  Under the  heading
    "Decision" the following is said:

        "On 29 October 2007 a decision was made to refuse to  grant  asylum
        under paragraph 336 of HC 395 (as amended), and on 29 October  2007
        a decision was made to remove an illegal entrant  from  the  United
        Kingdom by way of directions under paragraphs 8 to 10 of Schedule 2
        to the Immigration Act 1971."


    He argued that it was therefore the case that it was not  a  matter  of
    removal by virtue of section 10, which did not apply to the  appellant.
    The two documents should be  read  in  concert.   This  was  clearly  a
    removal under the 1971 Act and not the 1999 Act.  He made  the  further
    point that the appellant had never attended for interview and therefore
    it would have been impossible in any event, even if it  were  necessary
    to do so for the matter to be considered under paragraph 395C.

7.    By way of reply  Dr  Chaudhry  argued  that  the  IS151B  referred  to
    removal directions under Section 10 and was applicable and had not been
    withdrawn.

8.    I reserved my determination.

9.    This appeal raises a short point on the ambit of  section  10  of  the
    Immigration and Asylum Act 1999  with  reference  to  the  form  IS151B
    containing a notice of  immigration  decision.   As  Mr  Parkinson  has
    pointed out, the front sheet, as it were, to the Secretary  of  State's
    bundle refers to a decision being made to refuse to grant asylum  under
    paragraph 336 of HC 395 (as amended) and on the same day a decision was
    made to remove an illegal entrant from the United  Kingdom  by  way  of
    directions under paragraphs 8 to 10 to Schedule 2  to  the  Immigration
    Act 1971.  That is not of course a notice which complies  or  seeks  to
    comply with the Notices Regulations,  and  the  notice  of  immigration
    decision purportedly  in  compliance  with  those  Regulations  is  the
    IS151B, the heading of which is as follows:

        "Decision  to  remove  an   illegal   entrant/person   subject   to
        administrative removal under Section  10  of  the  Immigration  and
        Asylum Act 1999/Asylum/Human rights claim refused."

10.   The notice then goes on to refer to the appellant and the  serving  on
    him  of  form  IS151A  on  17  September  2007  informing  him  of  his
    immigration status and liability  to  detention  and  removal  and  the
    decision to refuse his claim for asylum and/or  human  rights  for  the
    reasons stated in the attached letter and  reference  to  the  decision
    that had now been taken to remove him from the United Kingdom  and  his
    right of appeal.

11.   At this point it is  necessary  to  set  out  the  relevant  parts  of
    section 10 of the Asylum and Immigration  Act  1999.   This  states  as
    follows:

        "10.     Removal  of  certain  persons  unlawfully  in  the  United
             Kingdom


            (1)  A person who is not a British citizen may be removed  from
                 the United Kingdom, in accordance with directions given  by
                 an immigration officer, if -


                 (a)   having only a limited leave to enter  or  remain,  he
                     does not observe a condition attached to the leave  or
                     remains beyond the time limited by the leave;


                 [(b)  he uses deception in seeking (whether successfully or
                     not) leave to remain;


                 (ba)  his indefinite leave to  enter  or  remain  has  been
                     revoked  under  section  76(3)  of  the   Nationality,
                     Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (person ceasing to  be
                     refugee);] or


                 (c)   directions [...] have been  given  for  the  removal,
                     under this section, of a person [...] to whose  family
                     he belongs.


                 ..."


12.   It is not, I think, in  dispute  that  the  appellant  is  an  illegal
    entrant to the United Kingdom.  Indeed it is said at paragraph 9 of the
    Immigration Judge's determination that it had been the appellant's case
    that he had arrived illegally in the United Kingdom  in  November  1999
    and since then had been working in the United Kingdom as a butcher.   I
    see nothing in the wording of section 10 of the Immigration and  Asylum
    Act 1999 to render it applicable to the appellant's case as an  illegal
    entrant rather than a person who, for example, has only  limited  leave
    to enter or remain and does not observe a condition  attaching  to  the
    leave or remains beyond the  time  limited  by  the  leave.   It  would
    therefore not be lawful for  the  Secretary  of  State  to  remove  the
    appellant from the United Kingdom in accordance with section 10 of  the
    Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.  It is clear from section 3(1) of  the
    Immigration Act 1971 that a person who is not a British citizen:

        "(a)     ...shall not enter the United Kingdom unless  given  leave
             to do so in accordance with [the provisions of, or made  under]
             this Act;"

      An illegal entrant is defined at section 33(1)  of  the  1971  Act  as
    meaning a person:

        "(a)     unlawfully entering or seeking to enter  in  breach  of  a
             deportation order or of the immigration laws, or


        (b) entering, or seeking to enter by means which include  deception
             by another person,


        and includes  also  a  person  who  has  entered  as  mentioned  in
        paragraph (a) or (b) above;"

      Such a person may be removed by way of directions under  paragraphs  8
    to 10 of Schedule 2 to the 1971 Act.

13.   If one returns to the notice of immigration decision in this case,  it
    can be seen that, properly read, it covers a number  of  possibilities.
    I do not think the interpretation argued for by Dr Chaudhry before  the
    Immigration Judge and before me that it is a decision in respect  of  a
    person subject to administrative removal under Section 10 of  the  1999
    Act can properly be made.  The forward slashes in the heading  clearly,
    in my view, indicate alternatives, though,  as  I  pointed  out  to  Mr
    Parkinson in the course  of  submissions,  it  would  no  doubt  be  of
    assistance if those acting on behalf of the Secretary  of  State  would
    strike out the parts of the heading which are  not  applicable  to  the
    particular case so as to avoid potential confusion.   It  is  therefore
    clear to my mind that a series of alternatives is postulated, and it is
    equally clear, bearing in mind  that  it  would  be  unlawful  for  the
    Secretary of State to seek to remove the appellant under Section 10  of
    the 1999 Act for the reasons set out above, that it must be taken to be
    a decision to remove an illegal entrant under the 1971 Act.

14.   If then one turns to paragraph 395 A-D of HC 395, it can be seen  that
    paragraph 395A is  concerned  with  persons  liable  to  administrative
    removal in certain circumstances who prior to 2 October 2000 would have
    been liable to deportation.   Paragraph  395B  sets  out  the  relevant
    circumstances, and I have quoted those above, from section  10  of  the
    1999 Act.  Paragraph 395C then goes on to refer  to  all  the  relevant
    factors known to the Secretary of State to which  regard  will  be  had
    before a decision to remove under section 10 is given.

15.   It is clear that the circumstances and the factors are  relevant  only
    to a section 10 removal and not to the case of removal  of  an  illegal
    entrant.  Had it been intended that these criteria were to be  made  to
    be applicable to the case of  an  illegal  entrant  whose  removal  was
    contemplated,  then  the  Rule  would  have  said  so.   There  are  no
    equivalent criteria in the case of the removal of an illegal entrant.

16.   It is relevant to consider the decision in TE (Eritrea)  to  which  Dr
    Chaudhry referred.  This involved an Eritrean woman who had been in the
    United Kingdom since January 2003 and who had had an appeal  against  a
    refusal to grant asylum dismissed.  She was given  discretionary  leave
    until the eve of her 18th birthday and, shortly before  the  expiry  of
    that leave, she applied for an extension which, two  years  later,  the
    Home Secretary refused.  In the notice of refusal to vary leave it  was
    said that there was a right of appeal on grounds including human rights
    grounds and it was said that all grounds for being allowed to remain or
    not being removed must be  put  forward  on  the  appeal  except  those
    already  argued  and  if  there  was  no  appeal  or  any  appeal   was
    unsuccessful she would be removed to Eritrea.  Her appeal against  this
    decision was dismissed and there was found to be no material  error  of
    law on reconsideration.  The appellant appealed to the Court of  Appeal
    on the basis  that  the  Immigration  Judge  had  erred  materially  in
    overlooking the Home Secretary's failure to address paragraph  395C  of
    HC 395.  For the appellant, it was argued that the consequence  to  her
    of effectively being put in the position of an  overstayer,  which  she
    would be on the dismissal of any appeal against the refusal to vary and
    if the consideration of her removal would not occur until  then,  would
    put her in a position, as described by Sedley  LJ,  of  near  outlawry.
    Her argument that all of the issues arising or potentially  arising  in
    her case should have been addressed together was accepted by the  Court
    of Appeal.  The principles set out in JM  [2006]  EWCA  Civ  1402  were
    considered to apply with equal cogency in  this  case.   There  was  no
    reason for variation and removal not to be considered together  in  the
    instant case.  The Secretary of State undertook to allow an  in-country
    right of appeal if the decision under paragraph 395C was  adverse,  and
    the judgment leaves open the form of order  which  would  best  achieve
    this.

17.   It can be seen that this case is therefore materially  different  from
    the appeal before me.  There is no question of the Secretary  of  State
    putting the appellant in a position where he is effectively  committing
    a criminal offence by a failure to consider all relevant issues in  his
    case at one time.  Paragraph 395C issues simply do not  arise  for  the
    reasons that I have set out above.  Accordingly, TE  (Eritrea)  has  no
    relevance to this appeal.

18.   I therefore conclude  that  the  Immigration  Judge  did  not  err  in
    deciding that paragraph 395 considerations do not apply in  this  case,
    and his decision dismissing the appeal is maintained.



Signed



Senior Immigration Judge Allen
