
ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL

  BO and Others (Extension of time for appealing) Nigeria [2006] UKAIT 00035

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

                                       Date of Publication: 12 April 2006

                                   Before:
                    Mr C M G Ockelton (Deputy President)
                       Mr J Bailey (Immigration Judge)
                       Mr G Peart (Immigration Judge)

                                   Between


                                                                   Appellant
                                     and
                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, LAGOS
                                                                  Respondent
                                     and

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and
                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, LAGOS
                                                                  Respondent
                                     and

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and
                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, ISLAMABAD
                                                                  Respondent

                                     and

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and
                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

                                     and

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and
                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
The AIT has no power to extend time  for  appealing  in  the  absence  of  a
notice of appeal.  If a notice of appeal is given out  of  time,  the  first
task in deciding whether to extend time  is  to  see  whether  there  is  an
explanation (or a series of explanations) that cover the  delay.   If  there
is, it and all other relevant factors, such as the strength of the  grounds,
the consequences of the decision, the length of the delay and  any  relevant
conduct by the Respondent are to be taken into account in  deciding  whether
"by reason of special circumstances it would be unjust not to extend time".

                           DETERMINATION OF ISSUE

  1.  In  the  Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal,  an  appeal  against  an
     immigration decision is instituted by giving notice of appeal  to  the
     Tribunal.  In terms of transparency and independence, this is a  great
     improvement on the system that existed before 4  April  2005.   Up  to
     that time, the notice of appeal was served on the Respondent,  and  it
     regularly happened that the Respondent  did  not  forward  the  papers
     promptly to the Appellate Authority and, as a  result,  the  Appellant
     might have to wait months or years before his appeal was  heard.   All
     that has now changed.

  2. One consequence of the change is the treatment of  notices  of  appeal
     that are out of time.  When notices  of  appeal  were  served  on  the
     Respondent  there  were  specific  provision  in  the  Rules  for  the
     Respondent to condone any lateness and it is understood that he  often
     did so.  Only in cases where  the  Respondent  refused  to  treat  the
     notice as  given  in  time  was  there  any  need  for  the  Appellate
     Authorities to reach a judgment on  the  matter.   Under  the  present
     system, however, every  decision  on  whether  to  extend  time  is  a
     judicial decision:  and there are  arrangements  in  place  for  those
     decisions to be made by Immigration Judges sitting as "Duty Judge"  at
     the  Tribunal's  registry  in  Loughborough.   The  purpose  of   this
     determination is to give guidance to Duty Judges  and  information  to
     others on the principles that the Tribunal  will  employ  in  deciding
     whether to extend time for notices of appeal.

The statutory framework

  3. The decisions against which appeals  can  be  brought  are  listed  in
     s82(2) of the 2002 Act.  We do not need to set that section out:   the
     decisions include those relating to access to the  United  Kingdom  by
     non-UK nationals who are abroad and decisions relating to remaining in
     the United Kingdom by  non-UK  nationals  who  are  here.   Under  the
     provisions of s4 of the  1971  Act  and  associated  legislation,  the
     decision-maker may be the Secretary of State or an Immigration Officer
     in this country or an Entry Clearance Officer abroad, depending on the
     nature of the decision.

  4. Section 84(1) of the 2004 Act sets out the grounds on which  a  person
     may appeal to the Tribunal.  Again, we do not need to set this section
     out.  The possible  grounds  include  allegations  that  the  decision
     breaches an individual's rights under the Refugee  Convention  or  the
     European Convention on Human  Rights,  discriminates  against  him  on
     racial grounds, is contrary to EU law, is contrary to the  Immigration
     Rules, or is otherwise not in accordance with the law.

  5. Section 106 of the 2002 Act  contains  the  rule-making  power,  under
     which the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules  2005  (SI
     2005/230) are made.

  6. The time for giving notice of appeal is set out in Rule 7  and  ranges
     from five to twenty-eight days after the effective notice of decision.
      (There are special arrangements for "fast-track" cases, which  we  do
     not consider further in this determination.)  Rule 8 sets out the form
     and contents of the notice of appeal.  Amongst other requirements, the
     notice must include the grounds of appeal and reasons  in  support  of
     the grounds, and be signed and dated.   Rule  9  provides  that  if  a
     notice of appeal is given against a  decision  carrying  no  right  of
     appeal, the Tribunal "shall not accept the notice of appeal".  Rule 10
     is headed "Late notice of appeal" and is as follows:

           "(1)  If a notice of appeal is given outside the applicable time
                 limit, it must include an application for an  extension  of
                 time for appealing, which must-
                    a) include a statement of the  reasons  for  failing  to
                       give the notice within that period;  and
                    b) be accompanied by any written evidence relied upon in
                       support of those reasons.
              2) If a notice of appeal appears to the Tribunal to have  been
                 given outside  the  applicable  time  limit  but  does  not
                 include an application for an extension of time, unless the
                 Tribunal  extends  the  time  for  appealing  of  its   own
                 initiative, it must notify  the  person  giving  notice  of
                 appeal in writing that it proposes to treat the  notice  of
                 appeal as being out of time.
              3) Where the Tribunal gives notification under paragraph  (2),
                 if the person giving notice of appeal contends that-
                    a) the notice of appeal was given in time, or
                    b) there were special circumstances for failing to  give
                       the  notice  of  appeal  in  time  which  could   not
                       reasonably have been stated in the notice of appeal,
                 he may file with the Tribunal written evidence  in  support
                 of that contention.
              4) Written evidence under paragraph (3) must be filed-
                    a) if the person giving  notice  of  appeal  is  in  the
                       United Kingdom, not later than 3 days;  or
                    b) if the person giving notice of appeal is outside  the
                       United Kingdom, not later than 10 days,
                 after notification is given under paragraph (2).
              5) Where the notice of appeal  was  given  out  of  time,  the
                 Tribunal may extend the time  for  appealing  if  satisfied
                 that by reason of special circumstances it would be  unjust
                 not to do so.
              6) The Tribunal must decide any issue as to whether  a  notice
                 of appeal was given in time, or whether to extend the  time
                 for appealing, as a preliminary decision without a hearing,
                 and in doing so may only take account of-
                    a) the matters stated in the notice of appeal;
                    b) any evidence filed by the  person  giving  notice  of
                       appeal in accordance with paragraph (1) or (3);  and
                    c)  any  other  relevant  matters  of  fact  within  the
                       knowledge of the Tribunal.
              7) Subject to paragraphs (8) and (9), the Tribunal must  serve
                 written notice of any  decision  under  this  rule  on  the
                 parties.
              8) Where-
                    a) a notice of appeal under section 82 of the  2002  Act
                       which relates in whole or in part to an asylum  claim
                       was given out of time;
                    b) the person giving notice of appeal is in  the  United
                       Kingdom;  and
                    c)  the  Tribunal  refuses  to  extend  the   time   for
                       appealing,
                 the Tribunal must serve written notice of its  decision  on
                 the respondent, which must-
                    i) serve the notice of decision  on  the  person  giving
                       notice  of  appeal  not  later  than  28  days  after
                       receiving it from the Tribunal;  and
                   ii) as soon as is practicable after serving the notice of
                       decision, notify the Tribunal on  what  date  and  by
                       what means it was served.
              9) Where paragraph (8) applies, if  the  respondent  does  not
                 give the Tribunal  notification  under  sub-paragraph  (ii)
                 within 29 days after the  Tribunal  serves  the  notice  of
                 decision on it, the  Tribunal  must  serve  the  notice  of
                 decision on the person giving notice of appeal as  soon  as
                 reasonably practicable thereafter."

  7. We do not need to set out any other Rules.   The  provisions  in  Rule
     10(8) and (9) do not require further treatment here:  they are part of
     a scheme running through the  whole  of  the  Rules  relating  to  the
     service of decisions.  We draw attention to Rule 10(6).  The effect of
     requiring the decision to be taken  "as  a  preliminary  decision"  is
     twofold.  For the purposes  of  the  Rules,  the  decision  is  not  a
     "determination"  as  defined  in  Rule  2;   and  the  procedure   for
     reconsideration introduced by s103A ff of the  2002  Act  is  not,  by
     s103A(7)(a), available in the case of a preliminary  decision.   Thus,
     although the decision has to be taken without a hearing and on limited
     material, it is, so far as the Tribunal is concerned, final and can be
     revisited only by way of Judicial Review.

  8. In the light of the requirements of Rule 10(6), it is not possible for
     the Tribunal to hear oral argument on this question or to  put  points
     to the parties.   In  making  this  determination,  however,  we  have
     endeavoured to take account of  those  matters  which  our  experience
     shows are likely to recur.  There is no authority directly  in  point,
     but there are recent decisions on similar issues in R  (Tofik)  v  IAT
     [2003] EWCA Civ 1138, MN and others* [2004] UKIAT 00182,  and  AK  and
     others* [2004] UKIAT 00201, all of which we have considered.

General Principles

  9. No doubt it goes without saying, but we  nevertheless  emphasise  that
     the Immigration Judge's first task must be to see whether  the  appeal
     was in fact in time.  If it was, no  question  of  extension  of  time
     arises.  It may be that a member of the Tribunal staff,  or  even  the
     appellant, thought that the appeal was out of time:   the  Immigration
     Judge needs to check the calculation.

 10. It will be seen that Rule 10 envisages three possibilities.  There may
     be an application to extend time,  properly  supported,  made  at  the
     beginning of the process:  Rule 10(1).  There may be  no  application,
     but the Tribunal may, acting within the confines  of  Rule  10(5)  and
     (6), nevertheless extend time "of its own  initiative":   Rule  10(2).
     Or there  may  be  a  statement  of  special  circumstances,  properly
     supported, made following the notification envisaged  in  Rule  10(2):
     Rule 10(3)-(4).

 11. It will be seen also that Rule 10 does not envisage an application for
     the extension of time alone.  If a notice of appeal is  given  out  of
     time there may be an application  for  extension;   but  there  is  no
     jurisdiction to extend time except in response to an actual notice  of
     appeal.

The explanation for the delay

 12. Through the Rules, Parliament has made it clear that  the  explanation
     for the lateness of a late notice is of importance.  An appellant  who
     knows that his notice will be late is required to give his explanation
     in the notice itself;   if  there  is  no  explanation  then,  by  the
     procedure under Rule 10(2)-(4),  the  Tribunal  is  required  to  take
     certain steps to ensure that any appropriate explanation is before it.
      In all cases, the explanation for the lateness of the notice needs to
     be supported by evidence and is an integral part of an application for
     time to be extended.

 13. It seems to us that the explanation for the  lateness  of  the  notice
     should be the Immigration Judge's starting  point.   It  is  sometimes
     said or implied that the starting point might be the strength  of  the
     grounds.  Sometimes it is suggested that the strength of  the  grounds
     of appeal ought to be sufficient to overcome failure  to  comply  with
     Rules as to time, and it is sometimes said that the  strength  of  the
     grounds should always be considered.  We do not think  that  is  quite
     right.  No doubt, as we indicate below, the strength of the grounds is
     a factor to be considered if there is some explanation or  excuse  for
     the lateness.  But it does not seem to us that strong  grounds  could,
     by themselves, be a good reason for extending time.  If it were so,  a
     person who had strong grounds would in  essence  be  exempt  from  the
     requirements as to time.

 14. So the first question is, what is the explanation  for  the  lateness?
     If there is no explanation at all, or no satisfactory explanation,  or
     an explanation which is not supported by evidence that ought  to  have
     been readily available, we regard it as very unlikely indeed  that  it
     will be right to say that time should be  extended.   We  do  not  say
     "never", because that would be dangerous.  But in the  absence  of  an
     explanation, we think that it could only be where  there  are  obvious
     and quite exceptional reasons for extending time and where  the  issue
     is one of wider public  importance  or  where  (despite  the  lack  of
     information provided by the appellant) it is clear that there has been
     a  serious  denial  of  justice,  that  time  would  be  extended   in
     circumstances in which no, or no properly supported,  explanation  for
     the lateness is given.

 15. In deciding whether there has been an explanation  for  the  lateness,
     the Immigration Judge should ensure that whatever explanation is given
     covers the whole of the period of delay.  A week's sickness,  even  if
     properly evidenced, is very  unlikely  to  be  an  explanation  for  a
     month's delay.

 16. It is our experience that, in this jurisdiction, delay is  very  often
     said to be the fault of the appellant's representatives.   Either  the
     representatives themselves acknowledge the delay as  their  fault,  or
     one firm (or the appellant himself) blames the delay on another  firm.
     The principles that we consider ought  to  be  adopted  in  evaluating
     explanations  of  this  sort  are  the  following.   First,  delay  by
     representatives cannot be  an  explanation  for  the  appellant's  own
     delay.  If, therefore, the case is one in which the appellant might be
     expected to have himself been prompt in ensuring that a timely  notice
     of appeal was entered on his behalf, or if the representatives'  delay
     occurred only after time had already expired, it is very unlikely that
     delay by the representatives will be an effective explanation for  the
     lateness of the notice.

 17.  Secondly,  a  delay  by  representatives,   acknowledged   by   those
     representatives as their own fault, may be a satisfactory explanation:
      but the Tribunal keeps a record of those who offer such explanations,
     and a firm that finds itself obliged to  acknowledge  faults  of  this
     sort more than once or twice is likely to be reported to the Office of
     the Immigration Services Commissioner with  a  view  to  investigation
     either by the Commissioner herself or by the appropriate  professional
     body.

 18. There  is,  thirdly,  the  question  of  allegations  made  against  a
     representative who is not now acting.  The Tribunal's usual  practice,
     when an appeal is  current,  is  to  require  the  person  making  the
     allegations to substantiate them either  with  an  acknowledgement  of
     fault from the earlier representative, or documentation  showing  that
     letters on the subject have been sent and not  answered.   We  do  not
     consider that this procedure is practicable in the case  of  extending
     time for appealing.  Instead, in this type of case the  Tribunal  will
     consider the application for extension of time on its  merits,  noting
     the evidence that actually has  been  produced.   If  the  application
     lacks even evidence  which  would  have  been  available  to  the  new
     representatives, that may be the end of the matter.  If, on the  other
     hand, the new representatives appear to have done all that they  could
     do in order to make a proper application without extending  the  delay
     any further, the absence of information from the  old  representatives
     will not be fatal to the application for extension.  The Tribunal  is,
     however, likely to require  the  new  representatives  to  attempt  to
     obtain an acknowledgement of fault from the old representatives and to
     show, at the hearing of the appeal, either the result or the record of
     failure.  In all such cases the Tribunal is likely to make a report to
     the Office of the Immigration Services Commissioner.

 19.  The  requirement  for  evidence  is  important.   In  assessing   the
     explanation for delay, the Immigration Judge will be  making  findings
     of fact.  If he is not shown evidence that ought readily to have  been
     available, or if (whether or not evidence is  produced)  he  does  not
     believe the  explanation  given  on  the  appellant's  behalf,  he  is
     entitled to say so and to decide that  there  has  been  no  effective
     explanation for the delay.  As we have indicated above, in such a case
     it is very unlikely indeed that time should then be extended.

 20. If, on the other hand, there is an effective explanation,  whether  it
     amounts to a good excuse or a bad one is merely one of the matters  to
     be taken into account, with all other factors, in deciding whether "by
     reason of special circumstances it would  be  unjust  not  to"  extend
     time.

Other factors

 21. We cannot, of course,  provide  a  comprehensive  list  of  the  other
     factors that might  be  relevant:   every  case  depends  on  its  own
     individual facts and merits.  We offer the following observations  and
     guidance on a number of factors that, in  our  experience,  frequently
     arise for consideration.

     i) Strength of the grounds of appeal


        As we have said, good grounds of appeal cannot be a substitute  for
        timeliness.  If there is an explanation for the delay, however, the
        strength of the grounds of appeal may help to compensate for a  bad
        excuse.  The strength of the grounds  should  therefore  always  be
        taken into account in deciding whether to grant an application  for
        the extension of time that is properly supported by an  explanation
        and evidence.  The stronger the grounds are, the more likely it  is
        that justice will demand that they be heard.


        What then of weak grounds?  If  the  grounds  are  non-existent  or
        simply hopeless, it may be that no useful purpose would  be  served
        by extending time and so allowing an appeal to  proceed.   But  the
        Duty Judge considering whether to extend time should remember  that
        he is not deciding  the  appeal.   If  grounds  are  viable,  their
        weakness should not of itself be a reason for  refusing  to  extend
        time.


    ii) The consequences of the decision


        Particularly because the refusal to extend time  for  appealing  is
        for all practical purposes a final decision, the Duty Judge  should
        take into account what the consequences of that decision  will  be.
        In the case of  an  out-of-country  decision,  the  applicant  will
        nearly always have  an  opportunity  to  make  a  new  application,
        receive a new decision and, if necessary, appeal against  it  in  a
        timely manner.  (The only obvious exception is where the  appellant
        has reached the age of eighteen since his original application  and
        so cannot any longer have the benefits of being treated as a  minor
        under the Immigration Rules.)


        In many decisions relating to  those  who  are  within  the  United
        Kingdom, however, the consequence of the decision may be  that  the
        person no longer has the possibility  of  an  in-country  right  of
        appeal:  having failed successfully to appeal against the  decision
        he may be subject to removal and, if removed, will for  the  future
        be able to maintain his rights only from abroad in response to some
        future immigration decision.  There  is  thus  no  doubt  that  the
        consequences of refusal to extend time are likely to be more severe
        when the decision against which the appeal is to be brought is  one
        which carries a threat of removal.  We have no doubt that the  Duty
        Judge should take that into account.


        Having said that, it may well  be  that  the  express  or  implicit
        threat of  removal  in  the  case  of  an  in-country  claimant  is
        something which ought to stir him into action:  if that  is  right,
        it would follow that in such circumstances a long  delay  would  be
        more difficult to condone.


   iii) Length of delay


        That brings us to general issues relating  to  the  length  of  the
        delay.  As we have indicated,  there  must  be  an  explanation  or
        series of explanations that properly cover the whole of the  delay.
        That said, however, it appears to us that if such explanations  are
        put forward, there is no difference in  principle  between  a  long
        delay and a short delay.  In particular, firstly, we would not  say
        that there is any length of delay  beyond  which  applications  for
        extension could not normally succeed.  Clearly, the length  of  the
        delay is a factor to be taken  into  account  with  all  the  other
        circumstances of the case, but  an  explanation  that  is  adequate
        cannot be rendered less so by the length of the delay.


        At the other end of the scale, we  are  unable  to  assent  to  the
        proposition that a  short  delay  should  always  or  regularly  be
        condoned.  That is equivalent to saying that appellants do not need
        to meet the requirements of the Rules.  We see no  such  suggestion
        in the Rules themselves, nor does any principle of justice  require
        it.  In in-country appeals, a  day's  delay  is  equivalent  to  an
        addition of twenty percent or ten percent to the time  allowed  for
        appealing:  it can hardly be regarded as de minimis.  And the  fact
        that only a day has passed since the end of the  time  limited  for
        appealing  cannot   conceivably   be   regarded   as   a   "special
        circumstance".  A person who is a day late  needs  to  explain  his
        lateness in the same way as a person who is a week or a month late.
         A routine extension, without an  explanation  or  excuse  for  the
        delay, is not permitted  by the Rules.  But, again, the  fact  that
        the delay was only a short one is a factor to be taken into account
        in appropriate cases.


    iv) Prejudice to the Respondent


        It is frequently asserted that a court should be  more  willing  to
        extend time if to do so would  cause  no  prejudice  to  the  other
        party.  We readily accept that this is a factor to  be  taken  into
        account in matters relating, for example, to failure to comply with
        directions during pending litigation.  The position  in  the  cases
        which  we  are  considering,  however,  is  quite  different.   The
        prejudice to the Respondent is identical in every case.   If  there
        is an appeal, he will no doubt want to defend it.  If there is not,
        he will be saved the trouble and expense of doing so.  The  passage
        of time makes no difference to those considerations;  and  we  have
        not heard that, immediately time for  appealing  runs  out  in  any
        case, the Respondent diverts to other projects the  money  that  he
        would have used to defend an appeal if it  had  been  brought.   No
        doubt it could be said that the Respondent is entitled to know  the
        extent to which he is at risk of having to defend  an  appeal.   In
        practical terms, however, bearing in mind the numbers involved, the
        impact on the Respondent is minimal.


        For these reasons, it appears to us that no argument based on  lack
        of prejudice to the  Respondent  can  have  any  force  at  all  in
        individual applications for the extension of time.


     v) Mistakes, delays and breaches of Rules by the Respondent


        No doubt it is a consequence of the enormous numbers  to  which  we
        have  just  made  reference  that  it  occasionally  happens   that
        applications are lost or unaccountably delayed;  sometimes mistakes
        are made in dealing with them, sometimes amounting to a  breach  of
        the Rules.  We would not accept that all errors and mistakes by the
        Respondent entitle an appellant to an extension of time;  but there
        are two areas in particular where the Respondent's conduct  may  be
        of relevance.  First, it may be that an error by the Respondent has
        caused or contributed to the appellant's delay.  For  example,  the
        Respondent might have made a mistake as  to  the  address  for  the
        service of the notice of decision, or he might  have  miscalculated
        the date for the service of the notice of appeal and so misled  the
        appellant into thinking that he had longer to appeal  than  he  did
        have.  It is very unlikely that an Immigration Judge would want  to
        take such a factor into account without the  clearest  of  evidence
        supporting  a  claimant's  allegation:   but  if  there  was   such
        evidence, it is very likely that the  interests  of  justice  would
        require the  Respondent's  mistake  not  to  be  held  against  the
        appellant.


        Further, where there is a breach of the Rules or a mistake or  very
        extensive delay in the Respondent dealing with  the  appellant,  it
        might in some circumstances  be  regarded  as  disproportionate  to
        refuse to extend the appellant's time for appealing.  Clearly,  any
        such case would depend on the individual facts.

 22. We must again emphasise that the foregoing is not  intended  to  be  a
     complete list.  What is important is that the Duty  Judge  takes  into
     account all the material that is  before  him  and  balances  all  the
     factors, including  the  adequacy  of  the  explanation,  against  one
     another in order to decide whether the case is one in which there  are
     special circumstances demanding that time be extended in the interests
     of justice.

Giving reasons for the decision to extend or not to extend time

 23. It may not for present purposes matter very much whether the  decision
     made under Rule 10 is regarded as an exercise  of  discretion  (as  so
     described in AK and others) or of assessment and judgment (as asserted
     in Tofik).  What is certain in either event is that  the  reasons  for
     the decision are an essential  part  of  it  and  must  accompany  the
     decision when it is served on the parties under Rule  10(7).   If  the
     decision is to extend time, the reasons will probably be quite  brief,
     perhaps simply indicating that by reason of special circumstances  and
     in all the circumstances of the case it would be unjust not to do  so.
     If the extension has been refused because no effective reason for  the
     delay has been given, it will in almost all  circumstances  simply  be
     enough to say so.  But where there is an explanation for the delay and
     other factors have been taken into account, the decision must  contain
     enough information for a reader to be confident that the judgment  was
     a proper response to the material available.

 24. With those principles in mind, we turn to the individual cases  before
     us.

OA/04994/2006 and OA/04998/2006

 25. These cases are to all intents and purposes  identical.   Applications
     for entry clearance as a  working  holidaymaker  were  refused  on  12
     August 2005 on the ground that the Respondent was not  satisfied  that
     each Applicant was  intending  to  take  employment  incidental  to  a
     holiday and intended to leave the United Kingdom at  the  end  of  the
     working holiday.  The time for appealing is evidently accepted by  the
     Applicants as having expired on 12 September  2005.   The  notices  of
     appeal are each dated "03/02/2005", no doubt meaning 3 February  2006;
     they were received at the Tribunal's registry  on  13  February  2006,
     accompanied by letters from the Applicants'  representative  dated  20
     December 2005 and from the Applicants themselves  dated  "02/02/2006".
     The application for extension of time entered on the  appeal  form  in
     the first case is as follows:

           "We have an accident on our way coming from Abuja on the day  of
           our interview.  We can not  get  our  notice  of  appeal  again,
           because we are injured and stay in hospital for a  long  period.
           Our father called the British High Commission  on  December  and
           the British High Commission sent another to us  through  the  e-
           mail and we call the AIT we were told to send it and give reason
           of delay."

 26. The reasons given on the other form are not materially different.  The
     representatives' letter includes the following paragraph:

           "Firstly, we wish to apply for an extension of time within which
           to submit this appeal.  The lateness is due to the fact that the
           package containing the notice of appeal got to  our  client  far
           beyond the normal expected time."

 27. There is no further evidence of an accident or of a stay in  hospital.



 28. It is, however, clear from the  representatives'  letter  that  by  20
     December 2005 the "package" had been received.  It may be regarded  as
     somewhat surprising that the representative makes no reference to  the
     accident or hospitalisation.

 29. We see no reason to give any credence  to  the  assertions  about  the
     accident and the hospitalisation and, without further details, they in
     any event provide no  explanation  for  any  delay.   Further,  it  is
     apparent that there is no explanation at all for the delay between  20
     December 2005 and the beginning of February 2006 when the appeal forms
     were completed.

 30. The grounds of appeal amount merely to  disagreement  with  the  Entry
     Clearance Officer's decision.  The Appellants are at liberty  to  make
     another application for a working holidaymaker's visa.  There  are  no
     other factors of which we are aware.  In view of the fact  that  there
     is no explanation for a substantial proportion of  the  delay  and  an
     unsatisfactory explanation for the rest of it, we  decline  to  extend
     time.

VA/03709/2006

 31. This was an application by a citizen of Pakistan to visit her husband,
     who is in prison in the United Kingdom.  The application  was  refused
     on 13 December 2005, on which date the Applicant  was  served  with  a
     notice of refusal and time began to run.  It  expired  on  11  January
     2006.  The reasons for  refusal  indicate  that  the  Entry  Clearance
     Officer accepted the  bona  fides  of  the  sponsor,  the  Applicant's
     brother-in-law, but continue as follows:

           "Your stated purpose of travel is to visit your husband who  has
           been serving a prison sentence since  1998  and  whose  expected
           release  date  is  2011.   However,  you   have   submitted   no
           satisfactory evidence in this regard.  You intend to visit  with
           your son who is a British citizen and state that you will  apply
           to join your husband permanently in the UK upon his release from
           prison.  You have  failed  to  provide  reasonable  evidence  to
           demonstrate that you are  established  in  Pakistan.   You  have
           produced no satisfactory evidence of  your  income  or  of  your
           ownership of property or assets.  As such I consider that you do
           not have strong economic or social ties to Pakistan  to  satisfy
           me of that you intend to leave the UK but rather that  you  have
           good economic and social reasons for not doing so.  Therefore on
           the balance of probabilities, I am not satisfied that you intend
           a visit for the purpose and period as  stated  by  you.   41(i),
           (ii) & (iii) of HC 395."

 32. The grounds of appeal assert that  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  was
     wrong in suspecting that the Applicant was not financially  secure  in
     Pakistan and  had  little  reason  to  return  there.   Documents  are
     enclosed, including an undated letter from HMP Long Lartin,  including
     a memorandum relating to the Applicant's husband's first parole review
     in June 2009, a letter from the Secretary  of  the  Applicant's  Union
     Council, a bank statement, and an affidavit  by  the  Applicant.   The
     notice of appeal is signed and dated 31 December 2005.  In  the  space
     on the form for explaining any lateness is written the following:

           "Being sent in time.   x
           A bit late due to the papers of prison received late.
           Thanks."

 33. The explanation is no doubt that, when the form was completed  it  was
     expected that it would be sent in order to arrive before  the  closing
     date, but there was then a delay.

 34. The first question for us is whether the delay is explained.  There is
     a letter from the  sponsor,  the  material  part  of  which  reads  as
     follows:

           "As you are  already  aware  my  brother,  Shazad  Ali  Naz,  is
           currently serving a prison sentence at H.M.P  Long  Lartin.   In
           response to  your  request  we  asked  the  prison  for  written
           confirmation  of  his  sentence;   however  they  took  time  in
           processing this  request,  which  caused  initial  delay  in  us
           lodging the appeal.  Having received the confirmation  from  the
           prison, Shazad posted this  to  Pakistan  which  caused  further
           delay due to the international postal system.  I have also  been
           informed that the above reasons have already been put in writing
           with the appeal."

 35. No dates are given.  The appeal form,  dated  as  we  have  indicated,
     states that the evidence from the  prison  is  "enclosed".   There  is
     nothing in the material before us to show that the letter was in  fact
     received after 31 December or at any other  time  that  prevented  the
     appeal being lodged in time.  Indeed, we notice that it  is  only  the
     letter from the Secretary of the Union Council that bears a  date  (16
     January 2006) that is outside the time limited for appealing.

 36. Further, there is no explanation for the failure  to  adduce  evidence
     from the prison at the time of the application;   the  grounds  amount
     merely to disagreement with the Entry Clearance Officer's conclusions;
      the application can easily be made again and the  Applicant's  family
     situation is extraordinarily  unlikely  to  change  in  the  immediate
     future.  Although in this case the delay was only eight days it is not
     explained and we are, as a result, very far  from  satisfied  that  by
     reason of special circumstances it would be unjust not to extend time.
      We accordingly decline to extend time.

IA/01353/2006

 37. In this case, the decision was to remove the Applicant as  an  illegal
     entrant.  The date of service of the decision is  recorded  on  it  as
     "08/02/06", and the deadline for appeal is given as "24/02/06";  those
     dates are also entered, evidently  by  the  Respondent,  on  the  form
     supplied to the Applicant to enable her to give notice of appeal.  The
     method of service of the decision was by post, and it looks as though,
     in calculating the period allowed for an appeal, the person doing  the
     calculation added the two days allowed for in-country  postal  service
     to 8 February before allowing ten further working days for the  appeal
     to be lodged:  assuming, as we must, that 8 February was in  fact  the
     date of service (as defined by Rule 55(5)), rather than  the  date  on
     which the documents were posted, the result was to give the  Applicant
     two days too much.  The  appeal  was  received  on  24  February.   It
     appears, for the reasons we have given, to be two days  out  of  time,
     but was received within the time limited by the  indication  given  by
     the Respondent in the notice of  appeal  and  the  appeal  form.   The
     Respondent has no power to extend time or to condone  a  late  appeal,
     but it seems to us that a miscalculation by the Respondent  which  may
     have misled the Applicant is  a  special  circumstance:   and  if  the
     Applicant does indeed put in a notice within the time indicated by the
     Respondent, it would normally be unjust not to  allow  the  appeal  to
     proceed.  We emphasise, as we did earlier in this determination,  that
     it is unlikely that such a judgment would be made save on the clearest
     evidence of the Respondent's statement to the Appellant;  but there is
     such evidence in this case.  We extend time and order that this appeal
     proceed.

HX/00243/2006

 38. The Applicant arrived in the United Kingdom on 22  February  2000  and
     claimed asylum.  He was issued with a statement of evidence form on 18
     March 2000 to complete and return by 1 April 2000 but failed to do so.
      On 20 May 2000, a decision was made refusing him leave to  enter  and
     refusing him asylum.  Under the 1996 Procedure Rules he had seven days
     during which to appeal.  His notice  of  appeal  was  received  on  28
     November 2000, some six months out of time.  It was accompanied  by  a
     letter from his  representative,  the  Immigration  Advisory  Service,
     containing the following:

           "As this is a late appeal notice, we would as[k] the Adjudicator
           to exercise his discretion, and allow  this  late  notice.   The
           lateness of the appeal was due to the negligence of our client's
           previous  representative,  who  Mr  Ian   Coyne   of   Stanstead
           Immigration Office confirmed, had failed to submit the appeal on
           our clients behalf, when the refusal was served to them  on  the
           18.06.00."

 39. There is no other explanation for that last date.

 40. In the 2000 Rules, which were in force by the  time  this  notice  was
     submitted, Rule 10 required the  appeal  bundle  to  be  sent  by  the
     Respondent to the Adjudicator (whether or not the notice of appeal was
     given within the time  limit  specified).   The  Respondent  sent  the
     bundle to the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal under cover of a  letter
     dated 27 February 2006.  The  letter  gives  no  explanation  for  the
     lateness, unless the following is it:

           "Comments:  There is no Refusal notice for appellant, and appeal
                       form is completed in alias' name."


 41. The appeal form is completed in the name  described  as  that  of  the
     Appellant on the Respondent's appeal bundle  front  page,  the  asylum
     application referral  sheet,  the  letter  requiring  a  statement  of
     evidence form to be  returned,  and  a  further  letter  sent  to  the
     Appellant, refusing his claim, on 20 May 2000.   The  covering  letter
     also indicates that  the  Respondent  treated  this  appeal  as  "non-
     priority".  Perhaps that was why he took over five years to send these
     papers for judicial consideration.

 42. The notice of appeal was very late.  There is a  partial  explanation,
     partly supported by evidence.  Although  the  grounds  of  appeal  are
     rather weak, this is an asylum appeal.  What  makes  it  in  our  view
     truly exceptional is the Respondent's delay in sending the  papers  to
     the Tribunal.  That  delay,  in  the  context  of  all  the  resources
     available to the Respondent and his frequent assertion of the need  to
     deal with asylum cases promptly, would make  it  in  our  view  wholly
     disproportionate and hence unjust to refuse to  extend  time  in  this
     case.  We accordingly extend time and order  that  this  appeal  shall
     proceed.






                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT
                                                             Date:
