
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal

MJ and others (Art.12 Reg.1612/68 - self sufficiency?) Nigeria [2008] UKAIT
00034

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Determination Promulgated  |
|on 28th February 2008                 |                           |
|                                      |...........................|
|                                      |............               |


                                   Before

                      SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE SPENCER

                                   Between

                                     MJ
                                     SJ
                                     NJ
                                     PJ
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the appellants:    Mr O Adisa, solicitor, Julius Caesar Solicitors
For the respondent: Ms J Isherwood, Home Office presenting officer

Although Article 12 of Regulation EEC 1612/68 was not repealed by  Directive
2004/38/EC, any rights which the family members of an EEA national may  have
under it after the EEA national has  ceased  working  but  remained  in  the
United Kingdom are not  unconditional  but  subject  to  demonstrating  self
sufficiency and the possession of comprehensive sickness  insurance  in  the
United Kingdom.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The first named appellant, who was born on the 27 February 1971,  is  a
    citizen of Nigeria. The second named  appellant,  born  to  her  on  12
    September 1995 in Greece, is also a citizen of Nigeria. The third named
    appellant, who was born on 19 May 1999, is a citizen of Greece.  He  is
    the son of Mr K, whom the first named appellant married in Greece on 30
    November 1998. The fourth named appellant, who was born on  22  October
    2004 in the United Kingdom, is the son of the first named appellant and
    Mr K and is a citizen of Nigeria. The appellants' appeals  against  the
    decision  of  the   respondent,   refusing   their   applications   for
    confirmation of their right to  permanent  residence  under  regulation
    15(1)(b) of the Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations  2006
    (hereinafter called "the 2006 Regulations"), made on 5  November  2007,
    was dismissed after  a  hearing  by  Immigration  Judge  Malone,  in  a
    determination  promulgated  on  4  January  2008.  Reconsideration  was
    ordered on 18 January 2008 by Senior Immigration Judge Latter.

 2. The marriage of the first named appellant and Mr  K  had  broken  down.
    According to the written statement of the first named  appellant  Mr  K
    left the matrimonial home for good in September 2006. In oral evidence,
    however, she said that she last saw him  in  August  2006.   There  was
    conflicting evidence as to where he might  be.  The  immigration  judge
    formed the view that he could not be satisfied that Mr K had ceased  to
    reside in the United Kingdom. The evidence of the first named appellant
    was that Mr K had ceased to work in 2004.   She  herself  worked  as  a
    security guard.  The immigration judge dismissed  the  appeals  of  the
    third and fourth named appellants because he  was  not  satisfied  that
    they were the direct descendants  of  a  person  who  ceased  to  be  a
    qualified person on ceasing to reside in the United Kingdom as required
    by regulation 10(3)(a)(ii) so as to enable them to  be  family  members
    who had retained the right of residence. He dismissed the appeal of the
    second named appellant because he was not satisfied  that  he  was  the
    direct descendant of a person who  was  the  spouse  of  the  qualified
    person who ceased to be a qualified person on ceasing to reside in  the
    United Kingdom as required by regulation 10(3)(a)(iii) by reference  to
    sub-paragraph (ii).   He  dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  first  named
    appellant because he was not satisfied that she  was  the  parent  with
    actual custody of a child who  satisfied  the  condition  in  paragraph
    10(3) as required by regulation 10(4).

 3. The immigration judge observed that the applications had  been  refused
    by reference  to  regulation  15(1)(b)  and  that  before  him  it  was
    submitted that the  appellants'  applications  rested  upon  regulation
    15(1)(f) as persons who had  resided  in  the  United   Kingdom  for  a
    continuous period of 5 five years and who were,  at  the  end  of  that
    period, family members who had retained  the  right  of  residence.  He
    found, however, that the evidence at its highest demonstrated that  the
    appellants resided with Mr K from December 2001 to August 2006 and none
    of them had retained the right of residence under regulation 10.

 4. In the cases of the first three named appellants it was asserted in the
    grounds for review that they did comply with the regulations  mentioned
    by the immigration judge since Mr K had ceased to be a qualified person
    on ceasing to reside in the United Kingdom.  In the case of the  fourth
    named appellant it was said that he had retained the right of residence
    and had resided in the United Kingdom for a period of five years.

 5. Before me Mr Adisa relied upon his skeleton argument which did no  more
    than set out the requirements of regulations 10(3), 10(4) and 15 of the
    2006 Regulations and which stated that regulation 10(3)  and  (4)  were
    designed to implement the decision of the Court of Justice (hereinafter
    called "the ECJ") in Baumbast and R (Free movement of  persons)  [2002]
    EUECJ C-413/99.  Mr Adisa submitted that it should be presumed that  Mr
    K had left the United Kingdom because it would not be possible for  the
    appellant to prove that he had, although he  could  not  point  to  any
    authority for this proposition. He drew my attention  to  Baumbast  and
    when it was pointed out that the EEA national in Baumbast had  obtained
    employment outside the United Kingdom he submitted that had he not done
    so the situation would have been covered by the  principle  established
    in Aissatou Diatta v Land Berlin [1985] EUECJ R-267/83.

 6. The appellants have brought their appeals under regulation  26  of  the
    2006 Regulations and by virtue of Schedule 2 to  the  2006  Regulations
    the grounds made available by section 84(1), except paragraphs (a)  and
    (b), are open to them.  It is to the 2006  Regulations  first  of  all,
    therefore, that  one  must  have  regard  in  determining  whether  the
    immigration judge made a material error of law.

 7. Regulation 10 of the 2006 Regulations so far as is relevant provides as
    follows:
           "(1) In these Regulations, "family member who has  retained  the
           right of residence" means, subject to paragraph  (8),  a  person
           who satisfies the conditions in paragraph (2), (3), (4) or (5).

            ...

           (3) A person satisfies the conditions in this paragraph if-

                 (a) he is the direct descendant of-

                       (i) a qualified person who has died;


                       (ii) a person who ceased to be a qualified person  on
                       ceasing to reside in the United Kingdom; or


                       (iii) the person who was the spouse or civil  partner
                       of the qualified person  mentioned  in  sub-paragraph
                       (i) when he died or is the spouse or civil partner of
                       the person mentioned in sub-paragraph (ii); and

                 (b) he was attending an educational course  in  the  United
                 Kingdom immediately before the  qualified  person  died  or
                 ceased to be a qualified person  and  continues  to  attend
                 such a course.

           (4) A person satisfies the conditions in this paragraph  if  the
              person is the parent with  actual  custody  of  a  child  who
              satisfies the condition in paragraph (3).

           ...

           ...



           (7) In this regulation,  "educational  course"  means  a  course
              within the scope of Article 12 of  Council  Regulation  (EEC)
              No. 1612/68 on freedom of movement for workers.
           ..."
 8. It was not disputed that the appellants are  family  members  of  Mr  K
    within the meaning of regulation 7 of the 2006  Regulations  since  the
    first named appellant is still his wife, the second named appellant  is
    the son of the first named appellant and is under 21 years of age,  the
    third named appellant is the son of Mr K and under 21 years of age  and
    the third named appellant is the son of both Mr K and the  first  named
    appellant and under 21 years of age.  Whether Mr K had left the  United
    Kingdom or not was more likely to be within the knowledge of the  first
    named appellant than that of the respondent and in my view  the  burden
    of proof in showing that they came within the 2006 Regulations lay upon
    the appellants, notwithstanding how difficult it  might  have  been  to
    achieve, see AG and others (EEA-jobseeker-self-sufficient person proof)
    Germany [2007] UKAIT 00075, summary point (v). Mr Adisa was not able to
    point to any authority for  the  proposition  that  where  it  was  not
    possible for an appellant to demonstrate a particular fact he should be
    dispensed from satisfying the burden of proof.

 9. The immigration judge was clearly correct  in  not  being  able  to  be
    satisfied on the evidence before him that Mr  K  had  left  the  United
    Kingdom.  In these circumstances the appellants were not able  to  show
    that they were family members who had retained the right  of  residence
    within the scope of regulation 10 since it cannot be said that Mr K was
    a person who ceased to be a qualified person on ceasing  to  reside  in
    the United Kingdom.  Rather he ceased to be a qualified person in  2004
    upon ceasing his employment and this would have been the case  even  if
    he had left the United Kingdom subsequent to having ceased  working  in
    the United Kingdom.  The  appellants  have  not  demonstrated  that  he
    remained a qualified person in any other way.

10. Mr Adisa sought to rely upon Directive 2004/38/EC but it is clear  that
    the relevant provision of the Directive, which  regulation  10  of  the
    2006 Regulations was designed to implement,  namely  Article  12,  also
    requires the EEA national to have departed from the host Member  State.
    Article 12 so far as it is relevant provides:

                                 "Article 12
            Retention of the right of residence by family members
           in the event of death or departure of the Union citizen

      1. Without prejudice to the second subparagraph, the  Union  citizen's
      death or departure from the host Member State  shall  not  affect  the
      right of residence of his/her family members who are  nationals  of  a
      Member State. Before acquiring the right of permanent  residence,  the
      persons concerned must meet the conditions laid down  in  points  (a),
      (b), (c) or (d) of Article 7(1).
      ...

      3. The Union citizen's departure from the host Member State or his/her
      death shall not entail loss of  the  right  of  residence  of  his/her
      children or of the parent who has  actual  custody  of  the  children,
      irrespective of nationality, if the children reside in the host Member
      State and are  enrolled  at  an  educational  establishment,  for  the
      purpose of studying there, until the completion of their studies."


11. Article 7(1) provides as follows:

      "All Union citizens shall have the right of residence on the territory
      of another Member State for a period of longer than  three  months  if
      they:
      (a) are workers or self-employed persons in the host Member State; or
      (b) have sufficient resources for themselves and their family  members
      not to become a burden on the social assistance  system  of  the  host
      Member State during their period of residence and  have  comprehensive
      sickness insurance cover in the host Member State; or
      (c)    - are enrolled at a private or public establishment, accredited
           or financed by the  host  Member  State  on  the  basis  of  its
           legislation  or  administrative  practice,  for  the   principal
           purpose of following a course  of  study,  including  vocational
           training; and
            - have comprehensive  sickness  insurance  cover  in  the  host
           Member State and assure  the  relevant  national  authority,  by
           means of a declaration or by such equivalent means as  they  may
           choose, that they have sufficient resources for  themselves  and
           their family members not  to  become  a  burden  on  the  social
           assistance system of the host Member
           State during their period of residence; or
      (d) are family members accompanying or joining  a  Union  citizen  who
      satisfies the conditions referred to in points (a), (b) or (c).


    It is of relevance to note that these provisions  require  the  persons
    concerned to be workers or self-employed or if otherwise entitled to be
    in the United Kingdom to be self sufficient and to  have  comprehensive
    sickness  insurance.   Although  the  first  named  appellant  was   in
    employment there was no evidence before the immigration judge that  the
    appellants had comprehensive sickness insurance.

12. Notwithstanding that I have reached the conclusion that the  appellants
    cannot comply with the provisions of the 2006 Regulations,  Mr  Adisa's
    reference to Baumbast does  raise  the  question  whether  any  of  the
    appellants can rely upon Article 12 of Regulation EEC 1612/68 which  as
    an EEC regulation has direct effect in UK  law.   Directive  2004/38/EC
    repealed Directives  64/221/EEC,  68/360/EEC,  72/194/EEC,  73/148/EEC,
    75/35/EEC,90/364/EEC, 90/365/EEC and 93/96/EEC and  amended  Regulation
    (EEC) No 1612/68 by the repeal of Articles 10 and 11 with  effect  from
    30 April 2006.  Article 12  therefore  remains  in  force.  Article  12
    provides as follows:

                                 "Article 12
      The children of a national of a  Member  State  who  is  or  has  been
      employed in the territory of another Member State shall be admitted to
      that  State's  general  educational,  apprenticeship  and   vocational
      training courses under the same conditions as the  nationals  of  that
      State, if such children are residing in its territory.


      Member States shall encourage all efforts to enable such  children  to
      attend these courses   under the best possible conditions."


13.  In  G.B.C.Echternach  and  A.  Moritz  v  Minister  van  Onderwijs  en
    Wetenschappen.(Free Movement of persons) [1989]  EUECJ-389/87  the  ECJ
    held that under Article 12 of Regulation 1612/68 a child of a worker of
    a Member State who had been  in  employment  in  another  member  State
    retained the status of member of a worker's family within  the  meaning
    of Regulation No 1612/68 when  that  child's  family  returned  to  the
    member State of origin and the child remained in the host  State,  even
    after a period of absence, in order to continue his studies,  which  he
    could not pursue in the State of origin.  The reasoning  of  the  Court
    was that the equal treatment, in relation to national workers, to which
    workers of a Member State who were employed  in  another  Member  State
    were entitled as regards the  benefits  granted  to  members  of  their
    families, contributed to their integration in the society of  the  host
    country, in accordance with the aims of the free movement for  workers:
    see paragraph 20 of the judgement.  In paragraph 21  of  the  judgement
    the Court said that for such integration to come about, a  child  of  a
    Community worker must have the  possibility  of  going  to  school  and
    pursuing further education  in  the  host  country,  as  was  expressly
    provided in Article 12 of Regulation No 1612/68, in order to be able to
    complete that education satisfactorily and he retained that right  even
    if his father returned to the Member State of origin if the  child  had
    no choice but to return to the country  where  he  attended  school  in
    order to continue studying.

14. In Baumbast Mrs Baumbast was a Colombian national married to  a  German
    national.  They had two daughters, the elder,  Mrs  Baumbast's  natural
    daughter, was a Colombian national and the younger had  dual  Colombian
    and German nationality. They moved from Germany to the  United  Kingdom
    in 1990, where Mr Baumbast carried on economic  activity  first  as  an
    employed person and then as the head of his own company.   The  company
    failed, however, and  although  continuing  to  reside  in  the  United
    Kingdom he became employed by German companies in  China  and  Lesotho.
    During the material time he and his wife owned a house in  England  and
    their daughters went to school here. In January 1996 the  Secretary  of
    State refused to renew Mr Baumbast's residence permit and the residence
    documents of the members of his family.

15. The first question which the  Court  was  called  upon  to  answer  was
    whether children of a citizen of the European Union who were themselves
    such citizens and who had installed  themselves  in  primary  education
    during the exercise by their father of rights of residence as a  worker
    in another Member State of which he was not a national were entitled to
    reside in the host  State  in  order  to  undergo  general  educational
    courses there, pursuant to Article 12 of Council Regulation No  1612/68
    and whether the answer might  vary  depending  upon  whether  only  one
    parent was a citizen of the European Union and that parent  had  ceased
    to be a worker within the host State and whether the children were  not
    themselves citizens of the European Union.  In paragraph  50  of  their
    judgement the Court said that the aim of Regulation No 1612/68,  namely
    freedom of movement for workers,  required,  for  such  freedom  to  be
    guaranteed in compliance with the principles of  freedom  and  dignity,
    the best possible conditions  for  the  integration  of  the  Community
    worker's family in the society of the host Member State.  In  paragraph
    52 of their judgement the Court said that  to  prevent  a  child  of  a
    citizen of the Union from continuing his education in the host State by
    refusing him permission to remain  might  dissuade  that  citizen  from
    exercising the rights to freedom of movement laid down in Article 39 EC
    and would therefore create an obstacle to the effective exercise of the
    freedom thus guaranteed by the EC Treaty.  The Court went on to hold in
    paragraph 54 of  their  judgement  that  to  permit  such  children  to
    continue with their education in the host Member State only where  they
    could not do so in their Member State of origin, as in  Echternach  and
    Moritz, would offend not only the letter of Article  12  but  also  its
    spirit.  As to whether the fact that the children were  not  themselves
    citizens of the Union made any difference,  the  Court  found  that  as
    under Article 10 of 1612/68 the descendants of a Community  worker  who
    were under the age of 21 or  were  dependants,  irrespective  of  their
    nationality, were to be regarded as members of his family and have  the
    right to install themselves with that worker, they had the right to  be
    admitted to the school  system  in  accordance  with  Article  12.   In
    paragraph 57 of their judgment they went on to  hold  that  this  right
    must be interpreted as extending to the descendants of the  worker  and
    his spouse since to give a restrictive interpretation to  exclude  them
    would run counter to the aim of Regulation No 1612/68.

16. The second question which the Court  was  called  upon  to  decide  was
    whether Article 12 of Regulation No  1612/68  must  be  interpreted  as
    entitling the parent  who  was  the  primary  carer  of  the  children,
    irrespective of nationality, to reside with them in order to facilitate
    the exercise of that right notwithstanding the fact that the parent who
    had the status of citizen of the European Union  had  ceased  to  be  a
    migrant worker in the host Member State.  The Court found that  Article
    12 must be so interpreted otherwise that might deprive the children  of
    a right granted to them by the Community legislature.

17. The third question was whether Mr Baumbast  who  no  longer  enjoyed  a
    right of residence as a migrant worker might enjoy a right of residence
    in the United Kingdom by direct application of Article  18(1)  EC.  The
    Court held that he did so since the Treaty on European  Union  did  not
    require that citizens of the  Union  pursue  a  professional  or  trade
    activity, whether as employed or self-employed, in order to  enjoy  the
    rights provided in Part Two of the Treaty and there was nothing in  the
    text of the Treaty to permit the conclusion that citizens of the  Union
    who had established themselves in another  Member  State  in  order  to
    carry on an activity as an employed person there were  deprived,  where
    that activity came to an end, of the rights  which  were  conferred  on
    them by the EC Treaty.  Such right of residence, however,  was  subject
    to the limitations and conditions laid down by the EC  Treaty  and  the
    measures adopted to give it effect. Article 1(1)  of  Directive  90/364
    provided that member States could require of the nationals of a  member
    State who wished to enjoy the right to reside  within  their  territory
    that they themselves and the members of their families  be  covered  by
    sickness insurance in respect of all risks in the host State  and  have
    sufficient  resources  to  avoid  becoming  a  burden  on  the   social
    assistance system of the host State during their period of residence.

18. It is plain in my view that the rights of Mrs Baumbast and the children
    of the family under Article 12 of  Regulation  1612/68  were  different
    from those of Mr Baumbast under Article 18(1) of the  EC  Treaty.   The
    question, which the Court was not  asked  to  decide,  remains  whether
    their rights were also subject to Article 1(1) of Directive 90/364.  As
    a matter of fact the  Baumbast  family  were  able  to  rely  upon  the
    resources available to Mr Baumbast and the comprehensive  insurance  he
    had in Germany.  In the linked case of R, a United States citizen,  who
    was divorced from her husband, a French national,  and  in  respect  of
    whom the Court found that she and  her  two  children  from  her  first
    marriage had similar rights to  those  of  the  Baumbast  family  under
    Article 12, R's husband remained in employment in  the  United  Kingdom
    and so was still exercising rights as a migrant  worker.   The  divorce
    settlement provided for the children to reside with R  in  England  and
    Wales for at least five years after the divorce. She  had  purchased  a
    house and had established a business in the United Kingdom and both she
    and her former husband were financially responsible for the children.

19. In paragraph 38 of their determination  in  GM  and  AM  (EU  national;
    establishing self sufficiency) France [2006] UKAIT 00059  the  Tribunal
    said this about the decision in Baumbast:

      "It might be thought that the Court's recognition of Mrs B's right  is
      some indication of the existence and scope of the  second  appellant's
      right in this appeal.  It is not.  Whilst the case does illustrate the
      Court of Justice's approach  to  children  when  exercising  their  EU
      rights to reside and the need for them to have their parent/carer with
      them, Mrs B's right was  derived  from  her  daughter's  free-standing
      right under Article 12 of Council regulation No 1612/68 as  the  child
      of a former EU national worker.  Neither her right, nor  that  of  her
      daughter, depended upon Article 18 and Directive 90/364.   Hence,  the
      element  of,  and  need  to  establish,  'self-sufficiency'  was   not
      present."

20. It was not necessary for the Tribunal in GM and AM to make any  finding
    as to whether the rights under Article 12 were subject to the  need  to
    establish self sufficiency and, as  been  indicated,  that  was  not  a
    question which the Court in Baumbast had been called upon to decide.

21.   In Ali v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2006]  EWCA  484
    the Court of Appeal had to consider the case of a Somali failed  asylum
    seeker who had established, in the United Kingdom, a relationship with,
    but did not co-habit with a Dutch national, Mrs Abdi, who  had  arrived
    in the United Kingdom in November 2000, about two years before  he  did
    so.  The appellant had a son, born in 1999, who was  a  Dutch  national
    and he, with Mrs Abdi's children, two of whom the  appellant  may  have
    been  the  father,  attended  school  in  the  United   Kingdom.    The
    immigration judge had found that Mrs Abdi was not a worker and was  not
    otherwise exercising Treaty rights and that therefore the appellant did
    not have a right of residence  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  that  the
    children did not have a right to receive education for which they  were
    not paying.  In the Court of Appeal the main argument addressed to  the
    court was that the appellant's son as a Dutch national had a  right  to
    reside in the United Kingdom in order to be educated here under Article
    18 of European Community Treaty and that the appellant was entitled  to
    accompany his son while he was a  minor.   It  was  submitted  that  as
    Directive 2004/38, which  conferred  a  right  of  residence  on  those
    enrolled at a private or public establishment for the principal purpose
    of following a course of study, including vocational training which was
    conditional upon  them  having  comprehensive  sickness  insurance  and
    assuring the relevant  national  authority  that  they  had  sufficient
    resources for themselves and their  family  members  not  to  become  a
    burden on the host state, operated only from 30 April 2006 there was  a
    lacuna not covered by the Directive so that the right of residence  for
    the time being was not dependant upon showing sufficient resources  not
    to become a burden on the state. Article 18 provides:
      "1. Every citizen of the Union shall have the right to move and reside
      freely within the territory of the Member States, subject to the
      limitations and conditions laid down in this Treaty and by the
      measures adopted to give it effect.
      2. If action by the Community should prove necessary to attain this
      objective and this Treaty has not provided the necessary powers, the
      Council may adopt provisions with a view to facilitating the exercise
      of the rights referred to in paragraph 1. The Council shall act in
      accordance with the procedure referred to in Article 251."
22.   In paragraph 20 of his  judgement,  Keene  LJ,  with  whom  the  other
    members of the court agreed, stated that what had  been  submitted  was
    patently not the position under European law. He said that none of  the
    ECJ decisions recognised such an  unfettered  right  of  residence  and
    several of them clearly implied that there was  no  such  right  merely
    because of Article 18.  He  quoted  the  decision  in  Baumbast  as  an
    example where the Court upheld the right of residence of  a  child  who
    was a European citizen and receiving primary  education  on  the  basis
    that not to do so would inhibit the child's parent from exercising  his
    Article 39 right.  He went on to say in paragraph 21:
      "What is noticeable is the persistent theme in the Directives and  the
      jurisprudence of the Luxembourg court  that  the  right  of  residence
      under Article  18  is  not  unfettered.  In  particular,  there  is  a
      recognition of the principle that the exercise of  this  right  should
      not place an unreasonable burden on the public finances  of  the  host
      state. Hence the regular  requirement  that  the  person  in  question
      should have sufficient resources to  avoid  becoming  such  a  burden,
      unless he is in or seeking employment or is self-employed and  thereby
      earning such resources himself. Directive 90/364 includes amongst  its
      recitals the following:
           "Whereas beneficiaries of the right of residence must not become
           an unreasonable burden on the public finances of the host Member
           State..."
      The same words appear in the recitals to Directive 90/365 and 93/96,
      and recital 10 to the recent Directive 2004/38 on freedom of movement
      and residence states:
           "Persons  exercising  their  right  of  residence  should   not,
           however, become an unreasonable burden on the social  assistance
           system of the host Member State  during  an  initial  period  of
           residence. Therefore, the right of residence for Union  citizens
           and their family members for  periods  in  excess  of  3  months
           should be subject to conditions."
    In paragraph 22 he said:
      "In the case of Chen [2004] ECR 1 - 9925, the European Court of
      Justice stated at paragraph 32:
           "Moreover, the limitations and conditions referred to in Article
           18 EC and laid down by Directive 90/364 are based  on  the  idea
           that the exercise of the right of residence of citizens  of  the
           Union can be subordinated to the  legitimate  interests  of  the
           member States. Thus, although, according to the  fourth  recital
           in the preamble to Directive 90/364, beneficiaries of the  right
           of residence must not become an  "unreasonable"  burden  on  the
           public finances of the host Member State, the Court nevertheless
           observed that those limitations and conditions must  be  applied
           in compliance with the limits imposed by Community  law  and  in
           accordance with the principle of proportionality."
      The Court there properly emphasises that the rights under  Article  18
      are expressly stated to be "subject to the limitations and  conditions
      laid down in this Treaty and  by  the  measures  adopted  to  give  it
      effect":  see  Article  18(1).  These  measures  include  the  various
      Directives  to  which  I  have  referred  and  which  contain  various
      restrictions on the  right  of  residence.  In  particular,  Directive
      90/364 reflects the requirement  of  "sufficient  resources  to  avoid
      becoming a burden" on the host state and, subject to  that  condition,
      provides for a right of residence to nationals of member states
           "who do not enjoy this right under other provisions of Community
      law."
      Yet if Mr  Bedford  is  right,  this  Directive  and  its  restrictive
      requirement have very little, if any, role to play, because Article 18
      itself confers an unfettered right of residence.  His  argument  would
      rob Directive 90/364 of any  real  application.  That  does  not  make
      sense."
23. In Ali the appellant could not seek to rely upon Article 12 of  1612/68
    since neither he nor his child had installed themselves in  the  United
    Kingdom with Mrs Abdi.  Nonetheless it seems to me  that  had  he  been
    able to do so the same principles as those applied by the  court  would
    necessarily have applied for the same reasons. The decision in Baumbast
    is not to the contrary effect since, as indicated above,  the  question
    whether the rights of the Mrs Baumbast and the children were unfettered
    was never posed.    It  would  have  been  extraordinary  if  while  Mr
    Baumbast was obliged to have sufficient resources and  insurance  cover
    for him not to be a burden on the host state to  be  able  to  enjoy  a
    right of residence in  the  United  Kingdom  as  someone  not  carrying
    economic activity here, the members of his family whose rights depended
    upon him not being inhibited from exercising his right of free movement
    as a worker should not have been subject to the  same  conditions.   It
    would also be extraordinary if it were the case that the appellants had
    a right of residence in the United Kingdom, without needing to be  self
    sufficient, because Mr K should not be  deterred  from  exercising  his
    right of free movement as a worker given that, on the  finding  of  the
    immigration judge, he  had  remained  in  the  United  Kingdom  without
    carrying on any economic activity and without any right to do so  under
    European law.

24.   This view is borne out by the recent  decision  of  the  ECJ  in  Eind
    (Free movement of persons) [2007] EUECJ C-291/05 in whose judgement the
    following passage appears:

      "28.As a preliminary point, it must be borne in mind that the right of
        nationals of one Member State to reside in the territory of another
        Member State without being engaged in any activity, whether  on  an
        employed or a self-employed  basis,  is  not  unconditional.  Under
        Article 18(1) EC, the right of every citizen of the Union to reside
        in the territory of the Member States is recognised subject to  the
        limitations and  conditions  imposed  by  the  Treaty  and  by  the
        measures adopted for its implementation (see, to that effect,  Case
        C-456/02 Trojani [2004] ECR I-7573, paragraphs 31 and 32, and  Case
        C-200/02 Zhu and Chen [2004] ECR I-9925, paragraph 26).
      29. Among those limitations and conditions is the  provision  made  in
        the first subparagraph of Article 1(1) of Directive  90/364,  under
        which the Member States may require citizens of the Union  who  are
        not economically active and wish to enjoy the right  to  reside  in
        their territory, to ensure that they themselves and the members  of
        their families are covered by sickness insurance in respect of  all
        risks in the host Member State and  have  sufficient  resources  to
        avoid becoming a burden on the social assistance system of the host
        Member State during their period of residence.
    30. The right of residence enjoyed by the members of the family  of  an
        economically non-active citizen of the Union under Article 1(2)  of
        Directive 90/364 is linked to the right  enjoyed  by  that  citizen
        under Community law".
25.   In the particular circumstances of that case, where the  appellant  as
    a citizen of the Netherlands had a right to return to  his  own  member
    State from the United Kingdom without being economically active, it was
    held his daughter had a similar right by analogy under Article 10(1)(a)
    of Regulation 1612/68.  In this particular case Mr K had lost the right
    to remain in the United Kingdom upon ceasing to work.  The decision  in
    Eind therefore is of no assistance to the appellants.


26.   Although the first named appellant was in  employment,  any  right  of
    residence she might have depended upon those of the EEA national child,
    which in turn depended upon the child being self sufficient.  The child
    would not be able to establish self sufficiency, however,  in  reliance
    upon the first named appellant's income since the first named appellant
    had no independent right to live and work in the United  Kingdom.   The
    remarks of the  tribunal  in  GM  and  AM  in  paragraph  63  of  their
    determination are equally applicable here:

      "What is being said in this case is quite different.  Here, it is said
      that the parent/carer is entitled to be in the  UK  and  work  because
      only then will the child be self-sufficient and hence establish her EU
      right of residence.  Thus, the family member's presence in the UK (and
      right to work) is relied upon not  in  order  to  avoid  a  'clog'  or
      'chill' on the exercise of the right of  the  EU  national  child  but
      rather in order to create that very right  itself  -  the  right  from
      which the family member then seeks to derive his own right  to  reside
      as her carer/parent.   Only if the parent/carer resides in the UK with
      the EU national child can it be said that the child has an EU right at
      all.  The  argument  is  then  exposed  for  what  it  is  -  entirely
      circular."


27.   For the sake of completeness in Aissatou Diatta  the  ECJ  ruled  that
    the members of a migrant worker's family, as defined in Article  10  of
    Regulation 1612/68, were not necessarily  required  to  live  with  him
    permanently in order to qualify for a right  of  residence  under  that
    provision and Article 11 of the same Regulation  did  not  establish  a
    right of residence independent of that  provided  for  in  Article  10.
    That decision is not relevant to this case since the  issue  there  was
    whether a non EU national who was separated but not divorced from an EU
    migrant  worker  was  nonetheless  entitled  to  an  extension  of  her
    residence permit.  In this case on the finding of the immigration judge
    Mr K was no longer a migrant worker in the United Kingdom.

Decision

28.   In these circumstances the immigration judge did not make  a  material
    error of law in  his  determination  and  therefore  his  determination
    dismissing the appeals shall stand.



 Signed


 Senior Immigration Judge Spencer





