



Asylum and Immigration Tribunal

           HT (Special Voucher Holder - dependants) India [2007] UKAIT 00031

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                    |Determination Promulgated|
|On 22 August 2006 and 22 January 2007   |On 05 March 2007         |
|                                        |                         |


                                   Before

                     Senior Immigration Judge Goldstein
                               Mr G F Sandall

                                   Between


                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                      Entry Clearance Officer - MUMBAI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:                  Mr O Jibowu, Counsel
For the Respondent:            Miss R Brown, Home Office Presenting Officer


The fact that one is a dependant of a Special Voucher Holder makes no
difference to the general principle that when the Special Voucher Scheme
was abolished on 5 March 2002, it was an abolition of the scheme in its
entirety. Thus dependants of Special Voucher Holders can no longer seek
entry clearance to the United Kingdom in that capacity.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.      The Appellant, a citizen of India, has been  granted  an  order  for
    the  reconsideration  of  the  determination   of   Immigration   Judge
    Freestone, who, sitting at Taylor House on 5 April 2005, dismissed  the
    Appellant's appeal against the  decision  of  the  Respondent  dated  5
    September 2002 to refuse to him entry clearance to the  United  Kingdom
    as the dependant of his father.

2.      The  Appellant's  application  was  considered  in  accordance  with
    paragraphs 252 and 317 of Immigration Rules HC 395.

3.      The issue for the Tribunal was whether the Immigration Judge made  a
    material error of law, this being an error of law  that  affected  her
    decision on the appeal.

4.      In that regard, we have been mindful of the guidance  of  the  Court
    of Appeal in R [2005] EWCA Civ 982, that before the  Tribunal  can  set
    aside a decision of an Immigration Judge on the  grounds  of  error  of
    law, it has to be satisfied that the correction of the error would have
    made a material difference to the outcome or to  the  fairness  of  the
    proceedings. Further a finding might only be set aside as an  error  of
    law on the grounds of perversity, if it was irrational or  unreasonable
    in the Wednesbury sense, or one that  was  wholly  unsupported  by  the
    evidence. The Court of Appeal continued that a decision should  not  be
    set aside for inadequacy  of  reasons,  unless  the  Immigration  Judge
    failed to identify and record the matters that  were  critical  to  his
    decision on material issues, in such a way that the Tribunal was unable
    to understand why he reached that decision.

 5.       Senior  Immigration  Judge  Warr   in   ordering   reconsideration
    considered that the grounds of application raised  arguable  issues  on
    the application of the special voucher scheme and whether the  case  of
    RM (Special Vouchers - representation) India [2005] UKIAT 00067,  (that
    has since been upheld by the Court of Appeal in  Modhvadiya  [2005]EWCA
    Civ  1340,  that  we  drew  to  the  parties'  attention),   could   be
    distinguished.

6.      We have observed that the order for reconsideration, 29  June  2005,
    pre-dated the promulgation of the decision of the Tribunal in PP and SP
    (paragraph  252 - effect of deletion) India [2005] UKAIT 00141, account
    of which was properly taken, by the parties' representatives.

7.      It would be as well to set out the grounds of appeal in  support  of
    the application for reconsideration:

           '1.     The Adjudicator accepted that the sponsor  in  this case
               held a special voucher and that the rule (paragraph  252  of
               HC 395), had not been deleted  until  September  2002  (i.e.
               after the Appellant had lodged his application).


           2.      In fact the application was refused before the abolition
               of the rule in September 2002.  On the premise above, it  is
               wrong for the Respondent and/or the Adjudicator to read into
               the rules that existed at that time, what Parliament had not
               included.


           3.      It is submitted that the rule was retained to  serve the
               purpose which it  served  prior  to  the  abolition  of  the
               voucher scheme.  It is further submitted that the purpose of
               the rule as it stood can be clearly  understood  by  reading
               the rules. The particular paragraph clearly  refers  to  the
               Dependant of voucher holders.


           4.      It is  therefore  submitted  that  at  the  time  of the
               application, the  sponsor  was  a  voucher  holder  and  the
               Appellant was his dependant. When the rule became  abolished
               in September  2002 dependants of voucher holders  no  longer
               had the  privilege  to  apply  under  that  rule.  There  is
               therefore a clear and logical distinction between dependants
               of special voucher holders before the abolition of the  rule
               and after the abolition of the rule.


           5.      The case  of  RM  is  clearly  distinguishable  from the
               present case as both Appellant and sponsor  in  RM  had  not
               been granted  special  vouchers,  therefore  the  appellants
               could not be  upgraded  to  dependants  of  special  voucher
               holders.


           6.      In  this  particular  case,  the  sponsor  had  become a
               special voucher holder before the scheme was abolished.  The
               effect of the abolition in March 2002 was that  nobody  else
               could be granted special vouchers.


           7.        The  abolition  never  referred  to  any  exclusion of
               dependants  of  special  voucher  holders,   otherwise   the
               applicants' siblings and mother would not have been  granted
               entry clearance as dependents of the  sponsor  (after  April
               2002) when they were granted.'

8.      We set out below for  the  sake  of  completeness,  the  Appellant's
    skeleton argument:

       '1.      The Appellant reiterates his grounds of appeal.


       2.      The Appellant will argue that the  abolition  of  the special
           voucher scheme did not prevent special  voucher  holders  and/or
           their dependents from enjoying the  benefits  accorded  to  them
           (special voucher holders).   The said benefits include those set
           out in the Immigration Rules.   The relevant rules in this  case
           are paragraphs 249-252 of HC 395 as it stood up  till  September
           2002.


       3.       The  Appellant  will  argue  that  the  rules  continued and
           remained applicable until  (they  were)  abolished.    The  said
           rules remained in force when the Appellant applied on  15  April
           2002.


       4.      The Appellant will argue that the provisions of the  IDI (Feb
           05) in paragraphs 1.2, 3 and 3.2 are relevant to and  consistent
           with his claim as a dependant.


       5.        The  Appellant  will  respond  to   paragraph   21   of the
           Adjudicator's determination thus;


           The  IDI  guidance  is  clear  that  where  there  were  pending
           applications under the scheme, then would be holders  and  their
           dependants were to be treated in accordance  with  the  previous
           practice that had existed before the abolition  of  the  scheme.
           See notes to paragraph 1.2 of the guidance.


       6.      The Appellant will submit that the benefits were to  be given
           to applicants for vouchers whose applications  had  been  lodged
           before the abolition of the scheme in March 2002.


            The Appellant will submit further that his sponsor  had  already
           obtained the voucher. The Appellant will submit further that the
           notice of abolition clearly  states  that  in  the  interim  the
           guidance  on  special  vouchers  in   the   instructions   would
           continue.  The Appellant will argue that the interim period  was
           between the time of abolition of the scheme and abolition of the
           rules.


            The  Appellant  will  argue  that  it  would  be  anomalous  and
           unintended by Parliament (or indeed  the  Secretary  of  State,)
           that those whose voucher applications were  yet  to  be  decided
           should be able to confer the benefits to their dependants whilst
           those  whose  vouchers  had  been  issued  earlier  (as  in  the
           Appellant's father's case) would not be able.


       7.      The Appellant  submits  that  his  case  is  in  all respects
           different from RM where the sponsor had  not  lodged  a  voucher
           application before the abolition.  The Adjudicator accepted  the
           application in RM was only lodged on 26 November 2002.  This was
           at a time when the voucher scheme had  been  abolished  and  the
           interim period had elapsed with the abolition  of  the  relevant
           rules.  This case  of  RM  clearly  is  distinguished  from  the
           current case.'


9.      The Appellant, born on 5 March 1983, applied for an entry  clearance
    or a Certificate of Entitlement to the Right of  Abode  to  the  United
    Kingdom as the dependent of his father, but the Entry Clearance Officer
    was not satisfied that he was living outside the United Kingdom in  the
    most  exceptional  compassionate  circumstances  and  mainly  dependant
    financially on relatives settled in the United Kingdom.  In addition he
    was not satisfied that the Appellant had no other  close  relatives  in
    his own country to whom he could  turn  for  financial  support.    His
    application was therefore refused under  Immigration  Rule  317  of  HC
    395.   The Appellant had applied along with his mother and brother. The
    Appellant's  mother  was  interviewed  on  5  September  2002  and  the
    Appellant's application was refused the same day.

10.    The Appellant at the date of decision was aged nineteen  years.   His
    application was considered in accordance with paragraphs 252 and 317 of
    HC 395.

11.    In his Explanatory Statement the Entry Clearance Officer explained:

        'I interviewed the Appellant's mother (see Appendix 4)  who  stated
        that she and the whole family had first gone to the United  Kingdom
        in 1992 and as evidence of this produced  thereof   passports  (see
        Appendix 5).   The Appellant had been granted indefinite  leave  to
        remain in the United Kingdom on 17.04.92 and had  left  the  United
        Kingdom on 12.07.92.    It was apparent that the Appellant had  not
        returned to the United Kingdom since this date.


        Mrs Tank stated that her husband had also returned  to  India  with
        the family unit and had not gone back to the United  Kingdom  until
        about two years ago.  During this time Mrs  Tank  stated  that  the
        whole family had stayed in the same house as her husband's parents,
        his two brothers and two sisters  and  had  remained  in  the  same
        property after his return to the United Kingdom.  She  stated  that
        the family in India was supported from the joint family power  loom
        business, and agreed that since her husband  had  returned  to  the
        United  Kingdom,  her  financial  support  had   come   from   this
        business.   She added that she  was  well  looked  after  here  and
        confirmed that her husband had not sent any money from  the  United
        Kingdom for the support of his family.


        Mrs Tank confirmed that the Appellant still lived with his paternal
        grandparents, his  two  paternal  uncles,  their  wives  and  their
        respective seven children.   She confirmed that they had very  good
        relations with all her husband's brothers and their  families.  She
        added that all the children considered themselves  to  be  brothers
        and sisters rather than cousins.


        Mrs Tank stated that the Appellant was a second year student  on  a
        Bachelor of Mechanical Engineering course.  However she stated that
        she did not know the name of the college and was unable to  provide
        any evidence of his studies. It was apparent that  the  Appellant's
        uncle, his father's brother, paid the education fees and  that  the
        father in the United Kingdom made no financial contribution.


        I now looked at the application  as  a  whole.  I  noted  that  the
        Appellant's father had initially gone to the United  Kingdom  as  a
        Special Voucher  Holder  and  I  am  aware  that  this  scheme  was
        abolished in 05.03.02.    The  concessions  relating  to  dependent
        children state inter alia that:


           "Dependant  children  (i.e.  those   who   are   unmarried   and
           unemployed) ..., who are under the age of twenty-five  when  the
           parent receives a voucher, may be granted an entry clearance  to
           join the UKPH heads of household who are present and settled  in
           the United Kingdom or who are being admitted for settlement."


        I am not satisfied that,  given  the  complete  lack  of  financial
        support from his father in the United Kingdom, that  the  Appellant
        was  dependant  on  his  father   and   therefore   qualified   for
        consideration under paragraph  252 of HC 395.


        In these circumstances and in view of the fact that  the  Appellant
        was  over  the  age  of  eighteen  years,  I  now  considered   the
        application in accordance with paragraph 317 of HC 395.  Given  all
        of the above, I was not satisfied the Appellant  was  living  alone
        outside the United Kingdom in the  most  exceptional  compassionate
        circumstances and was mainly  dependant  financially  on  relatives
        settled in the United Kingdom.  In addition, I  was  not  satisfied
        that the Appellant had no other close relatives in India to whom he
        could turn for continued financial support.


        In these circumstances, I refused the application  and  served  the
        Appellant Form APP 200, which set out the reasons for  the  refusal
        and explained the right to appeal.


        On 3.03.2002 Form 2, Notice of Appeal (Overseas)  was  received  at
        this office.  I have looked at the application in the light of  the
        grounds of appeal however I am not minded  to  alter  the  original
        decision.'

12.    The appeal first came before us on 22 August  2005,  when  Mr  Jibowu
    helpfully confirmed that no  challenge  was  raised  to  the  reasoning
    behind the refusal of the Appellant's application for  entry  clearance
    under paragraph 317 of HC 395  and  that  the  only  outstanding  issue
    therefore related to paragraph 252.  The provisions  of  the  paragraph
    252 are as follows:

        'The requirements for indefinite leave to enter the United  Kingdom
        as the spouse or child of a Special Voucher  Holder  are  that  the
        person concerned:


        (i) is in possession of a valid United Kingdom entry clearance  for
           settlement to the United Kingdom in this capacity; and


        (ii) can and will be  maintained  and  accommodated  adequately  by
           special voucher holders without  recourse to public funds.'

13.    It is not in dispute, that the Appellant's father acquired a  special
    voucher at some date in the 1990s  and  further  that  the  Appellant's
    mother obtained entry clearance to the United Kingdom in 2002.

14.    We have noted that the special voucher scheme was devised  to  permit
    but also to control, entry into the United Kingdom  of  Ugandan  Asians
    and their families.   It was originally outside the Immigration  Rules.



15.    The Scheme was abolished on 5 March  2002 when in  a  written  answer
    in the  House  of  Commons,  Angela  Eagle,  the  Minister  of   State,
    explained the thinking behind the abolition of the scheme as follows:

        'Angela Eagle: The Special Voucher Scheme was introduced in 1968 in
        recognition of the specific hardship being suffered at that time by
        British  Overseas  Citizens  (BOC)  passport  holders   and   their
        dependants, who  were  under  political  pressure  to  leave  their
        countries of residence in  East  Africa,  but  who  held  no  other
        citizenship and had nowhere else to go.  Several thousand BOCs  and
        other United Kingdom passport holders took advantage of the  scheme
        and settled in the United Kingdom in the 1970s and 1980s.


        However, the world political situation has now changed and BOCs are
        no  longer  under  threat  of  expulsion  .  They  have,  over  the
        intervening years, either settled with their families  in  the  new
        independent East African countries  or,  alternatively,  some  have
        moved with their families to India. Their families have  now  grown
        up and have families of their own.


        There are relatively few applications for  special  vouchers  these
        days and those who do apply are not being pressured  to  leave  the
        country in which they reside.  The  scheme  no  longer  serves  the
        purpose for which it was set up.   The  Government  have  therefore
        decided that  the  time  has  come  to  abolish  the  Scheme,  with
        immediate effect.  No new applications for special vouchers will be
        considered.'

16.    As noted, by the Tribunal in RM,  this  statement  demonstrated  that
    the scheme had been wound up and new  applications  were  not  accepted
    because the scheme was thought to have achieved its purpose.

17.    We were provided with  the  copy  of  the  Immigration  Directorate's
    Instructions  (IDI's)  Chapter  7  Section  2  '  'Holders  of  Special
    Vouchers'. We set out below paragraphs 1.2, 3  and  3.2  to  which  the
    Appellant's skeleton argument refers:

        '1.2    ABOLITION OF THE SPECIAL VOUCHER SCHEME
             The Government announced the abolition of the  Special  Voucher
             Scheme on 5 March 2002, with immediate effect. Entry  Clearance
             Posts Overseas have  not  accepted  any  new  applications  for
             special vouchers as  from  6  March.  As  Posts  will  consider
             applications received before the abolition of the scheme in the
             usual way, there may be a delay before the  issue  of  vouchers
             ceases. In the interim, the guidance on Special Vouchers in the
             IDIs will continue to apply.


        3.      INDEFINITE LEAVE TO  ENTER  AS  A  DEPENDANT  OF  A SPECIAL
             VOUCHER HOLDER.
             Paragraph  252 in Part 7 of HC 395 has only two requirements to
             be met by a person seeking  indefinite  leave  to  enter  as  a
             dependant of a special voucher holder. These are that he/she:


             Holds an entry clearance for settlement in this capacity; and
             can and will be maintained and accommodated adequately  by  the
             special voucher holder without recourse to public funds.


             There are, however, a number of concessions outside  the  Rules
             affecting dependants of special voucher holders who are settled
             or  coming  here  for  authorised  settlement  in  the   United
             Kingdom.    Under  these  concessions   the   maintenance   and
             accommodation requirement should  not  be  applied  rigorously.
             For example, if it is clear that the voucher holder is not able
             to support and accommodated his dependants but there are  other
             family in the United Kingdom who would be willing and able  to,
             the application(s) may be granted.  If, however,  it  is  clear
             that the dependants of the voucher holder will have recourse to
             public funds from the outset, applications should be refused or
             deferred  until such time as the voucher   holder  is  able  to
             provide sufficient support and accommodation, i.e. has obtained
             work and found suitable accommodation.


             In any case, where a spouse or dependant seeks to join  such  a
             person for settlement and it is not  obvious  from  the  outset
             that the applicant is admissible  under  the  Rules,  reference
             should be made at the earliest opportunity to AEAD Group No. 5,
             via Passenger Casework Section.


        Note:
             Only dependants who apply at the same time as would-be  voucher
             holders, or within a reasonable time  afterwards,  may  benefit
             from  these  concessions.  A  list  of  other  concessions   is
             continued in the Special Voucher Guidance Notes at Annexe C.


        3.2     INDECS
              SWO- Wife Special voucher holder
              SEO-Child - Under Twenty-five of special voucher holder
              SH-Husband or husband of special voucher holder.'

18.    The Immigration Judge was clearly referred to these  passages  by  Mr
    Jibowu when he appeared before her and to which the  Immigration  Judge
    referred in her determination.

19.    The Immigration Judge noted Mr Jibowu's contention,  that  she  could
    consider the Appellant's  application  under  paragraph  252,  in  that
    although the scheme for people to apply for Special Vouchers  had  been
    abolished, applications for those who would benefit  from  the  Special
    Voucher Holder privilege, continued until the  rules  were  deleted  in
    September 2002.

20.    The Presenting Officer before the Immigration Judge, relied on RM  in
    which Mr Justice Ouseley had considered the issue and at paragraph 5 of
    that determination stated as follows:

        'The scheme was ended on 5 March 2002; and no new applications were
        accepted  after  that  date.  The  relevant   paragraphs   of   the
        Immigration Rules, 249 to 254, remained in force to cover those who
        had been granted a voucher but  had  not  yet  entered  the  United
        Kingdom and those whose applications were undecided at  that  date.
        Those paragraphs were deleted with effect from 18 September 2002 in
        a Statement of Changes presented in August 2002.'

21.    The Immigration Judge did not agree with Mr Jibowu, that RM could  be
    distinguished, because the sponsor in RM  was  not  a  special  voucher
    holder. She continued at paragraph 15:

        "15. I accept that the sponsor in the appeal before me is a special
             voucher holder and the one in RM is not.   However it is  clear
             that when the Tribunal considered the date of  the  application
             which was 26  November  2002,  it  was  on  the  assumption  of
             possible entitlement to entry  clearance  as  dependants  of  a
             special voucher holder.


             16. In the case of RM, the appellants  relied  on  a  statement
             from the Secretary of State in April 2002  in  a  debate  on  a
             Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Bill 2002 which is noted in
             paragraph  13 of the determination as follows:


              "In recognition of the fact that the old special quota scheme
              had ceased to be used  for  the  purpose  for  which  it  was
              originally designed, we abolished it.   I  will  examine  the
              possibility  of  an  alternative  arrangement   for   British
              Overseas Citizens who have  no  other  nationality  but  who,
              under the existing complex historical circumstances, are  not
              able to enter the country.  It would be right for  us  to  do
              that, as we have a moral obligation to them going back a long
              way and it is unfinished business."'

22.    The Immigration Judge noted that in  RM  the  Tribunal  at  paragraph
    24, considered the House of Commons written answers to  which  we  have
    above referred and subsequent statements of the Home Office,  in  order
    to place their meaning into their  proper  context.    The  Immigration
    Judge noted that at paragraph 33 of RM the Tribunal stated as follows:

        'There is no argument that when the Scheme was ended,  neither  the
        sponsor nor the Appellant were special voucher holders  or  had  an
        application undetermined.  The clear purpose of the ending  of  the
        scheme  was  to  stop  further  applications  by  those  who  might
        otherwise succeed. (Our emphasis).'

23.    The  Immigration  Judge  found  that  the  Appellant  failed  in  his
    application, because the scheme was abolished by the time he  made  his
    application.  She continued at paragraph 21 of her determination:

        'I do not accept that it was only abolished  for  applications  for
        Special Vouchers and not for dependants of those  who  are  already
        Special Voucher Holders.  From the IDIs and the case of  RM  it  is
        clear that no new applications under the scheme for either  Special
        Vouchers or  for their dependants were  being  considered  after  5
        March  2002 and that the reasons for the guidance still  continuing
        was only to deal with those applications that were already  in  the
        system on that date. '

24.    The Immigration Judge found, that the Appellant could not succeed  in
    his appeal against the refusal under paragraph 317 or under  Article  8
    of the ECHR.   Those latter findings are of course not under  challenge
    in the context of the instant appeal.

25.    We have concluded that the determination  of  the  Immigration  Judge
    does not disclose a material error of  law.   We  shall  now  give  our
    reasons for so finding.

26.    At the hearing on 22 August  2006,  and  in  providing  the  parties'
    representatives  with  copies  of  the  judgment  in  the  cases  above
    referred, we drew to their attention that  Richards  LJ  who  gave  the
    leading judgment in Modhvadiya, stated inter alia, at paragraphs 22  as
    follows:

        'Let me  deal  also  with  the  next  contention,  which  is  that,
        notwithstanding  its  deletion,  paragraph  252  applies   to   the
        applicant's case because they had a pre-existing right to  rely  on
        that paragraph  by virtue of the fact that their mother received or
        was entitled to a Special  Voucher. Even if  she  had  received  or
        been entitled to  a  Special  Voucher  it  seems  to  me  that  the
        applicants could not rely on paragraph 252 itself, given that  that
        had disappeared completely from the Rules  by  the  time  of  their
        application.  Whatever the position might have  been  if  they  had
        applied in time, they were too late. The scheme  had  gone  by  the
        time they applied; it had  been  closed  in  March   2002  for  new
        applicants and had remained in force until September 2002  to  deal
        with outstanding cases, but  thereafter  it  had  ceased  to  exist
        altogether.'

27.    His Lordship continued at paragraph 23 as follows:

        'In  so  far  as  the  applicants  still  rely  on  the  legitimate
        expectation argument to the effect that they were  entitled  to  be
        treated in accordance  with  the  terms  for  the  special  voucher
        concession, even if the scheme itself had disappeared, it could  no
        longer be invoked, again I consider the argument to lack  any  real
        prospect of success.   In part I think it is the argument  rejected
        for sound reasons by the Tribunal [in RM], but  in  so  far  as  it
        relies on the  additional  materials  and  submissions  placed  and
        developed before me,  in  my  judgment  they  give  it  no  greater
        substance.  I do not consider anything that  occurred  in  judicial
        review proceedings could give the scheme continuing force after  it
        had been deleted from the Rules, or would give the children of  the
        judicial  review  claimants  any  equivalent  rights  through   the
        operation of the doctrine of legitimate expectation or otherwise.'

28.    In drawing the parties' attention to the decision of the Tribunal  in
    PP and SP, (that was reported as regards  the  effect  on  deletion  of
    paragraph 252 of the Immigration Rules on applications made before  the
    date of deletion but  not decided until after the date of deletion), it
    was said at paragraph  22 inter alia:

        'As Mr Ahmed properly acknowledged before us, when  paragraph   252
        was deleted from the Immigration Rules, there were no  transitional
        provisions dealing with the position of individuals,  such  as  the
        appellants,  who  had  applied  for  entry  clearance  under   that
        paragraph  prior to the date of  deletion  but  whose  applications
        were not decided until after the date of deletion.'

29.    Mr Jibowu properly reminded us, that the  Appellant  in  the  instant
    appeal had applied after the announcement  of  the  abolition  for  the
    Scheme but was refused some two weeks before the date of deletion.

30.    We reminded Mr Jibowu of the observation of  Richards  LJ,  that  the
    scheme had only remained in force until September 2002  'to  deal  with
    outstanding cases but thereafter has ceased to exist altogether'.

31.    Mr Jibowu submitted that the reference to the fate of  paragraph  252
    as  described  by  Richards  LJ  at  paragraph  22,  only  related   to
    applications for a special voucher and not to applications within  that
    period  by  dependants  of  existing  special  voucher   holders.    He
    maintained that voucher holders were still entitled to gain the benefit
    of their voucher by extending it to their dependants for  the  purposes
    of an entry clearance application.   The Rule in its entirety  was  not
    deleted until September 2002 and the Appellant made his application  in
    April  2002.

32.    We do not agree with Mr Jibowu's  interpretation  of  His  Lordship's
    findings at paragraph 22  of  Modhvadiya,  who  was  dealing  with  the
    contention that notwithstanding the "deletion" of the  Rule,  paragraph
    252 continued to apply to a person who had a pre-existing right to rely
    on that paragraph 'By virtue of the fact that their mother received  or
    was entitled to a special voucher', (Our emphasis).  His  Lordship  was
    considering inter alia, (see also e.g. paragraph 6 of  the  judgement),
    the contention, that the consequence of various Government  statements,
    gave rise to a legitimate expectation that the Tribunal (in RM), should
    as a matter of substance, have  given  effect  to,  namely,  "that  the
    children of those who were or should have been special voucher holders,
    should have been permitted to enter as if the changes in the Rules  and
    the scheme had not been made".(Our emphasis). His  Lordship  considered
    that argument to "lack any real prospect of success". In  part  it  was
    "the argument rejected for sound  reasons  by  the  Tribunal"  and  the
    additional material and submissions placed and  developed  before  him,
    gave it "no greater substance".

33.    Indeed, at paragraph 22 of his  judgement,  his  Lordship  continued:
    'Even if she, [the Sponsor] had received or been entitled to a  special
    voucher' (Our emphasis), applicants could not  rely  on  paragraph  252
    itself, because it had disappeared completely from  the  Rules  by  the
    time of their application. Had such applicants applied in time it would
    be a different matter, but in the event they  were  too  late.  We  are
    mindful in that regard, that this Appellant made application after  the
    scheme had been closed in March 2002 to new applicants and that it only
    remained in force until September 2002 to deal with outstanding  cases.
    This scheme had gone by the time the Appellant in  the  instant  appeal
    applied".

34.    It was Mr Jibowu's contention, having taken us through  the  passages
    in the IDI to which we have referred, that  they  implied  recognition,
    that dependants of existing Special  Voucher  Holders,  notwithstanding
    the  abolition  of  the  Rule,  were  still  entitled  to  have   their
    applications considered.     Miss Brown maintained that the IDI at  1.2
    was clear as to the abolition of the scheme entirely.  There were to be
    no applications for vouchers from 6  March  2002,  the  only  exception
    being applications that  were  still  to  be  considered  having  been
    received before the abolition of the Rule up until September  2002 when
    the Rule would be deleted.

35.    Miss Brown maintained that it therefore did not relate to  dependants
    of special voucher holders. She informed us that she  had  checked  the
    position with Alison Bennett of  the  Managed  Migration  Strategy  and
    Decision Department who had confirmed the position.

36.    Miss Brown accepted however, that it was not appropriate for  her  to
    give evidence about the matter as she was relating third hand what  she
    had been told by someone else. She had  however,  been  told  that  the
    abolition of the scheme meant that it was not available or amenable  to
    subsequent applications by dependants of special voucher holders.

37.    It was at this point in the hearing, that the parties agreed with  us
    that for the Tribunal to make a proper decision on the matter,  it  was
    necessary to have a statement  from  the  appropriate  Officer  of  the
    relevant Home Office Department concerned.   Further,  as  regards  the
    matters referred to in the IDI, it was  necessary  that  the  statement
    should provide clarification as to the responsibilities of  'AED  Group
    5', with regard to such applications. We  thus  adjourned  the  hearing
    part-heard, to the first available date after 15 November 2006, (having
    been informed by Miss Brown, that the reality of the situation was that
    she was unlikely to obtain all the information necessary  earlier  than
    six to eight weeks), for such further evidence to be  obtained  and  we
    made appropriate directions.

38.    At the resumed hearing on 22  January  2007,  the  Tribunal  and  the
    parties had the benefit  of  a  comprehensive  witness  statement  from
    Alison  Bennett,  the  Assistant  Director  of  the  Managed  Migration
    Strategy and Review Directorate.

39.    We find  that  Miss  Bennett's  statement  has  only  but  served  to
    reinforce our findings.

40.    Miss Bennett was clear, that she made the statement  in  response  to
    the request to the  Tribunal  for  further  advice  about  the  Special
    Voucher Scheme and she began by pointing  out,  that  she  intended  to
    describe the background to the scheme, its eligibility, the decision to
    abolish the scheme and the position of dependants  of  special  voucher
    holders between 5 March 2002 and September 2002.   It is right that  we
    should set out the remainder of her detailed and most helpful statement
    in full:

        'Background
        The special voucher scheme was introduced in 1968 in recognition of
        the specific hardship being suffered at that time by United Kingdom
        passport holders  (UKPH)  and  their  dependants,  who  were  under
        political pressure to leave their countries of  residence  in  East
        Africa, but who held no other citizenship and had nowhere  else  to
        go.   Under the scheme, heads of household could apply for vouchers
        to come to the UK  for  settlement  with  their  families.  Several
        thousand British Overseas Citizens and other  UK  Passport  holders
        took advantage of the scheme and settled in the UK in the 1990s and
        1980s.


        United Kingdom Passport holders (UKPH)  are  generally  persons  of
        Asian origin who derived  British  Overseas  Citizenship  (formerly
        citizenship of the United  Kingdom  and  Colonies,  CUKC)  from  or
        residence in  a  former  British  dependency  in  East  or  Central
        Africa.   When those countries  became  independent,  many  of  the
        residents of Asian origin automatically acquired citizenship of the
        new states or did so by registration within  a  prescribed  period.
        Many, however, did not acquire local citizenship and retained their
        citizenship of the United Kingdom and Colonies after  independence.




        The term UKPH also includes:


        'British protected persons (BPPs) most of whom derived their status
        from a connection  with  former  British  Protectorates  or  former
        Trusts  Territories  but  have  not  become   citizens   of   these
        countries;


        British subjects born before 1 January  1949  who had  that  status
        by reason of their connection with former British India but who had
        not become citizens of  India  or  Pakistan  when  those  countries
        became independent (usually, in the case of persons of Asian ethnic
        origin, because they were not living in one for those countries  at
        that time).     In 1980, it was estimated that there were at  least
        50,000 persons in this situation.


        Eligibility
        UKPHs, who  held no other citizenship and who have nowhere else  to
        go but the UK, who are heads of household, who are  under  pressure
        to leave their countries of residence and who intend to  settle  in
        the UK, were eligible for the voucher scheme,  provided  that  they
        were :

            . BOCs, BPPs and British subjects of Indian Subcontinent origin
              resident in an East African country with its own quota'


            . BOCs,  BPPs  and  British  subjects  of  Indian  Subcontinent
              origin resident in India with an East African connection;


            . BOCs, BPPs and British subjects of Indian Subcontinent origin
              resident in the rest of the world who have  an  East  African
              connection and are under pressure to leave their  country  of
              residence.

        Vouchers were issued on the basis of the applicant's  circumstances
        at the time one became available.  Thus an applicant  who  took  on
        another citizenship after applying  for  a  voucher  would  not  be
        eligible, nor would a single woman who married before receiving the
        voucher, unless she qualified as head of the household.


        East African Connection
        An East African Connection covers UKPHs who  have been resident  in
        Kenya, Uganda, Zambia, Malawi, or Yemen, provided that they are:

            .  UKPHs  who  acquired  British   nationality  by   birth   or
              registration in any of these countries;


            . UKPH children born to those above; or


            . UKPHs who have at any time been settled in any of the  listed
              countries, regardless of when they left.



        Pressure to leave
        At some time it was decided that all  UKPH  residents  in  an  East
        African  country  or  resident  in  India  with  an  East   African
        connection, would automatically be considered to meet the  pressure
        to leave criterion. Otherwise, an applicant will generally  not  be
        considered as eligible and will become so only where  he  is  under
        pressure to leave his country of residence if he has no unqualified
        right of entry to any other country and:


            . He is about to be deported;


            . His residence permit has expired or been cancelled and  there
              is no possibility of his obtaining a further extension;  or


            . He has a standard for living substantially below that of  his
              country of residence as a direct  result  of  restriction  on
              trade, residence or employment which apply  to   non-citizens
              generally or to UKPHs in particular.

         Head of Household
         For the purpose of this scheme, heads of household are :

            . Men over the age of eighteen;


            . Women over the age of eighteen who are eligible,  widowed  or
              divorced; or

            . Women over the age of  eighteen  married  to  a  man  who  is
              incapable of fulfilling the role of  head  of  household  for
              medical reasons;  or

            . Dependant children, who are unmarried and unemployed, between
              the ages of eighteen and twenty-five, if their  parents  have
              not applied for vouchers and if they intend to come to the UK
              for settlement without their parents.

        Intention to settle
        Vouchers will only be issued to applicants  who  intend  to  settle
        permanently in the UK.   They should not be issued if the applicant
        intends to use the voucher simply as a fall-back "escape route" and
        proposes to continue business in his country of  residence,  or  to
        leave his dependants here to become a burden on public funds.

        Abolition of the Scheme
        The special voucher scheme was abolished on 5 March  2002  and  the
        Government announced that no new applications for special  vouchers
        would be considered.  Paragraphs 249-254 of the  Immigration  Rules
        (HC 395) were later  removed  from  the  Immigration  Rules  on  18
        September  2002  which  was  the  earliest  opportunity  after  the
        announcement of the abolition of the scheme.

        There was no specific mention for the  position  of  dependants  of
        special  vouchers  in  the  annoucement  to  Parliament.   However,
        dependants of special voucher holders came within the remit of  the
        scheme and consequently the abolition of the scheme was intended to
        include the abolition of the provision for  dependants  of  special
        voucher holders.   And thus, from 5 March 2002, there was no longer
        provision for dependants of special voucher holders to come  t  the
        UK on that basis.  All applications submitted after  5  March  2002
        should therefore have been refused.

        AEAD Group 5 considered all referred entry clearance  applications,
        including referred applications  for  special  vouchers  and  their
        dependants.  This would usually include applications which required
        consideration outside the  Immigration  Rules.  For  example  where
        compassionate or exceptional circumstances  had  been  raised.   In
        addition, specific entry clearance posts were advised to refer  all
        special voucher applications to the Home Office  (i.e.  AEAD  Group
        5).


        Annex C to Chapter 7 of the Immigration  Directorate  Instructions,
        the "Special Voucher Guidance Notes" is  no  longer  available  but
        from my recollection this set out the criteria and eligibility  for
        the scheme which I have included above.'

40.     Mr  Jibowu  in  response  to  Miss  Bennett's  statement,  began  by
    observing, that those who applied  under  the  Special  Voucher  Scheme
    before 5 March 2002  were  entitled  to  (if  their  applications  were
    successful) to seek entry clearance and indefinite leave to  remain  in
    the United Kingdom.     He maintained  that  it  would  not  serve  any
    purpose at all, if those who had applied  before  5  March  2002,  were
    granted vouchers on 6 March 2002 and were allowed to pursue their entry
    clearance for indefinite leave to remain in  the  United  Kingdom  with
    their dependants, whilst a person who obtained a  voucher  on  4  March
    2002 was precluded, because the Rule only applied to applications  that
    were still pending.  Mr Jibowu maintained that the fact of the  voucher
    itself was the  condition  precedent  to  any  entry  clearance  or  an
    application for indefinite leave to remain.

42.    Mr Jibowu referred us to the decision of the Tribunal in PP  and  SP,
    the background of which was that on 17 April 2002, the appellants  made
    separate applications to the Respondent for entry clearance to come  to
    the United Kingdom as the children of a Special Voucher Holder,  namely
    their mother, and it was not in dispute between the parties,  that  she
    had been granted a special voucher in 1996 or 1997 and had entered  the
    United Kingdom pursuant to the  terms  of  that  voucher  on  26  April
    1997.

43.    At paragraph 4 of PP and  SP,  it  was  noted  that  the  appellants'
    applications were under paragraph 252, that the Tribunal  described  as
    'still in force at that time ,,,'.

44.    Mr Jibowu submitted, that it was therefore clear to the  Tribunal  in
    that case and was thus clear in  terms  of  the  instant  appeal,  that
    insofar  the  Appellant's  application  was  concerned,  it  was  still
    applicable.

45.    Mr Jibowu continued:

        'I say the rules were retained and not deleted, so that  those  who
        had satisfied the  condition  precedent,  namely  the  grant  of  a
        voucher, could then go on to make their application for  indefinite
        leave to remain after 5 March  2002.'

46.    Mr Jibowu referred us to paragraph 249 that, he contended, was  clear
    as to the requirements for indefinite leave to enter as the holder of a
    special voucher where the  person  concerned  was  a  British  Overseas
    Citizen and in possession of such a  voucher.   As  such,  the  special
    voucher was in effect an entry certificate which entitled the holder to
    entry clearance upon arrival in the United Kingdom without the need  to
    make a further application.  He maintained that if that  was  so,  then
    there would be no point in retaining the Rule, that those with vouchers
    and their dependants would be required to make a  specific  application
    for entry clearance to the United Kingdom.

47.    With respect to Mr Jibowu, we find  that  he  did  not  consider  the
    provisions of the Rules within their proper context. Paragraph 252  was
    clear, that the requirements for indefinite leave  to  enter  as  inter
    alia, the child of a  Special  Voucher  Holder  were  that  the  person
    concerned:

        '(i) (was) in possession of a valid United Kingdom entry  clearance
             for settlement in the United Kingdom in this capacity; and


        (ii)   (could)  and  (would  )  be  maintained   and   accommodated
             adequately by the special voucher holder  without  recourse  to
             public funds'

48.    It is thus apparent, that paragraph 252, called  upon  the  dependant
    of a Special Voucher Holder to make a specific  application  for  entry
    clearance, so as to satisfy those requirements.

49.    We would agree with Miss Brown, that Miss  Bennett's  statement  only
    but served to reinforce Miss Brown's submissions that she began  before
    us at the hearing on 22 August 2006.

 50.  It is clear that the Special Voucher Scheme was abolished on 5  March
    2002.   The announcement of the abolition was equally applicable to the
    dependants of Special Voucher Holders.

  51. As Miss Bennett clarified in her  statement,  although  there  was  no
    specific mention of their position in the announcement  to  Parliament,
    dependants of Special Voucher Holders came within  the  remit  for  the
    scheme. Consequently  the  abolition  of  the  scheme  encompassed  the
    abolition of the provision for dependants of Special  Voucher  Holders.
    There was thus  from  5  March  2002,  no  longer  provision  for  such
    dependants to come to  the  United  Kingdom  on  that  basis.   Special
    Voucher Holders and their dependants were covered by the  same  scheme.
    That scheme was abolished in its entirety.

  52. We find that Miss Bennett's  statement,  clarifies  that  it  was  the
    intention and indeed the case, that when the scheme was abolished on  5
    March 2002, it was abolished for everyone and there was no  longer  any
    provision by which dependants of Special  Voucher  Holders  could  seek
    entry clearance to the United Kingdom in that capacity.

 53.  Indeed, Miss Bennett in her statement, referred to the provisions  of
    paragraphs 249 to 254 of the Immigration Rules HC 395 that  were  later
    removed on 18 September 2002,  that  being  'the  earliest  opportunity
    after the announcement of the abolition of the scheme'.

54.     Paragraphs  249  to  254  did  not,  as  Richards  LJ  concluded  in
    Mohdvadiya,  provide  applicants  who  made  applications   after   the
    abolition of the scheme in March 2002 with any  legitimate  expectation
    that they were entitled to be treated in accordance with the  terms  of
    the  special  voucher  concession  even  if  the  scheme   itself   had
    disappeared. His Lordship endorsed the views of the Tribunal in RM,  in
    that regard. He was clear that there was nothing within the  additional
    material and submissions placed and developed before him  that  in  his
    judgment, demonstrated that:

        ' . the scheme [had] continuing force after  it  had  been  deleted
        from the Rules or could give the children of  the  judicial  review
        claimants any  equivalent  rights  through  the  operation  of  the
        doctrine of legitimate expectation or otherwise'.

55.    We would thus agree with Miss  Brown,  that  the  announcement  on  5
    March 2002  as reflected in the IDIs, was an abolition of the scheme in
    its  entirety.  No  further  appeals  after  5  March  2002  would   be
    entertained or considered by the Secretary of State or Entry  Clearance
    Officer for entry to the United Kingdom on the  basis  of  the  Special
    Voucher Scheme and that applied equally, to voucher holders  themselves
    seeking entry clearance on that basis or dependants of Special  Voucher
    Holders seeking such entry clearance.

56.    It is apparent to us, that between 5 March 2002 and the  deletion  of
    the relevant  rules  on  18  September  2002,  that  only  those  whose
    applications had been made prior to 5 March 2002 and which  were  still
    outstanding on that date, remained to be considered.

57.    The guidance as to how to deal with any application received after  5
    March 2002, was that new applications would not be  accepted  by  Entry
    Clearance Officers, and that applied to voucher holders  themselves  or
    their dependants.

58     We  are  satisfied  that  Miss  Bennett's  statement,  sets  out  and
    confirms the position and clearly indicates the  Secretary  of  State's
    position, that no  applications  from  dependants  of  Special  Voucher
    Holders would be considered after 5 March  2002 if they had not applied
    before that date.

59.    We thus reject Mr Jibowu's assertion that in fact the Rules  remained
    in force implicitly to applications made after 5 March 2002 under those
    provisions and continued to be considered. Indeed,  the  relevant  IDIs
    demonstrate that this was not the case.

 60.  We were unpersuaded by Mr Jibowu's attempt,  to  draw  a  distinction
    between the manner in which dependents would be treated and the way  in
    which special voucher holders would be treated until  the  deletion  of
    the rules on 18 September 2002. We agree with Miss Brown,  that  if  Mr
    Jibowu's assertion that the Rules remained in force for dependants, but
    not for special voucher holders  themselves  were  correct,  then  with
    respect to him, it would make  no  sense  that  the  abolition  of  the
    scheme, though relevant to voucher holders, was not relevant  to  their
    dependants.

61.    The Tribunal in RM was clear that  the  scheme  was  abolished  on  5
    March  2002  and  although  the  rules  for  Special  Voucher   Holders
    themselves stayed until September 2002, there was  no  basis  on  which
    applications after 5  March  2002  could  be  considered  unless  these
    provisions equally applied to dependants for Special  Voucher  Holders.



62.    As Miss Brown rightly clarified, it  was  in  consequence,  that  the
    Respondent's Notice of  Decision,  dated  5  September  2002,  confined
    itself to  whether  or  not  the  Appellant  met  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 317 of HC 395. Indeed that was in the circumstances, the only
    basis  under  which  this  Appellant's  application  could  have   been
    considered

63.    Miss Brown accepted that some misunderstanding had  arisen,  in  that
    within the Explanatory Statement, it was stated on  page  1,  that  the
    Appellant's application was refused under paragraph 317 and no  mention
    was made to the  Appellant's  application  under  paragraph  252,  when
    strictly speaking, there should have been.  Nonetheless we would  agree
    that the subsequent Notice of Decision  made  the  position  absolutely
    clear.

64.    For the above reasons, we are satisfied that  the  Immigration  Judge
    was right to reject the contention that there  remained  provision  for
    dependants of special voucher holders to come  to  the  United  Kingdom
    after the announcement of the abolition of the scheme on 5 March  2002.
    As  Immigration  Judge  Freestone  noted  at  the  conclusion  of   her
    determination, the Tribunal in RM observed at  paragraph  44  of  their
    determination that:

        '... the Rules cannot be interpreted as if they still contain Rules
        which have been removed from them, simply because they at one time,
        provided a basis for someone to come who now cannot  do  so."   The
        Rules  would  effectively  be  variously  frozen  as  at  the  time
        preferred by applicants.'

65.    We are satisfied that the Immigration Judge made no error of  law  in
    arriving at that conclusion and there is therefore  no  arguable  basis
    for interfering with her decision.

Decision
66.    The original Tribunal did not make a material error of  law  and  the
    original determination of the appeal shall therefore stand.


Signed
   Date
Senior Immigration Judge Goldstein


