
ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL


                AH (Scope of s103A reconsideration) Sudan [2006] UKAIT 00038

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at: Field House  Date of Hearing: 11 October 2005
                             & 5 January 2006

            Promulgated On: 19 April 2006

                                   Before:

                    Mr C M G Ockelton (Deputy President)
                   Mr D K Allen (Senior Immigration Judge)
                   Mr P R Lane (Senior Immigration Judge)

                                   Between


                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
11 October 2005:
For the Appellant:           Dr Chirico, instructed by Wilson & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:          Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer
5 January 2006:
For the Appellant:           Mr J Walsh, instructed by Wilson & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:          Mr L Parker, Home Office Presenting Officer

In a reconsideration of an appeal following  an  order  for  reconsideration
made by the AIT (as distinct from a grant of permission  to  appeal  to  the
IAT):  (1) The reconsideration is of the appeal as a whole;   therefore  (2)
it is not limited to the grounds  for  review  or  the  grounds  upon  which
reconsideration is ordered, but (3) it is limited to the grounds  of  appeal
to the Tribunal (including any  variation  allowed  under  rule  14  by  the
original judicial decision-maker).  (4) No directions can limit  the  issues
before the Tribunal on a reconsideration, but (5) the  way  in  which  those
issues are dealt with can be limited by directions.  In particular  (6)  the
Tribunal has the earlier  determination  before  it  and  can  and  probably
should adopt any parts of it that are not vitiated by error of law.  (7)  In
deciding whether there is a material error of  law  within  the  meaning  of
rule 31(2) and (5) the Tribunal  is  similarly  not  restricted  to  matters
raised in the grounds for review and any reply, but (8) at the  first  stage
of the reconsideration it is unwilling to allow  parties  to  raise  matters
that - despite having had an opportunity to do so -  they  have  not  raised
previously, or that have been  specifically  rejected  as  arguable  in  the
order for reconsideration or by direction, and (9) if  it  wishes  to  raise
issues of its own motion it will need to ensure that the parties  are  given
an adequate opportunity to deal with them.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

  1. The Appellant is a citizen of Sudan.  He appealed against the decision
     of the Respondent on 25 May 2004 refusing his entry clearance  with  a
     view to settlement as the husband of  the  sponsor.   His  appeal  was
     heard by an Adjudicator, Mrs P Milligan-Baldwin,  and  dismissed.   He
     served an application for permission  to  appeal  to  the  Immigration
     Appeal Tribunal.  That application was pending before the  Immigration
     Appeal Tribunal on 4  April  2005,  when  both  Adjudicators  and  the
     Tribunal were replaced by the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal.   Under
     Article 6(1) of the Asylum and Immigration  (Treatment  of  Claimants,
     etc) Act 2004 (Commencement No 5 and  Transitional  Provisions)  Order
     2005  (SI  2005/565)  the  application  fell  to  be  treated  as   an
     application for an order that the  AIT  reconsider  the  Adjudicator's
     decision on the appeal.

  2. The grounds accompanying the application raised two principal  issues.
     The first was  procedural  unfairness  in  relation  to  a  concession
     apparently made by the Respondent and concerning the validity  of  the
     marriage between the Appellant and the sponsor.  The second  was  that
     the Adjudicator had erred in her treatment of Article 8.

  3. The Senior Immigration Judge who considered the application on 23 June
     2005 ordered  reconsideration.   He  gave  reasons  for  his  decision
     including  assertions  that  the  grounds   relating   to   procedural
     unfairness and the concession raised arguable errors  of  law  by  the
     Adjudicator.  He specifically refused to make an order on  the  ground
     relating to Article 8 on  the  basis  that  arguments  based  on  that
     Article had in principle no application to this appeal.

Material error of law

  4. We convened on  11  October  2005  to  begin  the  reconsideration  so
     ordered.  We were required by rule 31 of the 2005 Rules (which we  set
     out below) to determine whether there was a material error of  law  in
     the  Adjudicator's  determination.   We  had  little   difficulty   in
     concluding that there was.

  5. The Respondent took no issue on the validity of the  marriage  in  the
     Notice of Refusal or the Explanatory Statement.  At the hearing before
     the Adjudicator, the Presenting Officer, representing the  Respondent,
     was invited to confirm and did confirm that there was no issue  as  to
     subparagraph (i) of paragraph 281 of HC 395:  he  accepted,  he  said,
     that the  Appellant  and  the  sponsor  were  formally  married.   The
     Adjudicator gave no indication at the hearing  that  she  intended  to
     differ from this agreed position, nor did she question the validity of
     the marriage.  As a result, no arguments were addressed to her on that
     issue, and no evidence was called specifically relating to it.

  6. In her determination, the Adjudicator noted that the sponsor had  been
     previously married and that  the  validity  of  her  marriage  to  the
     Appellant therefore depended  on  there  having  been  a  valid  prior
     divorce  from  her  first  husband.   She  considered  the   documents
     available to her and conducted what she describes as a "review of case
     law" (otherwise unspecified),  leading  her  to  the  conclusion  that
     "where a divorce was obtained before or after 1988 [sic],  section  44
     of the 1986 Family Law Act applies".  She concluded,  without  further
     investigation, that the divorce was invalid because "obtained" in  the
     British Islands and  not  granted  apparently  by  a  court  of  civil
     jurisdiction, and therefore that the Appellant and  the  sponsor  were
     not validly married.

  7. It is, we think, fair to say that it is  not  now  asserted  that  the
     marriage is valid.  What is said in the grounds is that the Respondent
     was treating the marriage as valid and was entitled to  do  so.   That
     may or may not be right.  It is clear that by not raising the question
     at the hearing the Adjudicator entirely deprived the  parties  of  any
     opportunity to make submissions on it.  If  she  was  troubled  by  an
     issue that had been conceded at the hearing, she should have  arranged
     for the parties to have an opportunity to address her on it.  She  did
     not do so.  As a result, there is no doubt at all  that  there  was  a
     considerable measure of procedural unfairness.  She decided  an  issue
     against the Appellant without hearing him on it.

  8. It cannot be said that the arguments on this  issue  proposed  in  the
     ground were bound to fail.  As a result, and particularly  bearing  in
     mind the sensitivity to fairness of the proceedings that is  axiomatic
     when an appellant  appeals  from  abroad,  we  conclude  that  by  the
     procedure she adopted the Adjudicator materially erred in law.

The ambit of reconsideration

  9. We accordingly passed from the first of our tasks under rule 31 to the
     second.  At this point, Dr Chirico indicated that he proposed to  take
     no further issue on the validity of the  marriage  or  the  concession
     relating to it.  He  no  longer  depended  on  an  argument  that  the
     marriage was formally valid.  Instead, he proposed to raise  arguments
     based on human rights grounds, the very grounds in fact which had been
     specifically rejected by the  Senior  Immigration  Judge  who  ordered
     reconsideration.  We accordingly needed to consider whether  he  could
     do so and, if so, whether he could do so as of  right  or  whether  he
     needed our permission.  That is the same as the question  whether  the
     order for reconsideration limits (finally or provisionally) the  scope
     of the reconsideration, or whether its only function is to  allow  the
     reconsideration to take place at all.

 10. Dr Chirico's  submission  was  based  on  what  he  submitted  was  an
     ambiguity in rule 27 of the 2005 Rules, which require  an  Immigration
     Judge making an order for reconsideration to  state  "the  grounds  on
     which the Tribunal is  ordered  to  reconsider  its  decision  on  the
     appeal".  The submission was that that rule could be read as requiring
     a statement of the grounds of  review  to  which  the  reconsideration
     would be devoted;   or  it  could  be  taken  as  requiring  merely  a
     statement of the  reasons  why  reconsideration  was  ordered.   In  a
     lengthy and powerful submission, Dr Chirico sought to demonstrate that
     the latter  reading  must  be  correct  and  indeed  that  intractable
     difficulty would arise from adopting the  former  reading.   Mr  Avery
     simply submitted  that  the  former  reading  was  preferable  in  the
     interests of the economy of Tribunal hearings.

The law

 11. Rule 27(2) cannot be read out of context.  It is one of  a  number  of
     procedure  rules  dealing  with  reconsideration,   made   under   the
     provisions of the 2002 Act (as amended), the amendments to which  also
     introduced the system of reconsideration in place of  appeals  to  the
     Immigration Appeal Tribunal effective from 4 April 2005.

 12. The relevant provisions of the 2002 Act are the following:

        "103A    Review of Tribunal's decision
        1) A party to an appeal [to the Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal]
           may apply to the appropriate court,  on  the  grounds  that  the
           Tribunal made an error  of  law,  for  an  order  requiring  the
           Tribunal to reconsider its decision on the appeal.
        2) The appropriate court may make an order under subsection (1)-
              a) only if it thinks that the Tribunal may have made an  error
                 of law, and
              b) only once in relation to an appeal.
        [(3) sets out the time limits.]
        4) But-
              a) rules of court  may  specify  days  to  be  disregarded  in
                 applying subsection (3)(a), (b) or (c), and
              b) the appropriate  court  may  permit  an  application  under
                 subsection (1) to be made outside the period  specified  in
                 subsection (3) where it thinks that the  application  could
                 not reasonably  practicably  have  been  made  within  that
                 period.
        5) An application under  subsection  (1)  shall  be  determined  by
           reference only to-
              a) written submissions of the applicant, and
              b) where rules of court permit, other written submissions.
        6) A decision of the appropriate  court  on  an  application  under
           subsection (1) shall be final.
        ..."


      [The appropriate court is defined as the High Court, the High Court in
      Northern Ireland or the Court of Session as appropriate to  the  place
      where the appeal to the AIT was decided.]


 13. As a result  of  the  "transitional  provision"  in  paragraph  30  of
     Schedule 2 to the 2004 Act, the decisions are in  fact  made  for  the
     most part not by any member of those courts but by the Tribunal.   The
     provision is the following:

        "(1)This paragraph shall have effect in  relation  to  applications
           under section 103A(1) or for permission under section 103A(4)(b)-


           [during a period which began on 4 April 2005 and continues].
        2) An application in relation to which this  paragraph  has  effect
           shall be considered by a member of the  Asylum  and  Immigration
           Tribunal (in accordance with arrangements under  paragraph  8(1)
           of Schedule 4 to the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
           2002 (inserted by Schedule 1 above)).
        3) For the purposes of sub-paragraph (2)-
           a) references in section 103A to the appropriate court shall  be
              taken as references to the member  of  the  Tribunal  who  is
              considering  the  application  or  who  is  to  consider  the
              application,
           b) rules of court made for the purpose of section 103A(4)(a)  in
              relation to the court to which the application is made  shall
              have effect in relation to the application despite  the  fact
              that it is considered outside the appropriate court, and
           c) section 103A(6) shall be subject to sub-paragraph (5) below.
        4) Where a member of the Tribunal considers  an  application  under
           section 103A(1) or 103A(4)(b) by virtue of this paragraph-
           a)  he  may  make  an  order  under  section  103A(1)  or  grant
              permission under section 103(4)(b ), and
           b) if he does not propose to make an order or grant  permission,
              he shall notify the appropriate court and the applicant.
        5) Where notice is given under sub-paragraph (4)(b)-
           a) the applicant may notify the appropriate court that he wishes
              the court to consider this application under section  103A(1)
              or 103A(4)(b),
           b) the notification must be given within the period  of  5  days
              beginning with the date on which the applicant is treated, in
              accordance with rules under section 105 of  the  Nationality,
              Immigration and Asylum Act  2002,  as  receiving  the  notice
              under sub-paragraph (4)(b) above, and
           c) the appropriate court shall consider  the  application  under
              section 103A(1) or 103A(4)(b) if-
              i)  the  applicant  has  given  notice  in   accordance   with
                 paragraphs (a) and (b) above, or
             ai) the applicant has given notice under  paragraph  (a)  above
                 outside the period specified in paragraph  (b)  above,  but
                 the appropriate court concludes that the application should
                 be considered on the grounds  that  the  notice  could  not
                 reasonably practicably have been given within that period.
        6) Rules of court may specify days to be  disregarded  in  applying
           sub-paragraph (5)(b).
        ..."

 14. The 2004 Act also amended the rule-making power in s106  of  the  2002
     Act, enabling rules to be made "about reconsideration  of  a  decision
     pursuant to an order under section 103A(1) (which may, in  particular,
     include  provision  about  the   action   that   may   be   taken   on
     reconsideration and about  the  matters  and  evidence  to  which  the
     Tribunal may have regard)".  The rules in question  are  in  the  2005
     Rules, which contain provisions for the procedure generally on appeals
     to the AIT, the procedure on applications for review, the procedure on
     reconsiderations, and other matters including transitional provisions.
      We begin with the principal provisions of rules 26 and 27, which  are
     as follows:

           "Deciding applications for review
           26(1)  A  section  103A  application  shall  be  decided  by  an
                 immigration judge authorised by the President to deal  with
                 such applications.
           (2)   The immigration judge shall decide the application without
                 a hearing, and by reference only to the applicant's written
                 submissions and the documents filed  with  the  application
                 notice.
           (3)   The immigration judge is  not  required  to  consider  any
                 grounds  for  ordering  the  Tribunal  to  reconsider   its
                 decision other  than  those  set  out  in  the  application
                 notice.
           ...
           Form and service of decision
           27(1)  Where  an  immigration  judge  decides  a  section   103A
                 application, he must give written notice of  his  decision,
                 including his reasons which may be in summary form.
           (2)    Where  an  immigration   judge   makes   an   order   for
                 reconsideration-
                 a) his notice of decision must state the grounds  on  which
                    the Tribunal is ordered to reconsider  its  decision  on
                    the appeal;  and
                 b) he may give directions for the  reconsideration  of  the
                    decision on the appeal which may-
                    i) provide for any of the matters set out in rule  45(4)
                       which    he    considers    appropriate    to    such
                       reconsideration;  and
                   ii) specify  the  number  or  class  of  members  of  the
                       Tribunal  to  whom  the  reconsideration   shall   be
                       allocated.
           ..."

 15. Earlier in the Rules are the provisions for instituting an  appeal  to
     the Tribunal and for its decision by the  Tribunal,  including  issues
     relating to withdrawal, abandonment, adjournment and so on.  There  is
     a time limit for  giving  notice  of  appeal  against  an  immigration
     decision;  the time limit may be extended.  The notice of appeal  must
     "set out the grounds for the appeal;  and give reasons in  support  of
     those grounds" (Rule 8).  Rule 14 is as follows:

           "Variation of grounds of appeal
           14.   Subject to section 85(2) of the 2002  Act  [which  has  no
                 bearing on this appeal or on the general question  we  have
                 to decide], the appellant may vary his  grounds  of  appeal
                 only with the permission of the Tribunal."


 16. Rule 29 applies a number of the rules we have just  mentioned  to  the
     reconsideration of an appeal.  It does so in the following terms:

           "Rules applicable on reconsideration of appeal
           29.   Rules 15 to 23, except for rule 23(2) and (3), and Part  5
                 of these Rules apply to the reconsideration of an appeal as
                 they do to the initial  determination  of  an  appeal,  and
                 references in those rules to an appeal shall be interpreted
                 as including proceedings  for  the  reconsideration  of  an
                 appeal."


 17. It will be noted that rule 14 is not included amongst the rules  which
     apply on reconsideration as  they  do  on  the  initial  appeal.   The
     principal provisions for the  procedure  on  reconsideration  are  the
     following.

           "Reply
           30(1) When the other party to the appeal is served with an order
                 for reconsideration, he  must,  if  he  contends  that  the
                 Tribunal  should  uphold  the  initial  determination   for
                 reasons different from or additional to those given in  the
                 determination, file with the  Tribunal  and  serve  on  the
                 applicant a reply setting out his case.
           (2)   The other party to the appeal  must  file  and  serve  any
                 reply not later  than  5  days  before  the  earliest  date
                 appointed  for  any  hearing  of  or  in  relation  to  the
                 reconsideration of the appeal.
           (3)   In this rule, 'other party to the appeal' means the  party
                 other than the party on whose  application  the  order  for
                 reconsideration was made.


           Procedure for reconsideration of appeal
           31(1) Where an order for  reconsideration  has  been  made,  the
                 Tribunal must reconsider an appeal as  soon  as  reasonably
                 practicable after  that  order  has  been  served  on  both
                 parties to the appeal.
           (2)   Where the reconsideration is pursuant to  an  order  under
                 section 103A-
                 (a)   the Tribunal carrying out  the  reconsideration  must
                       first decide whether the  original  Tribunal  made  a
                       material error of law;  and
                 (b)   if it decides that the original Tribunal did not make
                       a material error of law, the Tribunal must order that
                       the original determination of the appeal shall stand.
           (3)   Subject to paragraph (2), the Tribunal must  substitute  a
                 fresh decision to allow or dismiss the appeal.
           (4)   In carrying out the reconsideration, the Tribunal-
                 (a)   may limit submissions or  evidence  to  one  or  more
                 specified issues;  and
                 (b)   must have regard  to  any  directions  given  by  the
                       immigration  judge  or  court   which   ordered   the
                       reconsideration.
           (5)   In this rule, a 'material error of law' means an error  of
                 law which affected the Tribunal's decision upon the appeal.


           Evidence on reconsideration of appeal
           32(1) The Tribunal may consider as evidence any note  or  record
                 made by the Tribunal of any previous hearing at  which  the
                 appeal was considered.
           (2)   If a party wishes to ask the Tribunal to consider evidence
                 which was not submitted on any previous occasion  when  the
                 appeal was considered, he must file with the  Tribunal  and
                 serve on the other party  written  notice  to  that  effect
                 which must-
                 (a)   indicate the nature of the evidence;  and
                 (b)   explain why it was  not  submitted  on  any  previous
                       occasion.
           (3)   A notice under paragraph (2) must be filed and  served  as
                 soon as practicable after the parties have been served with
                 the order for reconsideration.
           (4)   If the Tribunal decides to admit additional  evidence,  it
                 may give directions as to-
                 (a)   the manner in which;  and
                 (b)   the time by which,
                 the evidence is to be given or filed."

 18. Part 5 of the Rules contains general provisions.  It includes rule  45
     on directions, to which reference is made in rule 27(2).   We  do  not
     need to set out that rule, save to note that it permits  the  Tribunal
     to give directions to the parties relating to  "the  conduct"  of  any
     appeal or application and indicates  a  number  of  matters  on  which
     directions may be given, including the manner in which proceedings are
     to be conducted.  There is a power to limit number of documents, time,
     length of oral submissions and "the issues which are to  be  addressed
     at a hearing" (our emphasis):  but we do not read the rule  as  giving
     any specific power to limit the issues before the Tribunal.

 19. We  must  refer  finally  to  rule  62,  which  contains  transitional
     provisions.  The effect of the Asylum and  Immigration  (Treatment  of
     Claimants,  etc)  Act  2004  (Commencement  No  5   and   Transitional
     Provisions) Order 2005 is that on the commencement date, 4 April 2005,
     pending applications for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Immigration
     Appeal Tribunal became applications under s103A, and  appeals  pending
     before the Immigration Appeal Tribunal became reconsiderations.   Rule
     62 applies the rules on applications  and  reconsiderations  to  those
     pending matters with some modifications, including the following:

           "62(6)      Where, pursuant to a transitional provisions  order,
                 the Tribunal  reconsiders  an  appeal  which  was  original
                 determined by an adjudicator, Section 2 of  Part  3  [which
                 comprises  rules   27   to   33]   shall   apply   to   the
                 reconsideration, subject to paragraph (7).
           (7)   Where-
                 (a)   a party has been granted permission to appeal to  the
                       Immigration Appeal Tribunal against an  adjudicator's
                       determination before 4th April 2005, but  the  appeal
                       has not been determined by that date;  and
                 (b)   by virtue of  a  transitional  provisions  order  the
                       grant of permission to appeal is treated as an  order
                       for the  Tribunal  to  reconsider  the  adjudicator's
                       determination,
                 the reconsideration shall be limited to  the  grounds  upon
                 which the Immigration Appeal Tribunal granted permission to
                 appeal."

The position before 4 April 2005

 20. As is well  known,  before  the  coming  into  force  of  the  appeals
     provisions of the 2004 Act, an appeal from an Adjudicator  lay,  on  a
     point  of  law  only,  with  permission,  to  the  Immigration  Appeal
     Tribunal.  The Tribunal's function was thus to  hear  appeals  against
     Adjudicators' decisions.  An application  for  permission  had  to  be
     accompanied by grounds of appeal.  A grant or  refusal  of  permission
     had to be accompanied  by  reasons,  and  when  the  Tribunal  granted
     permission to appeal it  had  to  indicate  "the  grounds  upon  which
     permission to appeal  is  granted"  (Immigration  and  Asylum  Appeals
     (Procedure) Rules 2005 (SI 2003/652), r18.)

 21. The Tribunal's decision on the application was subject  to  a  process
     called Statutory Review, which enabled a party dissatisfied  with  the
     decision to have it reviewed by the appropriate  court.   This  remedy
     could be sought by a party who had been refused permission altogether;
      a party who had been granted permission only on limited grounds,  and
     who argued that other grounds in his application should also have been
     the subject of a grant of permission;  and by  a  party  against  whom
     permission  to  appeal  had  been  granted,  if  he  considered   that
     permission ought not to have  been  granted.   It  was  important  for
     parties to establish  the  grounds  of  appeal  upon  which  they  had
     permission (whether  by  grant  from  the  Tribunal  or  by  order  on
     Statutory Review), because of the  following  provision  in  the  2003
     Procedure Rules, applying only to appeals to  the  Immigration  Appeal
     Tribunal:

           "Variation of grounds of appeal
           20(1) A party may vary his  grounds  of  appeal  only  with  the
                 permission of the Tribunal.
           (2)   Where the Tribunal has refused permission to appeal on any
                 ground, it must not grant permission to vary the grounds of
                 appeal to include that ground unless it is satisfied  that,
                 because of special circumstances, it would be unjust not to
                 allow the variation."


Discussion

 22. The major change made on 4 April 2005 by the coming into force of  the
     appeals provisions of the 2004 Act was the abolition of second appeals
     within the statutory appellate system.   Whereas  previously  a  party
     could appeal against an Adjudicator's determination, there is now only
     the possibility of a reconsideration of the Tribunal's decision on the
     appeal.  The process of reconsideration requires the Tribunal to leave
     the original decision on the appeal unchanged unless it is found to be
     affected by a material error of law;  if and only if there is such  an
     error, the Tribunal is required to substitute a decision  allowing  or
     dismissing the appeal.  It does so, as we read  the  language  of  the
     statute and Rules, not by dealing  any  further  with  the  Tribunal's
     original decision but by replacing it;  and doing so  not  by  way  of
     appeal against it but by way  of  reconsideration  of  the  (original)
     appeal to the Tribunal.

 23. In this context it is worthy of note that, once a  material  error  of
     law has been detected, the Tribunal is not permitted simply to  affirm
     the earlier Tribunal decision even if, having reconsidered the appeal,
     it reaches the same decision as the earlier Tribunal.  It is  required
     in those circumstances to "substitute" a new decision that is  to  the
     same effect as the old.  Further, even if the  first  decision  is  in
     favour of the claimant, so that it is the Respondent at whose instance
     the  reconsideration  is  undertaken,  it  is  the  claimant  who  is,
     throughout the reconsideration,  regarded  for  all  purposes  as  the
     appellant.

 24. There could, we suspect, be no clearer indications that what is before
     the Tribunal on reconsideration is not an appeal against  the  earlier
     Tribunal decision but the appeal that was made by the claimant to  the
     Tribunal in the first  place.   If  that  is  right  (and  we  see  no
     particular reason to doubt it) it is not at all surprising  if  it  is
     found that the grounds of appeal to be treated  on  a  reconsideration
     are the same grounds of appeal as were originally  considered  by  the
     Tribunal.  And it appears that that is  precisely  what  is  intended.
     The Rules require grounds of appeal to be advanced in  the  notice  of
     appeal against the government decision;  rule 14 allows those  grounds
     to be varied with  the  permission  of  the  Tribunal;   but  rule  29
     excludes rule 14 from any application to  reconsiderations.   It  does
     not necessarily follow from that alone that on a  reconsideration  the
     claimant is entitled to all the grounds that he relied  upon  earlier;
     but it does appear that he can have no more.

 25. Is there, then, any scope for restricting, or power to  restrict,  the
     reconsideration by excluding any of the grounds of  appeal  that  were
     previously before the Tribunal?  Again, it would not be surprising  to
     find that there is no such power.  A Tribunal substituting a  decision
     on the (original) appeal in its reconsideration might well be expected
     to have to bear in mind all the grounds of appeal,  because  otherwise
     the new decision would run the risk of being worse than the old.

 26. What we do find, in  rules  31  (procedure  for  reconsideration),  32
     (evidence on reconsideration) and 45 (directions) are powers to  limit
     submissions or evidence (particularly new evidence) on reconsideration
     and to impose limits on the judicial time spent on a  reconsideration:
     for example, the matters to be the subject of  examination  or  cross-
     examination of witnesses, or the issues to be addressed at a  hearing,
     can be restricted.  Decisions under rules 31  and  32  and  directions
     under rule 45 are matters of  good  housekeeping.   If  (despite  some
     material error of law) an  issue  or  matter  has  been  properly  and
     satisfactorily dealt with in the first decision, there  is  no  reason
     why further time  should  be  spent  on  it  in  the  reconsideration.
     Although the Tribunal reconsidering the appeal has all the grounds  of
     appeal before it, it also has - indeed it has just been considering  -
     the previous decision, and it must be at liberty to adopt those  parts
     which it considers are sound.  The principle perhaps goes further than
     that.  Because the process is a reconsideration, we would  incline  to
     the view that in general the Tribunal should always adopt those  parts
     of a previous decision which are not shown to be unsound.

 27. It follows from what we have just said  that  the  reference  in  rule
     27(2) to directions given under Rule 45  is  not  itself  a  reference
     which enables the Tribunal, on making an order for reconsideration, to
     restrict the issues or grounds which are before the Tribunal.  It  may
     give directions about the way those issues are to be  dealt  with  and
     rule 31(4)(b) requires the Tribunal to have regard to - not  be  bound
     by - those directions.  Directions  under  rule  45  cannot,  however,
     altogether exclude any issue.

 28. If there is power to restrict the grounds available on reconsideration
     it must therefore be found in the words of rule 27(2)(a) requiring the
     decision on the application for a reconsideration order to "state  the
     grounds on which the Tribunal is ordered to reconsider its decision on
     the appeal".  We have set out the two possible readings of that phrase
     in paragraph 10 above.  We are confident that the words  do  have  and
     must have the meaning for which Dr Chirico contends.  Our reasons are,
     firstly, that that reading is consonant with the general  approach  to
     reconsideration which we derive from the statute  and  the  Rules  and
     which we have set out above, and secondly that the other reading leads
     to a difficulty so acute that it must be regarded as unintended.

 29. We need say little more about the  first  of  those  reasons.   It  is
     sufficient to point out that, in  the  light  of  everything  we  have
     already set out about the process of reconsideration, one would expect
     that, if a reconsideration is to  take  place  at  all,  it  would  be
     unlikely to benefit by a restriction on the grounds of appeal made  at
     what is essentially the permission stage, without notice  and  without
     any argument.  A restriction  on  the  grounds  at  that  stage  would
     essentially prevent the "appeal to the Tribunal"  being  reconsidered.
     It would be something else - a lesser appeal, or an  appeal  on  fewer
     grounds, that was being reconsidered.

 30. The second reason requires a little more by way of expansion, but  the
     difficulty is well illustrated by this appeal.  It is contained in the
     transitional provision of the 2004 Act and s103A(6) of the  2002  Act.
     When an application for reconsideration is considered by a  member  of
     the Tribunal under the transitional provision, he may  make  an  order
     for reconsideration or decide not to make an order.  It is only if  he
     decides not to make an order that the application can, in essence,  be
     renewed to the High Court, whose decision is final.  If he has made an
     order for reconsideration, however partial or defective the order  may
     be considered to be, the application cannot be renewed.

 31. In the present case, as we have seen, the application was made on  two
     bases.   The  member  of   the   Tribunal   considering   it   ordered
     reconsideration specifically on the first and refused it  specifically
     on the second.  Reconsideration having  been  ordered,  there  was  no
     possibility of inviting the High Court to amend the order  to  include
     the second issue as well.  If the second issue had stood alone and had
     been the subject of a refusal, the High Court could have reversed  the
     refusal.  As it stands as part of an application which was successful,
     the refusal, if effective, would appear to be irremediable.

 32. We do not think that result can possibly have been intended.  There is
     indeed some reason in the Rules themselves for considering that it was
     not.  We have already briefly made reference to the position as it was
     before 4 April 2005.  An appeal to  the  Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal
     required permission from the Tribunal.  Applications were made to  and
     determined by  the  Tribunal.   Following  the  determination  on  the
     application, either party could apply for review of the  determination
     by the High Court.  Thus, a party against  whom  permission  had  been
     granted might have the grant set aside;  a party who had been  refused
     might have the refusal reversed;  and a party who had been only partly
     successful in his application might succeed  in  persuading  the  High
     Court that grounds rejected in the Tribunal's permission determination
     should be open to be considered on the appeal.  The parties  thus  had
     ample opportunity to  ensure,  within  a  few  days  of  the  Tribunal
     application, that the grounds of  the  appeal  to  the  Tribunal  were
     properly settled.   In  addition,  the  procedure  rules  relating  to
     appeals to the Tribunal contained in the provisions in rule 20 that we
     set out above.  The Tribunal had power to amend the grounds  on  which
     permission had been granted and even, for  good  reason,  to  allow  a
     ground to be argued that had been rejected at  the  permission  stage.
     (We should point out that there is no suggestion in those  Rules  that
     any such application should be left until the hearing:  there  can  be
     no doubt that any such application ought to have been made as soon  as
     possible.)

 33. It is no doubt in the context of that entirely different  regime  that
     the 2005 Procedure  Rules  make  a  clear  distinction  between  those
     reconsiderations which might be regarded as  "pure"  reconsiderations,
     that is to say where the entire process of  ordering  and  undertaking
     reconsideration  post-dates   4   April   2005,   and   "transitional"
     reconsiderations, where the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal has  taken
     over appeals pending before the Immigration Appeal  Tribunal  on  that
     date.  In the latter case, the grounds contained  in  the  application
     are truly grounds of appeal rather than grounds  for  reconsideration,
     and the parties have already had a full  opportunity  to  ensure  that
     they are  complete.   As  a  result,  rule  62(7)  provides  that  the
     reconsideration shall, in such cases, be limited to the grounds (which
     must  here  mean  grounds  of   appeal   against   the   Adjduicator's
     determination) upon which  the  Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal  granted
     permission to appeal.   There  is  no  equivalent  limiting  provision
     relating to "pure" reconsiderations.  The  reason  is  no  doubt  that
     there is under the new regime no provision at all for the variation of
     grounds in the course of a reconsideration.  If  our  view  is  right,
     there does not need to be:  because, subject to any variation  at  the
     (original) appeal, the grounds of appeal to the Asylum and Immigration
     Tribunal remain the same throughout.  In  "transitional"  cases,  this
     Tribunal is performing a rather different  function,  because  of  its
     inheritance of cases from the Immigration Appeal Tribunal.  Nobody can
     claim to be entitled to raise new grounds now when, under the  process
     by which a further hearing of the appeal was ordered, they had  chosen
     not to do so earlier.

 34. We are aware of four possible objections to our reading of rule 27(2).
      The first is that it essentially prevents any limitation being put on
     the scope of the reconsideration.  That, as we have indicated,  we  do
     not regard as truly an objection.   It  is  the  scheme  of  the  Act.
     Limitations can be put on the way the reconsideration  proceeds  -  so
     much is clear from rules 31(4) and 32 as well as the reference to rule
     45;  and limitations should be put in  order  to  avoid  needless  re-
     litigation.  But a true reconsideration must have  the  whole  of  the
     original appeal as its ambit.

 35. The second objection is that if "the grounds on which the Tribunal  is
     ordered to reconsider its decision" in rule  27(2)  means  merely  the
     Tribunal member's grounds for making the reconsideration order,  there
     is a possible duplication of rule 27(1), which requires the notice  of
     decision to include "reasons which may be in summary form".  This does
     not appear to us to be a very serious problem.  Rule 27(1) relates  to
     all decisions on applications under s103A.  There are  evidently  four
     possible decisions under that section:  to extend time, to  refuse  to
     extend time, to make an order for reconsideration and  to  decline  to
     make an  order  for  reconsideration.   Whichever  decision  is  made,
     reasons are required by rule 27(1).  They  may  be  in  summary  form,
     although experience suggests that where there is a refusal the reasons
     need to be set out in some detail.  If reconsideration is ordered, the
     reason will no doubt be simply that the member of the Tribunal dealing
     with the application considers that it is arguable that there has been
     a material error of law.

 36. Only in that latter case does rule 27(2) go on to require him to state
     the grounds for his having reached that conclusion.  It may be that in
     the system as we envisage it there is no very great formal distinction
     between reasons and grounds, but the latter word is  perhaps  of  more
     weight and rule 27(2) does not give the opportunity of a summary form.
      If a reason for the difference is required, it  is  no  doubt  to  be
     found in the fact that in this one alone of the four  possibilities  a
     member of the Tribunal is raising the possibility that a  decision  by
     his colleague is wrong.  Nothing could be more natural that, in  those
     circumstances, he should say with some precision why  he  has  reached
     that conclusion.

 37. The third objection is similar.  It is that if the 2005 Rules  are  to
     be read as we suggest, phrases identical to those in  the  2003  Rules
     are to be given an entirely different meaning.  This, however, is only
     likely to be considered a problem if it is not  appreciated  that  the
     abolition of appeals within the Tribunal system is a major change  and
     that the procedures of the 2003 Rules cannot be expected to  be  those
     of 2005.  At the time of the  2003  Rules  the  IAT  existed  to  hear
     appeals against Adjudicators' determinations and it is in  the  nature
     of an appellate process that it  is  regulated  differently  from  the
     original procedure, and firmly.  It should not  be  assumed  that  the
     novel procedure of reconsideration is to be treated as though it  were
     an appeal against the Tribunal's earlier decision:  it is not.

 38. Besides, the phrase in rule 27(2) that we have to interpret is to  all
     intents and purposes identical to that in rule  26(3),  where  it  can
     only mean the reasons for considering that the previous  determination
     is at fault.  A similar phrase in the same set of  rules  is  of  more
     persuasive  force  in  interpretation  than  a  similar  phrase  in  a
     different set of rules.

 39. The fourth difficulty is a little more troublesome.  We  have  so  far
     been looking at the reconsideration as a whole and  have  reached  the
     conclusion that it ought to be on all the grounds that were before the
     Tribunal when it  made  its  original  decision.   Rule  31,  however,
     divides the reconsideration into two stages.  At the first stage,  the
     Tribunal is confined to considering whether the original Tribunal made
     a material error of law.  We need to consider what, if  any,  are  the
     restrictions on the issues  it  may  consider  in  order  to  reach  a
     conclusion on that question.  Evidently the starting point must be the
     order for reconsideration, which  gives  the  "grounds  on  which  the
     Tribunal is  ordered  to  reconsider  its  decision",  and  which  may
     incorporate all or parts of the grounds set out in the application for
     that order.  If we had  adopted  the  narrower  construction  of  rule
     27(2), that would be the end of the matter:  it would be those grounds
     only that could be the subject of the reconsideration.   But  we  have
     not adopted that reading.  The  grounds  of  the  reconsideration  are
     wider.  Does it follow from that that  the  Tribunal  is  entitled  or
     bound to look outside the grounds referred to in rule 27(2)  in  order
     to determine  whether  there  is  a  material  error  of  law  in  the
     Tribunal's original decision?  Can it consider  grounds  contained  in
     the application but specifically rejected?  Can  it  consider  grounds
     never previously mentioned by either of the parties?  Can it  consider
     grounds of its own motion?

 40. One possible answer to that series of questions might be based  on  an
     apprehension  of  a  limit  to  the  Tribunal's  jurisdiction   on   a
     reconsideration.  Here again, we can perhaps benefit by  looking  back
     to the Tribunal's predecessors.  Before the coming into force  of  the
     2002  Act,  the  Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal  had  jurisdiction   to
     entertain appeals on both fact and law.  By s101(1) of  the  2002  Act
     the Tribunal's jurisdiction was limited to hearing an appeal  "against
     the adjudicator's determination on a point of law".  It  followed,  as
     the Court of Appeal held in Miftari v SSHD [2005]  EWCA  Civ  481  and
     reiterated with some reservations in R (Iran) and others v SSHD [2005]
     EWCA Civ 982  that the Tribunal's jurisdiction was only engaged by the
     identification of an error of law in an application for permission  to
     appeal to it and the grant of permission to appeal on that basis:  the
     Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal   was   otherwise   apparently   without
     jurisdiction.  Those decisions were, however, made  in  respect  of  a
     system where there were two separate Immigration Appeal bodies, one of
     which  (the  Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal)  heard   appeals   against
     decisions of the other.  Questions of jurisdiction between  those  two
     bodies were no doubt crucial.  The position is now  rather  different,
     because of the integration of the two functions and the replacement of
     appeals by reconsiderations.  The appeal under reconsideration  is  an
     appeal  that  the  Tribunal  reconsidering  it  has  had  within   its
     jurisdiction  from  the   beginning.    It   may   be   that,   on   a
     reconsideration, there are limits to what can be reconsidered:  but we
     should not expect to find them in  legislation  or  decisions  dealing
     with the former system.

 41. The process for reconsideration begins with an application  which  has
     to be supported by grounds arguing that the (original) Tribunal made a
     material error of law (s103A(1)).  The order for reconsideration is to
     be made only if the appropriate court or the member  of  the  Tribunal
     dealing with the application "thinks that the Tribunal may  have  made
     an error of law" (s103A(2)).  The member of the  Tribunal  making  the
     order for reconsideration gives the grounds  on  which  the  order  is
     made, which in view of what we have said earlier must mean the  reason
     why he thinks that the original Tribunal made a material error of law.
      The rules contain no indication that the appropriate appeal court (or
     a member of the Tribunal) is not entitled to "think that the  Tribunal
     may have made an error of law" for reasons other than those  mentioned
     in the grounds.   On  the  contrary,  rule  26(3)  provides  that  the
     Tribunal is not required to consider any grounds other than  those  in
     the  application,  but,  in  contrast  to  rule  26(2),   imposes   no
     restriction on what the Tribunal may do.

 42. We  can  discover  no  restriction  elsewhere.   The  jurisdiction  to
     reconsider comes from a reconsideration order made because,  after  an
     application but not necessarily only because of what is  said  in  the
     application, a person qualified to make an order  for  reconsideration
     does so.  Once the order for reconsideration is made, the Tribunal  is
     bound by rule 31 to conduct it in a particular way.  Rule 31  requires
     the Tribunal to decide whether the original Tribunal made  a  material
     error of law.  There is no suggestion there that in  considering  that
     question it is confined to matters mentioned in  the  application  for
     reconsideration,  in  the  reconsideration  order  or  elsewhere.   We
     conclude that there are no formal  or  jurisdictional  limits  on  the
     issues that the Tribunal may take into account when  deciding  whether
     the original Tribunal made a material error of law.

 43. We would emphasise  that  that  does  not  mean  that  proceedings  on
     reconsideration cannot be the subject of any proper  limitation.   The
     following factors apply.  First, the party seeking the reconsideration
     can be expected to include in his application every reason upon  which
     he relies for considering that the Tribunal made a material  error  of
     law.  A party who seeks to raise new issues at a late stage is  likely
     to find that he is the subject  of  directions  restricting  the  time
     spent in considering such issues and the Tribunal  may  well  consider
     that issues that have any merit are highly likely to have been  raised
     in the  proper  place  and  at  the  proper  time,  that  is,  in  the
     application.

 44. Secondly, provision is made in rule 30 for a reply by the party who is
     not the party seeking the reconsideration.   Any  new  issues  of  law
     relied upon by that party should  be  contained  in  a  timely  reply,
     otherwise they are likely to be  treated  in  the  way  we  have  just
     indicated.

 45. Thirdly, both parties should be aware that the  reasoning  on  whether
     the (original) Tribunal made a material error of law is  not  inherent
     in the claimant's grounds of appeal to the  Tribunal:   it  is  a  new
     issue.  If there is to be a substituted determination, all the grounds
     of appeal are before the Tribunal.  That  does  not  mean  that  those
     grounds are themselves of any relevance in determining  whether  there
     should be a substituted determination.  The claim  that  the  original
     Tribunal erred in law needs to be put and evaluated separately.

 46. Fourthly, there can be no restriction on the Tribunal's identification
     of grounds of its own motion whether at the  stage  of  an  order  for
     reconsideration or at the reconsideration itself.  It is  not  dealing
     with the  criticism  of  another  judicial  body's  decision:   it  is
     reconsidering its own.  In those circumstances, it cannot sensibly  be
     required to decide that its original decision  contained  no  material
     error of law if it thinks that there was a material error of law.   It
     must, however, give an opportunity to the parties  to  deal  with  any
     matter that takes them by surprise.

Application to this appeal

 46. So far as the present appeal is concerned, the effect of our  decision
     on the ambit of reconsideration is that the Appellant is not prevented
     from raising arguments based on Article 8, even though those arguments
     were  rejected  by  the   Senior   Immigration   Judge   who   ordered
     reconsideration.  We saw  no  reason  not  to  allow  the  Appellant's
     representative to address us  on  them  and  to  call  or  adduce  any
     appropriate further evidence.

The substituted decision

 47. At the resumed hearing, Mr Walsh argued, in  considering  breaches  of
     Article 8, that post-decision evidence such as two visits to Egypt and
     the impending birth of a child could properly be taken into account as
     clarification of the circumstances appertaining at  the  time  of  the
     decision to refuse.   Evidence  concerning  intervening  devotion  was
     admissible within the terms set out by the Tribunal in  DR  (Morocco)*
     [2005] UKIAT 00038, reiterating well-established principles.  It was a
     question of weight ultimately rather than  admissibility.   The  post-
     decision evidence could be used to support the argument that when  the
     decision about entry clearance was made there was an intention to live
     together and there was family life.

 48. Thereafter Mr Walsh put in a statement  made  by  the  sponsor  on  21
     December 2005.

 49. The sponsor Mansura Hussein of 312 Southcote Lane,  Reading  RG30  3BL
     gave evidence.  She was from Darfur and would not feel able to go back
     to live there as she would feel in  danger.   Khartoum  was  not  safe
     either because of the Government and she had left the country  because
     of the Government.  She had been suffering from depression.   She  had
     been recognised as a refugee in the United Kingdom  in  2002  and  had
     been twice to Egypt most recently in April/May 2005.  She produced her
     passport.

 50. It could be seen from the passport that she had gone to  Cairo  on  17
     April 2005 and left on 17 June as she was later able to  clarify.   As
     regards her visit to Egypt in 2004, she had obtained a visa  from  the
     Egyptian Embassy in London.  On the occasion of the 2005 visit she had
     obtained the visa at the airport in Cairo.  They had put  in  a  stamp
     allowing her to stay for one to two months.  She had paid for  a  stay
     of two months.  If you wanted to stay longer then you would have to go
     to the office to get another stamp and it would cost a lot  of  money.
     She could not live in Egypt permanently.  Her husband had only  got  a
     month's permit and was not allowed to work.

 51. With regard to her husband's interview, she had initially met  him  in
     high school in about 1986.  With regard to his answer to  question  48
     she was sure that it was 1986.  Her child born in the  United  Kingdom
     had been born in June 2003.   She  had  married  the  Appellant  on  1
     December 2002.

 52. When cross-examined by Mr Parker the sponsor said that  she  had  been
     allowed to stay for exactly two months in Egypt when she went in 2005.
      She did not know why  that  requirement  had  not  been  put  in  her
     passport.  She was referred to her statement in the bundle  where  she
     had said that she met her husband in  1986  and  told  him  about  the
     problems with her first husband and how she been forced to marry  him.
     She was asked why at interview he did not know when she was previously
     married.  She said that they had not lived in the same village and her
     first marriage was when she was thirteen and he had not asked her when
     she married.  As to why he had said she had only one child  there  was
     confusion in that he had thought that what was meant was children with
     her.  As regards the answers to questions 44 to 47 she  thought  there
     were problems with translation.  Her daughter  had  been  born  on  17
     January 1987 and it could be that she was mistaken  in  what  she  had
     said in her statement.

 53. She was asked why the job offer that had been made to her husband  had
     not been mentioned to the Entry Clearance Officer and she said that no
     one had asked her husband about it.  It was pointed out to her that he
     had been asked about this at interview and she was  asked  whether  it
     was the case that the job offer did not exist at  that  time  and  she
     said it did not.  As regards his answer to question 31  at  interview,
     where he said he did not know when  she  was  divorced,  she  had  not
     discussed it with him.  She had told him she was divorced but  he  did
     not know when.  He had not  asked  her  about  this  and  it  was  not
     necessary.

 54. On re-examination she said that her daughter lived with her mother  in
     Darfur and had always lived there.

 55. In response to questions from the Tribunal the witness said  that  her
     husband came from Darfur and now lived  in  Port  Sudan.   He  was  in
     business and was very hard-working.  She was asked why she  could  not
     go and live with him and said that even for him the Government treated
     him differently and he had to pay more tax and they said he  supported
     the rebels in Darfur and he was not really comfortable.

 56. In his  submissions  Mr  Parker  argued  that  the  marriage  was  not
     subsisting.  The interview showed that the Appellant knew very  little
     about the sponsor as could be seen for  example  from  his  answer  to
     question 22 and also the answer to question 26 which both contradicted
     what was said by the sponsor in her statement.  There was confusion as
     to how he had introduced himself to her.  It was odd that he  did  not
     know when she divorced her first husband as it was  the  precursor  to
     the telephone marriage.  There was no substance to  the  relationship.
     The  Adjudicator's  comments  at  the  end  of  paragraph  26  of  the
     determination should also be noted.  As regards Article 8,  the  claim
     failed under the Immigration Rules so there could not be a  breach  of
     Article 8.  They could live  in  Egypt.   There  was  nothing  in  her
     passport to show restrictions at the time of the second visit  and  if
     she were allowed to stay for  only  two  months  then  it  was  highly
     surprising that there would not be a stamp in the passport  indicating
     the existence of any conditions.  There was no relationship  when  the
     application was made and as to whether there was a relationship now it
     had not been shown to be the case.  There had been two visits to Egypt
     and the child was the child of the couple if the sponsor was believed.

 57. In his submissions Mr Walsh argued with reference to  the  answers  at
     interview that it was necessary  to  be  cautious.   For  example,  in
     answer to question 43 the Appellant had been put in a  false  position
     by what was said at question 41 where it was implied  in  effect  that
     the child had been conceived after the telephone marriage.  There  was
     no inconsistency in the answers to questions 22 and 30 as the  sponsor
     said she had told the Appellant about the marriage  but  did  not  say
     that she had told him the date,  and  the  inference  that  Mr  Parker
     sought to be drawn should not  be  drawn.    There  had  clearly  been
     confusion about dates.

 58. As regards the post-decision evidence it was clear that they were both
     in Egypt at the same time and this was in order to be  together;   and
     the child had been conceived.  Mr Walsh could not say positively  that
     they were married under the laws of any country.  The  later  evidence
     however threw light on any doubts about the answers given at interview
     by the Appellant and showed a genuine relationship akin  to  marriage.
     On a balance of probabilities it should be accepted that the child was
     the Appellant's and that they had a genuine relationship.  At the date
     of decision there was a genuine relationship with an intention to live
     together as husband and wife.

 59. An issue  arose  as  to  when  the  sponsor  became  naturalised.   On
     instructions Mr Walsh told us that she had said she applied in January
     2003 and was told later that year that the decision had been made in a
     letter sent out but she had not received it so they had sent a further
     copy of the letter and a certificate of  naturalisation  and  she  had
     received it and then applied for her passport and she had received the
     passport after some two weeks.

 60. As recently as 2002, she had been found to have a well-founded fear of
     persecution in Sudan and the problems there were ongoing, so she could
     not realistically carry on family life there with the  Appellant.   As
     regards Egypt, on the evidence she had required  permission  to  enter
     and her stay had been limited to one or two months.   She  was  not  a
     national of Egypt and there was no evidence that the Appellant  was  a
     national of Egypt.  It was a question of lack of  respect  for  rather
     than interference with family life.

 61. As regards proportionality there had been a wrongful  assumption  that
     they were married and it was a genuine mistake and not a ruse designed
     to circumvent the  Immigration  Rules.   It  could  have  been  argued
     earlier that the application could succeed under the fianc rules  and
     the Tribunal should be satisfied that the Appellant  and  the  sponsor
     were in a position  to  come  within  the  Rules  at  a  future  date,
     including today, assuming that a divorce was  obtained.   They  should
     not be required to make a fresh application given the cost  and  delay
     and the fact that they had already been through the procedure and  the
     child was about to be born:   this  justified  the  appeal  succeeding
     under Article 8 rather than  them  being  required  to  make  a  fresh
     application after the obtaining of a divorce in the United Kingdom.

Decision

 62. It was essentially conceded at the earlier  hearing  that  the  appeal
     could not succeed under the Immigration Rules and accordingly, in  the
     light of our ruling above permitting human rights to  be  argued,  the
     appeal falls to be decided under Article 8 only.

 63. In this regard we are satisfied from the evidence both documentary and
     oral that the sponsor did stay in Cairo with  the  Appellant  for  two
     months, in 2004 and 2005, and that the child due to be  born  soon  to
     the sponsor is the  child  of  their  union.   We  accept  Mr  Walsh's
     submission that those two visits and the impending birth of the  child
     can properly be taken into account in the light of  the  clarification
     of the meaning of s85(5)(b) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
     Act 2002 in the IAT's decision in DR (Morocco)*.  Those  later  events
     clarify the question of the parties' intentions towards each other and
     the genuineness of their relationship as at the date of decision.   It
     has however, as we have noted above, been  conceded  that  the  appeal
     cannot succeed under the Immigration Rules and clearly in the light of
     authorities such as Huang this makes it very much more  difficult  for
     the appeal to succeed under Article 8.

 64. We accept, as will be clear from what we have said above,  that  there
     is family life in this case between the Appellant and the sponsor.  We
     agree with Mr Walsh that the genuineness of the  relationship  is  not
     materially shown to be diminished  by  answers  of  the  Appellant  at
     interview in particular in response to question  22  and  question  31
     since the evidence of the sponsor was not as to when she told him that
     she was married to her first  husband  and  when  they  ceased  to  be
     married but simply the fact of that taking place.   That  having  been
     said however, we do have concerns about the fact  that  the  Appellant
     would, on the evidence, appear to have been unclear as to  whether  or
     not the sponsor was divorced at the time  when  he  entered  into  the
     telephone marriage with her, given that  he  did  not  know  when  the
     divorce took place.  That  having  been  said  however,  we  consider,
     bearing in mind that it is a matter  of  a  balance  of  probabilities
     only, that the evidence shows that he knew  that  they  were  divorced
     even if he did not know when, and  hence  we  accept  that  they  both
     believed that they were entering into a genuine marriage on 1 December
     2002.

 65. The stumbling block for the  Appellant  however  is  the  question  of
     proportionality.  The only reasons Mr Walsh could give for  justifying
     a successful appeal under Article 8 as opposed to the Appellant  being
     required to make an entry clearance application to come to the  United
     Kingdom in due course were the fact that they would have to go through
     the inconvenience of a fresh application with the inevitable cost  and
     delay and the fact that they had already been  through  the  procedure
     and had made the earlier application on the basis of a genuine mistake
     and the fact of the impending birth of the child.  An aspect  of  that
     delay must be that the sponsor would have to obtain  a  civil  divorce
     from her first husband in the United Kingdom  in  order  to  enable  a
     fresh application to be made by the Appellant, and it may be  that  he
     would experience  difficulties  in  seeking  to  enter  into  a  fresh
     marriage under Sudanese law since under Sudanese  law  he  is  already
     married to the sponsor, and might therefore need to  make  application
     as a fianc to come to the United Kingdom and then marry under  United
     Kingdom law when here. These matters to our mind  are  very  far  from
     making it disproportionate to the normal requirement that where a case
     does  not  fall  within  the  Immigration  Rules  something   entirely
     exceptional must be shown in order for  it  to  succeed  and  for  the
     respect due to the Appellant's private life to be able to outweigh the
     demands of a fair and properly applied immigration policy.

 66. We are clear that the Article 8 claim does not succeed.   The  refusal
     of entry clearance in no sense precludes the Appellant from making  an
     application in the circumstances we envisage above,  subsequent  to  a
     divorce having been obtained by the sponsor in the United Kingdom  and
     a fresh application being made by the Appellant as a fianc.  There is
     no good reason why such an application should not be required in  this
     case.  Such interference as there would be with the family life of the
     Appellant is in no sense disproportionate.  Clearly there would be  an
     element of inconvenience and perhaps a somewhat longer period of delay
     than might ordinarily be  the  case  since  there  are  issues  to  be
     resolved in this country before an application can be made.  But those
     arrangements  ought  in  any  event  to  have  been  made  before  the
     Appellant's application, and we do not think that he  has  any  proper
     cause for complaint if they have to be made now.

Conclusion

 67. For the reasons  given  in  paragraphs  4  to  8,  we  find  that  the
     Adjudicator made  a  material  error  of  law.   For  those  given  in
     paragraphs 63-67, we substitute a determination dismissing the appeal.





                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT


                                                             Date:





