

Asylum and Immigration Tribunal

SR (Iraqi Arab Christian: relocation to KRG) Iraq CG [2009] UKAIT 00038


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Date Sent                    |
|On 6 November 2008                            |On 29 July 2009              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                       SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE ALLEN
                       SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE MATHER
                                 MR P BOMPAS

                                   Between

                                     SR

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms G Brown, Counsel instructed by Kingston &
                    Richmond Law Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr K Kyriacou, Home Office Presenting Officer


An Iraqi Arab Christian at risk in his home area and throughout central and
southern Iraq is likely to be able to obtain the documentation needed by a
person wishing to relocate within Iraq, and is likely to be able to
relocate to the KRG with the assistance of a sponsor, in particular, on the
basis of the latest statistics available, in Erbil or Dohuk.







                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



1.    The appellant is a national of Iraq.  He appealed  to  an  Immigration
    Judge against the Secretary of State's decision of 18 September 2006 to
    remove an illegal entrant from the United Kingdom.

2.    The Immigration Judge found the appellant to be credible and made  the
    following findings.  He found that the appellant  and  his  family  are
    practising Christians and  had  suffered  from  discriminatory  remarks
    relating to their religion, although  no  direct  threats  of  violence
    relating to his religion had been made.  With the exception of a letter
    that was left in the appellant's shop, there was  no  evidence  of  any
    other written threats for either religious or political  reasons.   The
    appellant had travelled legally to the United Kingdom in March 2006 and
    had returned in accordance with the terms of his visa on July  5  2006.
    Following his return to Iraq from the United Kingdom the appellant  did
    not receive any face-to-face threats of violence.  He specifically told
    the Immigration Judge at the hearing that there  had  been  no  threats
    made to him directly.  The letter referred to above was received at his
    shop on 27 July 2006 and he was warned to leave Iraq or be killed.   He
    made arrangements to leave Iraq immediately.  Since his return  to  the
    United Kingdom there has been no evidence that any of  his  family  has
    been approached by the military group or any other group.  One  of  his
    brothers had been shot at in the street but there was no evidence  that
    that shooting was by the militia group in question nor  was  there  any
    evidence as to why he was shot at.  No one had visited the  appellant's
    house or shop looking for him, despite him being told he must leave the
    country by 1 August 2006.

3.    The Immigration Judge went on to consider  relevant  country  guidance
    decisions and background evidence including a report by Dr Alan George.
     He  concluded  that  the  appellant  did  not  face  a  real  risk  of
    persecution or ill-treatment giving rise  to  a  breach  of  his  human
    rights on return to Iraq.

4.    The appellant sought reconsideration of this  decision,  arguing  that
    in fact the evidence showed that conditions for Christians in Iraq were
    such as to engage the appellant's rights under the Refugee  Convention.
    Reconsideration was ordered by a Senior Immigration Judge.

5.    At a hearing on 6 November 2007 a Senior Immigration Judge  identified
    an error of law in the Immigration Judge's determination as follows:

         "While the Immigration Judge has not said so in terms,  it  may  be
         inferred from the determination as a whole  that  he  believes  the
         appellant to have a well-founded fear in his home  area  of  Mosul.
         He deals with internal  flight  at  paragraphs  78  to  81  of  the
         determination, but only gives reasons  why  relocation  to  another
         part of Iraq would be safe for the appellant. He gives  no  reasons
         why it would be reasonable to expect him to relocate.  The  reasons
         why the judge thinks that the appellant  would  be  safe  elsewhere
         revolve around the finding that the militia are not looking for him
         in Mosul, which appears to contradict the (implicit)  finding  that
         the appellant has a well-founded fear in Mosul.


         Credibility as such has not been challenged  in  the  'reasons  for
         refusal' letter, which takes the view that the appellant's  account
         of what happened to him in Mosul amounts to discrimination,  rather
         than persecution.  A clear finding needs to be made at the  'second
         stage' of the reconsideration on whether the appellant has a  well-
         founded fear of persecution in Mosul and, if so, whether relocation
         to either the Kurdish Regional Government or central  and  southern
         Iraq is feasible, safe and reasonable for this appellant, who is  a
         Christian."


6.    At a for mention hearing on 15 August 2008 it was accepted  on  behalf
    of the Secretary of State that the appellant had a well-founded fear of
    persecution in Mosul and perhaps other areas in Iraq as  well  and  the
    appeal would therefore turn on the question of relocation to the KRG.

7.    The hearing before us took place on 6  November  2008.   Ms  G  Brown,
    instructed by Kingston & Richmond Law Centre, appeared on behalf of the
    appellant.  Mr K Kyriacou appeared on behalf of the Secretary of State.



8.    Ms Brown made an application under Rule 50 of the Procedure Rules  for
    the exclusion of any or all members of the  public  from  the  hearing.
    This was on the basis  of  the  appellant's  concerns  for  his  family
    members in Mosul and was essentially precautionary.  Mr Kyriacou had no
    objection.

9.    We considered the matter.   It  is  provided  in  Rule  54(3)  of  the
    Procedure Rules that:

    "(3)   The Tribunal may exclude any or all members of the  public  from
         any hearing or any part of a hearing if it is necessary -


         (a)      in the interests of public order or national security; or


         (b)      to protect the private life of a party or the interests of
             a minor.


    (4)    The Tribunal may also, in exceptional circumstances, exclude any
         or all members of the public from any hearing or part of a  hearing
         to ensure that  publicity  does  not  prejudice  the  interests  of
         justice, but only if and to the  extent  if  that  it  is  strictly
         necessary to do so."


10.   There were no submissions made contrary to Ms Brown's submission.   We
    concluded out of caution that in order to protect the private  life  of
    the appellant it was necessary to exclude members of  the  public  from
    the hearing  and  accordingly  we  acceded  to  the  request  to  order
    exclusion.  In fact the matter  was  academic  because  there  were  no
    members of the public at the time or so far as  we  understand  at  any
    later stage wishing to attend the hearing.

11.   Ms Brown said that she was not proposing to call the appellant  unless
    the Tribunal wished him to be called as there was no extra evidence for
    him to give.  She  did  however  propose  to  call  evidence  from  the
    appellant's sister, Dr EP.  She did not propose to call  the  solicitor
    in respect of the evidence in the statement.  There would be two expert
    witnesses.

12.   Mr Kyriacou said that he would have no  questions  for  the  appellant
    and he accepted the solicitor's evidence in her statement.

13.   We raised with Ms Brown the question of whether there was an issue  as
    to how the appellant would behave on return in light of what  had  been
    said in HJ (Homosexuality:  reasonably  tolerating  living  discreetly)
    Iran [2008] UKAIT 00044.  It  had  been  held  there  that  it  was  an
    objective test as to whether it was reasonable to believe that a person
    would behave subjectively as they said they would.  It was a  potential
    Article 9 flagrant breach point.

14.   On considering the matter and taking  instructions  Ms.  Brown  stated
    that in her view the appellant did not need to give evidence.

15.   Dr EP gave evidence.  She is a British citizen and the sister  of  the
    appellant.  The contents of her statement dated 22  October  2008  were
    true and correct and she was content for them to be considered as  part
    of her evidence today.  Likewise  the  contents  of  her  letter  of  6
    November 2006 were true and correct and she was happy for them to  form
    part of her evidence along with her  brief  letter  at  C12.   She  had
    formerly been a medical doctor and was now a herbalist.

16.   In cross-examination the witness  said  that  she  had  four  brothers
    including the appellant, and one  sister.   She  was  asked  where  her
    brother, Mazin, was and she said  she  could  not  tell  exactly  where
    because he was not at one address.  He was in Mosul  or  around  Mosul.
    She had last had contact with him a few days ago  by  telephone.   This
    was the only way but that was not easy and it could take a  long  time.
    She contacted him via a mobile number  which  was  the  number  of  the
    telephone belonging to Mazin.  Sometimes he would switch if  off  as  a
    precaution so she would try to contact him via his wife.  He  was  with
    his wife and three children and also with  the  witness's  and  Mazin's
    mother.

17.   Her brother Yunis was in Syria.  Her brother Mahur  was  also  in  the
    Mosul area and lived with his wife but not with Mazin.  Her sister  was
    married.  Her sister's husband had received a  threatening  letter  and
    they had had to leave and again had no  fixed  address  but  again  she
    believed they were in the Mosul  area.   Her  sister's  husband  was  a
    Christian.

18.   She was asked whether they told  her  of  any  specific  incidents  or
    threats directly.  She said that it had lasted a  long  time,  for  the
    last two years, and they had all experienced stress and fear and  every
    day there was a new threat and it was more and  more  frightening.   It
    was unclear whether a person would get back if they  left  their  home.
    She was referred to the direct threat made to  the  appellant  and  the
    other e-mail threats and she was asked whether there had been any other
    direct threats to any other family member.  She said that she  did  not
    know of anything like that.  She was asked what she thought  about  the
    suggestion that the appellant could return  and  go  and  live  in  the
    Kurdish area where he would be safe.  She said that that area  had  its
    own government and unless you were Kurdish and had ID to prove you were
    Kurdish you could not move there or live and get a job or buy a  house.
    You might live as a refugee or fugitive  but  would  not  be  living  a
    proper life.

19.   She was asked whether her family told her that  they  were  approached
    by anyone asking if they were Christian and whether they had to pretend
    not to be Christian.  She said she did not know,  but  there  had  been
    times when they were asked and they had had to  cover  their  hair  and
    this still happened and it was getting worse.   It  was  becoming  more
    difficult to worship now and they were not  able  to  worship  as  they
    wished to or as they used to.  Worship took place mostly in the  homes.
    She did not know if they went to church in Mosul.  They used  to.   She
    was last there fifteen years ago.

20.   We asked the witness whether there were any other  relatives  in  Iraq
    and she said that there was an uncle and his wife but most of them  had
    died.  The uncle was old and ill and their two children were  not  with
    them any more.  She did not know where they were.  They lived in  Mosul
    but did not get out except when her aunt went to  get  groceries.   She
    did not have a postal address for her family and  could  not  write  to
    them but could only contact them via mobile.  She  did  not  know  what
    area they were in other than being in the Mosul area.   They  mentioned
    places she did not know of when they  told  her.   As  to  whether  her
    family's worries were  as  to  the  general  situation  or  because  of
    problems specific to them, she said that it was a question of both  but
    mainly their religion.  It was the threat  and  the  general  situation
    against Christians.  It was a matter of  everyday  life.   They  feared
    suicide bombers and did not know what to expect.  After the killing  of
    their parish priest most of the Christians in the area had  left  their
    houses.  A lot had received threatening letters.  They were more afraid
    to stay in the area after  that  and  also  after  the  Archbishop  was
    killed.  They were targeted as Christians.  There was an atmosphere  of
    fear.  The family had nowhere else to go.  While they moved around they
    stayed with other Christian families.

21.   On re-examination she was asked how she knew that if a person went  to
    the KRG they would need an ID card to be able to live  a  proper  life.
    She said that she heard the news which she got from home and had  asked
    about this question of whether the KRG was safe and they had said  they
    were not Kurdish and had no ID to prove they were Kurdish so they could
    not go there.  It would be possible to get a pass for a few  hours  but
    not possible to live there.  She had asked her brother, Mazin  and  her
    mother.  She had asked all of them.

22.   She was asked whether they would be able to hide their  religion  e.g.
    by covering their heads and she said they might.  They  did  not  leave
    the house on their own but just got into the car and went out in  order
    to do shopping.  There was nothing that the men could do to  avoid  the
    risk.  As regards her contact with Mazin, e-mail contact had stopped as
    they had lost contact which happened if you did  not  use  your  e-mail
    over a period of time.  They had lost the ability to communicate by  e-
    mail as they were not very familiar with computers.

23.   The next witness was Dr Alan George.   He  had  provided  two  reports
    dated 25 October 2006 and 23 October 2008 respectively.  He  was  happy
    with the contents of the reports except that there should  be  a  minor
    amendment to paragraph 108 of the second report  to  be  rearranged  as
    marked in the report.  The reports stood as his evidence in chief.

24.   When cross-examined by Mr Kyriacou, Dr George agreed that the bulk  of
    the relevant evidence was in the second report.  He had  been  to  Iraq
    most recently in April 2008 for a week in the KRG area.  There had been
    intelligence officers and checkpoints, thus evidencing the thoroughness
    of checks on entrance.  He had flown to Erbil from Vienna.

25.   He was referred to paragraph 117 of the second report with  regard  to
    the question of help to the appellant and he said that it was not  said
    that everyone could be protected from everything.  He  agreed  that  he
    had said elsewhere in that paragraph and later on in  the  report  that
    the KRG would be very unlikely to grant  the  appellant  permission  to
    reside there.  He was referred to the Secretary of State's evidence  in
    this regard including evidence from the KRG website where it  was  said
    that they welcomed Christians and were  quite  clear  about  this.   Dr
    George did not resile from the view expressed in his report.   He  said
    that if they were so welcomed then he would expect to  find  a  lot  of
    Christians living in the KRG.  Certainly there were some but they  were
    mainly Kurdish Christians but not Arabic Christians.  The KRG was  very
    aware of its dependency on its alliance with the USA and understood the
    force of fundamentalist Christianity in US politics and therefore  such
    speeches did not surprise  him.   He  said  there  was  a  need  to  be
    sceptical about what politicians said.  It was put to him that that was
    a matter of opinion: he said that was what he was here to give  and  it
    was a matter of fact also.

26.   It was put to Dr George that with reference to  paragraph  89  of  his
    report that it  appeared  that  the  appellant  could  go  to  Northern
    Governorates and that this did happen.  Dr George said that if the  KRG
    Prime Minister was saying that this showed that  the  KRG  was  totally
    open to all Christians then this  was  rhetoric  and  not  true.   Some
    Christians had  relocated  to  the  KRG.   He  referred  to  the  UNHCR
    Governorate Assessment Report of September 2007 for Dohuk, Sulaymaniyah
    and Erbil, by religion.  Dohuk had the second largest concentration  of
    post-February 2006 refugees.  As of 31 August 2007  there  were  54,797
    IDPs most of whom, i.e. 81%, were Kurdish.  There  were  16%  who  were
    ethnic-based Christians (Assyrians, Chaldeans and  Syriacs),  2%  Arabs
    and others 1%.  It was not clear what "ethnic based Christians"  meant.
    A fair proportion of the Christians would be Kurds.  It was known  that
    many Kurdish Christians from just outside the KRG fled  into  the  KRG.
    That was a supposition on his part, but not all the Christians could be
    Arabs and there were 2% Arabs.  There were similar statistics  for  the
    other two governorates.  He assessed that there were  11,000  -  12,000
    Christian IDPs.  He accepted that it could be the case that a number of
    the 16% were Arab Christians.  There were certainly Arab Christians  in
    the KRG, some of whom for example would be academics  and  professional
    people who would be welcome there or people who  were  rich  enough  to
    bribe their way in, or people who had  family  connections.   Paragraph
    129 of the report dealt with the reasons why the appellant would not be
    likely to be allowed  in.   As  to  the  point  that  there  were  Arab
    Christians who were not Kurds who had been allowed into the KRG, it was
    put to him that he had not ruled that out.   Dr  George  said  that  he
    dismissed it as rhetoric that all doors were totally open and said that
    a Christian who was an Arab did not automatically face a ban  from  the
    KRG and if they had the right characteristics they might  get  in,  but
    there was a high probability that a person  of  average  profile  would
    not.  There was not an enormous number of Arab Christians  in  the  KRG
    despite the 2006 bloodbath.

27.   With regard to the figures for Erbil, in September 2007  there  was  a
    total of over 230,000 IDPs, a large majority of whom, comprising nearly
    197,000 people, were displaced after  the  bombing  in  February  2006;
    there were another 34,717 IDPs since the  2006  evaluation.   37%  were
    ethnic Arabs, 32% ethnic based  Christians  (Assyrians,  Chaldeans  and
    Syriacs), 29% Kurds  and  1.3%  other  ethnicities  including  Turkmen,
    Mandean/Saddean and Armenians who were likely to be Christians also, so
    there were some 11,109 Christians.

28.   It was suggested to Dr George that this was a larger figure  than  the
    number of Kurds and that was quite significant.   Dr George  said  that
    context was everything.  It  was  unclear  whether  they  were  Kurdish
    Christians.  They should be compared to the  number  of  Christians  in
    Iraq as a whole.  Even if  they  were  all  Arabs,  only  10,000  Iraqi
    Christians had got to Erbil.  The fact that a lot  had  gone  to  other
    countries such as Syria meant it should be questioned  why  they  would
    need to go there if they could go to the KRG.

29.   With regard  to  Sulaymaniyah,  in  September  2007  there  were  over
    360,000 IDPs, over 302,000 of those had been there  before  the  summer
    bombings of 2006.  There were 67,844 IDPs at the end of July  2007  who
    were displaced after the bombing.  Of the new  IDPs  they  were  mainly
    ethnic Arabs who comprised some 65%,  and  33%  Kurds  and  about  1.4%
    ethnic based Christians and others who would be likely to  be  Turkmen.
    All three reports said that Kurds comprised a high  proportion  of  the
    IDPs.

30.   We asked Dr George whether there might not  be  geographical  reasons,
    for example for the number of Christians moving to Erbil,  noting  that
    Erbil was near Mosul and  therefore  nearer  the  trouble.   Dr  George
    agreed and said it was relevant to see where a place was in relation to
    the adjacent areas.  To the south and west of Sulaymaniyah  were  large
    Kurdish areas and likely to be Kurdish therefore.  Also as some  people
    moved to an area others might likewise move.  It could reflect economic
    activity in the town also.  There had been a construction  boom  for  a
    time in Sulaymaniyah and at the time Erbil had also been active.

31.   Dr George was referred to page 1 of the Secretary of  State's  bundle,
    being a KRG website report.  This contained a  reference  to  Christian
    families moving into Ainkawa.  Dr George was asked whether he  knew  of
    other historic Christian areas in Erbil or elsewhere around the KRG and
    he said there were Christian  villages.   He  agreed  that  this  could
    reflect on  why  there  were  the  numbers  there  were  of  Christians
    relocating to Erbil.

32.   Going back to his report, at  paragraph  133  and  the  last  sentence
    there where  he  had  said  there  were  powerful  social  reasons  why
    relocation to the Kurdish north would be  very  difficult  for  persons
    such as the appellant, he  was  asked  whether  nevertheless  he  would
    accept that any social reasons were unlikely to amount to  persecution.
    Dr George said this was not for him to say and was a  matter  for  the
    court.

33.   Mr Kyriacou clarified that it was accepted that  the  appellant  would
    be at risk in Mosul and also in Central and Southern Iraq.  It was  not
    accepted that there was risk for all Christians  across  Iraq  but  the
    Secretary of State's general position was that the  matter  had  to  be
    dealt with on a case-by-case basis.   It  was  not  expected  that  the
    appellant would be able to relocate elsewhere in Iraq  other  than  the
    KRG: the matter would need to be dealt with, as had  been  said,  on  a
    case-by-case basis.

34.   Dr George was referred to the OGN of  4  October  2008,  at  paragraph
    3.12.5.  He said that as far as it went he accepted it, but the Finnish
    report referred to in that paragraph also said that not all  Christians
    were allowed into the KRG.  In general they did not  get  in.   It  was
    suggested to  Dr  George  that  reference  to  a  "significant  number"
    suggested more than he said.  Dr George said that one could discuss the
    meaning of words for  a  long  time.   There  were  some  thousands  of
    Christians in the KRG.  It was a matter for the court  to  decide.   He
    referred to paragraph 6.1 of the  Finnish  report  under  section  5.2.
    There was a need for  a  sponsor.   The  implication  in  the  OGN  was
    misleading in implying that the Finnish report said that the doors were
    open.  Footnote 74 at paragraph 3.12.5 was quoted as if it was fact and
    it was not.  Mr Timmerman was an activist.  Reference was made  to  the
    article of 26 October 2008 that had been put in  today  and  should  be
    contrasted with what Mr Timmerman had said in April 2008.  His evidence
    was to be treated with some caution.

35.   Dr George was asked, with reference  to  his  paragraphs  97  and  98,
    about the question of travel for example if the appellant  returned  to
    Baghdad and was told to get to the KRG.  Dr George questioned  how  the
    appellant could get to Baghdad City for a start from  the  airport  and
    referred to what he had said at paragraph 146 to paragraph 152.  It was
    put to him that the Secretary of State's policy in  collaboration  with
    the KRG was that she would not return a non-Kurd directly  to  the  KRG
    area so the appellant would be returned to Baghdad and would internally
    relocate by his own efforts to the northern areas.  Dr George said that
    if that was so it could be relevant in respect of Baghdad.   He  quoted
    the  Baghdad  correspondent  of  the  Independent  Newspaper,   Patrick
    Cockburn, who had said there had never been such a  difference  between
    life as it was in Iraq and the perception of life there, especially  in
    the USA.  Baghdad was the most dangerous city in the world.  There were
    4.7  million  refugees  outside  Iraq  and  100,000  or  so  returnees.
    Everyday life  was  hard.   There  was  dirty  water  and  cholera  and
    electricity for only five hours a day.   He  referred  to  various  BBC
    reports on the situation of living with violence in Iraq.  It had  been
    described as a desolate, post apocalyptic maze.  As regards travel from
    Baghdad to the north, the airport road had been described by the  UNHCR
    as the most dangerous road in the world.  That had been in August  2007
    and it was now improved somewhat.  Initially a  person  would  need  to
    travel through a mainly Sunni area and later it was more diverse and it
    was effectively a matter  of  war  with  al-Qaeda  being  very  active.
    Christians had been targeted recently and Mosul was very risky.   There
    were checkpoints manned by militias and it was very hazardous.

36.   We asked Dr George whether he was saying that if the  appellant  could
    get into the KRG legitimately he would be all right.  He said yes  that
    was the case.  He would experience problems from lack of  a  supportive
    family, but there were church organisations.  He was  asked  about  the
    checkpoints he had gone through to the north and said that  there  were
    checkpoints with floodlights and guard boxes.

37.   On re-examination Dr George was referred to his visit to the  KRG  and
    what he said about Christians or people generally being admitted to the
    north and the nature of the restrictions.  He  said  that  there  is  a
    checkpoint at the airport at Erbil and it was  very  computerised  with
    intensive controls and was efficient and disciplined.  Once within  the
    KRG there were frequent checkpoints and the Asayish  Internal  Security
    Force had an active presence, especially at major crossroads.  All cars
    were stopped and there were  searches  and  document  checks  and  this
    occurred every 50 or 70 miles.   He  had  interviewed  the  officer  in
    charge at Kirkuk.  They had computerised information and hard  copy  of
    the documents.  He referred to an Arab man and  his  Kurdish  wife  who
    were there who were being interviewed quite seriously about their  bona
    fides.   He  got  the  impression  that  the  authorities  were  highly
    efficient and serious.

38.   He was referred to the IDP population in the KRG and the figures  that
    he had given, for example  in  Sulaymaniyah  and  the  number  of  Arab
    Christians there.  He was asked whether it was not the case that  there
    were a lot of children.  Dr George said that in each Governorate Report
    there  was  reference  to  the  high  proportion  of   children.    The
    Sulaymaniyah Report said that the majority of IDPs were children.  This
    did not surprise him, as Iraqi families were large they were likely  to
    have three, four or even five children, so if a family was fleeing, the
    majority would be children.

39.   He was asked about  the  difficulties  the  appellant  would  face  in
    getting into the KRG and he said it was mainly that he was Arab, and as
    the UNHCR had said, it was KRG policy to keep the number  of  Arabs  in
    the KRG to a minimum.  There would also be linguistic  problems  as  he
    did not speak a Kurdish dialect and though some people in the  KRG  did
    speak Arabic, it was not in general use.  Also he would suffer  from  a
    lack of family support which was unusual in Iraq.  He was asked whether
    the appellant could hide his religion in the KRG and he said  that  his
    name was obviously Christian and he would have to present documentation
    and that would show his name.

40.   Mr Kyriacou stated that the Secretary of State would  not  expect  the
    appellant to use deception in order to enter the KRG.

41.   Ms Brown asked Dr George about the conditions in Mosul and he said  it
    was a war and there were very active hostilities.  He was asked whether
    the appellant would need to pass Mosul and he said he was highly likely
    to go into Baghdad after leaving the airport though there were  tracks.
    He had set out the Foreign Office travel advice  in  his  report  about
    travel around Iraq.

42.   We asked Dr George  whether  the  KRG  drew  any  distinction  between
    different Christian  denominations  and  he  said  ethnicity  was  what
    mattered  in  the  KRG  rather  than  a  person's  faith  or  religious
    denomination.  It was a question whether they were Arab or Kurdish.

43.   The next witness was Dr Erica Hunter.  She had put in a  report  dated
    4 November 2008.  She referred to paragraph 2.3 of her report  and  the
    lack of homogeneity of the Christian communities in Iraq.   The  church
    had separated on theological, political and linguistic grounds from the
    Great Church of Byzantium.  She dealt with  the  question  of  risk  at
    paragraph 1.5 of  the  report,  in  particular.   All  Christians  were
    similarly at risk.  An example was the  recent  lecture  given  by  the
    Pope.  The Syrian Orthodox Church had been told to denounce this around
    Mosul although they had never been in communion with  Rome.   They  had
    pointed this out but had been told they had to do  what  was  asked  of
    them anyway.

44.   With regard to paragraph 2.7 of her report, she said it was  important
    to  realise  that  Christians  in  Iraq  had  almost   a   century   of
    displacement.  Some Christians would be admitted if  they  could  prove
    links with the KRG.  It was not only a linguistic, but  also  a  socio-
    economic division.  The Assyrians tended to be concentrated  in  Kirkuk
    and the Chaldeans in Mosul.

45.   She was referred to what the Deputy Prime  Minister  of  the  KRG  had
    said about Christians being welcome in the KRG.  She  thought  that  he
    had referred to their Christian brethren and said that she took that to
    imply all the connotations of kin and ethnicity which were at the heart
    of Christian society.  There was the question of tribal and clan  links
    and it was not open.  The statement was very adroit.  She was  referred
    to paragraph 3.8 of her statement and the  provincial  elections.   She
    said it was not just the Christians but the Yazidis and the Turkmen who
    were also affected.  It meant that effectively non-major  players  were
    marginalised.  It was very disturbing for the minority communities.  It
    amounted to an effective denial of  even  token  participation  in  the
    democratic process.  There had been small recent redress,  but  it  was
    unsatisfactory to the Assyrians.  She thought that this was  Iraq-wide.
    It was necessary to realise the  wide  picture  behind  it.   Iraq  was
    between Iran and Saudi Arabia who funded insurgency groups, so both had
    a vested interest in Iraq.  It was clear that Saudi Arabia feared  Iran
    so  the  insurgency  was  not  just  internal.    Minorities  had  been
    relegated to very marginal roles and would be overlooked.  There was no
    concept of democracy for them.

46.   She was  asked  whether  she  had  any  ongoing  contacts  with  Iraqi
    Christians, having visited Iraq up to 2002.   She  said  that  she  had
    worked in the Iraq Museum  until  then  but  it  could  not  cope  with
    scholars now as it was not functioning, and was closed.  She was  asked
    whether she could say anything about travel between Baghdad and  Erbil.
    She said that when she was there the journey was by  bus  and  it  took
    four or five hours and was very arduous and it would now be a matter of
    Russian roulette if one travelled by bus.  It would,  however,  be  the
    safest method as a private car would be hijacked but even though a  bus
    would be preferable to that,  it could be stopped  at  any  checkpoint,
    and passengers could be required to produce their ID card.  There  were
    attested cases of Christians showing their ID card being shot.

47.   When cross-examined by Mr Kyriacou, Dr Hunter said that she  had  been
    to the KRG most recently  in  around  1992.   Flights  there  had  been
    initially banned but it was better going by bus as she  had  done  when
    she went to Mosul.  She thought that air travel would be safer than bus
    unless there were hijackers.

48.   It was put to her that she had not referred to  other  expert  reports
    and she said she had.  Her reports had always led to success in appeals
    and this was a source of great pride.  She had written  eight  or  nine
    reports over two and a half years and was very selective in  the  cases
    she took and it was only if she was 100% sure that  she  could  endorse
    that case that she would do so.  They had  all  been  Iraqis  and  only
    Christians and Mandeans and also she would provide reports for Jews  if
    they were still there.

49.   She was referred to paragraph 2.1 of her report.  She said that  given
    the lack of tribal and family ties and linguistic skills and  being  an
    Arab also she believed that the appellant would be refused entry to the
    KRG.  She was referred to the document from the KRG  website  and  what
    was said by the Deputy Prime Minister and Prime Minister in the  bundle
    at page 2 and the reference to the  government  having  opened  special
    schools to meet the needs of Christian refugees who  spoke  Arabic  and
    not  Kurdish.   She  said  that  in  1915  there  was  active   Kurdish
    participation in the massacre of Christians  in  Kurdistan,  there  had
    been a flight south of Christians.  Ba'athists  had  prevented  use  of
    Kurdish and they had to speak  Arabic  so  many  Kurds  did  not  speak
    Kurdish as spoken in Baghdad for 50 years.  The question  of  kin/tribe
    was central to Kurdish society.  She was also referred to what she  had
    said at paragraph  2.1  of  her  report  concerning  the  lack  of  any
    protection for Christians.  Her source  for  this  had  been  a  German
    diplomat in Istanbul, Herr Munch.  She said it was a bold assertion but
    Herr Munch had been going back to Turkey regularly.  She  had  been  in
    Turkey last year.  People she spoke to there were  very  worried  about
    the rise in the prospect of Kurdish insurgency into Eastern Turkey  and
    there was rising tension there.  It was put to her that expressing this
    in terms of there being a real prospect of war was very  bold  and  she
    was asked whether there was really enough evidence of that.  Dr Hunter
    said that there were signs pointing to a real prospect.

50.   She was referred to the evidence of Dr George where he had  said  that
    if the appellant could get in the KRG he would probably be  all  right.
    She disagreed with Dr George in this respect and she considered  there
    would be no prospect of permanent protection as the situation was  very
    volatile in the KRG quite apart from the job difficulties.  As  regards
    the safety or otherwise of a Christian in the KRG today,  she  referred
    to a conversation she had had with the Auxiliary Bishop of Baghdad  who
    was very concerned about the placement and settlement of Christians  in
    the KRG in very vulnerable regions which were prone to  attack  by  the
    PUK.   The  KRG  was  like  South  Eastern  Turkey  twenty  years  ago.
    Christians there were between the government and the  PKK.   They  were
    told to help the PKK and if they did not they were killed and the  army
    said they aided and abetted them and arrested them so they were  caught
    in the middle and she feared a similar situation.

51.   She was asked about Ainkawa, an  historic  Christian  city  which  was
    referred to at page 1 of the Secretary of State's bundle.    Dr  Hunter
    agreed that there were certainly historic settlements.   The  Assyrians
    saw  themselves  as  descendants  of  the   Assyrian   Empire.    These
    settlements emerged in  the  fourteenth  century,  they  were  not  new
    settlements.  She was referred to the contrast between a BBC Report  of
    15 October 2008 blaming Sunnis for attacks on Christians and the Syrian
    information news source she had noted referring to Kurds  being  behind
    attacks on Christians in Mosul recently.  Dr Hunter said she understood
    the concerns about the  AINA's  (Assyrian  International  News  Agency)
    objectivity,  but  made  the  point  that  the  BBC  sources  were  not
    necessarily good.  Mosul was a very Sunni city and it was necessary  to
    ask what groups were involved.  It was very difficult to  discern,  but
    the Kurds were very keen to expand their  territories.   It  should  be
    asked why the Sunnis would do  this  and  what  they  would  gain  from
    purging fellow Arabs like the Chaldeans.  She did not necessarily  have
    an answer.  Also there was a question of why it would benefit the Kurds
    to purge Mosul of the communities.  She  agreed  that  there  were  two
    viewpoints and one could not be certain which, either Kurd or Sunni, it
    was.  She was referred to the KRG's Prime Minister's answer at  page  3
    and she said that the underlying premise was  that  there  was  a  real
    power bid at the moment and Christians were among the minority who were
    not traditionally armed and were an easy target for power politics.

52.   She was referred again to her paragraph 2.7 and Mr Kyriacou  suggested
    that where she said the "right of return" was exercised strictly on the
    basis of historic tribal and family affiliations, the use of  the  word
    "strictly" suggested that this was the only requirement.  She said that
    the word "strictly" could be inappropriate.   The  Kurds  did  look  at
    other factors such as financial factors and as regards  other  evidence
    of wider requirements one could say that most things could  be  bought.
    In respect of the same paragraph it was put to her in  connection  with
    the Prime Minister and Deputy Prime Minister's  statements  that  Kurds
    were discouraged from selling to Arab Christians and reference was made
    also to page 1 of the bundle.  She said that it  went  back  to  who  a
    person  was  and  their  family  and  ethnic  background.   It   lacked
    substance.  The actual facts did not show assistance  and  it  was  the
    churches and the communities, not the KRG, who  provided  the  support.
    She was referred also to paragraph 3.12.5 of the OGN  and  the  Finnish
    Report.  Dr Hunter  referred  to  paragraph  2.11  of  her  report  and
    concerns about the PUK.  It went back to her view  about  the  possible
    conflict with Turkey.  It could be a factor of  relevance  to  Turkey's
    wishes to join the EU with changed attitudes to Christians there.   She
    thought that this was part of that large equation.

53.   We asked Dr Hunter where these Christians came from and she said  that
    they were those who  came  back  from  the  regions.   The  Bishop  had
    expressed his worries about this to her.  They were terrified of  being
    corralled into such an area and as had happened before there was a risk
    of targeting and displacement.  She was asked about her  paragraph  3.9
    and its contrast with what Dr George said at  paragraph  97  concerning
    Christian militias.  She said that there could be a slight oversight in
    the writing  of  her  report.   The  Assyrians  had  militias  and  the
    Chaldeans had not.  Traditionally, they were forbidden to carry arms as
    the price of protection under Islam.  The Chaldeans  were  happy  about
    this and this was indicative of the urban/tribal divide.  The Assyrians
    were much more like the Kurds in their strictness.

54.   We asked her if there was a name for the Kurdish community in  Baghdad
    and she said they would not be Christian Assyrians and that those  with
    ethnic links would not necessarily be Kurds.  We suggested to Dr Hunter
    that an Arab could have historic links to the Kurdish area in order  to
    be able to go back to it and she said that one would have to go back to
    the Middle Ages.  The appellant, by his own statement, said his  family
    had lived in Mosul for generations and he spoke  Arabic  and  he  would
    mean, several centuries.  She thought that at the border a person would
    need a Kurdish  sponsor.   Even  to  visit  a  colleague  it  would  be
    necessary to have a sponsor.  She referred to the example concerning Dr
    Al-Jihouri  that she had given in her report.  She  was  asked  whether
    other denominations of Christians would be likely to be regarded in the
    same way as Chaldeans and Assyrians.  She  said  that  expatriates  and
    Iraqis attended  St  George's  when  she  went  there  and  there  were
    Protestants, ex-Chaldeans.  There used to be Jehovah's Witnesses also.

55.   There was no re-examination.

Submissions

56.   In his submissions Mr Kyriacou relied on the refusal letter  as  being
    relevant to the issue of relocation to the KRG.  It was not  relied  on
    in respect of the asylum and  human  rights  issues.   The  appellant's
    credibility had been accepted and that he was at real risk in the Mosul
    area.  On behalf of the Secretary of State it would be  said  generally
    that Iraqi Christians from outside the KRG could safely and  reasonably
    relocate there and it would not be unduly harsh to do so.   They  could
    not be returned directly to the KRG as there was a  joint  policy  with
    the United Kingdom Government that the KRG authorities would not accept
    anyone directly from the United Kingdom without strong  links  with  or
    being from the KRG so the appellant  would  have  to  be  returned  via
    Baghdad to the KRG.  It was reasonable and possible to do so.   At  the
    KRG border he would be able to get residency  as  a  Christian  fleeing
    persecution.  It could be a matter of direct flight as an  alternative.
    Once in the KRG the appellant would be able to go about his normal life
    and worship freely.  Dr George had accepted that if the appellant  got
    into the KRG he would be all right.

57.   The experts were very  knowledgeable  and  credible  but  Mr  Kyriacou
    could not agree with  some  bold  and  sweeping  assertions  they  made
    especially with regard to the inability to enter or reside in  the  KRG
    as a Christian and a non-Kurd from outside  the  KRG.   Dr George  had
    expressed the view that it would be "very  unlikely"  with  respect  to
    permanent residence and Dr Hunter likewise, but there was  quite  clear
    evidence in the KRG website  articles  of  April  2008  and  the  Prime
    Minister's interview to the contrary.  The point made about this  being
    rhetoric was noted, but it did not mean that what was said by the Prime
    Minister and the Deputy Prime Minister should be discounted.   Reliance
    was placed on pages 1-3 of the bundle.

58.   It could be seen  from  the  statistics  provided  by  Dr  George  and
    elsewhere that there were 2000 Christian families who had settled since
    2003 in Ainkawa.  That indicated a sufficiency of protection.  In Erbil
    a significant proportion of IDPs were Christians.  This  was  important
    evidence.  That was as clear a rebuttal as one could hope  for  of  the
    expert evidence. The Tribunal was  referred  to  the  OGN  on  this  in
    respect of the Finnish report and the August 2007 paper and  also  page
    140 of the second bundle.  This  evidence  seemed  to  go  against  the
    argument that Arab Christians would be turned away.  Reference was also
    made to the evidence in the OGN concerning ability to get to  the  KRG.
    There was some evidence of protection, for example at pages 6, 7, 9 and
    10 of the bundle which would be relevant if the appellant had to travel
    through that area.  There was  a  possibility  of  flights  also  which
    precluded the concerns  attaching  to  road  travel.   As  regards  the
    process of crossing the border, reference was made to paragraph 2.14 of
    the OGN.  The Home Office would look into  the  appellant  getting  the
    correct documents for return.  He had an ID document at the moment  and
    in Iraq he would be able to obtain any other necessary documents.

59.   It was agreed that in light of the fact that we had  raised  with  the
    representatives the possibility of flights  being  made  directly  from
    Baghdad to Erbil that there would be a period of fourteen days in which
    further submissions on this point could be made.

60.   In her submissions  Ms  Brown  made  the  point  that  Dr  Hunter  had
    commented on the documentation at the KRG border  and  the  process  of
    obtaining documentation in Iraq and again  it  was  agreed  that  there
    would be an adjournment of seven days for any further evidence on  that
    and a further seven days for Mr Kyriacou to comment.

61.   Ms Brown relied on the skeleton argument.  This went beyond  what  was
    now in dispute.  The main issue was  relocation  within  the  KRG  area
    which encompassed the question of how the  appellant  would  get  there
    since he would be removed to Baghdad and would have  to  make  his  way
    there.  It was a question of what would  happen  when  he  got  to  the
    border and also what would happen if he were allowed to enter, and this
    was relevant to the reasonableness of relocation.  Reliance was  placed
    on paragraph 14 of the skeleton and  what  was  said  there  about  the
    decisions of the House of Lords in Januzi v Secretary of State for  the
    Home Department and Others [2006] UKHL 5 and in Secretary of State  for
    the Home department v AH (Somalia) and Others [2007]  UKHL  49.   There
    had  to  be  an  assessment  as  regards   the   appellant's   personal
    characteristics.  He had previously been targeted by insurgents and was
    seen in Mosul as a collaborator.  This was relevant to the question  of
    whether he could live a reasonably  normal  life.   On  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State it was said that the appellant would  be  admissible
    to the KRG and welcomed there, with reference being made to the remarks
    of the Prime Minister and the  Deputy  Prime  Minister.   The  Tribunal
    would want to analyse that evidence and Ms Brown argued that it had  to
    be treated with caution.  Both  amounted  to  statements  of  intention
    rather than the actual reality with reference to what they would do and
    although these were not necessarily false intentions it was a  question
    of what was actually happening rather than the will of the authorities.
     There was a contrast between this and the Newsmax article of two  days
    previously from the same reporter in very different  terms,  which  had
    been handed in today.  It was relevant to  bear  in  mind  Dr  George's
    comments also with respect to the author, Mr Timmerman.  With reference
    to the OGN and COIR, there were deep distinctions between the different
    Christian groups and their ethnic make up and it was odd therefore  for
    there to be such a blanket statement made.  Reference was also made  at
    paragraphs  2.17  and  2.19  of  the  UNHCR  August  2007   paper   and
    particularly the last sentence and the comments of  Dr  George  and  Dr
    Hunter on the risks involved  in  the  journey.   Dr George  had  also
    commented on the FCO advice and therefore a number of sources indicated
    an extreme risk in travelling to the KRG.  It did  not  mean  that  the
    appellant could not do  it,  but  there  was  a  reasonable  degree  of
    likelihood that he would have some difficulties, given the evidence  of
    the risk.

62.   Reliance was placed on the new bundle in  general  and  in  particular
    with regard to the recent violence  in  Mosul.   If  the  Deputy  Prime
    Minister were correct, then it should  be  questioned  why  the  people
    referred to had gone to Syria.  Not  all  had  gone  to  the  KRG.   Dr
    George's report was relevant to this.  It was accepted with respect  to
    the statistics he had provided concerning  IDPs  that  Christians  were
    part of this new wave, but it  was  relevant  to  the  KRG  authority's
    intention and why the offer was made now and not previously.  The  COIR
    of August 2008 was the one referred to and commented on by the experts,
    and  neither  COIR  dealt  with  the  new  wave  of  violence   against
    Christians.  The tenor of the Home Office report  was  of  a  state  of
    affairs of peaceful living for Christians in the KRG, but there was  no
    evidence before the Tribunal as to why they  had  been  displaced  from
    Mosul.  It had begun in early October but  there  was  no  confirmation
    that they had all gone to the KRG.

63.   In summary, the appellant was unlikely to be able to enter the KRG  or
    even travel safely back there and even if he could get in it would  not
    be reasonable for him to relocate there and it would be  unduly  harsh.
    Ms Brown did not press the point of  safety  in  the  KRG  but  it  was
    relevant to consider the safety of Christians  there  and  the  experts
    differed on this.  The concerns of Dr Hunter  should  be  noted.   With
    regard to general country guidance issues, the objective  evidence,  if
    it showed a pattern, showed improvements in Iraq and in  the  KRG,  but
    such were often followed by a period  of  deterioration  and  this  was
    rather a pattern.  The region was  unstable  and  changing  daily.   Dr
    George had dealt with the United States' "surge" and noted that it  was
    relative.  There was a context of previous raised levels  of  violence.
    Dr George referred to a risk of a period of  protracted  violence  and
    renewed civil war and this was  all  part  of  the  background  of  the
    situation of Christians generally in Iraq.

64.     We   subsequently   received   further   submissions    from    both
    representatives concerning the outstanding issues. Ms Brown reminded us
    of the Secretary of State's stated policy  concerning  returns  to  the
    KRG.  She argued that even if the appellant could take  a  flight  from
    Baghdad the level of instability and insecurity there was such that  it
    would not be safe or reasonable for him to be  returned  there  with  a
    view to travelling from the airport.  In this  regard  a  supplementary
    report of Dr Hunter was referred to and other aspects of the background
    evidence.  Ms Brown also emphasised that as  a  perceived  collaborator
    the appellant was at risk for this additional  reason  in  Baghdad  and
    also as a person with no links or support network in  that  area.   She
    also referred to the documents the appellant would  need  in  order  to
    enter the KRG and the difficulties he would be likely to experience  in
    that regard.  Attached to the report is the note from Dr Hunter and her
    CV and also the Iraq Country Policy Bulletin of 17 December 2007.

65.   Mr Kyriacou provided  further  submissions,  developing  his  argument
    that there was a viable internal flight alternative for the  appellant.
    On the one hand he argued that  road  travel,  while  not  without  its
    problems, was a perfectly viable method of travel for the appellant  to
    reach the KRG area and in the alternative  the  appellant  could  avail
    himself of domestic air travel services  to  travel  to  the  KRG  from
    Baghdad Airport.  He attached a schedule of flights from  Erbil  for  a
    given week which indicated seven flights from Baghdad to Erbil  between
    24 November and 29 November 2008.

66.   With regard to documentation, it was submitted that if  the  appellant
    were unsuccessful he would be provided with the relevant  documentation
    required to undertake his removal to Baghdad.  Once in Iraq it would be
    the appellant's responsibility  to  obtain  any  further  documentation
    necessary for his relocation to any other area in Iraq.  He  would  not
    be expected to have to visit his home area, where it was accepted  that
    he had a fear of persecution, to obtain any documentation required  for
    internal relocation.  The difficulties involved  were  argued  to  fall
    well short of treatment engaging the Refugee Convention or Article 3 of
    the Human Rights Convention.  Reference was made to a UNHCR  Report  of
    August 2008 which sets out the conditions for entry into  each  of  the
    three Governorates (Erbil, Sulaymaniyah and Dohuk) and  it  was  argued
    that on the facts of the case there was no  reason  why  the  appellant
    would not be able to benefit from the shelter and  protection  provided
    by the KRG Governorates.

Discussion and Conclusions

    Exposition and Evaluation of Expert Evidence

67.   The issues in this appeal are whether the appellant, who  is  at  risk
    in his home area of Mosul and who, it is accepted, cannot reasonably be
    expected to relocate to  the  centre  or  south  of  Iraq,  can  effect
    internal relocation to the KRG.  It is accepted that he is a  Christian
    and an ethnic Arab and that he received a letter at his shop  in  Mosul
    on 27 July 2006 in which he was warned to leave Iraq or be killed.   He
    had visited the United Kingdom previously, and his perception was  that
    the threats were made  because  by  dint  of  that  visit  he  was,  by
    implication, seen as a collaborator and  secondly  on  account  of  his
    religion.

68.   We have two reports from Dr Alan George and propose to concentrate  on
    the second one which was the main focus of his evidence though we shall
    refer to the earlier report where necessary.  Dr George deals initially
    in detail with the situation in Iraq in light of  its  recent  history,
    noting particular matters such as the Foreign Office travel advice  for
    Iraq as at 26 August 2008 concerning the dangerous  security  situation
    in  Iraq  and  consequential  risks  to  travellers.   As  regards  the
    particular situation of Iraq's  Christians,  he  notes  that  some  two
    thirds of Iraq's Christians are Catholics, these are mainly  Chaldeans,
    the  rest  being  Syrian  Catholics,  Roman  Catholics   and   Armenian
    Catholics.  Of the non-Catholics the most numerous by far are  said  to
    be adherents to the Church of the East (formerly known  as  Nestorian);
    the Assyrian Orthodox (also known as Syriac) Church  and  the  Armenian
    Orthodox Church.   The  overwhelming  majority  of  the  Chaldeans  and
    Nestorians are Assyrian by ethnicity.  A census in 1987 shows that  the
    country had some  1.4  million  Christians  but  as  a  consequence  of
    sustained emigration both before and after the 2003 invasion there were
    thought to  be  fewer  that  1,000,000  Christians  in  Iraq  and  some
    estimates put the number as low as 400,000-600,000.  Associated factors
    to that of their faith are that Christians are widely perceived  to  be
    collaborators  with  the  US-led  occupation  forces  and  are   widely
    perceived to be wealthy.

69.   At paragraph 89 of the  report  Dr  George  quotes  from  the  UNHCR's
    eligibility guidelines for assessing the international protection needs
    of Iraqi asylum seekers, published in August  2007  where  among  other
    things it is said that insecurity and targeted attacks had forced  half
    of Iraq's Christian population to depart from the country  since  March
    2003 and that those remaining were either too  poor,  old  or  sick  to
    leave.  It was said  that  many  others  sought  refuge  in  the  three
    Northern Governorates, mainly the  Governorate  of  Dohuk  and  in  the
    Ninewa Plain.  At paragraph 98 Dr George notes the deterioration in the
    situation in Mosul which is the capital of  Ninewa  Province,  and  the
    flight of at least 1,300 Christian families from Mosul in October  2008
    after an upsurge of violence against them by Muslim extremists.  It was
    said that thousands of people had sought refuge  in  outlying  villages
    since the murder of a dozen Christians the previous week.

70.   Dr George, at paragraph 109 of the report,  considers  that  there  is
    abundant evidence that Christians face serious problems in Iraq.   This
    is a matter that we think is common ground  before  us,  especially  in
    light of the acceptance of risk to  the  appellant  in  Mosul  and  his
    inability to relocate to the centre or the south of Iraq.  We must bear
    in mind that the appellant would be returned  to  Baghdad  and  in  due
    course we shall have to consider how it might be possible  for  him  to
    travel from Baghdad to Erbil or elsewhere in the KRG and what risks  he
    might face initially in Baghdad and in the course of travel.   For  now
    though we shall concentrate on the question of whether, as a  Christian
    Arab with the background he has, he would be able to  relocate  to  the
    KRG.

71.   Dr George deals with the question of internal flight at paragraph  127
    onwards in the second report.  At paragraph  127,  noting  the  serious
    security situation in all parts of Iraq, he states that physical safety
    is not the only point at issue when considering the scope  of  internal
    flight and that there are reasons other than those related to  security
    which would  seriously  hinder  the  appellant's  ability  to  relocate
    anywhere within Iraq.  He notes the UNHCR's December 2006 advisory that
    conditions in the KRG area while not ideal are far better than  in  the
    centre or south of the country.  The  UNHCR  has  consistently  advised
    that the KRG authorities deny permanent entry  to  Iraqis  who  do  not
    originate from the KRG area.  The 2006 advisory which remains in effect
    reaffirms that Iraqis not from the KRG area face very serious obstacles
    to entry to the KRG controlled area.  The aim is apparently to keep the
    KRG area "Kurdish" and there is therefore in  principle  reluctance  to
    accept any increase of non-Kurdish populations.   Strict  controls  are
    therefore implemented on the presence of non-Kurdish people.  Depending
    upon the applicant, especially his or her ethnic and political profile,
    he/she  may  not  be  allowed  to  relocate  to  the   three   Northern
    Governorates for security, political  or  demographic  reasons,  though
    UNHCR's eligibility guidelines of August 2007 state that at times it is
    difficult to establish clear criteria to predict who will  be  admitted
    or rejected.

72.   Dr George goes on  to  note  at  paragraph  130  of  his  report  that
    regulations and practices differ between the three governorates  within
    the KRG area, but the general position is  that  the  restrictions  are
    much tighter for Arabs than for Kurds and that in any event Kurds  from
    outside the KRG zone do not have an automatic right  to  reside  there.
    It  is  said  in  the  UNHCR's  eligibility  guidelines  that  in   the
    Governorate of Sulaymaniyah admission (as opposed  to  residency)  into
    the governorate is generally not restricted  and  does  not  require  a
    sponsor.  However, persons from Arabised areas claimed by the PUK, i.e.
    Kirkuk and Khanaqeen in the Governorate of Diyala, are generally denied
    entry to the governorate for political and demographic  reasons  unless
    they only wish to come for a visit.

73.   At paragraph 131 of the report it is said  that  people  who  wish  to
    reside in the KRG Governorates must apply  for  what  the  UNHCR  terms
    "quasi residence permits".  It is said that a local sponsor is required
    for applicants for residency in all  three  governorates  although  the
    criteria governing the issue of quasi residence  permits  vary  between
    the three.  For example, applicants to Erbil Governorate would have  to
    establish either political links to the region or that they  have  fled
    violence or persecution and likewise  in  Dohuk;  and  in  Sulaymaniyah
    people originating from Kirkuk or Khanaqeen are not able  to  obtain  a
    quasi residency permit for demographic and political reasons.

74.   In the light of this evidence Dr George considers that  the  appellant
    would very likely be denied permanent entry to the KRG zone.   He  goes
    on to emphasise the  fundamental feature of Iraq that its societies are
    organised on family, tribal, ethnic and religious bases  and  that  the
    UNHCR explicitly  refers  to  the  significance  of  these  family  and
    community  links  in  assessing  the  viability  of  relocation.    The
    appellant would appear to lack a  supportive  family  network  in  Iraq
    beyond his home city and he is not from the Kurdish controlled part  of
    Iraq and therefore quite apart  from  matters  of  security  Dr  George
    considers there to be powerful social reasons  why  relocation  to  the
    Kurdish north would  be  very  difficult  for  a  person  such  as  the
    appellant.

75.   Having assessed the issue of relocation to Central and  Southern  Iraq
    with which we are not concerned, as noted above,  Dr  George  addresses
    the issue of administrative obstacles to relocation.  He considers that
    there is a  real  risk  that  insurgents  through  their  contacts  and
    sympathisers within administrative offices will learn  a  person's  new
    address,  given  the  lengthy  administrative   process   involved   in
    relocation within Iraq.  If a person does  not  register  though,  they
    will be  unable  to  transfer  their  Ministry  of  State  ration  card
    entitling them to heavily subsidised food and  other  basic  goods  and
    also access to local schools, hospitals and other public  services.   A
    person who wishes to relocate must first apply for  security  clearance
    with the security authorities in their new location and having obtained
    that must submit the security clearance to the local Civil Court  along
    with their nationality certificate, ID card, a letter from the  mukhtar
    (mayor) of their previous locality  confirming  their  identity  and  a
    letter of approval from the mukhtar of the  new  locality.   Dr  George
    notes the OGN of 12 February 2007 and the Iraq Country Policy  Bulletin
    of 17 December 2007 concerning documentation.

76.   As regards the practicalities of return to Iraq,  Dr  George  comments
    that air travel to the Kurdish north is unsafe.  As regards an  attempt
    to return  the  appellant  to  Iraq  via  Baghdad  Airport,  Dr  George
    considers this to be problematic.   He  comments  that  insurgents  are
    targeting Baghdad International  Airport,  according  to  a  report  of
    August 2007, and that civilian and military aircraft  arriving  to  and
    departing from the airport have been subjected to attack by small  arms
    and missiles, and insecurity and lack of proper maintenance  to  Iraq's
    aircraft often lead to cancellations and delays.  It is also said  that
    insurgents reportedly have also targeted Erbil Airport.   The  road  to
    Baghdad Airport, a twelve kilometre  stretch  of  highway  linking  the
    airport to the international  zone,  has  been  a  regular  target  for
    insurgents and was labelled the most dangerous road in Iraq.  According
    to the UNHCR eligibility  guidelines  of  August  2007,  fatal  attacks
    continue to take place on  an  almost  daily  basis.   There  are  also
    references in both the UK and US authorities' reports to the dangers of
    using Baghdad Airport.

77.   In his oral evidence, Dr George  reasserted  his  view  that  the  KRG
    would be unlikely to grant the appellant permission  to  reside  there.
    The remarks of the Prime Minister of  the  KRG  which  appeared  to  go
    contrary to this were  rhetoric.   He  said  that  if  what  the  Prime
    Minister said were the case he would expect to  find  a  lot  of  Iraqi
    Christians living in the KRG and considered that  such  as  were  there
    were mostly Kurdish Christians and not  Arab  Christians.   He  thought
    that the undercurrent of  the  Prime  Minister's  remarks  lay  in  his
    awareness of the KRG's dependency  on  its  alliance  with  the  United
    States of America and he thought that such a speech should be  regarded
    with scepticism.  Dr George provided some helpful statistics on IDPs as
    of September 2007.  As we have set out above, in Dohuk as of 31  August
    2007 there were 54,797 IDPs of whom 16% were  Christians.   These  were
    described as "ethnic based Christians", and Dr George  thought  that  a
    fair portion of  the  Christians  would  be  Kurds  but  that  not  all
    Christians could be Arabs.  He assessed  in  total  there  to  be  some
    11,000 to 12,000 Christian IDPs.  He accepted that a number of that 16%
    would be Arab Christians and he thought that some  would  be  academics
    and professional people who would be welcomed into the  KRG  or  people
    rich enough to bribe their way in or having family connections.   Being
    an Arab Christian did not automatically bar a person from entry to  the
    KRG and if they had the right characteristics they might get in but for
    a person of an average profile there was a high probability  that  they
    would not get in.

78.   As regards the other Governorates, in Erbil of the IDPs in  2007  some
    32% were ethnic based Christians, he thought there would be a total  of
    something slightly over 11,000 Christians.  It was unclear whether they
    were Kurdish Christians and even if they were all Arabs, it would  seem
    that only 10,000 Iraqi Christians had got to  Erbil.   The  number  for
    Sulaymaniyah was very much lower, showing only about 1.4% ethnic  based
    Christians.  As we have seen, Dr George accepted that  there  might  be
    geographical reasons for the disparity, bearing in mind that  Erbil  is
    near Mosul and therefore they would be likely to have  experienced  the
    troubles which caused a lot of Christians to flee.  To  the  south  and
    west of Sulaymaniyah were largely Kurdish  areas  and  therefore  there
    were likely to be Kurds fleeing  from  there.   The  movement  of  some
    members of an ethnic group might lead to the movement of others and the
    figures could also reflect economic activity in a particular town.

79.   Dr George referred to relevant paragraphs of the OGN of  October  2008
    and accepted what was said there as far as it went, but he referred  to
    the Finnish report which he noted also said  that  not  all  Christians
    were allowed into the KRG and commented that in general  they  did  not
    get in.   As  regards  the  reference  in  the  Finnish  report  to  "a
    significant number" of Christians having sought refuge in  the  region,
    Dr George accepted that there were some thousands of Christians in  the
    KRG and also accepted that it was a matter for the court to decide.  He
    referred to other aspects of the Finnish report such as the need for  a
    sponsor and argued that the implication in the OGN was misleading if it
    suggested that the Finnish report said the doors were open.

80.   We shall return to other aspects of Dr George's evidence  subsequently
    but it is relevant at this point also to note his  views  that  if  the
    appellant entered the KRG legitimately  then  he  would  be  all  right
    subject to the problems he would experience from lack of  a  supportive
    family  network,  but  he  would  receive   the   support   of   church
    organisations.

81.   The other expert is Dr Erica Hunter.  She is  a  lecturer  in  Eastern
    Christianity in the Department of the Study of Religions at the  School
    of Oriental and African Studies at University of London  and  lived  in
    Iraq between 1987 and 2002.  In her report  Dr Hunter  refers  to  the
    general background of problems for Christians in Iraq and the risk that
    Christians  face  throughout  Iraq.   On  the  question   of   possible
    relocation by the appellant to the north,  she  notes  that  he  is  an
    Arabic speaking Iraqi Christian born in Mosul and with no  demographic,
    linguistic or ethnic credentials to support  his  resettlement  to  the
    north of Iraq.  She considers that without tribal and family  ties  and
    without the requisite linguistic skills and coming from an alien ethnic
    group, the Kurds would have robust grounds to refuse the appellant  the
    right to live in the KRG.  She also said that there is no  prospect  of
    permanent  protection  for  Christians  in  the  KRG  which  faces  the
    increasingly real prospect of war with Turkey.

82.   Dr Hunter goes on to note a deterioration in the relationship  between
    Christians and Kurds during the last century or so.  Though  there  has
    been a well publicised exodus of Christians from Mosul to  villages  on
    the Ninewa Plains, this does not indicate a long  term  willingness  on
    the part of the Kurds to accommodate the Christians, but  is  rather  a
    measure of expediency and emergency.  Dr Hunter  goes  on  to  consider
    that as a  Chaldean  whose  family  has  been  Catholic  Christian  for
    generations, the appellant would not have the  requisite  pedigree  for
    the right of return to the areas controlled by the KRG.  She makes  the
    point that the Christian communities of Iraq should not be treated as a
    homogeneity: there are real differences between, for example, the socio-
    economic profile of the Assyrians and that of the Chaldeans.  She  goes
    on to note that the Kurdish authorities have permitted some  Christians
    (Assyrians) to return to Kurdistan but  states  that  this  is  not  an
    automatic right but is a "right of return".  She says this is exercised
    strictly on the basis of historic, tribal and family affiliations.  She
    says that this is implicit in the UNHCR statement:

         "In the three Northern  Governorates  of  Sulaymaniyah,  Erbil  and
         Dohuk the rights  of  Christians  are  generally  respected  and  a
         significant number of them have sought refuge  in  the  region,  in
         particular in the Governorate of Dohuk(from where  many  originate)
         and the Christian town of Ainkawa, near the city of Erbil".


    Dr Hunter emphasises the  phrase  "from  where  many  originate".   She
    states that the right of settlement for Christians is not automatic but
    is determined by the Kurdish authorities on the basis of ethnicity  and
    that Arab Christians are discouraged from settling in the  KRG  because
    of their ethnicity and suspicions about their possible affiliation with
    other Arabs, notably Sunnis.  She goes on to state that the appellant's
    linguistic, ethnic and kin profile is totally alien to  the  Kurds  and
    that he has no family  or  religious  ties  to  anchor  any  claims  to
    residency, as well as being linguistically and ethnically alien to  the
    Kurds.  She says there is no guarantee that officials would accept  him
    and allow him to stay, as acknowledged by the UNHCR, and that he  would
    require a sponsor.  She gives an example of an Iraqi academic colleague
    of hers who had to have a sponsor to enable him to talk with colleagues
    at the University of Erbil.


83.   Dr Hunter goes on to state that where the right  of  return  has  been
    exercised Christians face a very uncertain and  insecure  future.   She
    says that villagers have been  discriminated  against  by  the  Kurdish
    authorities and do not share reconstruction funds and oil revenues, and
    farms and villages have been confiscated.  She says that far  from  the
    welcome  portrayed  by  Kurdish  officials,  notably  by  the  Regional
    governor of Erbil, Christians living in the Ninewa Plain in which Mosul
    is situated, Erbil and Kirkuk have  come  under  de  facto  control  of
    Kurdish parties and militias since the fall of the former  regime,  and
    have resisted  attempts  by  Kurds  to  assimilate  them  into  Kurdish
    culture,  language  and  political  parties.   She  states  that   many
    Christians who had the right of return to their ancestral homes in  the
    KRG have left and gone to Syria or Jordan  due  to  the  dire  economic
    situation.  She considers that in the  KRG  there  is  a  deteriorating
    security situation and that the prospect of  conflict  with  Turkey  is
    real and escalating.  She refers to the  Finnish  report  where  it  is
    stated that Christians were worried about the PKK conflict  which  also
    touched areas near the border where Christian people were  settled  and
    where  shelling  had  occurred.   She  considers  the  resettlement  of
    Christians on border areas adjacent to Turkey to be a pragmatic move on
    the part of the Kurdish officials, providing  a  "human  shield".   She
    quotes the Chaldean Bishop of Baghdad as stating that these  settlement
    patterns place the Christians in a  very  vulnerable  situation,  being
    caught between the Kurds and the Turks.

84.   Dr Hunter  goes  on  to  state  that  the  appellant's  names  clearly
    indicate his  ethno-religious  identity  and  that  people  would  know
    immediately that he is Christian in origin and this would be clear from
    his identity card in any  event.   She  considers  that  there  is  the
    highest probability that as a Christian  "collaborator",  elsewhere  in
    Iraq and also in  the  KRG  the  appellant  would  be  abducted  and/or
    murdered at the hands of Islamic extremists.  Thereafter Dr Hunter goes
    on to deal  with  various  matters  with  which  we  are  not  directly
    concerned today since they relate to aspects of the risk which  it  has
    been accepted exists in Mosul and the centre and south  of  Iraq.   Her
    comments are, however, relevant to the issue  of  risk  in  Baghdad  on
    return there and prior to or during any attempt to relocate to the KRG.



85.    We  have  set  out  above  Dr  Hunter's  oral  evidence.   There  she
    emphasised the very lengthy time during which Christians  in  Iraq  had
    been subject to displacement.  She had doubts about the genuineness  of
    what was being said by the Deputy  Prime  Minister  of  the  KRG  about
    welcoming Christians to that area.  She emphasised her  selectivity  in
    choosing cases in which she was prepared to provide  a  report  stating
    that it was only if she was 100% sure of that  she  could  endorse  the
    particular case.

86.   In passing, in respect of what Dr Hunter  said  on  this,  we  do  not
    consider it is necessary for an expert to take  the  view  either  that
    they have to be confident they can support the case in question or,  as
    she also said, that they should take pride in their success record,  as
    it were, in appeals.  The role  of  an  expert  is  to  give  objective
    unbiased evidence concerning a particular case and it should not  be  a
    matter of concern to  the  expert  thereafter  whether  the  person  in
    respect of whom the report is provided is successful or unsuccessful in
    their appeal; nor should it be a matter of concern to them whether  the
    person's case is one in which they believe.  Credibility  findings  and
    conclusions on risk of return are, of course, for the Tribunal,  though
    we accept that experts can give opinions relevant to  credibility,  for
    example as to the plausibility of a claim.  This is not said by way  of
    criticism of  Dr  Hunter,  but  rather  by  way  of  clarification  and
    encouragement to experts not to feel that their reputation should stand
    or fall by the success or  lack  of  it  of  particular  appellants  in
    respect of whom their reports are provided.  Nor do  we  consider  that
    any momentum attaches to an expert's report as a consequence  of  their
    reports  having  been  regarded  favourably  in  previous  cases.   The
    reputation of an expert is  not  an  irrelevant  consideration  but  in
    general a report has to be considered in the context  of  a  particular
    case rather than having acquired some extra weight because  of  success
    of appellants in previous cases in which reports have been provided  by
    that expert.

87.   Returning to Dr Hunter's report, we address first  of  all  the  issue
    which arose as to the lack, as she said, of  permanent  protection  for
    Christians in light of the threat as it would seem to be  from  Turkey.
    She quoted a German diplomat, Herr Munch, in this regard.  She accepted
    that this was a bold assertion but said that he is experienced  in  the
    area and she had spoken to Turks who were concerned at the rise in  the
    prospect of a Kurdish insurgency into Eastern Turkey  escalating.   The
    view expressed at paragraph 2.1 of her report  that  there  is  a  real
    prospect of war with Turkey is not one that we have seen echoed in  any
    other reports.  Certainly it did not appear to  form  any  part  of  Dr
    George's report and in our view it  is  a  somewhat  isolated  opinion.
    Bearing in mind the absence of  evidence  in  this  regard  from  other
    sources we find it unduly speculative.

88.   A further issue of concern in respect of Dr Hunter's evidence  is  the
    disagreement, as we think it can properly be characterised, between her
    and Dr George as to the conditions the appellant would face in the  KRG
    were he to succeed in obtaining entry, and that relates to the previous
    point.  Dr George, in effect, considered that if the appellant was able
    to effect entry for the purpose of residence in the KRG then  he  would
    not experience problems beyond those stemming from lack of a supportive
    family network.  He thought the appellant  would  be  able  to  receive
    support from church organisations.  Dr Hunter took a much  dimmer  view
    of this, for example at paragraph 2.10 of her report,  and  effectively
    said that there was no prospect of permanent protection given the  very
    volatile situation she identified in the KRG.

89.   Again we consider there is weakness in Dr Hunter's  evidence  in  this
    regard.  Hers is again an isolated voice in this respect in contrast to
    what is said by Dr George  and  what  is  to  be  found  in  the  other
    background  reports,  for  example  the  Finnish  report  discussed  at
    paragraph 95 below.  We think that  she  has  somewhat  overstated  the
    position in this regard and this is a matter that we shall go  into  in
    greater detail subsequently.

90.   Dr Hunter provided a further comment concerned firstly with  the  very
    problematic general conditions in  Baghdad,  secondly  the  dangers  of
    travelling on the road from Baghdad International Airport to the centre
    of Baghdad, thirdly noting the possibility of a flight from Baghdad  to
    Erbil, the difficulties in respect of documentation that the  appellant
    would  face  in  order  to  relocate,  including  problems  with  Iraqi
    bureaucracy and difficulties of staying  in  Baghdad.   She  considered
    that if he took a flight from Baghdad to Erbil he should arrive  safely
    at his destination though his difficulties would begin at  the  airport
    in the light of the thorough checks carried out  there.   She  attached
    also the comments of Professor  Harrak,  who  is  a  Professor  at  the
    University of Toronto, together with a copy of his CV,  making  similar
    points.

      Other Evidence

91.   In the Secretary of States' bundle  there  is  a  Newsmax  article  by
    Kenneth R Timmerman which contains a quotation from  the  Deputy  Prime
    Minister of the KRG, Omar Fattah, who says: "Christians  in  Iraq  need
    special attention, because they have been suffering  because  they  are
    Christians."  He is also quoted  as  stating:  "Those  people  are  our
    citizens, and when they are coming to Kurdistan they are most  welcome,
    and we will provide them with all possible assistance."   The  Governor
    of Erbil Province states that today  for  Christians  Kurdistan  is  an
    option and that his government has opened special schools to  meet  the
    needs of Christian refugees who speak Arabic and  not  Kurdish  and  he
    states, "We have done everything we can to  integrate  Christians  into
    Kurdish society.  We are not going to refuse them.  They are Iraqi.  We
    know what they are running from."  The Prime Minister of Iraq, Nuri Al-
    Maliki, is quoted on  October  12  2008  as  having  vowed  to  protect
    Christians in Mosul.  In the Operational Guidance Note (OGN) of October
    2008, there is a section on the situation for Christians  at  paragraph
    3.12 and subsequent paragraphs.  At paragraph 3.12.5 there is reference
    to the Finnish Government's Fact Finding Mission Report of  2007  where
    the government reported that the  KRG  had  become  a  safe  haven  for
    internally displaced persons including Christians who were welcomed  by
    the local population in the  Northern  Governorates  and  respected  by
    their  moderate  Muslim  neighbours.   It  is  said  that   UNHCR   has
    corroborated this position.  It is also said that, according to  UNHCR,
    the rights of Christians in the  KRG  are  generally  respected  and  a
    significant number of Christians have  sought  refuge  in  the  region.
    Reference is also made to the Newsmax interview of Omar Fattah.

92.   It is also relevant to remind ourselves of the figures provided by  Dr
    George  concerning  IDPs  in  the  three  Northern  Governorates.    Of
    particular significance appear to be the  11,000  to  12,000  Christian
    IDPs in Dohuk at least some of whom Dr George accepted would  be  Arab
    Christians though he thought they would be likely to be  academics  and
    professional people welcomed there or rich enough to bribe their way in
    or having family connections.  Also of some significance are the 11,000
    or so representing 32% of the IDPs in Erbil.  Dr George  said  that  it
    was unclear whether they were Kurdish Christians but even if they  were
    all Arabs it would mean that only 10,000 Iraqi Christians  had  got  to
    Erbil.  In this regard we can see no reason why Kurds should be  listed
    as a separate category of IDPs (29% in Erbil) if some of the Christians
    are also Kurds.  We think it is reasonable to assume that  all  of  the
    32% are Arab Christians.  Dr George also made the point that it  needed
    to be considered why Christians would go to  other  countries  such  as
    Syria if they were able to go to  the  KRG  freely.   In  this  regard,
    though, it is relevant to note that the Syrian border is pretty much as
    close to Mosul as Erbil and Dohuk are,  and  considerably  closer  than
    Sulaymaniyah is.  No doubt Christians leaving the  area  would  have  a
    variety of  reasons  for  choosing  the  particular  destination,  e.g.
    joining family or friends, and we do not think that  the  fact  that  a
    number of Christians have gone to Syria  can  be  said  ipso  facto  to
    demonstrate a lack of willingness on the part of the KRG authorities to
    receive them.  We also do not think it can be assumed  from  the  UNHCR
    paper  quoted  at  paragraph  86  above  that  it  is  only  Christians
    exercising a 'right of return' who have sought refuge in the KRG.   The
    fact that many are from Dohuk does not appear to entail  a  requirement
    of historic, tribal and family affiliation, and we can  see  no  reason
    why UNHCR would not have qualified their remarks in the  way  suggested
    by Dr Hunter if such were the case.

93.   It is also relevant to note the interview with Prime Minister  Barzani
    of 5 November  2008  with  krg.org  about  the  attacks  on  the  Iraqi
    Christian community, in which he states among other things that the KRG
    has provided as much assistance as possible to the Christian  families,
    20,000 of whom he said had fled to the KRG and settled in the Dohuk and
    Erbil  Governorates.   He  says  that  this  assistance  has   included
    employing  them  within  the  KRG,  reconstructing  approximately   100
    villages and helping around 10,000 families with monthly stipends.   He
    also said that  the  KRG  has  been  helping  Christian  families  with
    assistance through churches and cultural  and  community  centres.   He
    said that the government had taken these actions based on  feelings  of
    brotherhood and out of responsibility as a constitutionally  recognised
    federal region of Iraq and considered it to be a  political  and  moral
    obligation to assist these displaced families  and  to  work  with  the
    Federal Government to end terrorism against  the  Christian  community.
    He states that the Kurdistan region is home to  a  large  and  peaceful
    Christian community and that their Christian brothers are welcome there
    and they participate in the government's society and economy and are as
    much a part of Kurdish history as the many other ethnic  and  religious
    groups living there in peace and harmony.

94.   There is another Newsmax piece from  Mr  Timmerman  referring  to  the
    thousands of Christians fleeing persecution  in  other  parts  of  Iraq
    having returned since 2004 to ancestral lands in the Ninewa Plain  just
    north east of Mosul but they now face a new battle confronting poverty,
    joblessness and despair.  He says that the KRG are  seeking  to  annexe
    this fertile land where Christians have lived for 2000  years,  because
    it is believed to contain rich oil resources.  It is  said  that  while
    the Kurds are providing much  needed  security  and  emergency  refugee
    housing  they  are  also  seeking  to  manipulate  the  Christians  for
    political gain  though  a  sophisticated  system  of  patronage,  local
    officials, refugees  and  international  aid.   The  CEO  of  Christian
    Solidarity  International  is  quoted  as  saying  that  the  Christian
    community in Iraq is on the verge of extinction.  People are quoted  as
    saying they could not get work in Erbil unless they knew  somebody  and
    that they were told to join the KDP of President Barzani if they wanted
    to find a job.  The Kurdish officials are  said  to  have  acknowledged
    that discrimination against Christians existed, but  insisted  that  it
    was not official government policy.  A further article by Mr  Timmerman
    on 26 October 2008 refers to Christian refugees  he  met  in  Amman  in
    April 2008 not expressing any confidence in the  Iraqi  Government  and
    none wanting to return to Iraq.  Again, there is reference  to  efforts
    by the KRG to win more territory in the Ninewa Plain and the fact that,
    though Kurdish leaders say  they  have  made  efforts  to  protect  the
    freedom  of  religion  and  have  allowed  Evangelical  Christians   to
    proselytise in Muslim areas, nevertheless they are said to  be  engaged
    in a cynical effort to use the Assyrian Christians as  political  pawns
    to expand their own power.

95.   The  Fact  Finding  Mission  to  Iraq's  three  Northern  Governorates
    carried out by the Legal Service and Country Information  Unit  of  the
    Directorate of Immigration in Finland took place  between  October  and
    November 2007.  At paragraph 6.1 it is said that the situation for  the
    Christian population in Iraq is very serious.  Many Christians are said
    to have fled to Dohuk or Erbil.  It is said  that  due  to  the  stable
    situation, the three Northern Governorates have become a safe haven for
    Christians and there, according to the Chaldean  Culture  Society,  the
    situation  of  Christians  resembled  something  like  a  normal  life.
    Christians are said to have been welcomed by the  local  population  in
    the  three  Northern  Governorates  and  there  has  been   substantial
    immigration of Christians to Dohuk and Erbil.  The Fact Finding Mission
    was told that all Christians were not able to enter the three  Northern
    Governorates.  According to the  Chaldean  Culture  Society,  everybody
    needs a sponsor to enter the  region.   A  trusted  sponsor  can  be  a
    sponsor to many internally  displaced  persons.   At  page  25  of  its
    report, the Fact Finding Mission quotes the IOM as stating that  it  is
    fairly easy  for  an  ordinary  person  without  problems  (it  is  not
    specified what "without  problems"  means)  to  migrate  to  the  three
    Northern  Governorates.  UNHCR confirmed that basically anyone can  act
    as a sponsor.  In Sulaymaniyah (but not in  Erbil  or  Dohuk,  where  a
    sponsor is needed) it  has  been  possible  for  Christians  to  obtain
    residency by obtaining a recommendation from a local church and  taking
    the recommendation to the Asayish.  It is said that displaced Christian
    families receive only nominal support and that Christians in the  three
    Northern Governorates have a committee through which families receive a
    monthly amount of US$80, but in practice the money lasts for about four
    days and due to inflation and high prices people have  trouble  getting
    married and starting a family.  According to UNHCR, Christians  do  not
    get money grants in Sulaymaniyah.  According  to  UNHCR,  mentioned  in
    this  report,  the  situation  of  Christians  in  the  three  Northern
    Governorates is generally good.  UNHCR mentions 36  Christian  families
    living in difficult conditions in a place called Koy Sanjaq.

      Existing Tribunal Authority

96.   Previously it was said  by  the  Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal  in  RA
    (Christians) Iraq CG [2005] UKIAT 00091 at paragraph 63 that it had not
    been shown that it would be unduly harsh for a Christian to relocate to
    the north in Iraq.   Subsequently  in  LM  (Educated  women  -  Chaldo-
    Assyrians - risk) Iraq CG [2006] UKAIT 00060,  this  Tribunal  said  as
    follows at paragraph 69:

    "69.   KDG links and the Northern Governorates.  Persons with links  to
         the KDG  may  be  able  to  mitigate  their  position  by  internal
         relocation, but entry to the Northern Governorates  is  restricted.
         The Governorates of Kirkuk, Sulaimaniyah and  Dohuk  are  now  only
         accepting those who have a proven link to their territories, or for
         whom (and in this respect, specific evidence is  required)  someone
         in the territory is prepared to sponsor them.   In  general,  those
         who are admitted to the KDG will be of Kurdish origin and  will  be
         Kurdish speakers, particularly  as  the  evidence  shows  that  the
         Northern  Governorates  have  tightened  entry  controls  to  these
         areas."


    More recently, in NS (Iraq: perceived collaborator: relocation) Iraq CG
    [2007] UKAIT 00046, at paragraph 38 the Tribunal said:


    "38.   In  the  UNHCR  Guidelines  of  October  2005  relating  to  the
         eligibility of Iraqi asylum seekers it is suggested that relocation
         in the three Northern Governorates will  depend  on  a  variety  of
         factors, the main one being whether the claimant would  be  allowed
         to enter and legally reside in the area of relocation  and  whether
         he/she has family, community  and/or  political  links  that  would
         allow for his/her protection, economic  survival  and  integration.
         Later in the same guidelines (at p.51, paragraph 8) it is said that
         the Kurdish authorities aim to keep the area "Kurdish" and  are  in
         principle  reluctant  to  accept  any   increase   of   non-Kurdish
         populations in their areas of influence.  Hence the KRG authorities
         implement strict controls on the presence of non-Kurdish people  in
         their areas. Whereas certain factors such as  former  Ba'ath  Party
         membership or a criminal record  would  clearly  entail  denial  of
         admission, otherwise it is difficult to establish clear criteria to
         predict who will be admitted or rejected.  At times decisions  seem
         to be taken in a discretionary manner.  There  are  checkpoints  at
         the  unofficial  borders  between  Central  Iraq   and   the   KRG-
         administered area, and the area is regularly patrolled and  heavily
         mined.  Hence entry via the checkpoints is, practically,  the  only
         option available.  At p.53-54, paragraph 21,  somewhat  contrasting
         with what was said at p.51 paragraph 8, it is said that the Kurdish
         parties will  reject  anybody  who  does  not  originate  from  the
         respective Governorate and does  not  have  a  Kurdish  sponsor  to
         guarantee his/her entry and stay (Governorates of Erbil and Dohuk),
         or may be considered to pose a security risk or is  found  to  have
         links with the  former  government.   It  seems  that  there  is  a
         difference between being admitted to the KRG area and  obtaining  a
         residence permit, which has to be applied for by  anyone  not  from
         the Governorate in question."

97.    It  is  necessary  now  to  bring  together  the  evidence  and   the
    conclusions in earlier Tribunal  decisions  in  assessing  whether  the
    appellant, an Arab Christian,  would be able  to  access  the  KRG  and
    whether it would be unduly harsh for him to exercise relocation  there.
    The statistics  provided  show  that  a  not  insignificant  number  of
    Christians have been able to access the three Northern Governorates, in
    particular Dohuk and Erbil.  It seems that a person may need a sponsor,
    and Dr George emphasised the significance of the necessary cultural and
    perhaps professional links as did Dr Hunter, particularly with  respect
    to the former.  We bear in mind the cautions expressed by Dr George and
    Dr Hunter concerning the extent to which one should accept what is said
    by the Prime Minister and Deputy Prime Minister as  to  the  extent  to
    which Christians generally, it would seem from the  evidence  emanating
    from them, are welcomed into the KRG.  We accept that there must be  an
    element of such caution in respect of that evidence  in  light  of  the
    other evidence referring to such matters as the need  for  sponsors  in
    certain situations and the difficulties otherwise that  may  exist  for
    Christians in relocating to the north.  We must bear in mind  also  the
    points made by the experts concerning  the  appellant's  ethnicity  and
    lack of any historic links  to  the  KRG.   But,  taking  the  evidence
    overall, we consider that it has not  been  shown  that  the  appellant
    would not be able to access the Northern  Governorates.   There  is  no
    indication as to why, for example, if sponsorship were needed he  would
    not be able to obtain a sponsor from a local church were he to seek  to
    enter Sulaymaniyah.  It would seem at least in  that  region  (and,  it
    would seem also in Erbil and Dohuk (see paragraph 95  above)  according
    to UNHCR), sponsorship is a relatively nominal matter requiring no more
    than that  kind  of  recommendation.   We  are  impressed  by  what  is
    contained in the  Finnish  report  which,  as  is  made  clear  in  the
    background  statement  at  paragraph  1,  contained  the  findings   of
    representatives of the Finnish Government and  the  NGO  community.   A
    number of sources were interviewed over a six day period and as can  be
    seen, the team managed to secure important meetings  with  the  Kurdish
    administration dealing with immigration issues and  the  KRG's  General
    Directorate of Displacement and Migration despite not being  officially
    welcomed by the KRG administration.  This is  a  recent  and  objective
    report which clearly is deserving of having significant weight attached
    to it.  That is not to denigrate the quality of the report of Dr Hunter
    and in particular the reports of Dr George.  We have identified as  set
    out above two respects in which we  have  concerns  about  Dr Hunter's
    report.  Where there is the contrast identified  between  her  evidence
    and Dr George's we prefer Dr George's report for the reasons given.  Dr
    George was in the end perfectly  happy  to  leave  the  matter  to  the
    Tribunal on the basis of the evidence he had provided  and  that  is  a
    very proper approach.  In light of the numbers identified by Dr  George
    and in particular entering Dohuk and Erbil Governorates,  it  does  not
    seem to us that the issue of sponsorship is likely to  pose  any  great
    difficulty.  There is no evidence other  than  supposition  to  suggest
    that a Christian would only be allowed in on the basis of  professional
    or family links.  In light of the numbers identified we  consider  that
    the  appellant  would  not  experience  any  particular  difficulty  in
    obtaining sponsorship to enable him to enter the KRG, and  we  conclude
    that it would not be unduly harsh for him to be expected to do so.   In
    general we conclude that the same applies to any Christian  Arab  Iraqi
    who is at risk elsewhere in Iraq.

98.   On the issue of conditions that the appellant would face  in  the  KRG
    having been admitted, we prefer Dr George's  evidence  to  that  of  Dr
    Hunter.  We do not find support  for  any  of  Dr  Hunter's  particular
    concerns elsewhere in the  background  evidence,  whereas  Dr  George's
    evidence is consistent with  the  view  we  have  come  to  as  to  the
    appellant's ability to enter the KRG.  No doubt the absence  of  family
    and clan links would be a disadvantage to the appellant in the KRG, but
    Dr George's evidence was that, though it would be difficult,  he  would
    be able to manage, particularly with church support.  In this regard we
    bear in mind also some of the evidence we have  considered  above  from
    the KRG Government concerning the welcome that they say is afforded  to
    Christians and although, as set out above, we have taken  that  with  a
    pinch of salt as regards the general extent of acceptance into the  KRG
    of Christians that appears to be set out in that evidence, nevertheless
    we consider that once a  Christian  such  as  the  appellant  has  been
    admitted to the KRG there is no reason  to  suppose  that  he  will  be
    regarded adversely and, subject to the general difficulties  of  living
    there without family and clan support, we consider that he will be able
    not only to enter the KRG but also will be able to live  there  without
    this being unduly harsh.

99.   Since the decision of the Court of Appeal in GH [2005] EWCA Civ  1182,
    the Tribunal has taken  the  view  that,  as  its  assessment  is  only
    hypothetical, practical issues to do  with  the  manner  and  means  of
    return are not for  it  -  see  e.g.  AM  &  AM  (Armed  conflict  risk
    categories) Somalia CG  [2008]  UKAIT  00091,  and  KH  (Article  15(c)
    Qualification Directive) Iraq CG [2008] UKAIT 0023,  except  where  the
    manner and method of return are  known.   It  is  however  sufficiently
    clear what the route of return would be in this case (via Baghdad)  and
    hence it is appropriate to deal in with these issues  as  part  of  our
    determination.  We should say that we have not found  it  necessary  to
    ask for further submissions in light of the decision of  the  Court  of
    Appeal in QD (Iraq) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2009]
    EWCA Civ 620, concluding that KH was wrong in law, since  there  is  no
    issue of civilians in the KRG succeeding under  Article  15(c)  of  the
    Qualification Directive, and in any event we have found  the  appellant
    to be at risk in his home area..

100.  As regards the issue of travel to the KRG, it  seems  clear  from  the
    post-hearing evidence provided by Mr Kyriacou that  there  are  regular
    (on average one daily) flights to Erbil from Baghdad.   Clearly,  as  a
    mode of travel, this is likely to be the safest option (in contrast  to
    bus  or  car  travel  by  road,  which  we  accept,  would  clearly  be
    problematic).  We bear in mind the evidence referred to in  Ms  Brown's
    additional written submissions in particular at paragraphs 3-6, but  we
    do not consider, bearing  in  mind  the  limited  amount  of  time  the
    appellant would need to be in Baghdad, that  the  conditions  he  would
    face would place him at real risk and/or would render  that  aspect  of
    internal relocation unreasonable.


101.  Clearly  there  would  be  difficulties  in  obtaining  the  necessary
    documentation to enter the KRG. According to the  Iraq  Country  Policy
    bulletin of 17 December 2007, a person wishing to relocate within  Iraq
    must possess:

          . the personal  identification  number  which  is  issued  by  the
            General Directorate of  Citizenship  in  accordance  with  Iraqi
            Civil Law number 65(1972);


          . the Iraqi National Certificate which shows that  the  holder  is
            Iraqi;

          . a letter of confirmation from the place of work in the  intended
            relocation town and/or the approval of the Mukhtar of that town;

          . a declaration from the security services that the person is  not
            involved in criminal activities.

    Without this documentation supporting official relocation,  individuals
    would be unable to access food which is rationed and  would  be  denied
    access to work.  A person wishing to relocate away from their home town
    does not have to visit their home town in order to obtain the requisite
    documentation for a relocation application.  It is said that  obtaining
    an Iraqi Civil Status Identity Card is a simple process.  FCO advice is
    that it generally takes approximately one day to obtain  the  necessary
    documentation on return to Iraq.  Although in 2005  UNHCR  stated  that
    returnees often faced difficulties in obtaining documentation, in  2006
    the IOM said that they were unaware  of  any  problems  experienced  by
    returnees in obtaining the necessary documentation on return,  and  had
    not been called on to help in that  regard.   Dr  Hunter  says  in  her
    supplementary report that Iraqi ID cards are not recognised as valid by
    the KRG who issue their own documents, but  the  Finnish  Fact  Finding
    Mission at page 25 of its report states that according to the IOM after
    arrival a person needs to visit the police in  a  few  weeks'  time  in
    order to receive a residency card, and they need to have  an  Iraqi  ID
    card, a birth certificate and a PDS card in  order  to  apply  for  the
    residency card.  We prefer the evidence of the Fact Finding Mission  on
    this point, as being recently obtained, and sourced.  Taking  all  this
    together, we conclude that difficulties in  obtaining  documents  would
    not be such as,  either  separately  or  cumulatively  with  the  other
    matters considered, to make relocation to the KRG unreasonable.





    The appeal is dismissed.





Signed                                             Date
