












R (on  the  application  of  Sorae)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
Department IJR [2016] UKUT 00030 (IAC)


                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber


                       Judicial Review Decision Notice







                       The Queen on the application of

                                 Ewaen Sorae
                                                                   Applicant
                                      v


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent




                     Before Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede



            Application for judicial review: substantive decision


Having considered  all  documents  lodged  and  having  heard  the  parties'
respective representatives, Mr  C  Mannan  of  Counsel,  on  behalf  of  the
Applicant, instructed through Direct Access and Ms J  Gray  of  Counsel,  on
behalf of the Respondent, instructed by the Government Legal Department,  at
a hearing at Field House, London on 3 December 2015


Decision: the application for judicial review is refused


                                  JUDGMENT


    1) This is an application for judicial review of  the  decision  of  the
       Secretary of State for the Home Department ("SSHD") dated 5  November
       2014,  entitled  "supplementary  reasons  for  refusal  letter",   to
       maintain  an  earlier  decision  of  20  March  2014  to  refuse  the
       applicant's application for indefinite leave to remain in the  United
       Kingdom as a Tier 1 (General) Migrant under the Points-Based  System.
       Permission to apply for judicial review was granted by Upper Tribunal
       Judge Allen on 3 September 2015 following an oral hearing.


    2)      The applicant is a national of Nigeria, born on 4 July 1978.  He
       entered the United Kingdom on 30 September 2003  with  a  visa  valid
       until 31 October 2004 and applied for leave to remain as  a  student.
       His application was rejected but he was subsequently granted  various
       periods of leave to remain as a student until 31 August 2008.  On  30
       November 2007 he was granted leave to remain until 30  November  2009
       as a Highly Skilled Migrant and then from 26 November 2009  until  30
       November 2012 as a Tier 1 (General) Migrant.

    3)  The applicant returned to Nigeria prior to the expiry of his  leave.
       During his stay in Nigeria he states that he  prepared  the  relevant
       documentation which he was intending to submit on his return  to  the
       United Kingdom for an application  for  further  leave,  but  he  was
       attacked by robbers who took his documents. He did not have  time  to
       obtain duplicate documents before returning to the United Kingdom and
       so arranged to have duplicates forwarded to him once he  was  in  the
       United Kingdom. He returned to the  United  Kingdom  on  29  November
       2012. He claims to have received the duplicate documents  in  January
       2013.

    4)  The applicant then made his  application  for  indefinite  leave  to
       remain as a Tier 1 (General) Migrant on 5 February 2013, on the basis
       of five years' continuous residence under  the  Points-Based  System,
       referring also to his private life established in the United Kingdom.
       He included in his covering letter an explanation for  the  delay  in
       submitting   the   application,   referring   to   the    exceptional
       circumstances preventing him from making the application  within  the
       period of his leave, namely the robbery and theft of his  documentary
       evidence  and  the  need  to  obtain  duplicate  documents  from  his
       accountant. He included, within the documents submitted in support of
       his  application,  and  in  support  of  his  claim  of   exceptional
       circumstances, a police investigation report from Nigeria.

    5) The applicant's application was, however,  rejected  on  25  February
       2013 as invalid, owing to his fee payment being rejected by the bank.
       He then re-submitted his application on 28 February 2013.

    6) In a decision made on 20 March 2014, and sent to the applicant  on  1
       April 2014, the respondent refused the  application  under  paragraph
       245CD(i)  of  the  immigration  rules,  on  the  basis  that  he  had
       overstayed in the United Kingdom for a period in excess of  28  days.
       The respondent calculated that the applicant had submitted his  valid
       application for indefinite leave to remain 89 days after  the  expiry
       of his leave to remain on 30 November 2012 and accordingly had stayed
       in the  United  Kingdom  in  breach  of  the  immigration  laws.  The
       respondent advised the applicant, in  the  refusal  letter,  that  he
       would have to make a charged application on the specified form if  he
       wanted consideration to be given to his family and private life under
       the immigration rules.

    7) On 1 April  2014  the  respondent  made  a  decision  to  remove  the
       applicant under section 10 of the Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  1999
       (administrative removal), advising the applicant  in  the  notice  of
       decision that he was entitled to a right of appeal from  outside  the
       United Kingdom.

    8) On 10 April 2014,  in  a  Pre-Action  Protocol  ("PAP")  letter,  the
       applicant submitted that he was entitled to an  in-country  right  of
       appeal, having raised Article 8 grounds in his application, and  that
       his removal was in breach of his Article 8  human  rights,  a  matter
       which  the  respondent  had  failed  to  consider  in  refusing   his
       application. It was further submitted that the respondent had  failed
       to  consider  the  exceptional  circumstances  referred  to  by   the
       applicant  when  making  his  application  which  had  led   to   his
       application having been made out of time. The respondent's failure to
       consider the exceptional  circumstances  was  contrary  to  the  Home
       Office policy "Guidance - Applications from overstayers  (non  family
       routes)" and to the "Statement of Changes in Immigration  Rules"  and
       accompanying "Explanatory Memorandum". It was also  contrary  to  the
       guidance on long residence and private life, which was relevant since
       the applicant qualified for indefinite leave to remain on  the  basis
       of 10 years lawful residence in the United Kingdom. The rejection  of
       the applicant's application of 5 February 2013  on  validity  grounds
       was also challenged under  the  principles  in  Basnet  (validity  of
       application  -  respondent)  Nepal  [2012]  UKUT  113,  but  it   was
       acknowledged that that would not have made any difference to the  out
       of time issue in any event.


    9) On 2 May 2014 the respondent advised the applicant that a response to
       the PAP would be delayed. A response was then sent on 9 May  2014  in
       which the respondent agreed to reconsider the  decision  of  1  April
       2014 in light of the points made in the PAP. On 14  August  2014  the
       respondent requested the resubmission of the  applicant's  previously
       submitted evidence in relation to exceptional reasons for  the  delay
       in his application. On 26 August 2014  the  applicant  submitted  two
       police investigation reports and a letter  from  his  accountants  in
       Nigeria.

   10) In the meantime, the applicant also lodged an appeal  to  the  First-
       tier Tribunal against the removal decision,  considering  that  there
       was an in-country right of appeal on the basis that  he  had  made  a
       human rights claim prior to the removal decision, and that appeal was
       listed for hearing on 14 November 2014.

   11)  On 5 November 2014 the respondent, having reviewed  the  applicant's
       application, then issued a supplementary reasons for  refusal  letter
       maintaining the refusal decision, concluding that the  applicant  had
       not made out his  claim  of  exceptional  circumstances  such  as  to
       justify the delay in making his application and again  reminding  the
       applicant that he needed to make a separate  charged  application  on
       the basis of his family and private life.

   12)  In a letter dated 14 November 2014 the applicant withdrew the appeal
       before the First-tier Tribunal, accepting that he  had  not  in  fact
       made a human rights claim in accordance with the requirements of  the
       new immigration rules and that he  therefore  did  not  have  an  in-
       country right of appeal.

   13)  On 2 December 2014 the applicant submitted his judicial review claim
       challenging the decision of 5 November 2014.

   14) The grounds of challenge in the application were that:

        a)  the respondent had wrongly interpreted the applicability of the
           28 day rule for overstayers and had given consideration only  to
           why the applicant could have applied before  the  expiration  of
           the 28 days rather  than  considering  whether  the  exceptional
           circumstances applied after the expiration of the 28  days.  The
           grounds asserted that the  respondent  had  failed  to  consider
           whether the applicant fell under one of the exceptions to the 28
           day period and relied on the Home Office policy guidance and the
           statement of changes in the rules and explanatory memorandum  in
           submitting that he clearly did fall within  the  exceptions,  by
           reason of having had problems  replacing  lost  documents  as  a
           result of theft;


        b) the respondent had significantly delayed in making her  decision
           in the applicant's application, which was a matter of procedural
           unfairness;

        c)  the  respondent  had  failed  to  reconsider  the   applicant's
           application within a reasonable period of time.

   15)  The respondent, in the summary grounds of  defence,  submitted  that
       she had a discretion whether or  not  to  conclude  that  exceptional
       circumstances existed in any particular case and, in the  applicant's
       case, having taken into account all relevant factors, had  reasonably
       and properly exercised that discretion. It was submitted further that
       the  delay  in  considering  the  applicant's   application,   albeit
       significant, was  not  unreasonable  and  did  not  disadvantage  the
       applicant and that careful scrutiny had been given by the  respondent
       to the applicant's application in undertaking the reconsideration.


   16) Permission to apply for judicial review was  initially  refused,  but
       upon renewal to an oral hearing was granted by Upper  Tribunal  Judge
       Allen on 3 September 2015, on the following basis:

           "It is arguable that  the  respondent  erred  in  not  expressly
           considering her policy in the exercise of her discretion,  given
           that the facts of the case ostensibly fall squarely  within  one
           of the bullet point examples in  the  policy  document.  In  the
           alternative, if she can be said in effect to have exercised  her
           discretion under the policy, this was  arguably  flawed  on  the
           basis that the reason given, at the fifth paragraph of page 2 of
           the supplementary decision letter, was  arguably  an  irrational
           basis on which to exercise the discretion."

     The Parties' Submissions

   17) At the hearing before me, the challenge  was  put  on  the  following
       basis: that the respondent, in her letter of  5  November  2014,  had
       failed to consider the policy guidance and that had the guidance been
       followed it would have been recognised that the applicant fell within
       the last bullet point and, given that no other reasons had been given
       for refusing his application, he should have been  granted  leave  to
       remain. Mr Mannan confirmed that the ground of challenge relating  to
       Article 8 was no longer pursued.


   18) Mr Mannan submitted that it was clear from the  refusal  letter  that
       the respondent, whilst considering whether exceptional  circumstances
       existed to justify the delay in making the application,  had  had  no
       regard to the terms of the  policy  itself,  which  provided  a  non-
       exhaustive list of circumstances considered  to  be  exceptional.  He
       submitted that it could not  be  implied  into  the  wording  of  the
       refusal letter that the policy had  been  considered.  The  applicant
       could not have made his application before he had  all  the  relevant
       documentary  evidence,  as  the  respondent  suggested,   since   the
       application would have been bound  to  fail  due  to  an  absence  of
       specified evidence. I pointed out to Mr  Mannan  that  the  applicant
       could not meet the terms of the policy in any event, as  he  had  not
       produced any evidence to show the date upon which  he  had  requested
       replacement documents. His response was that the absence of  such  an
       observation by the respondent herself was further confirmation of the
       fact that the terms of the policy had not been considered.

   19) Ms Gray referred to the correspondence between the applicant and  the
       respondent leading up to the decision of 5 November 2014 as providing
       a clear basis for accepting that it was implicit within  the  refusal
       letter that the respondent had considered the policy.  She  submitted
       that there was nothing irrational about the respondent's decision  to
       exercise her discretion, under the terms of the policy,  against  the
       applicant and there was no requirement for discretion to be exercised
       in his favour simply because he had had his documents stolen.

   20)  In response, Mr Mannan reiterated the  points  previously  made  and
       submitted that it could not be  implied  that  the  policy  had  been
       followed and neither could it be assumed  that  the  reference  to  a
       policy in previous correspondence meant that a policy introduced only
       two weeks before the decision had been considered by the respondent.


  Relevant Policy Guidance


   21) The relevant  part  of  the  policy  "Guidance  -  Applications  from
       overstayers (non family routes) - version 6.0", valid from 20 October
       2014, states as follows:


      "If you are refusing an application because of overstaying
      You must consider  any  exceptional  circumstances  that  stopped  the
      applicant applying within the 28 days. The 'exceptional circumstances'
      threshold is high, but can include:
       . The migrant or their representative could not submit an application
         on time because of:
           .  serious  illness  (supported  by  the   appropriate   medical
             documentation)
           . travel or postal delays. Or
       . They are not able to provide the  necessary  documents  because  of
         exceptional or unavoidable  circumstances  beyond  the  applicant's
         control. For example:
           .  The  Home  Office  has  lost  or  delayed  returning   travel
             documents.
           . The applicant is having problems replacing lost documents as a
             result of theft, fire or flood. They must provide evidence  to
             show the date of loss and the date they requested  replacement
             documents. "

   22) The relevant part of the Statement  of  Changes  in  the  Immigration
       Rules states as follows:


       "Applications from overstayers


       7.16 The Immigration Rules are being amended to ensure  a  consistent
       approach is taken to those who seek further  leave  to  remain  after
       their previous period of leave has expired. From 9  July  2012  those
       seeking  further  leave  to  remain  as  family  members   (including
       settlement) will be refused if they have overstayed by more  than  28
       days.


       7.17 From 1 October 2012 other immigration rules, including those for
       persons studying and working in the UK, will  be  brought  into  line
       with this approach, with applicants refused if they  have  overstayed
       by more than 28 days.


       7.18 There will be a number of safeguards to ensure that the  amended
       rules are fair and proportionate:
       . Where an applicant submits an  application  before  their  previous
 period of leave to
       enter or remain expires, but the application is rejected  as  invalid
       after their leave expires, the 28-day window in which the application
       may be submitted as an
       overstayer will start from the date  on  which  the  application  was
 rejected, rather than
       when leave expired.
       .  Caseworkers  will  continue  to  have   discretion   to   consider
 exceptional cases.
       Applicants who have overstayed by  more  than  28  days  may  provide
 evidence of
       exceptional circumstances which prevented them from submitting  their
       application in time."


  Discussion


   23)  It is not in dispute that the policy "Guidance -  Applications  from
       overstayers (non family routes) - version 6.0" was  not  specifically
       cited in the respondent's decision of 5 November 2014.  Neither is it
       disputed by Mr Mannan that the respondent was not  required  to  cite
       the policy in full. However, what is relevant is whether or  not  the
       respondent had the policy in  mind  and  considered  the  applicant's
       circumstances in line with the terms of the policy. I find myself  in
       agreement with Ms Gray's  submission  that  it  is  plainly  implicit
       within the terms of  the  refusal  letter,  and  in  particular  when
       considering the correspondence leading up to that decision, that  the
       respondent had the policy  very  much  in  mind  in  considering  the
       applicant's explanation for the delay in making his application.


   24) The respondent's decision of 5 November 2014 was a reconsideration of
       the applicant's application, further to a  previous  decision  of  20
       March 2014, and in response to the assertions made in the applicant's
       PAP letter of 10 April 2014.  Aside  from  the  grounds  relating  to
       Article 8, the main complaint in the PAP was that the respondent  had
       failed to consider the  applicant's  explanation  for  the  delay  in
       making his application and to consider the exceptional  circumstances
       that he had raised, in line with the Home Office policy guidance.  It
       was as a result of that complaint that the respondent, in her  letter
       of 9 May 2014, agreed to reconsider the decision of 20 March 2014/  1
       April 2014, stating the following:

           "Decisions for limited or indefinite leave to remain can only be
           reversed where it is clear that the original  decision  was  not
           taken in line with the prevailing policy and immigration law  at
           the  time  the  decision  was  reached....Having  reviewed   the
           decision in light of the  points  made  in  your  letter  before
           claim, the decision of 1 April 2014 will be reconsidered"

   25) It is absolutely clear from this, when considered together  with  the
       PAP letter, that the reason  for  the  agreement  to  reconsider  the
       decision was that the original decision had not been  taken  in  line
       with the relevant policy and that a reconsideration was to take place
       in order to take account of the policy. Accordingly  the  purpose  of
       the respondent's subsequent letter  of  14  August  2014,  requesting
       resubmission of  the  evidence  previously  produced  confirming  the
       applicant's exceptional reasons for the delay in his application, was
       to enable the applicant's explanation and evidence to  be  considered
       under the terms of the policy. The refusal letter of 5 November  2014
       made  it  clear,  at  page  2,  paragraph  2,  that  the  applicant's
       application had been reconsidered in light of his representations  in
       the PAP and there can be no doubt, therefore, that, whilst the policy
       was not cited in terms, paragraphs 3 to 5 of page 2  of  that  letter
       were   nevertheless   specifically   addressing    the    applicant's
       circumstances  within  the  policy.  There   was   nothing   in   the
       respondent's conclusions at paragraphs 4 and 5 to  suggest  that  the
       considerations had been anything other than in line with the terms of
       that policy. I do not agree that the  respondent's  consideration  of
       why the applicant was prevented from making an application before the
       expiry of the deadline indicates  a  failure  to  consider  a  policy
       concerning exceptional circumstances applying after the expiration of
       the deadline, as the initial grounds assert at  [11].  Neither  do  I
       agree with Mr Mannan's submission  as  to  concerns  that  the  wrong
       policy, or a different version, had been considered, when it is clear
       from the extract of the  policy  quoted  in  the  PAP  letter  (which
       incidentally had been force since 12 September 2013) that the  policy
       remained, where relevant, in identical terms in the  updated  version
       of 20 October 2014.


   26) Accordingly there is no merit in the first ground. It is  clear  that
       the respondent exercised  her  discretion  under  the  terms  of  the
       relevant policy and I dismiss the applicant's claim to the contrary.


   27) As to the basis upon which the  respondent  exercised  discretion,  I
       find nothing irrational in the conclusion reached.  At  paragraphs  3
       and 4 of page 2 of the letter of 5 November 2014 the respondent found
       that the reasons given by the applicant for the delay in  making  his
       application did not amount to exceptional circumstances, since it had
       been open to him to submit his application within the time limit with
       an explanation for  the  absence  of  relevant  supporting  evidence,
       making  the  same  representations  about  the  theft   of   relevant
       documents, and submitting the police investigation report already  in
       his possession. There is nothing irrational about such a  conclusion.
       The documents the applicant claims to have had stolen related  solely
       to his business activities in Nigeria whereas it is  clear  from  the
       list of documents in his letter of 5 February 2013 that the  majority
       of the documentation related to his business activities in the United
       Kingdom and there  is  no  reason  why  those  could  not  have  been
       submitted  with  an  in-time  application.  Accordingly  it  was  not
       irrational for the respondent to conclude that the theft of documents
       in Nigeria did not amount to exceptional circumstances justifying the
       delay in making his application. It  is,  moreover,  clear  from  the
       policy that the threshold for demonstrating exceptional circumstances
       is a high one. The policy lists circumstances  which  can  amount  to
       exceptional circumstances  and  I  do  not  accept,  as  Mr  Mannan's
       submission appeared to suggest,  that  it  automatically  follows  in
       every case that problems replacing documents as  a  result  of  theft
       will amount to exceptional circumstances. It is for the respondent to
       consider all the circumstances, which is what she undoubtedly did  in
       the applicant's case.  I therefore also dismiss the applicant's claim
       in this respect.


   28) Finally, and as I pointed out to Mr Mannan, it seems to me  that  the
       applicant could not, in any event meet the terms of the policy, since
       he failed to meet the requirement to provide  evidence  to  show  the
       date that he requested  replacement  documents.  Neither  the  police
       investigation reports  nor  the  accountant's  letter  provides  such
       information. Mr Mannan submitted that the fact that that  was  not  a
       matter raised by the respondent reinforced his case that  the  policy
       had not even been considered. I do not agree. The respondent  clearly
       did consider the policy and the fact  that  she  did  not  make  that
       observation adds nothing to the applicant's case. On the contrary, it
       is the case that even if the applicant made out his grounds as stated
       and there had been a failure to consider the policy (which I  do  not
       find to be the case), that is immaterial, since he could not  in  any
       event meet the terms of the policy.

   29)  Accordingly I find that the respondent was entitled  to  refuse  the
       applicant's application on the basis that she did. There was  nothing
       unreasonable, irrational or unlawful about her decision.

  Decision

   30)  For all of these reasons, the claim must fail  and  the  applicant's
       application for judicial review is refused.

  Permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal

   31)  Permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal is refused on the  basis
       that there is no arguable point  of  law  capable  of  affecting  the
       outcome of the application.


  Costs


   32)   The applicant, being the losing party, bears the burden of  meeting
       the respondent's costs. The respondent is to send the  applicant  her
       schedule of costs and any written submissions from the parties as  to
       costs are then to be made to the Upper Tribunal no later than 14 days
       from the date of this order.



                       [pic]
      Signed:

                             Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede


      Dated:                 10 December 2015










Applicant's solicitors:
Respondent's solicitors:
Home Office Ref:
Decision(s) sent to above parties on:
----------------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------------
 Notification of appeal rights

A decision by the Upper Tribunal on an application for judicial review is  a
decision that disposes of proceedings.

 A party may appeal against such a decision to the  Court  of  Appeal  on  a
question of law only. Any party who wishes to appeal  should  apply  to  the
Upper Tribunal for permission, at the  hearing  at  which  the  decision  is
given. If no application is made, the Tribunal must nonetheless consider  at
the hearing whether to give or refuse permission to appeal (rule  44(4B)  of
the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

If the Tribunal refuses permission, either in response to an application  or
by virtue of rule 44(4B), then the party wishing to  appeal  can  apply  for
permission from the Court of Appeal itself. This must be done by  filing  an
appellant's notice with the Civil Appeals Office  of  the  Court  of  Appeal
within 28 days of the date the Tribunal's decision on permission  to  appeal
was given (Civil Procedure Rules Practice Direction 52D 3.3(2)).









