
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
                                            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


R (on the application of NJ and YJ) v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
Department IJR [2016] UKUT 00032 (IAC)

             IN the matter of an application for judicial review


|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice Centre     |                              |
|On 6 November 2015                           |                              |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                    THE QUEEN (ON THE APPLICATION OF NJ)
                    THE QUEEN (ON THE APPLICATION OF YJ)
                                                                  Applicants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Applicants:    Mr I Palmer instructed by Genesis Law Associates
Solicitors Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr V Mandalia instructed by the Government Legal
Department


                                  JUDGMENT

Judge Grubb:

 1. I make an anonymity order under  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI  2008/2698  as  amended)  in  order  to
    protect the anonymity of the applicants who have claimed asylum.   This
    order prohibits the disclosure directly or indirectly (including by the
    parties) of the identity of the applicants.  Any disclosure and  breach
    of this order may amount to a contempt  of  court.   This  order  shall
    remain in force unless revoked or varied by a Tribunal or court.

Introduction

 2. The applicants are sister and brother who were born respectively  on  6
    January 1987 and 24 February 1985.  They are both citizens of Pakistan.
     They arrived in the United Kingdom on 22 April 2008 with their  mother
    and younger sister with leave as visitors.  On 23 April 2008, they  all
    claimed asylum.  On 27 October 2009 the  first  applicant's  claim  was
    refused.  Her appeal  was  dismissed  by  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
    Tribunal on 9 December 2009 and, following the  grant  of  a  statutory
    review, the Upper Tribunal dismissed her appeal  on  9  November  2010.
    She subsequently unsuccessfully applied for permission to appeal to the
    Court of Appeal and she became appeal rights exhausted on 28 June 2011.



 3. The second applicant's claim for asylum was refused by the Secretary of
    State on 7  October  2009.   His  subsequent  appeal  to  the  AIT  was
    dismissed on 5 November 2009.   Following  the  grant  of  a  statutory
    review, the Upper Tribunal dismissed his appeal  on  17  January  2011.
    Subsequent  applications  to  appeal  to  the  Court  of  Appeal   were
    unsuccessful and he became appeal rights exhausted on 28 June 2011.

 4. Although the applications of the applicants' mother and younger  sister
    were initially refused and their appeals  dismissed,  it  appears  that
    they were subsequently granted discretionary leave.

 5. The applicants made further submissions to the Secretary of State on 14
    September 2011 and  4  April  2012.   Those  further  submissions  were
    rejected on  30  January  2011  and  17  April  2012  respectively  and
    considered not to amount to fresh claims.

 6. On 30 January 2013 and 28  March  2013,  the  applicants  made  further
    submissions.  The Secretary of State rejected those submissions  on  26
    November 2013 and again considered that they did not amount to a  fresh
    claim.  Following a pre-action protocol letter sent to the Secretary of
    State on 13 January 2014, the Secretary of State issued a supplementary
    refusal letter on 22 January  2014  affirming  her  earlier  decisions.



 7. Judicial review proceedings were issued on 31 January 2014  challenging
    the  Secretary  of  State's  decisions  but  those   proceedings   were
    withdrawn, as I understand it, on the basis that the Secretary of State
    would reconsider the applicants' further submissions.

 8. Those submissions were reconsidered and again  rejected  in  individual
    decision letters in respect of the first and  second  applicants  on  1
    October 2014.  It is those  decisions  which  are  challenged  in  this
    claim.

 9. Following a  pre-action  protocol  letter,  on  14  November  2014  the
    Secretary of State responded maintaining her decisions.

10. Judicial review claims were issued on 31 December 2014 challenging  the
    respondent's decision letters of 1 October 2014.  On 23 June 2015,  HHJ
    Bidder QC granted both applicants permission to bring  judicial  review
    proceedings  and  directed  that  their  claims  be  listed  and  heard
    together.

The Applicants' Case

11. The applicants claim to be at risk on return  to  Pakistan  because  of
    their religion,  namely  that  they  are  Ahmadis.   Their  claims  are
    essentially based upon the same factual matrix.

12. The first applicant claims that she had been subjected  to  harassment,
    intimidation and violence by reason of her faith.  She claims that  she
    was seriously assaulted in 2006 by a friend of her brother who  accused
    of preaching to his sister.  She claims that her family home  had  been
    used as a 'mosque' for prayer meetings for Ahmadis.    She claims  that
    on 16 February 2007 her family home had been stoned by a mob  and  that
    she and her mother were attacked on 22 March 2007 as they were going to
    the local market.  She was injured and was taken  to  hospital  by  her
    father.   Thereafter,  her  family  started  to   receive   threatening
    telephone calls.  The prayer meetings ceased because of the attacks and
    the threats.

13. Thereafter, the first applicant and her family left Lahore (where  they
    lived) and moved to Rabwah in October 2007 where  the  first  applicant
    continued to work for the Ahmadi community.  On 10 January 2008 she was
    attacked by a group of Muslim women.  Her father  went  missing  on  30
    January 2008 and had not been seen since then.  Her brother, the second
    applicant, was arrested on 20 March 2008 and she and her mother went to
    the police station where he was held but were abused  and  harassed  by
    the police.  Her brother was released on payment of a bribe.

14. The first applicant claims that on 30  March  2008,  mullahs  from  the
    Khatm-e-Nabbuwat (the "KN") came to the family home and threatened  her
    family but they left once local Ahmadis intervened.  A few days  later,
    the first applicant claims that an article was  published  in  a  local
    newspaper saying that a claim had been lodged in the courts against her
    family.  Fearing persecution and prosecution, the first  applicant  and
    her family left their home and went to stay at a friend of her mother's
    house before arrangements were made for them to leave Pakistan and come
    to the UK.

15. Following the rejection  of  her  asylum  claim,  the  first  applicant
    appealed to the AIT.  Immigration  Judge  Harris,  in  a  determination
    dated 9 December 2009, accepted that the first applicant was an Ahmadi.
     However, he did not accept that the first applicant's  home  had  been
    used as a 'mosque' although he accepted that it may have been used  for
    "the occasional Ahmadi meeting".  The judge did not accept her  account
    that she had been subject to a serious assault as a  result  of  having
    preached to the sister of a friend of her brother.  Further, the  judge
    did not accept that mullahs from the KN had come to the family home and
    threatened the family as she claimed.  Applying  the  relevant  country
    guidance at the time, the judge concluded that the first applicant  was
    an  "unexceptional  Ahmadi"  and  was  not  as  a  result  at  risk  of
    persecution on return (see IA and Others (Ahmadis: Rabwah) Pakistan  CG
    [2007] UKAIT 00088); MJ & ZM (Ahmadis - risk) Pakistan CG [2008]  UKAIT
    0033 and KK (Ahmadi - unexceptional - risk on return)  Pakistan  [2005]
    UKIAT 00033 and.

16. The first applicant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal was dismissed  on  9
    November 2010 (DUTJ Alis) on the basis that the judge's  findings  were
    properly open to him on the evidence.

17. The second applicant's claim was that he  had  been  persecuted  as  an
    Ahmadi.  He had lost his job when his employers discovered  he  was  an
    Ahmadi.  In Lahore, he had worked for the Ahmadi  Muslim  Community  in
    the publication department for the  community's  magazine.   He  claims
    that on one occasion he had been taken  to  the  local  police  station
    having been found distributing the magazine and was only released after
    his money was taken from him and he was warned  not  to  do  it  again.
    After his family moved to Rabwah, his father went missing.

18. On 20 March 2008 he was at a medical camp  established  by  the  Rabwah
    Ahmadi community when that camp was attacked by local mullahs  and  the
    second applicant was assaulted.  After he was treated for  his  wounds,
    he claims that he was arrested by the police on the  instigation  of  a
    mullah who claimed that the first applicant had been preaching.  Whilst
    he was in detention, the second applicant claims that he was beaten and
    threatened.  He was released on payment of a bribe.

19. Like the first applicant, he claimed that on 30 March 2008 mullahs from
    the KN came to his family house and started threatening  him  and  they
    only left once the local Ahmadis intervened.   Again,  like  the  first
    applicant, he claims that a local newspaper article was published on  7
    April 2008 claiming that he had preached the Ahmadi faith  to  a  well-
    known local mullah.  As  a  result  of  this  publication,  the  second
    applicant along with his family, left Rabwah and subsequently Pakistan.

20. Following the rejection of the second applicant's claim, he appealed to
    the AIT together with his mother.  His appeal was dismissed by the  AIT
    and, following further appeal, the Upper Tribunal (DUTJ Alis) dismissed
    his appeal in a determination dated 17 January 2011.

21. Judge Alis accepted that the second applicant was an Ahmadi.   However,
    the judge made an adverse credibility finding.  He rejected the  "core"
    of the second applicant's account.  At para 108 he said:

         "In summary, whilst I accept the  family  may  have  suffered  some
         harassment in Lahore  I  am  not  satisfied  that  the  significant
         incidents described  by  them  as  having  occurred  actually  took
         place".

22. Further, Judge Alis did not accept what the  second  applicant  claimed
    had occurred to him (and his family) in Rabwah, including the visit  by
    the mullahs from the KN and the publication of an article in the  local
    newspaper claiming that he had preached the Ahmadi faith.   Judge  Alis
    did not accept that the second applicant  had  preached  his  faith  in
    Pakistan.

23. In reaching that conclusion, Judge Alis considered a  letter  from  the
    Ahmadiyya Muslim Association UK ("AMA UK") which purported  to  support
    the second applicant's account of what had happened to his  family  and
    him in Pakistan.  In  the  absence  of  anyone  from  the  organisation
    attending the hearing as a witness, and as there was no  evidence  from
    Pakistan to support the contents of the  letter,  Judge  Alis  did  not
    consider that the letter from the AMA UK assisted the second applicant.



24. Judge Alis concluded that the second applicant had failed to  establish
    that he would be at risk on return to Pakistan and said  this  at  para
    122 of his determination:

         "I have rejected much of his claims and what I am left  with  is  a
         male who is an Ahmadi who successfully, without any  real  problem,
         followed his religion.  He would be able to continue  that  on  his
         return.  I reject his claim that he is an 'exceptional Ahmadi'  and
         applying the test in HJ above (albeit for  gay  claims)  I  am  not
         satisfied he would be at risk of persecution as an Ahmadi".

The Further Submissions

25. In their further submissions, both applicants relied upon letters  from
    the AMA UK dated 19 January 2014 which listed their activities for  the
    Ahmadi community in the  UK.   The  letter  in  respect  of  the  first
    applicant is at pages 129-130 of the bundle.  At page 130  is  set  out
    the following:-

         "3.  According to the information received from  the  President  of
             our  Clapham  branch  the  above-named  participates  in   the
             activities of her local branch and that  of  the  Association.
             She has

             a.   offered daily prayers regularly,  Friday  sermons/prayers
                  (02 times per month), one Annual National convention,  one
                  gatherings   of   Lajna   Imaillah    (Ladies    auxiliary
                  organization in the community);

             b.   participated in the preaching  programs  of  the  branch,
                  including distribution of  the  literature/leaflets  about
                  the community (that  create  an  awareness  of  Islam  and
                  invite members  of  the  public  to  the  message  of  the
                  Ahmadiyya Muslim community);

             c.   assisted in organizing local  branch's  events  including
                  Qur'an exhibitions & preaching stalls  (these  exhibitions
                  and stalls involves providing basic information  to  those
                  interested  and  then  inviting  anyone  with  a   further
                  interest to other Ahmadi events);

             d.   attended Tabligh Coaching classes; (designed  to  provide
                  members with knowledge and confidence  so  that  they  are
                  able to complete tabligh in the community);

             e.   taken part in the general public welfare program  of  the
                  branch like  Meena  Bazar;  (to  raise  funds  by  selling
                  something on the stalls  in  some  gathering  for  charity
                  purposes);

             f.   participated in the Charity Walk to raise funds  for  the
                  local charities;

             g.   performed the duties assigned to  her  by  the  community
                  officials;

             h.   been working  (&  still  working)  as  Secretary  Tabligh
                  (Preaching)   of   local   ladies   organization    (Lajna
                  Imaillah)".

    The letter is signed by the "Acting Secretary of the AMA UK".

26. As regards the second applicant the letter from the AMA UK is at  pages
    131-132 of the bundle and at page 132 is set out the second applicant's
    activities as follows:

         "3.  According to the information received from  the  President  of
             our Clapham branch  in  the  United  Kingdom  the  above-named
             participates in the activities of his local branch and that of
             the Association.  He has

             a.   attended congregational  prayers  4  times  a  week,  all
                  Friday sermons/prayers, one  Annual  National  convention,
                  one  Annual  gathering  of   Khuddam-ul-Ahmadiyya   (males
                  between the age range of 15  to  40  years)  and  branch's
                  general monthly meetings;

             b.   taken part in the Charity Walk to raise funds  for  local
                  charities;

             c.   performed the duties assigned to  him  by  the  community
                  officials like cleaning of the Mosque,  Security  duty  at
                  Fazal Mosque once a month.

             d.   very co-operative with local youth  organization  (Majlis
                  Khuddam-ul-Ahmadiyya) and performed the duties assigned to
                  him".

27. In their further submissions, the applicants relied upon these  letters
    and also the country guidance case of MN and Others (Ahmadis -  country
    conditions - risk) Pakistan CG [2012] UKUT 00389 (IAC).  That  decision
    superseded the previous country guidance cases, in particular MJ &  ZM;
    KK and IA and  Others  which  were  applied  in  both  the  applicants'
    previous tribunal appeals.

28. On the basis of MN  and  Others,  it  was  argued  on  behalf  of  both
    applicants that they were at risk as Ahmadis as they would not be  able
    to practise openly their faith which, it was said, according to the new
    country guidance in MN and Others would put them at risk on  return  to
    Pakistan.  The essence of the submissions was that this issue  had  not
    previously been considered in the appeal hearing as  the  then  country
    guidance required, in effect, an Ahmadi to demonstrate that  they  were
    "exceptional" in the sense that they would openly preach or had a  high
    profile in the Ahmadi community in order to establish that  they  would
    be at risk on return.

The Respondent's Decisions

29. The respondent's decision letters of 1 October 2014 in respect of  both
    applicants are  in  similar  terms  although,  when  dealing  with  the
    relevant AMA UK letter, the decision  letters  differ  to  reflect  the
    slightly different content of the AMA UK letters as to each applicant's
    activities in the UK.

30. I will begin with the decision letter in respect of the first applicant
    (at pages 87-94 of the trial bundle) which  I  will  set  out  in  more
    fuller form than that of the second applicant to avoid repetition.

31. Having set out the first applicant's claim that she and her family were
    being persecuted in Lahore for using their property as a  mosque  which
    had been rejected on appeal, the respondent initially made reference to
    MN and Others  and  the  relevant  Country  of  Information  Report  as
    follows:

         "These further submissions have been considered  alongside  MN  and
         Others.  Your attention is brought to para  1.3.6  of  the  Country
         Guidance for Pakistan which states that the country  guidance  case
         of MN and others (November 2012) para 119ii) confirms that  it  has
         long been, possible in general for Ahmadis to practise their  faith
         on a restricted basis either in private or in community with  other
         Ahmadis, without infringing domestic Pakistan law.

         In para 1.3.2 of the Country Guidance it states that MN and  others
         relies  on  whether  the  person  was  registered  with  an  Ahmadi
         community in Pakistan and worshipped and engaged there on a regular
         basis.  In para 1.3.3 it states that, 'Post-arrival  activity  will
         also be relevant.  Evidence of this likely to be relevant includes:

           . confirmation from the UK  Ahmadi  headquarters  regarding  the
             activities relied on in Pakistan; and

           . confirmation from the local community  in  the  UK  where  the
             person is worshipping (MN and others paragraph 122)".

32. The decision then continues by setting out the  history  of  the  first
    applicant's claim, including earlier submissions of  letters  from  the
    AMA UK.   In  that  context,  the  respondent  referred  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal's decision in AB (Ahmadiyya Association UK: letters)  Pakistan
    [2013] UKUT 00511 (IAC) which dealt with the proper approach to letters
    of support from the AMA UK.  The respondent then said this:

         "It is  noted  that  you  previously  submitted  letters  from  the
         Ahmadiyya Muslim Association UK (AMA) which were dated  27  October
         2009, 17 August 2011  and  20  December  2012  and  confirmed  your
         involvement with the  Ahmadi  religion  in  Pakistan.   The  letter
         confirmed involvement in the UK.

         It is noted that when your appeal was dismissed on 9 November 2009,
         the IJ took into account a letter from the  AMA  dated  27  October
         2009.  However, since your appeal,  you  have  provided  additional
         letters dated 17 August 2011, 20 December 2012 and 19 January  2014
         from the AMA.  It is noted that information including  your  Ahmadi
         involvement whilst in the UK  is  contained  in  the  letters  from
         December 2012 and January 2014.  This corresponds to the  case  law
         of MN which  states  that,  'Post-arrival  activity  will  also  be
         relevant'.

         Our refusal letter of 24 October  2011  states,  'Regard  has  been
         given to the letter dated 17  August  2011  from  Ahmadiyya  Muslim
         Association UK.  It is noted that similar  letters  were  submitted
         from the same organisation at your family's appeal  hearing,  which
         the Immigration Judge went on to consider.  You have  not  provided
         any evidence to contradict the findings  made  by  the  Immigration
         Judge in regards to the previous letters  submitted,  for  example,
         why the letters did not conform to the information provided in  the
         guidance submitted, why nobody from the  organisation  attended  at
         your  appeal  hearing  in  support  of  your  claim,  or  why   the
         information you have now submitted was not before  the  Immigration
         Judge at the time of your family's appeal hearing'.

         The letter  continues,  'It  is  acknowledged  that  you  have  now
         submitted a further letter form the Ahmadiyya Muslim Association UK
         in an attempt to address some of the credibility findings raised by
         the Immigration Judge in regards to the previous letters submitted.
          However, the letter does not contain any new evidence  to  support
         your claim to be at risk on return to Pakistan.  Your religion,  as
         an Ahmadi, was not in  dispute  ...  The  other  letters  form  the
         Ahmadiyya Muslim Association  UK  submitted  at  your  appeal  also
         stated that your family's house was used for congregational prayers
         and  meetings  and  made  financial  contributions.   However,  the
         Immigration Judge went on to conclude that little weight  could  be
         given to these letters.  It is  therefore  reasonable  to  conclude
         that the Immigration Judge would have come to the  same  conclusion
         with this further letter form the same organisation as he did  with
         the previous letters.  Therefore, it is considered that this letter
         would not create a realistic prospect  of  success  before  another
         Immigration Judge'.

         In  the  letter  dated  20  December  2012  the  Ahmadiyaa   Muslim
         Association state that you served as the secretary of preaching for
         the females of the Clapham branch.  Furthermore, the letter  states
         that you  attended  congregational  prayers,  annual  gathering  of
         females, annual convention and  branch  meetings.   You  have  also
         participated in the preaching programmes of  the  branch  including
         door to door distribution  of  leaflets  and  assisted  in  holding
         Tabligh (preaching) stalls.  The letter goes on to state  that  you
         are a moosi (a member who has promised to follow the faith closely)
         and for one year you were the secretary Tabligh for the  Manchester
         North branch.

         Our refusal letter of 26 November 2013 refers to  the  letter  from
         the AMA dated 20 December 2012  in  which  various  activities  are
         related concerning your membership of the AMA.  Our letter  states,
         'Your client has also failed  to  produce  any  other  evidence  to
         further strengthen this claim, and as such it is believed that this
         is a self serving  document  designed  to  enhance  her  claim  for
         asylum.  As the basis of your client's claim is that as  an  Ahmadi
         who  preaches  to  others,  she  fears  persecution  on  return  to
         Pakistan, it is reasonable  to  conclude  your  client  would  have
         submitted the above documents and letters to show  her  involvement
         with the Ahmadi Association in United Kingdom as soon  as  she  had
         the opportunity'.

         'It is noted that your client became Appeal Rights Exhausted on  28
         June 2011.  It is also noted that his document was not available at
         your  client's  appeal,  has  only  been  requested  following  the
         dismissal of her appeal and does not state when your client started
         her claimed activities in the UK.  The fact that the letter for the
         Ahmadiyya Muslim Association UK dated 20 December  2012  about  the
         activities your client participates in relates to the local  branch
         in UK were not mentioned in  her  previous  further  representation
         dated 14 September 2011 and 4 April 2012, further proves that  your
         client has not shown  any  evidence  that  she  has  been  actively
         preaching the Ahmadi faith and participating in  community  related
         activities since her arrival in the UK, but only since  the  recent
         publication of the MN case law in order to enhance  her  claim  and
         bring it within the requirements of MN'.

         'It is therefore concluded that the documents have  been  submitted
         to bolster a weak claim for asylum; as such it  is  not  considered
         that your client holds a legitimate intention or wish  to  manifest
         his faith contrary to the Pakistan Penal Code and openly on  return
         to Pakistan.  Preaching or practising in such a way  has  not  been
         established as of particular importance to your client'.

         'In considering your client's case, reference has been made to  the
         caselaw AB (Ahmadiyya Association UK: letters) Pakistan [2013] UKUT
         511 (IAC).  In this case the appellant had submitted a letter  from
         the AMA which stated that the appellant's involvement with the  AMA
         in the UK included the appellant observing prayers in  congregation
         regularly, attending  the  mosque  regularly  for  Friday  prayers,
         preaching to his friends and contacts in  London  and  distributing
         introductory leaflets about Islam at  Tabilgh  (preaching)  stalls.
         In dismissing the appeal the IJ stated:

             'In a  case  such  as  the  present  where  credibility  is  a
             significant issue, the more that a letter from  the  Ahmadiyya
             Association UK as to an individual's activities  here  can  be
             supported with specific information the more likely  they  are
             to be given greater weight.  We would expect  the  Association
             to be in a position to explain the source of  the  information
             given in the letter, how the source is able to speak  to  such
             matters and what records are kept of the  activities  referred
             to in the  letter.   Overall  we  are  not  persuaded  by  the
             evidence that there is a reasonable degree of likelihood  that
             the appellant is a spiritually active Ahmadi who is  committed
             to preaching or similar acts of proselytising in Pakistan  and
             has a well founded  fear  of  persecution  arising  therefore'
             (paragraph 44).

         'Therefore, in light of the above case law even though the AMA have
         not provided evidence to  show  what  records  have  been  kept  to
         monitor your client's activities  in  Pakistan  and  the  UK,  some
         weight has been given  to  the  letters  dated  20  December  2012.
         Furthermore, taking into account your client has been in the UK for
         5 years and 6 months, the letters from the AMA UK do not show  when
         your client started being actively involved in the Ahmadi faith  in
         the UK.  The AMA letters does not identify with any rigour how your
         client's activities in the United Kingdom were investigated  or  on
         what basis they set out and describe those activities.

         It is therefore concluded that your client has provided the  letter
         of support dated 20 December 2012 from  the  AMA  UK  as  an  after
         thought to enhance her asylum claim'".

33. The respondent then turned to the AMA UK's letter of  19  January  2014
    which formed part of the basis of the most recent  further  submissions
    and said this:

         "The letter of 19 January 2014 does not provide any new evidence to
         support your claim.  It claims that you have offered daily prayers,
         attended  one  gathering  of  Lajna  Immaillah  (Ladies   auxiliary
         organization  in  the  community),  assisted  in  organizing  local
         branch's events  including  Qur'an  exhibitions,  attended  Tabligh
         Coaching classes (designed to provide members  with  knowledge  and
         confidence so that  they  are  able  to  complete  tabligh  in  the
         community), taken part in the general public welfare program of the
         branch like Meezn Bazar (to raise funds by selling something on the
         stalls in some gathering for charity purposes), participated in the
         Charity Walk to raise funds for the local charities, performed  the
         duties assigned to her by the community  officials  and  worked  as
         Secretary Tabligh for local ladies organisation (Lajna  Immaillah).
         The letter does not confirm when you began this activities  in  the
         UK.  It discusses that you have  attended  only  one  gathering  of
         Lajna Immaillah, although at that  time  you  had  resided  in  the
         United Kingdom for almost 6 years.

         The letter from the  AMA  recites  information  'according  to  the
         information received from the President of  our  Clapham  branch,.'
         This indicates  that  the  Association  has  very  little  personal
         knowledge of your activities in the UK as an Ahmadi.  There  is  no
         personal support from the President of the Clapham branch who it is
         presumed would know you and your Ahmadi activities well.   However,
         the letter gave no reference to when you became  actively  involved
         with the AMA when you arrived in the United Kingdom.  You  had  not
         provided evidence of your AMA activities within this country  until
         the letter of December 2012, issued at a time  when  you  were  all
         appeal rights exhausted.

         Your attention is drawn to Para 43  and  44  of  AB  caselaw  which
         states that, 'There was no  evidence  before  us  as  to   how  the
         Ahmadiyya  Association  undertakes   its   inquiries   as   to   an
         individual's UK activities or  on  what  basis  they  set  out  and
         describe  those  activities.   In  so  far  as  this  appellant  is
         concerned the lack of any  corroborating  evidence,  such  evidence
         being  readily  available  if  it   existed   together   with   the
         contradictions in the evidence before us and what  appears  in  the
         letter, results in us placing little weight upon the description of
         the appellant's activities in the UK'.

         The letter of 19 January 2014 is not corroborated and offers no new
         evidence which has not already been considered.   It  is  therefore
         considered that your submissions in this regard  do  not  create  a
         realistic prospect of success before another Immigration Judge".

34. In respect of the second applicant, the letter (at pages 79-86  of  the
    trial bundle) followed a similar pattern setting out first  the  second
    applicant's  claim,  namely  that  he  fears  the  KN  because  he  has
    previously preached the Ahmadi faith followed by reference  to  MN  and
    Others and para 1.3.2 of the Country of Information Report referred  to
    in the first applicant's refusal letter.  The decision  then  continues
    with a history of the second applicant's claim  and  previous  reliance
    upon AMA UK letters as follows:

         "It is  noted  that  you  previously  submitted  letters  from  the
         Ahmadiyya Muslim Association UK (AMA) on 27 October 2009, 17 August
         2011 and 20 December 2012  confirming  your  involvement  with  the
         Ahmadi religion within the UK.  The AMA letter of 20 December  2012
         states that you  have,  'attended  congregational  prayers,  annual
         conventions,  annual  gatherings  of  Khuddam  and  branch's  [sic]
         meetings and functions.  Mr J has  participated  in  the  preaching
         programmes of the branch including door  to  door  distribution  of
         leaflets and  has  assisted  in  holding  Tablih  stalls.   He  has
         performed sincerely the duties assigned to  him  by  the  community
         officials during annual conventions and various other events of the
         community.  On a number of occasions he  has  participated  in  the
         charity events and has collected funds for Charities.  In  2010  he
         served as an organizer of education for the  Khuddam  (males  under
         the age of 40 years) of  North  West  region.   At  present  he  is
         serving as the organizer of self-reformation  for  the  Khuddam  of
         Clapham branch in London'.

         The letter states that, 'According to the information received from
         the President of our Clapham branch in the United Kingdom the above-
         named participates in the activities of his local branch  and  that
         of the Association.  He has attended congregational prayers 4 times
         a week, all Friday sermons/prayers, one Annual  Nation  convention,
         one Annual  gathering  of  Khuddam  and  branch's  general  monthly
         meetings'.  The activities quoted  are  similar  in  both  letters,
         although a year separate the letters.  The letter  of  20  December
         2012 refers to 'annual conventions' although the  19  January  2014
         letter refers to 'one Annual Nation convention'.  It is  considered
         that  you  attended  just  one  Annual  Nation  convention  between
         December 2012 and January 2014.  As stated, the two letters outline
         similar activities but the new AMA letter does not refer to any new
         activities that you have undergone since the letter of 20  December
         2012 was considered and refused.   The  2014  letter  continues  by
         stating that you have, 'taken part in the  Charity  Walk  to  raise
         funds for local charities, performed the duties assigned to him  by
         the community official like cleaning of the Mosque,  Security  duty
         at Fazal Mosque once a month.  Very co-operative with  local  youth
         organization (Majlis Khuddam-ul-Ahmadiyya).  It is noted that  your
         activities with  the  Khuddam's  education  have  diminished  since
         December 2012.

         It is noted that the letters dated 27 October 2009 and 20  December
         2012 from the AMA have already been considered as a fresh claim and
         refused.  Our letter of 26 November 2013 states that, 'It is  noted
         when your client's appeal was dismissed on 17 January 2011, the  IJ
         took into account a letter from the  AMA  dated  27  October  2009.
         However, since your client's appeal, he has provided letters  dated
         20 December 2012 from the AMA.

         The letter dated 20  December  2012  states  that  your  client  is
         serving as the organiser of self-reformation  for  the  Khuddam  of
         Clapham branch.  Furthermore, the letter states  that  your  client
         attended annual gathering of Khuddam (males under  the  age  of  40
         years), annual convention and branch meetings.  The letter goes  on
         to state that in 2010 he served as an organiser  of  education  for
         the Khuddam of North West region'.

         The letter continues, 'It is not known why your client's activities
         in the UK were not mentioned in the letter dated  27  October  2009
         which was submitted at your client's appeal.  Furthermore it is not
         known why the additional activities mentioned in the  letter  dated
         20 December 2012 were not mentioned in the letter dated  17  August
         2011.

         With regards to your client's Ahmadi  activities  in  Pakistan,  IJ
         Brookfield noted  the  following  in  the  determination  dated  05
         November 2009

             'The  appellant  has  provided  evidence   that   his   Ahmadi
             activities in  Pakistan  comprised  of  the  delivery  of  the
             monthly magazine to Ahmadi homes in  Lahore  assistance  at  a
             medical camp near Rabwah on  the  20th  March  2008  where  he
             handed out free medicine and did not undertake any  preaching.
             The appellant has never claimed he has tried  to  convert  any
             person to  the  Ahmadi  religion  or  that  he  has  tried  to
             propagate his religion to any one from outside his own  faith.
             I conclude the appellant has not established he would seek  to
             proselytise  on  his  return  to  Pakistan  and  his  evidence
             suggests he is able to use  discretion  in  carrying  out  his
             Ahmadi activities.  I note the appellant  has  established  he
             has a well developed sense of  self  preservation  by  leaving
             Pakistan and travelling to the United Kingdom.  I am therefore
             not persuaded that this appellant would attempt  to  undertake
             any Ahmadi activities that would  bring  him  to  the  adverse
             attention of  anyone  in  Pakistan.   The  appellant  has  not
             provided any evidence to suggest he has any profile within the
             Ahmadi faith' (paragraph 14(xviii) of the determination).

         It is therefore concluded that the documents have been submitted to
         bolster a weak claim for asylum; as such it is not considered  that
         your client holds a legitimate intention or wish  to  manifest  his
         faith contrary to the Pakistan Penal Code and openly on  return  to
         Pakistan.  Preaching or practising in  such  a  way  has  not  been
         established as of particular importance to your client'.

         It is not considered that  you  have  submitted  any  new  evidence
         within these letters of 19 January 2014 to support your claim for a
         fresh asylum application".

35. The letter then continues with a reference to AB and  an  extract  from
    the earlier decision of 23 November 2013 as follows:

         "In considering your client's case, reference has been made to  the
         caselaw AB (Ahmadiyya Association UK: letters) Pakistan [2013] UKUT
         511(IAC).

         In this case the appellant had submitted  a  letter  from  the  AMA
         which stated that the appellant's involvement with the AMA  in  the
         UK  included  the  appellant  observing  prayers  in   congregation
         regularly, attending  the  mosque  regularly  for  Friday  prayers,
         preaching to his friends and contacts in  London  and  distributing
         introductory leaflets about Islam at  Tabilgh  (preaching)  stalls.
         In dismissing the appeal the IJ stated:

             'In a  case  such  as  the  present  where  credibility  is  a
             significant issue, the more that a letter from  the  Ahmadiyya
             Association UK as to an individual's activities  here  can  be
             supported with specific information the more likely  they  are
             to be given greater weight.  We would expect  the  Association
             to be in a position to explain the source of  the  information
             given in the letter, how the source is able to speak  to  such
             matters and what records are kept of the  activities  referred
             to in the  letter.   Overall  we  are  not  persuaded  by  the
             evidence that there is a reasonable degree of likelihood  that
             the appellant is a spiritually active Ahmadi who is  committed
             to preaching or similar acts of proselytising in Pakistan  and
             has a well founded  fear  of  persecution  arising  therefrom'
             (paragraph 44).

         Therefore, in light of the above case law even though the AMA  have
         not provided evidence to  show  what  records  have  been  kept  to
         monitor your client's activities  in  Pakistan  and  the  UK,  some
         weight has been given  to  the  letters  dated  20  December  2012.
         Furthermore, taking into account your client has been in the UK for
         5 years and 6 months, the letters from the AMA UK do not show  when
         your client started being actively involved in the Ahmadi faith  in
         the UK.  The AMA letters does not identify with any rigour how your
         client's activities in the United Kingdom were investigated  or  on
         what basis they set out and describe those activities".

36. The letter then turns its attention to the letter from the AMA UK dated
    19 January 2014 submitted as part of the second applicant's most recent
    further submissions as follows:

         "Likewise, the AMA letter you have submitted from 19  January  2014
         were written 'according' to information  from  the  Clapham  branch
         which indicates that  the  Association  has  very  little  personal
         knowledge of your activities in the UK as  an  Ahmadi.   Again,  no
         reference was given to when you became actively involved  with  the
         AMA when you arrived in the United Kingdom.  There is no supporting
         evidence from the Clapham branch of AMA describing your  activities
         whilst in the United Kingdom.  You have not at any  time  confirmed
         the date when you first became involved with the organization.

         You are reminded that our previous letter states that, 'It is noted
         that the letter from the AMA UK dated 20 December 2012 stating that
         your client is active in his  Ahmadi  faith  in  the  UK  has  been
         obtained since your client's appeal and it is significant  to  note
         that your client has failed to submit the AMA letter along with his
         previous further submission dated 04 April 2012.  Your  client  has
         not explained why it has taken so long to produce the evidence.  As
         the basis of your client's claim is that as an Ahmadi who  preaches
         to others, he fears  persecution  on  return  to  Pakistan,  it  is
         reasonable to conclude your client would have submitted the letters
         to show his involvement with the Ahmadi faith in Pakistan  and  the
         UK as soon as he had the opportunity, prior to the promulgation  of
         MN on 05 July 2012.

         It is therefore concluded that your client has provided the  letter
         of support dated 20 December 2012 from  the  AMA  UK  as  an  after
         thought to enhance his asylum claim'.

         Your attention is drawn to Paras 43 and  44  of  AB  caselaw  which
         states that, 'There was  no  evidence  before  us  as  to  how  the
         Ahmadiyya  Association  undertakes   its   inquiries   as   to   an
         individual's UK activities or  on  what  basis  they  set  out  and
         describe  those  activities.   In  so  far  as  this  appellant  is
         concerned the lack of any  corroborating  evidence,  such  evidence
         being  readily  available  if  it   existed   together   with   the
         contradictions in the evidence before us and what  appears  in  the
         letter, results in us placing little weight upon the description of
         the appellant's activities in the UK'.

    Finally, the respondent concludes:

         "It is therefore considered that your submissions in this regard do
         not  create  a  realistic  prospect  of  success   before   another
         Immigration Judge".

The Grounds

37. The applicants' grounds, which were summarised and relied  upon  by  Mr
    Palmer in his oral submissions, are as follows.  First,  the  Secretary
    of State has failed properly or at  all  to  consider  MN  and  Others.
    Secondly, the respondent irrationally rejected the most recent  letters
    from the AMA UK which provided evidenced detail of the two  applicants'
    activities in the UK and thereby failed properly to consider  under  MN
    and Others the relevant questions of whether the two  applicants  would
    openly practise their faith in Pakistan or would not do so for fear  of
    persecution.

38. Mr Palmer submitted that the earlier appeal decisions were  based  upon
    now outdated country guidance  that  risk  on  return  was  limited  to
    "exceptional" Ahmadis.

39. Mr Palmer submitted that on public  law  principles  the  Secretary  of
    State had unlawfully come to the conclusion that the applicants'  claim
    had no realistic prospect of success before a Judge of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal on appeal.

40. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Mandalia adopted the composite detailed
    grounds of defence.  He submitted  that  the  "nub"  of  the  case  was
    whether the Secretary of State was entitled to reach the  decision  she
    did in relation to the two letters from the AMA UK.  He submitted  that
    the Secretary of State had  plainly  referred  to  MN  and  Others  and
    applying AB (especially  at  [43]-[44])  the  Secretary  of  State  was
    entitled not to give weight to the letters and  to  conclude  that  the
    applicants had no realistic prospect  of  success  before  a  judge  on
    appeal and that their further submissions did not amount  to  a  "fresh
    claim".

The Law

41. The relevant law is not in dispute.  Para 353 of the Immigration  Rules
    (Statement of Changes in Immigration Rules, HC 395 as amended)  defines
    a "fresh claim" as follows:

         "353.    When a human rights or asylum claim has  been  refused  or
                withdrawn or treated as withdrawn under  paragraph  333C  of
                these Rules and any appeal relating  to  that  claim  is  no
                longer pending, the decision maker will consider any further
                submissions and, if rejected, will  then  determine  whether
                they amount to a fresh claim. The submissions will amount to
                a fresh claim if they are significantly different  from  the
                material  that   has   previously   been   considered.   The
                submissions will only  be  significantly  different  if  the
                content:

                (i)    had not already been considered; and

                (ii)    taken  together  with  the   previously   considered
                    material,  created  a  realistic  prospect  of  success,
                    notwithstanding its rejection".

42. In WM (DRC) v SSHD [2008] EWCA Civ 1495 the Court of Appeal set out the
    proper approach to para 353 and the role of the court  or  tribunal  in
    judicial review proceedings.

43. First, the Secretary of State has (1)  to  consider  the  new  material
    together with that  previously  submitted  and  determine  whether  the
    material is significantly different from that  already  considered  and
    (2) to take all the material together and determine whether objectively
    it creates a "realistic prospect of success" before a judge on  appeal.
    At para [11], Buxton LJ said:

         "The question is not whether the Secretary of State himself  thinks
         that the new claim is a good one or  should  succeed,  but  whether
         there is a realistic prospect of an adjudicator, applying the  rule
         of anxious scrutiny, thinking that the applicant will be exposed to
         a real risk of persecution on return ... The Secretary of State  of
         course can, and no doubt logically should, treat his  own  view  of
         the merits as a starting-point for that enquiry; but it is  only  a
         starting-point  in  the  consideration  of  a  question   that   is
         distinctly different from the exercise of the  Secretary  of  State
         making up his own mind".

44. In AK (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 447 at [35] Laws LJ said  that
    a  "realistic  prospect"  of  success  was  one  which  was  more  than
    "speculative".

45. Secondly,  the  Secretary  of  State  is  required  to  apply  "anxious
    scrutiny" in determining whether there  is  a  "realistic  prospect  of
    success" before a judge on appeal.

46. Thirdly, that test is a "somewhat modest" one as the  judge  will  only
    need to be satisfied that there is a real risk to the individual.

47. Fourthly, the Court of  Appeal  held  that  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision could only be challenged on public law principles, essentially
    on the basis of Wednesbury principles.

Discussion

48. There is no doubt that  since  the  decisions  of  the  Upper  Tribunal
    dismissing each of the applicants' appeals in November 2010 and January
    2011 respectively, the relevant country guidance concerning the risk to
    Ahmadis on return to Pakistan has  significantly  changed.   No  longer
    does a claimant have to  establish  that  they  were  an  "exceptional"
    Ahmadi  to  succeed.   The  new  country  guidance  in  MN  and  Others
    establishes that a risk may exist to an Ahmadi who openly (rather  than
    privately) practises their faith.

49. At para 2(i) of the head note in MN and  Others,  the  restrictions  on
    Ahmadis practising their faith is summarised:

        "2(i)      The  background  to  the  risk  faced  by   Ahmadis   is
             legislation that restricts the  way  in  which  they  are  able
             openly to  practise  their  faith.  The  legislation  not  only
             prohibits preaching and other forms of proselytising  but  also
             in practice  restricts  other  elements  of  manifesting  one's
             religious  beliefs,  such  as  holding  open  discourse   about
             religion  with   non-Ahmadis,   although   not   amounting   to
             proselytising. The prohibitions  include  openly  referring  to
             one's place of worship as  a  mosque  and  to  one's  religious
             leader as an Imam. In addition, Ahmadis are  not  permitted  to
             refer to the call to prayer as  azan  nor  to  call  themselves
             Muslims or refer to their faith as Islam. Sanctions  include  a
             fine and imprisonment and if blasphemy is  found,  there  is  a
             risk of the death penalty which to date has  not  been  carried
             out although there is a risk of lengthy  incarceration  if  the
             penalty  is  imposed.   There  is  clear  evidence  that   this
             legislation is used by non-state actors to threaten and  harass
             Ahmadis. This includes the filing of First Information  Reports
             (FIRs) (the first step in any criminal proceedings)  which  can
             result in detentions whilst  prosecutions  are  being  pursued.
             Ahmadis are also subject to attacks by  non-state  actors  from
             sectors of the majority Sunni Muslim population."

50. However, at para 2(ii) of the head note the Upper Tribunal  noted  that
    practise of faith in private is different:

        "2(ii)    It is, and has long been, possible in general for Ahmadis
             to practise their faith on a restricted basis either in private
             or in community with other Ahmadis, without infringing domestic
             Pakistan law."

51. At para 3(i) of the head note of MN and Others, the potential  risk  to
    those falling within para 2(i) is identified:

        "3(i)     If an Ahmadi  is  able  to  demonstrate  that  it  is  of
             particular importance to his religious identity to practise and
             manifest his faith  openly  in  Pakistan  in  defiance  of  the
             restrictions in the Pakistan Penal Code  (PPC)  under  sections
             298B and 298C, by engaging in behaviour described in  paragraph
             2(i) above, he or she is likely to be in need of protection, in
             the  light  of  the  serious  nature  of  the  sanctions   that
             potentially apply as well as  the  risk  of  prosecution  under
             section 295C for blasphemy".

    Further, following HJ (Iran) and Another v SSHD [2010] UKSC 31,  in  MN
    and Others it is recognised at para 3(ii) of the head note that:

         "(ii)    It  is  no  answer  to  expect  an  Ahmadi  who  fits  the
             description  just  given  to  avoid  engaging   in   behaviour
             described in paragraph 2(i) above ('paragraph 2(i) behaviour')
             to avoid a risk of prosecution".

52. At paras 5 and 6 of the head note, the two  questions  or  steps  which
    must be undertaken or answered are set out.

53. First, in para 5 it is recorded that the decision maker  must  identify
    whether the individual is genuinely an Ahmadi:

         "5.  In light of the above, the first question  the  decision-maker
             must ask is (1) whether the claimant genuinely is  an  Ahmadi.
             As with all judicial fact-finding the judge will need to reach
             conclusions on all the evidence as a whole giving such  weight
             to aspects of that evidence as appropriate in accordance  with
             Article 4 of the Qualification Directive.  This is  likely  to
             include an enquiry whether the claimant was registered with an
             Ahmadi community in Pakistan and worshipped and engaged  there
             on a  regular  basis.   Post-arrival  activity  will  also  be
             relevant.    Evidence   likely   to   be   relevant   includes
             confirmation from the UK  Ahmadi  headquarters  regarding  the
             activities relied on in Pakistan  and  confirmation  from  the
             local community in the UK where the claimant is worshipping".

    Of course, in this case it is accepted that both applicants are Ahmadi.



54. Then in para 6 the second step is set out relating to the  individual's
    intentions or wishes as to their faith if returned to Pakistan:

         "6.  The next step (2) involves  an  enquiry  into  the  claimant's
             intentions or wishes as to his or her faith,  if  returned  to
             Pakistan.  This is relevant because of the need  to  establish
             whether it  is  of  particular  importance  to  the  religious
             identity of the Ahmadi concerned to engage in  paragraph  2(i)
             behaviour.  The burden is on the claimant to demonstrate  that
             any intention or wish to practise and manifest aspects of  the
             faith openly that are not permitted by the Pakistan Penal Code
             (PPC) is genuinely held and of particular  importance  to  the
             claimant to preserve  his  or  her  religious  identity.   The
             decision maker needs to evaluate all the evidence.   Behaviour
             since arrival in the UK may also be relevant.  If the claimant
             discharges  this  burden  he  is  likely  to  be  in  need  of
             protection".

55. In para 8, the Upper Tribunal  entered  a  cautionary  note  for  those
    seeking to bring themselves within para 6:

        "8.  Ahmadis who are not able to show  that  they  practised  their
             faith at all in Pakistan or that they did so on anything  other
             than the restricted basis described in  paragraph  2(ii)  above
             are in general unlikely to be able to show that  their  genuine
             intentions or wishes are to practise and manifest  their  faith
             openly on return, as described in paragraph 2(i) above."

56. The importance of sur place activity in the  UK  to  the  issue  of  an
    individual's intentions on return to Pakistan is recognised in  MN  and
    Others at para 9 as follows:

        "9.   A  sur  place  claim  by  an  Ahmadi  based  on  post-arrival
             conversion or revival  in  belief  and  practice  will  require
             careful  evidential  analysis.   This  will  probably   include
             consideration of evidence of the head of the  claimant's  local
             United Kingdom Ahmadi Community and from the  UK  headquarters,
             the latter  particularly  in  cases  where  there  has  been  a
             conversion.  Any adverse findings in the claimant's account  as
             a whole may be relevant to the assessment of  likely  behaviour
             on return".

57. In this case, both applicants in their further submissions argued  that
    they fell within the risk category identified in para 3(i)  (read  with
    para 2(i)) of the head note in MN and Others) and, despite the  adverse
    credibility findings made in their appeals, on the basis of the letters
    from the AMA UK sought  to  argue  that  their  activities  in  the  UK
    demonstrated that they  were  Ahmadis  who  would  openly  practise  or
    manifest their faith in Pakistan.

58. Having carefully considered the respondent's two decision  letters  and
    the grounds and submissions made by the parties, I have concluded  that
    the respondent's decisions were unlawful.  My reasons are as follows.

59. First, although the respondent does make reference to MN and Others  in
    each of the decision letters, it is far  from  clear  to  me  that  the
    Secretary of State has fully  considered  or  taken  into  account  the
    import of the new country guidance and its disavowal  of  the  need  to
    establish that an individual is an "exceptional" Ahmadi  in  the  sense
    used in AK.

60. In each of the applicants' cases, the decision letters begin by setting
    out their respective claims as originally presented to the Secretary of
    State  and  on  appeal  to  the  Tribunals.   There,  each   applicant,
    effectively argued that they were "exceptional".  This was  based  upon
    the first applicant's claim that she and her family had  suffered  ill-
    treatment as a result of using their house as a  mosque  and  had  been
    visited by the KN as a result of the second applicant's preaching.  The
    second applicant's claim, largely similar, focused upon  his  claim  to
    have been accused of preaching.  Whilst these aspects of  their  claims
    were rejected on appeal, there  were  clear  findings  that  they  were
    Ahmadis and that they did pursue their faith.  Their respective  claims
    at the time of their  most  recent  submissions  and  the  respondent's
    decisions was now that they fell within the risk category identified in
    MN and Others.  It was, therefore,  incumbent  upon  the  Secretary  of
    State in applying "anxious scrutiny" to their claim to directly address
    and to do so explicitly their claim that they were at risk because they
    would practise their faith in  Pakistan  in  circumstances  which  fell
    within the risk category in MN and Others.

61. Secondly, highly relevant to that issue, was the evidence from the  AMA
    UK in their letters of 19 January 2014, which I  have  set  out  above,
    cataloguing the two applicants' activities in the UK.   The  importance
    of evaluating sur place activity follows from para 9 of MN and Others.

62. Mr Mandalia submitted  that  the  respondent's  adverse  view  of  this
    evidence was  entirely  lawful.   In  effect,  he  submitted  that  the
    respondent had  rationally  concluded  that  this  evidence  could  not
    establish a realistic prospect of success before a judge on appeal.  He
    relied upon the approach in AB at [43]-[44] where  the  Upper  Tribunal
    said this:

         "43.  There is no challenge to that evidence in  this  appeal,  but
             this appeal concerns not whether someone is an Ahmadi, but the
             extent to which someone who was not an active  member  of  the
             faith either in Pakistan  or  first  arriving  in  the  United
             Kingdom has now become one, since arrest and detention  for  a
             serious criminal  offence.   Whilst  it  is  possible  that  a
             combination of his father's murder and his awakening spiritual
             needs  in  detention  have   made   the   appellant   into   a
             fundamentally different person, we must also be alert  to  the
             possible re shaping of his asylum claim in the light of the MN
             decision.  We have found the appellant's own testimony written
             and oral not to be persuasive; although we found Mr  Zahar  to
             be a credible witness we have found the  limited  evidence  he
             could give  about  the  appellant's  personal  commitment  and
             activities significant.  The 6th June letter does not identify
             with any rigour how this appellant's activities in the  United
             Kingdom were investigated.  Much of what is said is  reportage
             and assertion and the evidence  before  us  does  not  sustain
             those assertions to the extent that it appears that  some  may
             be in error: for example the appellant preaching to  contacts,
             leafleting in Surrey and elsewhere each week.   There  was  no
             evidence  before  us  as  to  how  the  Ahmadiyya  Association
             undertakes its inquiries as to an individual's  UK  activities
             or on what basis they set out and describe  those  activities.
             In so far as this appellant  is  concerned  the  lack  of  any
             corroborating evidence, such evidence being readily  available
             if it existed together with the contradictions in the evidence
             before us and what  appears  in  the  letter,  results  in  us
             placing little weight upon the description of the  appellant's
             activities in the UK as set out in the 6th June letter.

         44.      In a case such as  the  present  where  credibility  is  a
             significant issue, the more that a letter from  the  Ahmadiyya
             Association UK as to an individual's activities  here  can  be
             supported with specific information the more likely  they  are
             to be given greater weight.  We would expect  the  Association
             to be in a position to explain the source of  the  information
             given in the letter, how the source is able to speak  to  such
             matters and what records are kept of the  activities  referred
             to in the letter".

63. In that case, the Upper Tribunal was not persuaded  that  the  evidence
    showed a "reasonable degree of likelihood" that that  appellant  was  a
    spiritually active Ahmadi who preached or carried out similar  acts  or
    proselytising in Pakistan.

64. In my judgement, the Secretary of State was not  entitled  to  conclude
    that, in effect, a judge on appeal could not accept that  the  evidence
    of the two applicants' activities in the UK was first, established and,
    secondly, indicative of how they would carry on their  spiritual  lives
    as Ahmadis in Pakistan.  A judge on appeal would, no doubt,  take  into
    account, as did the Secretary of State, the history of the  applicants'
    claims and the timing of submission of supporting letters from the  AMA
    UK.  The judge would also, no doubt, take into account  the  provenance
    of the information set out in the letters.  Mr Mandalia submitted  that
    it was not sufficient simply to repeat in the letters  the  information
    obtained from the president of the Clapham branch.  He pointed out that
    Judge Alis, in respect of the second applicant's appeal,  had  rejected
    reliance upon supporting evidence from the  AMA  UK  presented  by  the
    second applicant in part because of its provenance.  Nothing in  AB  is
    inconsistent with the AMA UK's letters in this case being  entitled  to
    some weight: they  are  relatively  detailed  and  the  information  is
    sourced.   Further,  the  AMA  UK's  letters  are  less  likely  to  be
    persuasive on past events in Pakistan than  they  are  in  relation  to
    matters in the recent past and currently in the  UK.   In  the  earlier
    appeal, Judge Alis was concerned with the  credibility  of  the  second
    applicant's  claim  in  respect  of  events  in  Pakistan.   Here,  the
    respondent was concerned with the credibility of the applicants' claims
    for activities in the  UK  and  the  implications  of  that  for  their
    behaviour on return to Pakistan.

65. In my judgement, the Secretary of State has  failed  to  give  'anxious
    scrutiny' to all the evidence in concluding, in effect, that there  was
    no realistic prospect that a Judge would accept the evidence  from  the
    AMA UK about the applicants' activities in  the  UK  and,  taking  that
    material into account, would find that there was a real risk  that  the
    applicants would openly practise and manifest their faith  in  Pakistan
    and as a consequence, following MN and  Others,  be  at  real  risk  of
    persecution in Pakistan.

66. Standing back from the detail of the submissions, there is no doubt  in
    my mind that the applicants' claims based upon MN and Others  have  not
    been fully and properly considered yet.  That has, no  doubt,  resulted
    from the "shifting sands" of the country guidance in respect of Ahmadis
    in Pakistan.   Both  applicants  are  entitled  to  have  their  claims
    properly and fully considered.

Decision

67. For these reasons, the claims succeed.  The respondent's decisions of 1
    October  2014  in  respect  of  both  applicants  were  unlawful.   The
    appropriate remedy is that both decisions are quashed.




                                                                      Signed




                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal




