
HH (Rule 23: meaning and extent) Iraq [2007] UKAIT 00036

                       ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at: Field House                                                 Date
of Hearing: 13 March 2007
                                         Date of Promulgation: 05 April 2007

                                   Before:


 Mr C M G Ockelton, Deputy President of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
                       Senior Immigration Judge Grubb

                                   Between

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:           Mr H N Taylor, instructed by Wilson & Co.
For the Respondent:          Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer

(1) Compliance with rule 23(5)(a)(i) is a precondition  for  a  valid  s103A
application by the respondent.  (2)  Rule  23  applies  to  all  (and  only)
appeals in relation to asylum claims.  It does not apply to  all  (or  only)
determinations of appeals on asylum grounds.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This reconsideration or purported reconsideration raises  a  number  of
    difficulties in the  interpretation  of  Rule  23  of  the  Asylum  and
    Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules  2005.   That  Rule  provides  a
    particular procedure, and  time  limits,  in  in-country  appeals  that
    relate to 'an asylum claim'.  The principal question is whether Rule 23
    applied to this appeal.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq.  He entered the United  Kingdom  on
    14 August 2000 and claimed asylum in a name which he now  says  is  his
    real name.  His claim was refused and he was removed  from  the  United
    Kingdom in February 2001.  He claims  to  have  re-entered  the  United
    Kingdom on 21 July 2002; the next day he claimed asylum in a new  name.
    In November 2002 he married an Iraqi resident here,  whom  he  had  met
    immediately on his arrival.  He then applied for leave to  remain  with
    her.  On 8 June 2006 he was served with a notice refusing him leave  to
    enter, his claim for asylum having been again rejected.   He  appealed,
    to an Immigration Judge.  He then withdrew his  appeal  insofar  as  it
    relied on asylum grounds: he thus accepts that he would not be at  risk
    of persecution if he were returned  to  Iraq.   The  Immigration  Judge
    allowed his appeal on Article 8 grounds, apparently on the  basis  that
    because of the lapse of the time since they married and  the  impending
    birth of a child the  appellant  and  his  wife,  both  of  them  Iraqi
    nationals, could not be expected to  return  to  Iraq  and  that  their
    circumstances were in the Huang v  SSHD  [2005]  EWCA  Civ  105   sense
    'truly exceptional'.  The Immigration Judge signed her determination on
    5 September 2006.

 3. Rule 23 reads as follows:

        "Special procedures and time limits in asylum appeals
       23.  - (1)      This rule applies to appeals under section 82 of  the
2002 Act where -
                 (a)    the appellant is in the United Kingdom; and
                 (b)    the appeal relates, in  whole  or  in  part,  to  an
                     asylum claim.
             (2)  Subject to paragraph (3) -
                 (a)    where an appeal is to be considered by the  Tribunal
                     at a hearing, the hearing must be fixed for a date not
                     more than 28 days after the later of -
                     (i)     the date on which the  Tribunal  receives  the
                         notice of appeal; or
                     (ii)    if the Tribunal makes a  preliminary  decision
                         under rule 10 (late notice of appeal), the date on
                         which notice of that decision  is  served  on  the
                         appellant; and
                 (b)   where  an  appeal  is  to  be  determined  without  a
                     hearing, the Tribunal must determine it not more  than
                     28 days after the later of those dates.
             (3)   If the respondent does not file the  documents  specified
                 in rule 13(1) within the  time  specified  in  rule  13  or
                 directions given under that rule -
                 (a)    paragraph (2) does not apply; and
                 (b)   the Tribunal may vary any hearing date  that  it  has
                     already fixed in accordance with paragraph (2)(a),  if
                     it is  satisfied  that  it  would  be  unfair  to  the
                     appellant to proceed with  the  hearing  on  the  date
                     fixed.
             (4)   The  Tribunal  must  serve  its  determination   on   the
                 respondent -
                 (a)    if the appeal is considered at a hearing, by sending
                     it not later than 10 days after the hearing  finishes;
                     or
                 (b)    if the appeal is determined without  a  hearing,  by
                     sending  it  not  later  than  10  days  after  it  is
                     determined.
      (5) The respondent must -
                 (a)   serve the determination on the appellant -
                     (i)       if  the  respondent  makes  a  section  103A
                         application or applies for  permission  to  appeal
                         under section 103B or 103E of  the  2002  Act,  by
                         sending,  delivering  or  personally  serving  the
                         determination not later than the date on which  it
                         makes that application; and
                     (ii)     otherwise,  not  later  than  28  days  after
                         receiving the determination from the Tribunal; and
                 (b)    as   soon   as   practicable   after   serving   the
                     determination, notify the Tribunal on what date and by
                     what means it was served.
             (6)   If the respondent does not give the Tribunal notification
                 under paragraph (5)(b) within 29 days  after  the  Tribunal
                 serves the determination on it, the Tribunal must serve the
                 determination  on  the  appellant  as  soon  as  reasonably
                 practicable thereafter.
             (7)   In paragraph (2) of this rule, references to a hearing do
                 not include a  case  management  review  hearing  or  other
                 preliminary hearing."

 4. Rule 2 contains interpretations and provides that  'asylum  claim'  has
    the meaning given by s  113(1)  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002, which is as follows:

            "113 ...
                  (1)  'asylum claim' means a claim made by a person to  the
                 Secretary of State at a place designated by  the  Secretary
                 of State that to remove the person from or require  him  to
                 leave the United Kingdom would reach the  United  Kingdom's
                 obligations under the Refugee Convention."

 5. Because this appeal had begun as an appeal raising, inter alia,  asylum
    grounds, it had been assigned a file reference within the Tribunal with
    the prefix AA, and it was no doubt for that reason rather than any more
    advanced  consideration  of  the  surviving  issues  that  caused   the
    Tribunal's staff to treat the appeal as governed  by    r  23.   On  11
    September the determination was sent to (or, at any rate, received  by)
    the relevant department of the Home Office.  On 18 September  the  Home
    Office submitted to the Tribunal an application for reconsideration, on
    which an Order was made by a Senior Immigration Judge on 21  September.
    But the Home Office did not serve the determination on the appellant on
    18 September (as apparently required by r 23(5)) or at  all.   Instead,
    it appears that the Home Office  decided  that  as  the  appellant  had
    withdrawn his asylum grounds, so that the determination was not  of  an
    asylum appeal, the appeal was not governed by r 23.   The  Home  Office
    therefore returned the determination to the Tribunal,  with  a  request
    that it be promulgated to both parties in the usual way, that  is,  not
    under the special procedure prescribed by r 23.  That was done,  on  28
    September.

 6. If r 23 applies to this appeal, the Home Office failed in its  duty  to
    send the determination to the appellant on the day the application  for
    reconsideration was made.  In those circumstances the  question  arises
    whether the application can be considered to be validly made.  This  is
    not easy to answer; but two things are clear.  The first  is  that  the
    terms of r 23 are intended to give  the  respondent  an  advantage  not
    normally available to a party to litigation.   The  second  is  that  r
    23(5)(i) is intended to ameliorate the appellant's position in  a  case
    where the respondent seeks to challenge a decision  in  favour  of  the
    appellant, before the appellant even knows it has been made.   Strictly
    speaking, the appellant is unlikely to be prejudiced by  knowing  about
    the reconsideration application only later, because the  next  possible
    act by him for which a time is fixed would be the service of a  'reply'
    under r 30, which does not have to be done  until  a  week  before  the
    hearing of the reconsideration.  Nevertheless, the possibility that the
    respondent will challenge a determination in favour  of  the  appellant
    without notifying the appellant of the determination or  the  challenge
    is not clearly envisaged by  the  Rules  and  could  only  add  to  the
    apparent unfairness of r 23.  In these circumstances we incline to  the
    view  that  the  requirements  of  r  23(5)(a)(i)  are  mandatory,  and
    compliance with them is a  precondition  of  a  valid  application  for
    reconsideration at the instance of the respondent.  Mr Walker  did  not
    dissent from that view.  We should emphasise that we  do  not  mean  to
    indicate any similar view in respect  of  sub-subparagraph  (a)(ii)  or
    subparagraph (b) of r 23(5), where the unfairness is significantly less
    apparent.

 7. It follows from the foregoing that if r 23 applies to this appeal,  our
    view is that the respondent's application for reconsideration  was  not
    validly made.

 8. The alternative is that r 23 does not apply to this  appeal.   In  that
    case, the sending of the determination to the respondent  alone  on  11
    September was not an  effective  communication  of  the  determination,
    which had instead, under the usual procedure for appeals  not  governed
    by r 23, to be sent 'to every party' (r 22).  That was not  done  until
    28 September.

 9. The time limits for applications for  reconsideration  are  in  primary
    legislation:           s 103A of the 2002 Act.   Subsection  (3)(c)  of
    that section provides that an application 'brought by a  party  to  the
    appeal other than the appellant' must be made 'within the period  of  5
    days beginning with the date on which he is treated, in accordance with
    rules made under section 106, as receiving  notice  of  the  Tribunal's
    decision'.  The rules are the 2005 Rules, and they make  provision  for
    service and time as well as requiring determinations to  be  sent  out.
    The formulation of the period of time specified by s  103(3)(c),  which
    is paralleled in the other paragraphs of that subsection  does  however
    make it clear that an early application  is  invalid.   The  subsection
    provides both  an  end  and  a  beginning  of  the  period  for  making
    applications.  It follows that if r 23 does not apply to  this  appeal,
    the application for reconsideration was invalid:  it  was  made  on  18
    September, whereas the only period during  which  such  an  application
    could be made did not begin until 28  September  (or  later  actual  or
    postal service).

10. It would therefore appear that, whether r 23 applies to this appeal  or
    not,  there  was  no  valid  application  for  reconsideration.    That
    conclusion  means  that  it  is  not  essential  to   decide   on   the
    interpretation of r 23(1)(b) itself.  But  that  is  an  important  and
    general issue, on which we heard submissions  from  Mr  Walker  and  Mr
    Norton-Taylor, as well as from another member of the Bar present at the
    hearing.  The rule is evidently concerned with provisions  relating  to
    appeals  and  their  determination,  whereas  the  statutory  provision
    governing the ambit of the rule is concerned not with appeals but  with
    claims.  A claim  ought  to  generate  a  decision;  if  the  claim  is
    unsuccessful and the decision is an 'immigration decision'  of  one  of
    the kinds listed in ss82-3A of the 2002 Act, there may  be  an  appeal.
    'Upgrade' appeals under   ss  83  and  83A  are  restricted  to  asylum
    grounds, but in every other case the appeal may be brought on  any  one
    or more of the grounds listed in s 84(1), one of which  is  the  ground
    that the appellant's removal would breach the Refugee  Convention.   It
    follows that an 'asylum claim' may be followed by an appeal not raising
    (or,  as  happened  in  the  present  case,  raising  and  subsequently
    dropping) Refugee Convention grounds; or a claim that in its origin had
    no 'asylum' content may lead to an appeal in which the appellant claims
    that his removal would (also) breach the Refugee Convention.

11. As we have indicated, the provisions of  r  23  are  unusual,  and  are
    contrary to the normal principle that the parties  before  a  court  or
    tribunal are to be treated equally.  There is a justification for  them
    in that they enable enforcement of judgments that  might  otherwise  be
    difficult to enforce.  That justification, endorsed (in relation to the
    preceding version of the Rules) by the Court of  Appeal  in  Bubaker  v
    Lord Chancellor and others [2002] EWCA Civ 1107, must  be  regarded  as
    valid even if experience shows that actual enforcement is unaffected by
    the existence of the rule.  Nevertheless, the peculiarity and the  one-
    sidedness of the rule remain, and for  that  reason  one  would  expect
    construction both contra proferentem (as we have applied above) and  so
    as to limit the number of cases to which the rule applied.  The  latter
    consideration would point to restricting  the  rule  to  those  appeals
    where grounds based on the Refugee Convention were actually dealt  with
    in the determination being sent out.  That was the view evidently taken
    by the official in the Home Office who sent the  determination  in  the
    present appeal back to the Tribunal.

12. It is, however, a construction that presents a number of  difficulties.
    The first and most obvious is that it entirely fails to recognise  that
    the relevant words are 'asylum claim', not 'asylum  appeal',  and  that
    they are  defined  by  reference  to  provisions  having  no  necessary
    connexion with appeals.  Further, if this construction is  adopted,  an
    appeal might, as it were, drift in and out of the rule.  Asylum grounds
    might be argued in a case not originating in an asylum  claim,  or  the
    grounds might (with the permission of  the  Tribunal  under  r  14)  be
    varied so as to enable asylum grounds to be added  to  an  appeal  that
    originally  had  nothing   to   do   with   the   Refugee   Convention.
    Alternatively, as we have seen in this appeal, asylum grounds might  be
    dropped, so that the determination does not, and does not need to, deal
    with the Refugee Convention even where that was the  whole  content  of
    the original application to the Secretary of State.  Quite  apart  from
    the provisions about sending  out  the  determination,  the  provisions
    about listing  in        r  23(2)  and  (3)  would  be  extraordinarily
    difficult to apply in such cases.

13. We should add to that the realities of  the  Tribunal's  administrative
    support.  No doubt it can be expected that an appeal will  be  properly
    assigned to the correct category when it is first received.  To  expect
    the Tribunal's staff to take responsibility for reclassification of  an
    appeal according to the application of r 23 from time  to  time  during
    the course of an appeal is,  however,  quite  unrealistic.   And  if  a
    mistake  is  made  it  will  either  deprive  the  respondent  of   the
    enforcement mechanism lawfully envisaged by Parliament or will  (as  is
    said to have happened in the present case) give  him  a  preview  of  a
    determination that has not been properly served at all.  And it must be
    the staff rather than the  judiciary  whose  responsibility  it  is  to
    decide whether r 23 applies, because it appears to be part of the ratio
    of Bubaker that the decision-maker's  function  is  complete  once  the
    decision is taken and that he has no input into the process of  service
    (see Laws LJ at [15]-[18]).

14. We therefore take the view that r 23 is not to be  interpreted  in  the
    narrower sense of applying only to an appeal that, at the time  of  the
    application of the rule, raises asylum grounds.  It applies to all (but
    only those) appeals in which  the  immigration  decision  under  appeal
    follows an 'asylum claim' within the meaning of s 113.   If  an  appeal
    begins as one to which r 23 applies, it continues as such while  it  is
    pending before the Tribunal.  (We should add here that an amendment  to
    the definition of 'asylum claim' in s  113  appears  in  s  12  of  the
    Immigration, Nationality and Asylum Act 2006.  We do not need  here  to
    decide whether, if and when that provision is brought  into  force,  it
    will affect the meaning of r 23.)

15. In the present case therefore the position is  as  follows.    Rule  23
    applied.  The determination was  correctly  served  on  the  respondent
    under r 23(4).  The respondent's application for reconsideration was in
    time, but was invalid for failure to comply with r 23(5)(a)(i).   There
    is no reconsideration before us.  The Immigration Judge's determination
    stands.











                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT
                                                             Date:

