
ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL

                     LO (Partner of EEA national) Nigeria [2009] UKAIT 00034

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


                                   Before:


 Mr C M G Ockelton, Deputy President of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal

                                   Between

                                     LO
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

There is an in-country right of appeal against a decision to refuse a
person a residence card as a partner of an EEA national within reg 8(5) of
the EEA Regulations.

                DECISION ON APPLICATION FOR EXTENSION OF TIME


   1. The appellant is a national of Nigeria. He makes this application  for
      the extension of time for lodging a Notice of Appeal to  the  Tribunal
      against a decision of the respondent on 5 November 2008 refusing him a
      residence card as confirmation that he is in  a  durable  relationship
      with an EEA national. The Notice of Appeal is dated 15 January 2009.

   2. The appellant's immigration history appears to be as follows. He  came
      to notice in 2006 when he was attempting to leave the  United  Kingdom
      on a false passport. He  was  subject  to  criminal  charges  and  was
      sentenced to eight months imprisonment. Following  the  completion  of
      that sentence he left the UK for Nigeria in June  2007.  In  September
      2007 he was intercepted again at Belfast Airport with a false  British
      passport.  He  was  again  subject  to  criminal  proceedings.  On  17
      September 2008 he was sentenced to four months imprisonment.

   3. Meanwhile, on 7 September 2008, the Secretary of State  had  issued  a
      decision to give directions for his removal as an illegal entrant. The
      appellant issued from within the United Kingdom  a  Notice  of  Appeal
      against that decision. That Notice was  out  of  time.  There  was  an
      application for extension of time on the basis that the appellant  had
      not appreciated that there was any urgency and that he  had  not  been
      able to contact a lawyer swiftly. On 3 November  2008  an  Immigration
      Judge determined that the Notice of Appeal was invalid, not because it
      was out of time but because it  was  issued  from  within  the  United
      Kingdom: the decision against which the appellant appealed carried, in
      the circumstances of his case, no right  of  appeal  from  within  the
      United Kingdom. That decision was made on 3 November 2008.

   4. On 4 November  2008,  the  appellant  made  the  present  application,
      claiming a residence card on the basis of a durable relationship  with
      an EEA national exercising treaty rights in the United Kingdom. It was
      refused, as I have said, on  5  November  2008.  The  reason  for  the
      refusal is that the appellant had not shown that  he  had  been  in  a
      durable relationship lasting two years. That  is  also  given  as  the
      reason why there is no in-country  right  of  appeal,  the  respondent
      indicating that the lack of a relationship of that character prevented
      the appellant from having the benefit of reg  26  of  the  Immigration
      (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006. That view  was  immediately
      challenged by those acting on the appellant's behalf. Judicial  Review
      proceedings were issued on 13 November 2008. They  have  been  stayed,
      awaiting this decision of the Tribunal.

   5. The appellant's representatives sought to have the matter aired at  an
      oral hearing. At their request it was added to a list of the  Tribunal
      sitting in Belfast on 10 February 2009, but they were reminded of  the
      provisions  of  r  10(6)  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration   Tribunal
      (Procedure) Rules 2005 which requires a decision such as  this  to  be
      made without a hearing. The Tribunal was  subsequently  notified  that
      the appellant's representatives no longer act for him.

   6. Given the provisions of r 10(6),  there  were  no  proceedings  on  10
      February, and after that the file was unfortunately wrongly classified
      by the Tribunal's administration. That is the reason for the delay  in
      this decision being made.

   7. The substantive question is whether  the  appellant  has  a  right  of
      appeal against the decision refusing him a residence card. There is no
      doubt that the provisions governing that issue are in the  Immigration
      (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006. In reg 2(1),  EEA  decision
      is defined:

            ""EEA Decision" means a decision under  these  regulations  that
           concerns a person's -

           (a)   entitlement to be admitted to the United Kingdom;
           (b)   entitlement to be issued with or have renewed, or  not  to
                 have revoked, a registration certificate,  residence  card,
                 documents  certifying  permanent  residence  or   permanent
                 residence card; or
           (c)   removal from the United Kingdom".


      So the decision in this case is an  EEA  decision.  Regulation  26  is
      headed "Appeal Rights". The relevant parts are as follows:

            "26(1) Subject to the following paragraphs of this regulation, a
           person  may  appeal  under  these  regulations  against  an  EEA
           decision.
            (2) If a person claims to be an EEA national, he may not  appeal
           under these regulations unless  he  produces  a  valid  national
           identity card or passport issued by an EEA state.
            (3) If a person claims to be the family member or relative of an
           EEA national he may not appeal under these regulations unless he
           produces -
                  (a)  an EEA family permit; or
                  (b)  other proof that he is related as claimed to  an  EEA
           national.
            ...
            (6)  Except where an appeal lies to the  Commission,  an  appeal
           under these regulations  lies  to  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
           Tribunal."


      Regulation 27 prevents a right of appeal being exercised  from  within
      the United Kingdom in certain circumstances, but that  provision  does
      not apply in the present case.

   8. There are a number of other provisions to which I must make reference.
      First, the appellant's application was on the  basis  that  he  has  a
      durable relationship with a named EEA national. That was a claim to be
      what the 2006 Regulations call an "extended family member".  "Extended
      family member" is defined in reg 8:

            "8(1) In these regulations  "extended  family  member"  means  a
           person who is not a family  member  of  an  EEA  national  under
           Regulation 7(1)(a), (b), or (c) and who satisfies the conditions
           in paragraph (2), (3), (4) or (5).
            ...
            (5)  A person satisfies the condition in this paragraph  if  the
           person is the partner of an EEA national  (other  than  a  civil
           partner) and can prove to the decision maker that  he  is  in  a
           durable relationship with the EEA national."

   9. The  other  relevant  provisions  are  in  the  Immigration  (Notices)
      Regulations 2003 (as amended). I do not need to  set  them  out.  They
      provide that a notice of a decision that is  appealable  must  contain
      certain details including a statement of the right of appeal  and  how
      it can be exercised. The Notices Regulations specifically apply to EEA
      decisions as well as to other immigration decisions.

  10. The appellant's claim to be an "extended  family  member"  and  to  be
      entitled to a residence card was met  by  a  refusal  to  give  him  a
      residence card. That  was  an  EEA  decision  within  the  meaning  of
      Regulation 2 of the 2006 Regulations. It therefore carried a right  of
      appeal unless paragraphs (2) or (3) of reg 26 apply to it. Neither  of
      those paragraphs do  apply.  The  appellant  is  not  himself  an  EEA
      national; and he does not claim to be a "family member"  or  relative.
      Quite apart from the terms of reg 8(1), the  Regulations  as  a  whole
      distinguish  clearly  between  family  members  and  extended   family
      members. It therefore seems clear to me that the appellant had an  in-
      country right of appeal against the refusal of a residence card.

  11. I reach that conclusion with no enthusiasm at all. The effect of it is
      that any person threatened with removal, who applies for  a  residence
      card,  even  on  an  entirely  spurious  basis,  so  that  refusal  is
      inevitable, is entitled to an in-country right of appeal against  that
      refusal and cannot be removed until the appeal  has  run  its  course.
      That cannot be intentional, but it does not  appear  to  me  that  the
      regulations can be read in any other way.

  12. As the appellant had an in-country right  of  appeal,  the  Notice  of
      Decision, which fails to set out his right of appeal, was ineffective.
      As the Tribunal has held on a number of occasions, where a  notice  of
      decision does not  comply  with  the  Notices  Regulations,  time  for
      appealing against the decision does  not  begin  to  run  against  the
      person who is the subject of the decision; but, if  he  does  enter  a
      Notice of Appeal, he may be taken to have waived the failure to advise
      him of a right of appeal, and may treat  the  Notice  of  Decision  as
      valid for the purposes of constituting his appeal. It follows that the
      Notice of Appeal in the present case cannot be out of time, and should
      be regarded as constituting a valid notice of an  appeal  against  the
      decision, which was on its face defective for failing to  comply  with
      the Notices Regulations.

  13. The appellant accordingly has an appeal pending before the Tribunal.





                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT
                                                             Date: 12 August
                                                   2009

