

Asylum and Immigration Tribunal

    MI (Hazara - Ismaili - associate of Nadiri family) Afghanistan CG [2009]
                                                                 UKAIT 00035



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard at Field House                          |                             |
|on 18th December 2008                         |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                       SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE ALLEN
                      SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE SPENCER

                                   Between

                                     mi

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent




Representation:

For the appellant:     Mr M Symes, counsel, instructed by IAS (Tribunal
    Unit)
For the respondent:    Mr J Gulvin, Home Office presenting officer


A person of Hazara ethnicity or of the Ismaili faith or  who  is  associated
with the Nadiri family is not likely to be at a real risk  of  serious  harm
in Afghanistan by reason of any of these factors alone or a  combination  of
any of them, although different considerations would apply if  an  Ismaili's
own home area were to be in an area controlled by  the  Taliban,  given  the
large scale massacre of Ismailis which took  place  when  the  Taliban  took
over the province of Baghlan in 1998.  In such a  case,  however,  he  would
ordinarily be safe in Kabul.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The background

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan, born on  1st  January  1977,
    who arrived in the United Kingdom on 1st May 2002.  His appeal  against
    the decision of the respondent, made on 28th August 2004, to remove him
    from the United Kingdom to Afghanistan, following the  refusal  of  his
    asylum and human rights claims, was dismissed on asylum grounds and  on
    human rights grounds after a hearing before  an  adjudicator,  Mr  N  P
    Dixon, in a determination promulgated on 7th January 2005.

 2. On 14th March 2005 the appellant was given leave to appeal to  the  IAT
    and in a determination promulgated on 24th May 2006 the AIT found  that
    the original Tribunal did not make a material error of  law.   On  11th
    October 2006 Pill LJ granted the appellant leave to appeal to the Court
    of Appeal.  Before the Court of Appeal it was  agreed  by  the  parties
    that neither the adjudicator nor the Tribunal gave adequate reasons for
    concluding that the appellant was not at risk  on  return  despite  the
    circumstances in which he was forced to leave Afghanistan and that  the
    position of Jamiat-i-Islami was not properly  considered  in  assessing
    the risk faced by the appellant  on  return  to  Afghanistan.   It  was
    agreed that the appeal should be allowed to the extent of remitting  it
    to  a  differently  constituted  tribunal  of  the  AIT  for   a   full
    reconsideration.  On 4th January 2007 by consent the  Court  of  Appeal
    quashed the decision of the AIT and ordered that the appeal be remitted
    for reconsideration before a differently constituted  tribunal  of  the
    Asylum and Immigration Tribunal.  Thus the matter came before us.

 3. Mr Symes did not call the appellant to give evidence.  He  relied  upon
    the  findings  of  fact  made  by  the  adjudicator,  which  were   not
    challenged.  He also  relied  upon  an  expert  report  of  Dr  Antonio
    Giustozzi, dated 30th September  2008.   Mr  Symes  indicated  that  Dr
    Giustozzi was unwilling to attend to give  oral  evidence.   He  relied
    upon a skeleton argument, dated 12th December 2008, and  various  items
    of background evidence together with a schedule of citations  from  the
    country evidence.  Mr Gulvin relied upon the COIR on Afghanistan, dated
    August 2008, and the determinations of the Tribunal in  PM  and  Others
    (Kabul - Hizb-i-Islami)  Afghanistan  CG  [2007]  UKAIT  00089  and  RQ
    (Afghan National Army - Hizb-i-Islami -  risk)  Afghanistan  CG  [2008]
    UKAIT 00013.  Since the hearing we have become aware of the publication
    of a recent COIR on Afghanistan, dated 26 June  2009,  but  it  is  not
    significantly different in content in relation to  any  of  the  issues
    which arise in this appeal as to make it  necessary  to  reconvene  the
    hearing   or   invite   further   submissions   from    the    parties'
    representatives.

 4. In paragraph 20 of his determination the adjudicator said that he found
    the appellant to be a credible witness.  In paragraphs 9, 10 and 11  he
    set out a summary of the appellant's claim.  The appellant claimed that
    he would face mistreatment on return to Afghanistan due to his religion
    as a Shia Ismaili, his ethnicity as a Hazara and his political  opinion
    as a supporter of Sayed Jaffar Nadiri and a member  of  Fidayan  Hassan
    Sibah.  In 1995 the appellant was a medical student  in  Mazar-i-Sharif
    when the spiritual leader of the Ismaili sect, Mr Sayed Mansoor Nadiri,
    asked him to devote himself to his service in the Kayan valley  in  the
    province of Baghlan.  In 1996 the appellant was appointed head  of  the
    Fidayan Hassan Sibah group.  The appellant had direct contact  with  Mr
    Sayed Mansoor Nadiri,  his  son  and  his  deputy.   His  task  was  to
    encourage their friends to become members of the Fidayan  group,  which
    was responsible for preaching about the Ismalia  sect  to  people,  for
    distributing religious material in books and encouraging people to  pay
    their allegiance to the spiritual leader.  After the Northern  Alliance
    forces were defeated by the Taliban, the area of Kayan came  under  the
    control of the Taliban.   The  appellant's  family  were  killed  in  a
    Taliban massacre in 1998 and the appellant was imprisoned and  tortured
    by the Taliban from 1998 to 2000 because they wanted to know about  the
    activities of the Fidayan group.  A senior member of the Taliban, a  Mr
    Molavy Bahreem, had arrested the appellant, although  allowing  him  to
    travel  to  Pakistan  and  obtain  treatment  for  his  injuries.   The
    appellant returned to  Afghanistan  in  2001  after  the  fall  of  the
    Taliban.  Jamiat-i-Islami had  taken  over  the  area  but  the  former
    governor, Sayed Jaffar Nadiri, fought back and asked for the assistance
    of the appellant's Fidayan group.  Mr Nadiri's  forces  were  defeated,
    the appellant's house was raided and people from his group were killed.
     The appellant went to stay with a relative in another part of  Baghlan
    before leaving Afghanistan.

The evidence of Dr Antonio Giustozzi

 5. In  his  report  Dr  Giustozzi  said  that  the  Ismaili  community  in
    Afghanistan was composed of two different ethnic groups:  Hazaris,  who
    were the majority, and Tajiks, also known as "mountain Tajiks"  because
    other (Sunni) Tajiks saw them as a separate ethnic group.  The mountain
    Tajiks and Ismaili Hazara had a long history of  suffering  marginality
    and discrimination in Afghanistan.  There were few Ismailis  living  in
    Kabul and they tended to be from the wealthiest households so they were
    not quite so vulnerable to  discrimination.   In  Kabul  too,  however,
    access to employment would be limited for  an  Ismaili.   Dr  Giustozzi
    said that Hazaras in general, regardless of their faith, had long  been
    discriminated against in Afghanistan and had limited access to jobs  in
    the state  administration  and  in  the  armed  forces  and  to  higher
    education.  Hazaras had distinctive facial features (Mongoloid),  which
    made them easy to  distinguish  from  most  other  ethnic  communities.
    Kabul had a large Hazara community which  was  the  poorest  among  the
    various ethnic communities of the city.  They were largely confined  to
    menial jobs and were  almost  completely  excluded  from  the  security
    services.  After 2001, however, the conditions of the Hazara  community
    in Afghanistan in general  and  in  Kabul  in  particular  had  greatly
    improved; much of the new emerging intelligentsia and middle class  was
    Hazara, mainly because Hazaras invested heavily  in  the  education  of
    their offspring in the 1980s and 1990s and now reaped the  benefits  of
    this strategy of survival.  It could not  be  said  that  Hazaras  were
    discriminated against in Kabul, at least not to a  major  extent.   The
    situation remained more critical in Baghlan.

 6. Dr Giustozzi said that Ismaili Hazaras faced  discrimination  not  just
    because they belonged to the Hazara ethnic group but also, as Ismailis,
    even at the  hands  of  their  fellow  Hazaras,  who  belonged  to  the
    mainstream  Twelver  Shia  community.   Many   Sunni   fundamentalists,
    especially  if  they  leaned  towards  the  Wahabi  brand  of   Islamic
    fundamentalism tended to dislike Shia Muslims but  others,  like  those
    belonging to Jamiat-i-Islami, were more conciliatory towards them.   He
    said that among Sunni fundamentalists of all persuasions  there  was  a
    widespread dislike for Ismailis, which  sometimes,  in  Dr  Giustozzi's
    words, took the form of an explicit invitation to violence.  It was  in
    part for this reason that in 1998,  when  the  Taliban  took  over  the
    province of Baghlan, they carried out  large  scale  massacres  of  the
    local Ismaili population.  Dr Giustozzi said  that  the  leadership  of
    Jamiat-i-Islami was not per se overtly hostile to Ismailis and at times
    reached local alliances with some Ismaili factions, but within its rank
    and file many had a more aggressive attitude  towards  Ismailis,  whose
    religious practice differed radically  from  that  not  only  of  Sunni
    Muslims but also from that of Twelver Shias.

 7. Many Sunni fundamentalists considered the Ismailis not to be Muslims at
    all and labelled them as infidels.  The recent involvement of  the  Aga
    Khan   Foundation   (an   international   Ismaili   organisation)    in
    reconstruction activities in Afghanistan had led to an  improvement  of
    the image of the Ismailis among the Afghan elite, but at the same  time
    might  have  exacerbated  resentment  among  grassroots  fundamentalist
    groups.  The hostility of  fundamentalists  towards  the  Ismailis  was
    exacerbated by the fact that many Ismailis, as a reaction,  had  openly
    supported secularist parties and politics.  Ismailis were also weakened
    by the fact that none of them was a member of  the  current  government
    nor did they hold significant positions in the  administration  or  the
    police.  During the 1979 to 1992 period, when Afghanistan was ruled  by
    Communists, many educated  Ismailis  joined  the  ruling  party,  being
    attracted by its secular policies and by the fact that new  avenues  of
    social advancement were open to them.  Many Ismailis  joined  the  pro-
    government militias and fought on the Communist side during the  period
    up to 1992 when the Communist regime fell and a  civil  war  among  the
    factions started.

 8. Starting from 1992 many Ismailis joined the  party  of  General  Rashid
    Dostom, Junbesh-i-Melli (National Front), attracted by  its  secularist
    stance.  At that time all other parties active in Afghanistan  belonged
    to various strands of Islamic fundamentalism.  As  a  result,  Ismailis
    were suspected by many Islamic fundamentalists of leaning  towards  the
    left wing and secular parties, a fact that reinforced  their  hostility
    towards them. Even when their religious identity was  concealed,  often
    Ismaili Hazaras attracted hatred from both Islamic fundamentalists  and
    Pashtun nationalists in Afghanistan, due  to  a  history  of  conflict.
    During the civil war, the largest Hazara  party,  Hizb-i-Wahdat  (Unity
    Party), was  aligned  against  the  coalition  led  by  Jamiat-i-Islami
    (Islamic Society), a Sunni fundamentalist party,  which  was  the  main
    power within the current  administration.  Although  Hizb-i-Wahdat  was
    also  part  of  the  current  administration,  its  ministers  occupied
    positions of little significance both in political and financial terms,
    which had a negative impact on their patronage and clientelist politics
    and on its lobbying power within the government.  Inside Kabul,  Wahdat
    and Jamiat had often clashed, even after the fall of  the  Taliban  and
    Jamiat supported a number of  small  parties  and  factions  among  the
    Hazaras, which opposed Hizb-i-Wahdat.

 9. Dr Giustozzi said that in the past Ismailis had suffered discrimination
    even from members of Hizb-i-Wahdat.  Ismailis as a result were excluded
    from occupying high positions within the party although  many  of  them
    fought in its ranks and occasionally achieved positions  of  leadership
    in the party militias.  Recently the  clerical  leadership  of  Hizb-i-
    Wahdat had taken initiatives to  bridge  the  gap  with  the  Ismailis,
    offering to guarantee a role for them within the ranks  of  the  party.
    Among many lower level clerical leaders of the  party,  however,  there
    was still reported to be hostility towards  the  Ismailis  and  it  was
    unlikely the Ismailis would  be  able  to  rely  on  Hizb-i-Wahdat  for
    support in the near future.

10. Dr Giustozzi said that after the fall of the Taliban regime the Ismaili
    community split internally.  A faction led by the Nadiri  family  tried
    to reassert its leadership and claim back the governorship  of  Baghlan
    province at the end of 2001.  The claim was rejected  by  the  Jamiatis
    who felt they were in a position to dominate Baghlan  entirely.   After
    some initial scuffles Nadiri responded by launching an armed assault on
    the town of Pul-i-Khumri in Baghlan province in late 2001.  The attempt
    was defeated but renewed clashes were reported in the following  months
    between supporters of the Nadiri family  and  those  of  a  new  leader
    appointed by the central government, whom the Nadiri accused of being a
    puppet.

11. Dr Giustozzi said that  there  were  in  Afghanistan  three  layers  of
    discrimination against the Ismailis: ethnic, religious  and  political,
    of which the religious one was the most important.  With the  important
    exception of Ittehad-i-Islami (Islamic Union), the parties  which  held
    real power in Kabul nowadays  did  not  actively  pursue  a  policy  of
    discriminating against the Ismaili  community  as  such.   Some  groups
    within the community, however,  might  be  targeted  because  of  their
    opposition to the authorities appointed to  lead  their  community  and
    because of their ethnic-nationalistic feelings.  Apart from any risk of
    persecution at the hands of rogue  individuals  within  the  government
    security agencies, prejudice against the Ismailis was  deeply  embedded
    amongst the rank and file of  Islamic  fundamentalist  parties  and  it
    would take a long time to  eradicate  these  prejudices,  even  in  the
    presence of  an  active  policy  promoting  reciprocal  coexistence  of
    different communities in Afghanistan, which at present did  not  exist.
    As a result, Ismailis were practically excluded from public  office  in
    Afghanistan but in the cities there were no reports of direct attack or
    harassment of Ismailis.  This might be due in part to the fact that few
    Ismailis lived in any city; their only urban presence was  in  Faizabad
    in Badakhshan and in Pull-i-Khumri.

12. Dr Giustozzi said that the legacy of war remained and  tension  between
    ethnic  communities  was  the  highest  in  Baghlan  in   north-eastern
    Afghanistan.  After 2001 no  governor  had  been  able  to  handle  the
    situation successfully and all had been replaced  by  President  Karzai
    after short  periods  in  office.   In  2003  Nadiri  put  forward  his
    candidature to the constitutional Loya Jirga but  was  forced  to  step
    down by a riot organised by conservative Islamist  groups,  who  almost
    lynched  him  at  the  polling  station  where  the  selection  of  the
    candidates was taking place.  During  the  parliamentary  elections  of
    December 2005, in which Sayed Mansur Nadiri was a  candidate,  attempts
    were made to prevent the mobilisation of the Ismailis  in  his  favour.
    Dr Giustozzi was sent by UNAMA to reassure the Ismailis  of  the  Kayan
    valley in April 2004 that they would be registered  for  the  elections
    but on the way he was first stopped by the state security and  then  by
    the police and warned not to travel to Kayan, despite the fact that the
    Bonn Agreement explicitly allowed the UN to travel  everywhere  without
    the need to request any authorisation.  After he visited  Kayan  valley
    the police raided the villages and  Ismaili  houses  in  Pull-i-Khumri,
    arresting several people and beating and harassing others.  Nonetheless
    under UN protection Nadiri was this time able to run in the  elections,
    emerging as the most voted for candidate in  Baghlan  and  obtaining  a
    large majority of the Ismaili vote.

13. As a result the presence of the Nadiris and  their  followers  was  re-
    established in Baghlan.   Dr  Giustozzi  said  that  tension  remained,
    however, as the Ismailis had not been able to reclaim any influence  in
    the provincial administration.  While in 2004 President Karzai  started
    appointing Pashtun governors, Hazaras had been kept out of positions of
    power and had little influence over  the  government  of  Baghlan.   In
    2005,  moreover,  signs  started  emerging  that   the   Taliban   were
    infiltrating Baghlan again.  Attacks on peacekeepers had been  reported
    since that  year.   In  December  2006  23  suspected  insurgents  were
    arrested in Kunduz and were said to be part of a network  extending  to
    Baghlan province too.  Such networks  included  250  activists  of  the
    Taliban according to security officials.  According to UN sources small
    groups of Taliban were active among the Pashtuns  of  northern  Baghlan
    and among the Tajiks of Andarab.  The worsening security  situation  in
    Baghlan contributed to raised tension in the province.  He said  Afghan
    police in Pull-i-Khumri (the administrative capital of  Baghlan)  which
    were dominated by the Jamiat-i-Islami would have  little  sympathy  for
    the appellant and little  interest  in  protecting  him.   The  Baghlan
    environment remained highly unstable with occasional flares of violence
    and particularly weak law enforcement and it was not  recommended  that
    the appellant return there  even  if  his  family  was  likely  to  own
    property there.  Dr Giustozzi said that it was clear that  there  would
    be a significant risk to the appellant if he returned to Baghlan.

14. Dr Giustozzi said that in terms of relocation  to  a  major  city  like
    Kabul, he thought that the risk to the appellant would be much lower as
    few Ismailis lived in Kabul and their presence was hardly  noted.   The
    appellant, however, would not be able to hide as  his  whereabouts  and
    personal background were likely to become known, as he  would  have  to
    give references and details about his family and place of  origin  when
    seeking rented accommodation or looking for a job.   He  expressed  the
    opinion that Jamiatis would not actively seek him out  in  Kabul  given
    the current situation.  They were happy to keep Nadiri's  followers  as
    weak as possible in Baghlan, but they were not bent on persecuting them
    individually.  The threat to the appellant was one  of  harassment  and
    mistreatment by Sunni religious zealots, whose influence  and  activism
    was on the rise because of the spreading insurgency and xenophobia -  a
    risk present in Kabul too.  Dr  Giustozzi  said  that  from  late  2004
    policing of Kabul started deteriorating again following the sacking  of
    a number of officials within the ministry.  A spate of attacks  against
    NGOs occurred in Kabul, some carried out by  men  in  police  uniforms.
    Men in uniforms manning roadblocks were  widely  reported  to  ask  for
    money from passing  cars.   As  early  as  2003  a  report  by  Amnesty
    International detailed abuses and corruption  in  the  police  but  the
    situation appeared to have worsened since then.  A  detailed  and  very
    critical  report  from  AREU  (Afghan  Research  and  Evaluation  Unit)
    appeared in July 2007 which said:

      "A major failure of reform efforts for the past five  years  has  been
         the lack of  political  will  to  proceed  beyond  recognising  and
         talking  about  the  problem  of  a  corrupt,   factionalised   and
         criminalised  Ministry  of  Interior.   Donors  should  make  their
         assistance more conditional on comprehensive top down reform of the
         MOI,  without  which  their  contributions  towards  police  reform
         efforts are likely to be wasted."

15. Another report detailing inefficiencies and abuses by Afghan police was
    released by the International Crisis Group in August  2007,  while  the
    press had been repeatedly reporting the issue. The  Afghan  Independent
    Commission for Human Rights received 775  complaints  of  human  rights
    violations by the Afghan security forces in the  Kabul  region  in  the
    year to June 2003, 881 in the year to June 2004, 488 in the year to May
    2005 and 410 to May 2006.  No member of the security  forces  had  been
    punished for any of these violations.  Dr Giustozzi said that as far as
    the security forces were concerned information had become available  on
    the NDS (Afghan Security Service) over the last  year  which  confirmed
    that their activities remained characterised by widespread abuses.

16. Dr Giustozzi said that given the extremely bad  security  situation  in
    Baghlan the appellant would have to  relocate  to  a  major  city  like
    Kabul.  He would be unlikely to face a specific security risk in  Kabul
    but would experience very  serious  personal  difficulties  in  finding
    accommodation and a job.  Unemployment was estimated varyingly  at  40%
    to 70%.  The population of Kabul had doubled in twelve months,  due  to
    the massive return of refugees from Pakistan and  rents  shot  up  from
    2002 to 2004.  Four to six fold increases were reported to  have  taken
    place over the last eighteen months.  In May 2007 rents had moved  even
    higher as the building industry failed to  meet  demand.   Poor  Afghan
    families coped with the situation by  sharing  one  or  two  rooms  and
    relying on more than one income to pay the cost.  Given the appellant's
    educational skills and knowledge acquired in Britain he might well rise
    up the social ladder relatively soon, although in  his  case  he  would
    also be likely  to  stand  out  and  attract  the  attention  of  Sunni
    religious extremists.  (This seems to be at odds with his opinion  that
    the appellant would experience very serious  personal  difficulties  in
    finding accommodation and a job.) Although  he  had  been  out  of  the
    country for almost seven years he did not think that this would have  a
    major impact on his personal situation.  He said  that  to  the  extent
    that there was hostility and harassment of Ismailis, he would of course
    be affected regardless.  His allegiance to Sayed  Mansur  Nadiri  would
    still be a problem if he  returned  to  Baghlan  because  it  would  be
    assumed that his return was politically motivated.  In Kabul his  links
    to Sayed Mansur Nadiri would not cause a direct threat to him.

The submissions on behalf of the appellant

17. Mr Symes began his address to us by reminding us of the relevant  facts
    in  relation  to  the  appellant's  activities   and   experiences   in
    Afghanistan.  He then turned to Dr Giustozzi's  report.   He  drew  our
    attention to the qualifications and expertise of Dr Giustozzi, pointing
    to the length of time that Dr Giustozzi had spent in  Afghanistan,  the
    papers that he had  presented  and  his  standing  with  the  Tribunal,
    drawing our attention to the statement made in PM and  Others  (PM  and
    Others (Kabul - Hizb-i-Islami) Afghanistan CG [2007]  UKAIT  00089)  to
    the effect that the Tribunal had received  extremely  helpful  evidence
    from  him,  that  he  had  spent  a  considerable  amount  of  time  in
    Afghanistan and only recently returned from there and that  both  sides
    accepted that factually  he  was  an  extremely  helpful  and  reliable
    witness.  He drew our  attention  to  passages  in  the  report  of  Dr
    Giustozzi which described the Ismaili community in Afghanistan and  the
    physical characteristics of Hazaras.  He submitted  that  Dr  Giustozzi
    seemed to be saying that the appellant would have  the  worst  of  both
    worlds.  He drew our attention to background material which showed that
    Ismaili Shias were  estimated  to  make  up  2%  of  the  total  Muslim
    population in Afghanistan.  That  was  a  matter  referred  to  by  the
    adjudicator in paragraph  21  of  his  determination  by  reference  to
    paragraph 6.80 of the then current CIPU.  He referred  us  to  the  IAS
    Research Analysis which set out extracts of various items of background
    material, particularly in relation to the situation of Hazaras.

18. He referred us to a section  in  the  analysis  which  quoted  from  an
    article in the New York Times dated 13th December 2001 which  described
    the fighting between troops loyal to Sayed Jaffar  Nadiri,  the  former
    governor of Baghlan province,  and  forces  of  the  Northern  Alliance
    stationed in Pull-i-Khumri in December 2001.   The  article  said  that
    Sayed Jaffar Nadiri's family  not  only  were  feudal  leaders  of  the
    Ismaili people in Afghanistan but traditionally their family  had  held
    the position of governor of Pull-i-Khumri.  Sayed  Mansur  Nadiri,  the
    leader of Afghanistan's Ismaili community, lived abroad and filled  the
    role of governor when the Northern Alliance was in power  between  1992
    and 1996.  Sayed Jaffar Nadiri was  his  American  educated  son.   The
    article said that he did not present a great military threat.  It  said
    that he was no battle hardened warlord and his bid for power  had  been
    swiftly crushed.

19. Mr Symes referred us to a RefWorld query and response, dated 7th  April
    2004, which quoted a Guardian newspaper article which  stated  that  an
    expert noted that Nadiri's forces drew their  numbers  from  the  small
    Ismaili community in Baghlan.  For the most part  smaller  ethnic-based
    militias in Afghanistan, such as  Nadiri's,  tended  to  remain  within
    their traditional region of control,  unless  there  was  a  compelling
    reason for them to fight.  The expert pointed out that Baghlan province
    did not border Kabul and  that  the  community  of  Ismailis  in  Kabul
    comprise only a small number of families, not enough to draw Nadiri and
    his fighters to Kabul in order to establish influence and/or defend the
    Ismailis there.  The article quoted  an  expert  saying  that  Baghlan,
    particularly the Pull-i-Khumri area, was a strategically important area
    in regard to travel through the north of the country.  The expert  said
    that General Dostom was likely to require some kind  of  alliance  with
    the Nadiris in order to move freely  through  the  Pull-i-Khumri  area.
    The expert said that while Sayed Jaffar Nadiri was an important  leader
    in the Northern Alliance  and  that  "certainly  no  Northern  Alliance
    leader is blameless" in supporting, committing and/or permitting  human
    rights abuses in Afghanistan, he had not heard that  the  Ismailis  had
    been involved in Dostom's more notorious purges of Taliban fighters  or
    Pashtun civilians in areas such  as  Kabul,  Mazar-i-Sharif  and  other
    areas heavily populated by Pashtuns.   Mr  Symes  submitted  that  this
    showed that the influence of Nadiri was local  but  that  the  area  in
    which he operated was not  merely  a  rural  area  but  a  location  of
    strategic importance.

20. Mr Symes also drew our attention to paragraph 8.64 of the  COIS  Report
    which said that an UNHCR security update on 23rd June 2008  noted  that
    Baghlan was among  the  areas  in  the  north-west  and  north-east  of
    Afghanistan which were assessed as being insecure.

21. In relation to the evidence of the attitude towards Ismailis  Mr  Symes
    drew our attention to an excerpt from an article whose source  was  the
    Library of Congress  Studies  (1997),  taken  from  About.com  entitled
    "Agnosticism/Atheism, Religion in  Afghanistan,  Ismailis  undated"  in
    which it was said that the Ismaili communities in Afghanistan were less
    populous than the Imami who considered the  Ismailis  heretical.   They
    were found primarily in and near the eastern Hazarajat in  the  Baghlan
    area north of the Hindu Kush, among the mountain  Tajik  of  Badakhshan
    and among the Wakhi in the Wakhan  Corridor.   The  article  said  that
    Ismailis in Afghanistan were generally regarded with suspicion  by  the
    ethnic groups and for the most part  their  economic  status  was  very
    poor.  Although Ismailis in other areas such as the northern  areas  of
    Pakistan operated well-organised social  welfare  programmes  including
    schools, hospitals and cooperatives, little had been done among  Afghan
    Ismaili  communities.   He  drew  our  attention  to   a   Radio   Free
    Europe/Radio Liberty article, dated 7th August 2007,  entitled  "Hazara
    Minority Becomes Unlikely Success Story in Afghanistan" which  referred
    to the liberation of the Hazara minority post-Taliban Afghanistan.  The
    article said that  Hazaras  were  now  members  of  President  Karzai's
    cabinet, provincial governors and had access to higher education.   The
    article went on to quote a Herat University  Professor  who  said  that
    years of abuse by the Taliban ensured  that  the  Hazaras  would  never
    reconcile with the Taliban.  Mr Symes submitted that that did not  mean
    that Hazaras would not have problems with Taliban who were now  on  the
    rise.

22. He drew our attention to a Voice of America  News  report,  dated  30th
    November 2008, in connection with the resurgence of the Taliban,  which
    stated that Afghanistan had experienced a surge in Taliban attacks this
    year but in Kabul in recent months locals  expressed  as  much  concern
    over a rise in criminal activity as terrorist attacks.  Kabul's  police
    chief told reporters that there was solid  evidence  of  links  between
    some of  the  capital's  criminal  gangs  and  Taliban  militants.   He
    referred to  the  report  of  the  UN  Secretary  General,  dated  23rd
    September  2008,  which  stated  that  the   security   situation   had
    deteriorated markedly and the number of security incidents rose to  983
    in August, which was the highest since the fall of the Taliban in 2001.
     The influence of the  insurgency  had  expanded  beyond  traditionally
    volatile areas and had increased in provinces neighbouring  Kabul.   He
    referred to a BBC Monitoring South Asia Report,  dated  15th  September
    2008, which stated that the conflict had  escalated  unusually  as  the
    Taliban had arrived at Kabul's gates.

23. In relation to the question of state protection he referred to the COIS
    Report of August 2008 which quoted  an  Institute  for  War  and  Peace
    Reporting report, dated 1st June 2006, which stated that corruption was
    a growth industry for Afghanistan's police.  It reported the provincial
    governor of the northern province  of  Balkh  saying  that  high  level
    corruption in the police force meant that the  Balkh  authorities  were
    unable to provide security for residents.  An  Institute  for  War  and
    Peace Reporting article also said that Afghans brushed aside the notion
    that trained police  were  any  improvement  over  the  old  force  and
    analysts tended to agree, saying that despite the best efforts  of  the
    international community, the police system was riddled with  corruption
    and nepotism.  He referred to the COIS  Report  of  August  2008  which
    quoted from an article by Dr Giustozzi, dated  28th  June  2006,  which
    said that former warlords appointed as chiefs of police  would  appoint
    their own foot  soldiers  in  the  police,  who  therefore  were  often
    reappointed each time there was a change of power in  an  area.   As  a
    result there were few professional police and it was very difficult  to
    enforce standards or agree  crime  reporting  standards  -  hence  some
    sections in Kabul reported zero crime rates out of a  desire  to  avoid
    communicating bad news.  Mr Symes also referred to the report of the UN
    Secretary  General,  dated  23rd  September  2008,  which   said   that
    insufficient numbers of police officers and  a  lack  of  training  and
    equipment had contributed to  a  very  high  casualty  rate  among  the
    members of the Afghan National Police.  There were credible reports  of
    police  positions,  particularly  in   lucrative   transit   and   drug
    trafficking corridors being "sold" for large amounts of money.

24. In relation to internal relocation Mr Symes referred  us  to  paragraph
    20.20 of the COIS Report, dated August  2008,  which  showed  that  the
    Hazaras were physically  distinct  from  the  remaining  population  of
    Afghanistan.  He submitted  that  Dr  Giustozzi's  view  was  that  the
    appellant would not be able to keep a low profile to avoid  recognition
    by fundamentalists.  He referred to the US State Department Report  for
    2008 which said that Hazaras had  been  reported  being  asked  to  pay
    bribes at border crossings where Pashtuns were allowed to  pass  freely
    and the report of the UNHCR  (6th  October  2008)  which  identified  a
    number of districts in the province of Kabul  which  were  assessed  as
    being  insecure.   The  report  of  the  UNHCR  entitled   "Eligibility
    Guidelines for Assessing the International Protection Needs  of  Afghan
    Asylum-Seekers", dated 3rd January 2008,  stated  that  Afghans  relied
    upon traditional extended family and  community  structures  for  their
    safety and economic survival including access to accommodation  and  an
    adequate level of subsistence.  The protection provided by families and
    tribes was limited to areas where family or  community  links  existed.
    Mr  Symes  submitted  that,  as  for  the  Ismailis   in   Kabul,   the
    opportunities for assistance for the appellant would be limited.

25. In relation to material additional to that contained in the appellant's
    original bundle, Mr Symes drew our attention to an  Institute  for  War
    and Peace Reporting entitled "Afghan Police Part of the Problem", dated
    1st June 2006, which quoted  the  governor  acknowledging  in  Mazar-i-
    Sharif that much of the new Afghan  National  Police  was  made  up  of
    former Mujahideen.  He also referred us to  a  statement  by  Professor
    Philip Olston, a Special Rapporteur, who reported that an international
    military commander stated bluntly  that  the  police  in  his  area  of
    operations were corrupt and  predatory  and  that  the  people  had  no
    experience of the police delivering services.  He stated he examined  a
    recent incident in which police were alleged to have massacred a  group
    of men from a rival tribe.  He said the point was that  no-one  in  the
    government had any interest in investigating,  much  less  prosecuting,
    those responsible.

26. Mr Symes drew our attention to an Interpress Service News Agency Report
    titled "Afghanistan: Return of the Uzbek Warlord", dated 5th June 2007,
    which said that ugly riots and police  firing  which  resulted  in  the
    deaths of at least a dozen people in northern Jowzjan province  in  the
    last week of May, were being seen as signs of a rebellion  against  the
    government of President Hamid Karzai by the warlord General Abdorrashid
    Dostom and his Uzbek community.  Mr  Symes  submitted  any  association
    with General Dostom was likely to cause problems.

27. In relation to the law Mr Symes drew our attention to Article 7 of  the
    Qualification Directive (Council Directive 2004/83/EC) which said  that
    protection could be provided by the  state  parties  or  organisations,
    including international  organisations,  controlling  the  state  or  a
    substantial part of the territory of the state.  He submitted  that  it
    was questionable whether the state in  Afghanistan  was  in  meaningful
    control.  He submitted that the  police  militias  were  likely  to  be
    composed of people with whom the appellant had been fighting.

The submissions on behalf of the respondent

28. Mr Gulvin submitted that the way in which Mr Symes  had  developed  his
    case was that it was a combination of factors which demonstrated a real
    risk to the appellant.   Mr  Gulvin  expressed  great  regret  that  Dr
    Giustozzi had not appeared as an oral witness.  He said that it was  by
    agreement with the Home Office but he himself would  not  have  agreed.
    He submitted that the expert's review was well-founded  and  supportive
    of the view taken by the Secretary of State  but  there  were  elements
    that had been left in the air.  Mr Gulvin proceeded to address passages
    contained in the skeleton argument.  He noted that paragraph 8 referred
    to the determination of the Tribunal in No 32 v Secretary of State  for
    the Home Department [2002] UKIAT 08360, in which it was  accepted  that
    the policing in Kabul was essentially done by Jamiat militia.  He  said
    that the only  reference  to  the  composition  of  the  police  in  Dr
    Giustozzi's report was in paragraph 15, but that  was  limited  to  the
    makeup of the police in Pull-i-Khumri, which was dominated by Jamiat-i-
    Islami.  Mr Gulvin said that he was unable to find  in  the  background
    evidence any support for the proposition that Jamiat-i-Islami dominated
    the police in Kabul.  He questioned whether that could be so  now  that
    there was an Afghan police  force.   He  submitted  that  it  would  be
    surprising if the police in Kabul were  dominated  by  Jamiat  militia,
    having regard to passages in the COIR which  referred  to  the  efforts
    made to establish and reform the Afghan National Police.

29. Mr Gulvin drew our attention to paragraph  13  of  Mr  Symes'  skeleton
    argument in which it was asserted  that  the  appellant  was  prominent
    because of certain factors.  He had been personally invited  to  devote
    himself to spiritual leader Sayed Mansur Nadiri.  He  was  enlisted  to
    bring the Fidayan to fight the Jamiat  by  Sayed  Mansur  Nadiri's  son
    Jaffar. His prominent role was in relation to the  Nadiri  family,  who
    had long held  the  position  of  governor  of  Pull-i-Khumri.   Having
    discovered the  importance  of  the  Fidayan  from  their  intelligence
    services, the Jamiat killed some members of the  Fidayan  and  searched
    for the appellant, raiding his home several  times.   Baghlan  province
    remained of supreme strategic importance and was a  hotbed  of  tension
    and assessed by UNHCR as insecure.  Mr  Gulvin  pointed  out,  however,
    that in  paragraph  23  of  his  report  Dr  Giustozzi  said  that  the
    appellant's link to Mansur Nadiri would not cause a  direct  threat  to
    him in Kabul.  Mr Gulvin submitted that it was ludicrous  to  say  that
    the appellant had any prominence.  He submitted that if  the  appellant
    were to land in Kabul, not one person would know of him by his name and
    say to himself "There is a prominent person returning".

30. In the light of Dr Giustozzi's evidence that a person arriving in Kabul
    would not be able to keep his identity a secret, Mr  Gulvin  questioned
    what people would be able to find out about the appellant,  apart  from
    the fact that he had  been  a  moderately  important  official  in  the
    Ismaili sect six or seven years  before,  who  had  had  some  personal
    dealings with the Nadiri family and who led a modest group  called  the
    Fidayan, about which there were no reports in  any  of  the  background
    material.  Mr Gulvin submitted that having regard  to  the  appellant's
    education and background and given that the smattering of  Ismailis  in
    Kabul were the wealthiest and that the  Nadiri  family  might  also  be
    there, there was no reason to think that the appellant would not have a
    network of assistance.  It might very well be that he had  an  extended
    family.  The evidence was silent about that.  We knew that  his  father
    and brother had been killed but there was a reasonable likelihood  that
    he would have lines of assistance to  families  in  Kabul.   Mr  Gulvin
    submitted that there was no evidence of any personal prominence on  the
    part of the appellant.  He  might  be  associated  with  a  group  that
    extremist Sunnis did not like but that was all.  He submitted  that  in
    other country  guidance  cases  distinctions  had  been  drawn  between
    persons of high and low profile.  He conceded that  the  appellant  was
    somewhere in-between.  It would be wrong to describe the  appellant  as
    prominent.

31. Mr Gulvin drew our attention to the fifth paragraph of the head note of
    the determination of the Tribunal in RQ which was added to the list  of
    country guidance cases on 26th February 2008.  There it was  said  that
    where the risk to the particular appellant was  confined  to  his  home
    area, internal relocation to Kabul was in general available.   It  said
    that it would not be unduly  harsh  to  expect  an  appellant  with  no
    individual risk factors outside his home area  to  live  in  Kabul  and
    assist in the rebuilding of  his  country.   In  paragraph  109(7)  the
    Tribunal said that where there was individual risk  not  local  to  the
    home area, the safety of  internal  relocation  to  Kabul  would  be  a
    question of fact, based on the particular history  of  that  individual
    appellant and of the warlord or factions  seeking  to  harm  him.   The
    country  guidance  evidence  did  not  as  yet  suggest  that  domestic
    protection in Kabul was sufficient to  meet  the  Horvath  (Horvath  v.
    Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2000]  UKHL  37)  standard
    where an individualised risk existed.

32. Mr Gulvin submitted that it was important to judge whether there was an
    individual risk for the appellant.  He referred to paragraph 14 of  the
    skeleton argument which asserted that the appellant was  at  risk  from
    the Taliban because he  was  thought  of  sufficient  interest  by  the
    Taliban to warrant keeping  him  in  detention  and  then  under  house
    arrest. It was argued that the Taliban were now on the rise  again  and
    had a significant network in Baghlan and their presence created a  risk
    for the appellant from other forces who might  don  the  guise  of  the
    Taliban insurgency to  cover  their  activities  and  the  Taliban  had
    connections increasing influence in Kabul.  Mr  Gulvin  submitted  that
    there was no evidence whatsoever of any real risk from the  Taliban  in
    Kabul. The Taliban were guilty of some atrocities in Kabul but to  talk
    of a risk from the Taliban was wrong.  Mr  Gulvin  submitted  that  the
    only risk on the basis of Dr Giustozzi's report that the appellant  ran
    was from Sunni fundamentalists of which many were not  associated  with
    the Taliban.

33. Mr Gulvin referred to paragraph  15  of  the  skeleton  argument  which
    submitted that the appellant faced risk as an Ismaili. As  they  had  a
    very limited urban presence, the appellant would not be able to  secure
    protection since they suffered discrimination even from the Hazaras and
    they had been massacred by the Taliban in the past.  The Hazaras  would
    never be reconciled with the Taliban.  Sunni  fundamentalists  and  the
    rank and file of Jamiat-i-Islami would be hostile.  Mr Gulvin drew  our
    attention to paragraphs  12  and  18  of  Dr  Giustozzi's  report.   In
    paragraph 12 he said that the parties that held the real power in Kabul
    nowadays did not actively pursue a policy of discriminating against the
    Ismaili community as such and that in the cities there were no  reports
    of direct attacks or harassment of Ismailis.  He submitted  that  there
    was nothing to show there was any threat  to  the  appellant  by  being
    linked to Nadiri and there were no reports of attacks on Ismailis or on
    Hazaras.

34. In relation to the position of the appellant as a Hazara in paragraph 5
    of his report Dr Giustozzi said that it could not be said that  Hazaras
    were being discriminated against in Kabul, at  least  not  to  a  major
    extent.

35. In relation to the issue of what would happen if the appellant were  to
    move to Baghlan, Mr Gulvin submitted that there might be a greater risk
    to the appellant there than in Kabul but it was  not  possible  to  say
    that there would be a real risk based on the limited knowledge of  what
    the situation was like in Baghlan,  apart  from  the  evidence  of  the
    Taliban being more active  and  Baghlan  being  a  place  of  strategic
    importance.

36. In relation to other factors Mr Gulvin drew our attention to  paragraph
    18 of the skeleton argument in  which  it  was  said  that  the  Jamiat
    militia have had a policing role in Kabul.   He  submitted  that  "have
    had" was the correct way of putting  it.   It  was  asserted  that  the
    appellant could not avoid  detection  in  Kabul  but  Mr  Gulvin  asked
    rhetorically whether anybody in Jamiat-i-Islami would be interested  in
    him. In paragraph 18 of his report Dr Giustozzi said that  he  did  not
    think that  Jamiatis  would  actively  seek  him  out  in  Kabul.   The
    remaining question was whether the level of  risk  from  Sunni  zealots
    which Dr Giustozzi referred to in  paragraph  6  of  his  report  would
    amount to a real risk of serious harm. He submitted that it  would  not
    amount to a real risk.

37. Mr Gulvin conceded that there was unemployment in  Kabul  but  we  were
    dealing with a former medical student who had spent seven years in  the
    United Kingdom and was highly  educated.   Those  qualifications  would
    help him to get a job above the menial level.  Mr Gulvin submitted that
    he had not been able to find a case where it had been decided that,  in
    the absence of risk in Kabul, relocation there would be unduly harsh or
    amount to a breach of a person's rights under article 3  of  the  ECHR.
    Mr Gulvin submitted that if  Nadiri  was  able  to  be  safe  then  the
    appellant would be safe.

The submissions on behalf of the appellant in reply

38. In reply Mr Symes said that it was not easy to  work  out  the  precise
    composition of the police force now.  He submitted, however,  that  the
    report of the IWPR, dated 1st  June  2006,  referred  to  in  the  COIS
    Report, did quote the provincial governor of the northern  province  of
    Balkh saying that much of the new Afghan National Police was made up of
    former Mujahideen.  In relation to the issue of whether  the  appellant
    was prominent or not, he submitted that he was an  interesting  person.
    His role in the Fidayan would have raise eyebrows  in  Afghanistan.  In
    relation to the risk  to  the  appellant  from  Sunni  extremists,  the
    expert's report made inferences.  Dr Giustozzi was entitled to  express
    an opinion as an expert and  was  not  obliged  to  draw  attention  to
    particular items of background evidence.  Although the appellant was at
    medical school he was young when he left.  In relation to the issue  of
    family links,  there  had  been  cases  where  the  Tribunal  found  an
    appellant was not credible but it would be difficult to establish  that
    he could not relocate.  In  this  appeal  the  appellant  was  entirely
    credible.  His brother and father had  been  killed.   There  were  few
    Ismailis who lived in urban areas.  The  appellant  was  not  obviously
    well off and it would be amazing if he had any family in Kabul.

Our conclusions

39. By virtue of paragraph 23 of  the  Tribunal's  Practice  Directions  we
    treat the grounds of appeal as including grounds that the appellant  is
    entitled to humanitarian protection under paragraph 339C of HC 395,  as
    amended.  Mr Symes did not suggest that  if  the  appellant  failed  to
    succeed in his asylum grounds of appeal there was any basis upon  which
    his humanitarian protection claim  or  his  human  rights  claim  under
    article 3 of the ECHR could succeed.  Therefore we regard the issue  in
    this appeal as being whether the appellant  can  show  that  there  are
    reasonable  grounds  for  believing  that  if  he  were   returned   to
    Afghanistan there would be a real risk that  he  would  suffer  serious
    harm for a Refugee Convention reason so as to entitle  him  to  refugee
    status. In reaching our decision we have taken account of  all  of  the
    evidence placed before us whether specifically mentioned or not.

A short appraisal of the expert evidence and background material

40.   The reports of Dr Giustozzi are generally held in high regard  by  the
    Tribunal.  In this particular appeal there is much in his report  which
    is not contentious.  We find his general analysis of  the  position  of
    persons of Hazara ethnicity and of the  Ismaili  faith  reliable.   The
    issues appear to be limited to whether the appellant would be at a real
    risk of serious harm on return to his own home area of Afghanistan  and
    whether, if so, it would be unduly harsh to expect him to  relocate  to
    Kabul.

41.   After the hearing we were sent written post-hearing submissions by  Mr
    Symes in which he suggested that Mr Gulvin had wrongly argued  that  we
    should give less weight to the report of Dr Giustozzi  as  he  did  not
    attend the hearing and give oral evidence, given  that  the  respondent
    had not opposed his non-attendance. It was open to  Mr  Symes  to  make
    these submissions in his  reply  to  Mr  Gulvin's  submissions  at  the
    hearing and therefore we propose to disregard  them.  We  do,  however,
    share with Mr Gulvin his disappointment that Dr Giustozzi was not  able
    to give oral evidence before us.  This is because there  is  a  certain
    lacuna in his report.  We find the picture presented  by  Dr  Giustozzi
    relating to what  would  be  the  appellant's  position  on  return  to
    Afghanistan not to be satisfactory  in  some  respects.   A  number  of
    unanswered questions arise from his report.  Since in paragraph  23  of
    his report he said allegiance to Mansur Nadiri would still be a problem
    if he returned to Baghlan because it would be assumed that  his  return
    would be politically motivated, we understand him  to  be  saying  that
    because  of  increased  tensions  in   Baghlan,   notwithstanding   the
    concentration of Ismaili Hazaras there  and  notwithstanding  the  fact
    that Sayed Jaffar Nadiri  represents  the  inhabitants  in  parliament,
    nonetheless his return would be a sign of renewed effort on the part of
    Nadiri to seize control from Jamiat forces,  which  would  attract  the
    adverse attention of Jamiat-i-Islami.  He has  not  explained  why  the
    appellant's arrival would have this effect when apparently the  renewed
    political activity of Sayed Jaffar Nadiri himself has not had the  same
    effect.

42.   In relation to the issue of internal relocation, the  evidence  of  Dr
    Giustozzi  that  the  appellant  would  be  at   a   serious   personal
    disadvantage in Kabul, as will be seen, seems to be inconsistent with a
    previously expressed general opinion of his, referred to in the COIR.

43.   Therefore while we accept that in general  terms  any  opinion  of  Dr
    Giustozzi is entitled to considerable respect, we have not hesitated to
    disagree with his opinion where it seems  to  us  that  there  is  good
    reason to do so.

44.   The background material  presented  to  us  overall  paints  a  fairly
    consistent picture in relation to the issues we have had to  determine.
    Those reports which we have quoted are from reputable sources, which we
    therefore feel able to accept. This is not  a  case  where  each  party
    relies upon background evidence not in step with that  relied  upon  by
    the other.  The resolution of  the  issues  which  we  have  identified
    require conclusions to be drawn from the background material which to a
    large extent is "all one way", in the  light  of  those  parts  of  the
    report of Dr Giustozzi which we feel able to accept.

The situation of Hazaras in Afghanistan

45. Paragraph 20.20 of COIR dated 29th August 2008 says this:

            "There are approximately 2.8  million  Hazaras  in  Afghanistan
        (CIA World Factbook 2007).   They  were  once  the  largest  Afghan
        ethnic group constituting nearly 67% of the total population of the
        state before the 19th century.  More than half  were  massacred  in
        1893 when their autonomy was lost as a result of political  action.
        Today they constitute approximately 9% of  the  Afghan  population.
        The origin of Hazara are (sic) much debated, the word Hazara  means
        'thousand' in Persian  but  given  the  Hazaras  features,  current
        theory supports their decent from Mongol soldiers  left  behind  by
        Genghis Khan in the 13th century.

            The majority of Hazaras live in Hazarajat (or Hazarestan), land
        of the Hazara, which is situated in the rugged central  mountainous
        core of Afghanistan with an area of approximately  50,000  sq.  km,
        with others living in the Badakhshan mountains.  In  the  aftermath
        of Kabul's campaign against them in the  late  19th  century,  many
        Hazaras settled  in  western  Turkestan,  in  JauzJan  and  Badghis
        provinces.  Ismaili Hazaras, a smaller  religiously  differentiated
        group of Hazaras live in the Hindu Kush mountains.  The most recent
        two decades of  war  have  driven  many  Hazaras  away  from  their
        traditional heartland to live on the fringes of the state in  close
        proximity to Iran and Pakistan.  There is also a large cross-border
        community of Hazaras who make up an influential ethnic group in the
        Pakistani border city of Quetta."

46. Paragraph 20.21 says that at national level Hazaras  tend  to  be  more
    progressive  concerning  women's  rights  to   education   and   public
    activities.  Educated Hazara women, in  particular  ones  who  returned
    from exile in Iran, are as active as men in civic and political arenas.
     Hazara families are eager to educate their daughters.  U.N.  officials
    in Bamian, twenty miles to the east, say that  since  the  collapse  of
    Taliban rule in late 2001, aid agencies have scrambled to build schools
    and have succeeded in attracting qualified female teachers to meet  the
    demand.  Paragraph 20.24 quotes the Pakistan Tribune in a report on the
    position of Hazaras in Bamian, dated 29th July 2004, saying that  armed
    with a new  constitution  that  guaranteed  equal  rights  to  minority
    groups, Hazaras were engaged in an  intense  campaign  to  obtain  some
    power and lift themselves from the bottom of Afghan society.  Paragraph
    20.26 quotes the Institute for War and Peace  Reporting  in  a  report,
    dated 27th October 2004, saying this:

      "Hazaras are the third largest ethnic group in the  country,  and  now
         live mainly in the central and north of  the  country.   They  have
         historically suffered discrimination.  Yusuf Waezi, manager of  the
         main Hazara party, Hizb-e-Wahdat-e-Islami, said, 'Hazara people are
         the most oppressed community and their only job was being  porters.
         An Hazara child wasn't allowed to study more than the six grade [13
         years] and there wasn't any school in majority of  the  areas  this
         community lived in,' he said.  But  he  said  that  conditions  had
         improved significantly under the transitional  government.   'After
         the fall of the Taleban, the rights of  the  Hazara  people  became
         satisfactory,' he said."

47. A report of Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty entitled  "Hazara  Minority
    Becomes Unlikely Success Story in Afghanistan", dated 7th August  2007,
    says that an overlooked success  in  post-Taliban  Afghanistan  is  the
    liberation of the Hazara  minority,  who  suffered  discrimination  and
    ethnic cleansing under the Islamist militants' rule as reported by  the
    Christian Science Monitor on 6th August 2007 which quoted  Abdul  Arhad
    Farzan, a human rights activist saying, "The interim administration [in
    2001] was the start of a golden  period  for  Hazaras".   Centuries  of
    abuse  dissolved  into  opportunities;  now  Hazaras  were  members  of
    President Karzai's cabinet, provincial  governors  and  were  accessing
    higher education.  The rise of the Hazara community as one of the  most
    liberal Muslim sects in Afghanistan was viewed as a positive change  in
    Afghan society from a Western perspective.

48. In paragraph 5 of his  report  Dr  Giustozzi  stated  that  Hazaras  in
    general, regardless of their faith, had long been discriminated against
    in  Afghanistan  and  had  limited  access  to  jobs   in   the   state
    administration and in the armed forces and  to  higher  education.   In
    Kabul the large Hazara community was  the  poorest  among  the  various
    ethnic communities of the city.  Hazaras in Kabul were largely confined
    to menial jobs and were almost completely excluded  from  the  security
    services.  After 2001, however, the conditions of the Hazara  community
    in Afghanistan in general and in Kabul in particular greatly  improved;
    much of the new emerging intelligentsia and middle  class  was  Hazara,
    mainly because Hazaras invested  heavily  in  the  education  of  their
    offspring in the 1980s and 1990s and now reaped the  benefits  of  this
    strategy of survival.  He said it could not be said that  Hazaras  were
    being discriminated against in Kabul at least not to  a  major  extent.
    Although in paragraph 9 of his report Dr Giustozzi  said  that  outside
    Kabul Hizb-i-Wahdat and Jamiat-i-Islami had often  clashed  even  after
    the fall of the Taliban and Jamiat supported a number of small  parties
    and factions among the Hazaras which opposed Hizb-i-Wahdat, nonetheless
    we find that the effect of his opinion read  as  a  whole  and  of  the
    background material to which we have been referred is that a person  of
    Hazara ethnicity is not likely to be treated by  reason  of  that  fact
    alone in Afghanistan in a way which would amount to  persecution  or  a
    breach of his rights under article 3 of the ECHR.

The situation of Ismailis in Afghanistan

49. An article by Mumtaz Ali Tajjdin on Ismaili.net entitled  "Ismailis  in
    Afghanistan" accessed on 2nd December 2008 says that unofficially there
    are over 200,000 Ismailis in Badakhshan and the majority of the  people
    there were of Tajik ethnic origin.  Apart from Badakhshan almost 90% of
    the Ismailis in Afghanistan belonged to the Hazara ethnic  group  while
    2%  belonged  to  the  Tajik  ethnic  group.   A  report  from   Global
    Security.org on Baghlan accessed on 2nd December 2008 said that the Pir
    or leader of Afghan Ismailis comes from  the  Sayed  family  of  Kayan,
    located near Doshi, a small town at the northern  foot  of  the  Salang
    Pass in western Baghlan province.  They were  generally  regarded  with
    suspicion by other ethnic groups and for the most part  their  economic
    status was very poor.  In the 8th century their  leaders  rejected  the
    heir designated by the sixth Imam and chose  to  recognise  his  eldest
    son, Ismail, as the seventh Imam and the Shia community split into  two
    branches.

50. In paragraph 4 of his report Dr Giustozzi said that  the  few  Ismailis
    living in Kabul tended to be from the wealthiest  households  and  were
    not quite as vulnerable to discrimination. In paragraph 6 of his report
    he said that Ismaili Hazaras faced discrimination not just because they
    belonged to the Hazara ethnic group but also as Ismailis  even  at  the
    hands of their fellow Hazaras, who belonged to the  mainstream  Twelver
    Shia community.  He said among  Sunni  fundamentalists  of  all  brands
    there was a widespread dislike of Ismailis, which  sometimes  took  the
    form of an explicit invitation to violence.  He  pointed  to  the  fact
    that in 1998 when the Taliban took over the  province  of  Baglan  they
    carried out large-scale massacres of the local Ismaili population.   He
    went on to say in paragraph 7 of his  report  that  the  leadership  of
    Jamiat-i-Islami was not per se overtly hostile to Ismailis and at times
    reached local alliances with some Ismaili factions but within its  rank
    and file many had a more aggressive attitude  towards  Ismailis.   Many
    Ismailis were suspected by  many  Islamic  fundamentalists  of  leaning
    towards left wing or secular parties, which reinforced their  hostility
    towards them.  In paragraph 12 of his report  he  said  that  with  the
    important exception of Ittehad-i-Islami (Islamic  Union),  the  parties
    which held the real power in Kabul nowadays did not actively  pursue  a
    policy of discriminating against the Ismaili  community  as  such.   He
    went on to say that in the cities  there  were  no  reports  of  direct
    attacks or harassment of the Ismailis.  In fact our attention  was  not
    drawn to any reported attacks on Ismailis elsewhere in Afghanistan.

51. Although it is clear that Ismailis are resented by Sunni extremists and
    to a large extent, although  not  exclusively  as  we  shall  see,  are
    excluded from public office in Afghanistan, nonetheless on the evidence
    that has been placed before us we are not satisfied that it can be said
    that Ismailis as such face a real  risk  of  treatment  in  Afghanistan
    which amounts to persecution and/or a  breach  of  their  rights  under
    article 3 of the ECHR.

The Nadiri family

52. There are a number of items of  background  material  which  deal  with
    Sayed Mansur Nadiri and his son Sayed Jaffar Nadiri.  An  Afghannet.com
    report entitled "Nadiri, Sayed Jaffar", dated 9th September 2005,  says
    that Sayed Jaffar Nadiri is the son of Sayed Mansur Nadiri,  leader  of
    the Ismaili community in Pull-i-Khumri, Kayan  and  Dowshi  in  Baghlan
    province. The report makes it plain that he  was  allied  with  General
    Dostom's militias, serving under the Communist regime, but he  defected
    to the Mujahideen in 1992 and followed Dostom thereafter.  Sayed Mansur
    Nadiri used to be the governor  of  Baghlan.  A  Ref  World  query  and
    response, dated 7th April 2004, says that a 1993 Amnesty  International
    Report listed former Afghan  army  general,  Sayed  Jaffar  Nadiri,  as
    governor of Baglan province at that time.  The report says  information
    garnered by the RIC indicated that the Nadiri family was forced to flee
    from Baghlan during the reign of  the  Taliban  in  Afghanistan.   They
    lived in Uzbekistan while the Taliban were in power.  The  report  says
    that there were clear indications that Sayed Mansur Nadiri and his  son
    did form an alliance with Afghan general, Abdul Rashid Dostom,  who  at
    the time of the report was Deputy Defence Minister  in  Hamid  Karzai's
    interim government.  An article in  the  New  York  Times  entitled  "A
    Nation Challenged: Dissension; Anti-Taliban Factions Clash  in  North",
    dated 13th December 2001, states that Sayed Jaffar's  family  not  only
    were  feudal  leaders  of  the  Ismaili  people  in   Afghanistan   but
    traditionally their family had held the position of governor of Pull-i-
    Khumri.  Sayed Jaffar represented his father, Sayed Mansur,  who  lived
    abroad and filled the role of governor when the Northern  Alliance  was
    in power between 1992 and  1996.   It  is  plain  from  the  background
    evidence that the Nadiris failed in their attempt  to  seize  back  the
    governorship of Baglan province.   It  was  of  course  the  defeat  of
    Nadiri's forces  at  this  time  which  provided  the  reason  for  the
    appellant to leave Afghanistan and seek asylum in the United Kingdom.

53. Dr Giustozzi mentions his own personal involvement in the  preparations
    for the parliamentary elections of September 2005 when he  was  stopped
    by the state security and then by the police on his journey  to  Kayan.
    It is evident, however, from what he said in paragraph 14 of his report
    that under UN protection Nadiri was able to run in  the  elections  and
    emerge as the most voted for candidate in Baghlan obtaining  the  large
    majority of the Ismaili vote.  The final sentence of  paragraph  14  of
    his report says this:

      "As a result, the presence of the Nadiris and their followers was  re-
         established in Baglan."

54. In paragraph 18 of his report Dr Giustozzi said that the  Jamiatis  are
    happy to keep Nadiri's followers as weak as  possible  in  Baghlan  but
    they were not bent on persecuting them individually.  Therefore we  are
    not satisfied that an association with the Nadiri family would  attract
    a  risk  of  persecution  either  in  Baghlan  or  anywhere   else   in
    Afghanistan.

A summary of our general conclusions

55.   A person of Hazara ethnicity  or  of  the  Ismaili  faith  or  who  is
    associated with the Nadiri family is not likely to be at a real risk of
    serious harm in Afghanistan by reason of any of these factors alone  or
    a combination of any of them, although different  considerations  would
    apply if an Ismaili's own home area were to be in an area controlled by
    the Taliban, given the large scale  massacre  of  Ismailis  which  took
    place when the Taliban took over the province of Baghlan in  1998.   In
    such a case, however, he would ordinarily be safe in Kabul.

The appellant's case

The position of the appellant in his own home area of Afghanistan

56. In reaching our conclusions we have regard to  what  we  have  said  in
    paragraph 41 above,  about  the  absence  of  an  explanation  from  Dr
    Giustozzi as to why the appellant's arrival in  Baghlan  would  attract
    the adverse attention of Jamiat-i-Islami,  given  that  apparently  the
    renewed political activity of Sayed Jaffar Nadiri himself there has not
    had the same effect.

57. In paragraph 15 of his report Dr  Giustozzi  mentioned  the  increasing
    Taliban activity in  Baghlan  and  said  that  the  worsening  security
    situation in Baghlan contributed to raising tension  in  the  province.
    He said that the Afghan  police  in  Pull-i-Khumri  were  dominated  by
    Jamiat-i-Islami, that in sum the Baghlan  environment  remained  highly
    unstable with occasional flares of violence and particularly  weak  law
    enforcement and it was not recommended that the appellant return there,
    even if his family was likely to own property there.  In  paragraph  17
    he went on to say that in his view it was clear  that  there  would  be
    significant risks to the appellant if he returned  to  Baghlan.   Given
    that Dr Giustozzi has acknowledged that in the cities, one of which  of
    course is Pull-i-Khumri, where the Ismailis  have  an  urban  presence,
    there are no reports of direct attacks or harassment  of  Ismailis  and
    given that  the  Nadiris  have  re-established  themselves  in  Baghlan
    province, it is difficult to see precisely why the appellant  would  be
    at risk there having previously been an  associate  of  Nadiri  in  his
    quest to seize control of Baglan province. If Jaffar Nadiri is able  to
    take his seat in the Afghan parliament and represent his  constituents,
    it is difficult to see why the appellant himself would be at risk.

58. In these circumstances we are not satisfied that the appellant would be
    at a real risk of serious harm of he were to return  to  his  own  home
    area of Afghanistan.

Internal relocation

59. In case we are wrong in reaching the conclusion about it being safe for
    the appellant in his own home area of Afghanistan, we go on to consider
    the option of internal relocation. Dr Giustozzi has made it plain  that
    the Jamiatis would not seek the appellant out in Kabul and his links to
    Sayed Mansur Nadiri would not be the occasion of a direct threat to him
    there.  The only other risk identified by Dr Giustozzi  is  from  Sunni
    fundamentalists but, as he himself conceded, there was no  evidence  of
    attacks on Hazaras or Ismailis in Kabul and, as he stated in  paragraph
    22 of his of report, the appellant would not face a  specific  security
    risk in Kabul.  In these circumstances we are not satisfied  that  even
    if there were a real risk of serious harm to the appellant in  his  own
    home area of Afghanistan that risk would extend  to  Kabul.   In  these
    circumstances the issue of whether the appellant would be able to  seek
    adequate protection from the state authorities does not arise.

60. The remaining question, therefore, is whether it would be unduly  harsh
    for the appellant to relocate to Kabul.  Our  starting  point  in  this
    regard must be the determination of the Tribunal in RQ.   In  paragraph
    109(5) of their determination the Tribunal said this:

       "Internal  relocation  to  Kabul  is  not  in  principle  impossible.
         Conditions in Kabul are not pleasant but they do not  approach  the
         AH [Secretary of State for the Home Department v. AH (Sudan) &  Ors
         [2007] UKHL 49] level and unless there are particular  reasons  not
         to do so, it would not be unduly harsh to expect an appellant  with
         no individual profile to live in Kabul and assist in the rebuilding
         of his country."

61. In paragraph 22 of his report, as previously  mentioned,  Dr  Giustozzi
    indicated  that  the  appellant  would  have  very   serious   personal
    difficulties in finding accommodation and a job. Unemployment in  Kabul
    was high and rents had increased.   He  indicated  that  the  appellant
    would not have the option of sharing a room with members of his  family
    as he did not have a family in Kabul.  He would have to earn  a  living
    which would allow him to rent at least a room for himself, which seemed
    difficult in the current circumstances.  He said that as he would  have
    to operate in an environment where he was  not  networked  and  had  no
    friends or acquaintances and his family  would  command  no  particular
    respect, he would have to content himself  with  humble  and  low  paid
    jobs.  He said it  was  obvious  that  the  appellant  would  at  least
    initially not be able to relocate in any of the well-off neighbourhoods
    and that he  would  have  to  settle  in  the  poorest  suburbs,  where
    sanitation, electricity and running water were lacking.  He  said  that
    given his educational skills and  the  knowledge  he  had  acquired  in
    Britain, he might well rise  up  the  social  ladder  relatively  soon,
    though in that case he would also be likely to stand  out  and  attract
    the attention of Sunni religious extremists. We take the view that,  in
    the light of Dr Giustozzi's acknowledgement that  the  appellant  might
    well rise up the social ladder relatively soon, it was his opinion that
    the appellant would be able  to  surmount  the  difficulties  he  would
    encounter in finding accommodation and a job.  Even if this was not  in
    fact the underlying logic of his opinion, we take the view that this is
    in fact likely to be the case.

62. We cannot be satisfied that the appellant would have no  contacts  that
    he could use in Kabul.  As Mr Gulvin submitted, and we  accept,  it  is
    likely that Jaffar Nadiri has some sort of  presence  in  Kabul,  given
    that he was elected to the Loya Jirga.  The appellant's case is that he
    was personally invited by Sayed Mansur Nadiri to devote himself to  his
    service and was then appointed head of the Fidayan  Hassan  Sibah.   He
    had  direct  contact  with  Mr   Sayed   Mansur   Nadiri.    In   these
    circumstances, having regard to his loyalty to the Nadiris, we take the
    view that it is  likely  that  he  could  look  to  them,  directly  or
    indirectly,  for  assistance  in  re-establishing  himself  in   Kabul.
    Moreover paragraph 29.24 of the COIR dated 29th August  2008  quotes  a
    passage in a report  from  Dr  Giustozzi,  dated  26th  June  2006,  as
    follows:

      "A person with language skills, especially English, and a  good  level
         of education would have good prospects of finding  work  in  Kabul;
         otherwise only people like doctors  and  a  few  other  professions
         which are in short supply might expect to find work.  The unskilled
         will have  serious  difficulties,  because  the  returnees  to  the
         country are mostly of working age, unemployment is high  and  there
         is a recession which is beginning to hit the building  trade  which
         is the main source of employment for cheap labour."

63. It is perfectly evident to us that the appellant, having  been  in  the
    United Kingdom since May 2002 will have acquired skills in the  English
    language.  He has a good level of education because he  enrolled  as  a
    student at the Faculty of Medicine in the University in  Mazar-i-Sharif
    before he left to devote himself to the  service  of  Mr  Sayed  Mansur
    Nadiri.  In these circumstances we are satisfied  that  he  would  have
    good prospects of finding work in Kabul and we take the  view  that  it
    would not be unduly harsh to expect him to relocate there.

64. For the reasons  given,  therefore,  we  are  not  satisfied  that  the
    appellant would be at  a  real  risk  of  serious  harm  on  return  to
    Afghanistan and in these circumstances his appeal on asylum grounds, on
    humanitarian protection grounds  and  on  human  rights  grounds  under
    article 3 of the ECHR is dismissed.


Signed



Senior Immigration Judge Spencer




















                                 APPENDIX A

               LIST OF BACKGROUND MATERIAL BEFORE THE TRIBUNAL


|1    |Undated          |IAS Research Analysis                          |
|2    |Undated          |h) Civilian deaths                             |
|3    |Undated          |Ismaili.net: Ismailis in Afghanistan [Accessed:|
|     |                 |2 December 2008]                               |
|4    |Undated          |Globalsecurity.org: Baglan [Accessed: 2        |
|     |                 |December 2008]                                 |
|5    |Undated          |About.com: Agnosticism/Atheism, Religion in    |
|     |                 |Afghanistan, Ismailis [Accessed: 2 December    |
|     |                 |2008]                                          |
|6    |Undated          |Major Afghan Mujahideen Groups: A Profile      |
|     |                 |[Accessed: 2 December 2008]                    |
|7    |Undated          |Pediaview: Sayed Jaffar Nadiri [Accessed: 2    |
|     |                 |December 2008]                                 |
|8    |29 May 1997      |New York Times: Afghan Force Ousts Taliban From|
|     |                 |City in North                                  |
|9    |13 December 2001 |New York Times: A NATION CHALLENGED:           |
|     |                 |DISSENSION; Anti-Taliban Factions Clash in     |
|     |                 |North                                          |
|10   |16 December 2001 |New York Times: Afghanistan is famous for its  |
|     |                 |ancient ruins and its millions of ever present |
|     |                 |KILLER WASPS Can you dance the Ismaili?        |
|11   |9 August 2002    |IWPR: Local Hopes Riding on Khalili            |
|12   |11 October 2002  |IWPR: Badakhshis Change Allegiances            |
|13   |7 April 2004     |Ref World: Query and response, Afghanistan:    |
|     |                 |Information on Activities of Ismailis Loyal to |
|     |                 |Sayed Kayan                                    |
|14   |9 September 2005 |Afghanet.com: Nadiri, Sayed Jaffar             |
|15   |16 November 2005 |CACI Analyst: AFGHANISTAN'S ELECTIONS:         |
|     |                 |DEMOCRACY WITHOUT PARTIES?                     |
|16   |30 November 2005 |IWPR: Killing Sparks Fears of Unrest in North  |
|17   |30 January 2007  |Institute for War and Peace Reporting (UK): New|
|     |                 |Film Opens Old Wounds in Afghanistan           |
|18   |12 March 2007    |British Agencies Afghanistan Group (BAAG):     |
|     |                 |Afghanistan: Monthly Review February 2007      |
|19   |5 June 2007      |Inter Press Service News Agency (IPS):         |
|     |                 |Afghanistan: Return of the Uzbek Warlord       |
|20   |7 August 2007    |Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty: Hazara        |
|     |                 |minority becomes unlikely success story in     |
|     |                 |Afghanistan                                    |
|21   |11 August 2007   |RFE/RL: Suspicion High After Deadly Attack On  |
|     |                 |Afghan Lawmakers                               |
|22   |31 October 2007  |Statefailure.blog: Baghlan's Special Warlords  |
|23   |November 2007    |Al Jazeera: Afghanistan mourns bomb victims    |
|24   |8 November 2007  |Asia Times Online: Afghanistan rocked by       |
|     |                 |northern bombing                               |
|25   |29 November 2007 |Austrian Centre for Country of Origin and      |
|     |                 |Asylum Research and Documentation (ACCORD):    |
|     |                 |Country Report: Afghanistan (Excerpt)          |
|26   |3 January 2008   |United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees  |
|     |                 |(UNHCR): UNHCR's Eligibility Guidelines for    |
|     |                 |Assessing the International Protection Needs of|
|     |                 |Afghan Asylum-Seekers (Excerpt)                |
|27   |18 February 2008 |Integrated Regional Information Networks News  |
|     |                 |(IRIN): Afghanistan: Kuchi nomads seek a better|
|     |                 |deal                                           |
|28   |2 June 2008      |Voice of America News: Afghan Refugees Return  |
|     |                 |Home to Uncertain Future                       |
|29   |8 July 2008      |The Independent (London): Kabul suicide bomber |
|     |                 |kills 41 in worst attack since fall of Taliban;|
|     |                 |Suspicion falls on Pakistani intelligence after|
|     |                 |embassy blast                                  |
|30   |24 July 2008     |Inter Press Service News Agency (IPS):         |
|     |                 |Afghanistan: Taliban Encroach On Karzai's Turf |
|31   |27 July 2008     |San Francisco Chronicle: Returning Afghans     |
|     |                 |survive in tent camps                          |
|32   |3 August 2008    |The New York Times: As the Fighting Swells in  |
|     |                 |Afghanistan, So Does a Refugee Camp in Its     |
|     |                 |Capital                                        |
|33   |13 August 2008   |BBC: Taleban at Kabul's doorstep               |
|34   |14 August 2008   |Inter Press Service News Agency (IPS):         |
|     |                 |Afghanistan: Security Fears Paralyse Kabul     |
|35   |19 August 2008   |BBC: Life in Afghanistan: City life (Excerpt)  |
|36   |29 August 2008   |Global Insight: Afghan Military Assumes Control|
|     |                 |over Security in Capital                       |
|37   |29 August 2008   |UK Home Office Country of Origin Information   |
|     |                 |Service: Afghanistan COI Report August 2008    |
|     |                 |(Excerpt)                                      |
|38   |8 September 2008 |Integrated Regional Information Networks News  |
|     |                 |(IRIN): Afghanistan: Minister disputes call to |
|     |                 |boost refugee returns                          |
|39   |15 September 2008|BBC Monitoring South Asia: Weekly wants urgent |
|     |                 |change of US strategy on Afghanistan           |
|40   |19 September 2008|US Department of State: International Religious|
|     |                 |Freedom Report 2008: Afghanistan               |
|41   |22 September 2008|Inter Press Service News Agency (IPS):         |
|     |                 |Afghanistan: Severe Hunger Can Help Taliban    |
|42   |23 September 2008|United Nations: The situation in Afghanistan   |
|     |                 |and its implications for international peace   |
|     |                 |and security: Report of the Secretary-General  |
|43   |1 October 2008   |HJT Research: US general says insurgents are   |
|     |                 |gaining in Afghanistan                         |
|44   |6 October 2008   |United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees  |
|     |                 |(UNHCR): Afghanistan Security Update Relating  |
|     |                 |to Complementary Forms of Protection           |
|45   |14 October 2008  |IRIN: Medical waste poses health risk in urban |
|     |                 |areas                                          |
|46   |14 October 2008  |United Nations News: Top UN envoy warns deadly |
|     |                 |Afghan attacks on increase as situation worsens|
|47   |20 October 2008  |United Nations News: Current crises threaten to|
|     |                 |plunge more Afghans into poverty, warns UN     |
|     |                 |official                                       |
|48   |24 October 2008  |INSI, (International News Service Institute):  |
|     |                 |Afghanistan - Security, AKE Security Briefing  |
|49   |25 October 2008  |Voice of America News: Three Shot Dead in      |
|     |                 |Afghan Capital                                 |
|50   |28 October 2008  |Internal Displacement Monitoring Centre        |
|     |                 |(Norwegian Refugee Centre): Afghanistan:       |
|     |                 |Increasing hardship and limited support for    |
|     |                 |growing displaced population (Excerpt)         |
|51   |30 October 2008  |Voice of America News: Taliban Claims          |
|     |                 |Responsibility for Kabul Suicide Bomb          |
|52   |3 November 2008  |Voice of America News: Foreign Aid Worker      |
|     |                 |Kidnapped, Afghan Killed in Kabul              |
|53   |3 November 2008  |Amnesty International: Afghanistan, Amnesty    |
|     |                 |International Submission to the UN Universal   |
|     |                 |Periodic Review: Fifth session of the UPR      |
|     |                 |Working Group of the Human Rights Council      |
|54   |10 November 2008 |United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees  |
|     |                 |(UNHCR): Afghanistan at the crossroads:        |
|     |                 |Drought, food crisis drive Afghans out of      |
|     |                 |villages                                       |
|55   |17 November 2008 |Voice of America News: Afghanistan's Taliban   |
|     |                 |Reject Offer for Peace Talks                   |
|56   |18 November 2008 |EurasiaNet: Afhganistan: Refugee Returns Should|
|     |                 |No Longer Be A Cause For Celebration In Kabul  |
|57   |18 November 2008 |United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees  |
|     |                 |(UNHCR): Afghanistan at the crossroads: Invest |
|     |                 |in Afghan returns or risk further displacement,|
|     |                 |cautions UNHCR                                 |
|58   |27 November 2008 |Voice of America News: Car Bomb Kills 4 Near US|
|     |                 |Embassy in Kabul                               |
|59   |27 November 2008 |International Rescue Committee (USA): Press    |
|     |                 |Release - Afghanistan: Aid Agencies Ask the UN |
|     |                 |Security Council for Assistance to Reach       |
|     |                 |Communities and Avoid Humanitarian Crisis      |
|60   |30 November 2008 |Voice of America News: Suicide Bomber Kills 3  |
|     |                 |in Afghan Capital                              |
|61   |26 June 2009     |UK Home Office Country of Origin Information   |
|     |                 |Service: Afghanistan COI Report June 2009      |




