

       TT (Long residence - "continuous residence" - interpretation) British
                                         Overseas Citizen [2008] UKAIT 00038


Asylum and Immigration Tribunal


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard at Field House                          |
|On 8 February 2008                            |
|                                              |



                                   Before

                       SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE ALLEN
                      SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE SOUTHERN


                                   Between

                                     TT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M S Gill QC, instructed by Harvey Son & Filby,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Smart, Home Office Presenting Officer


For the purpose of paragraphs 276A - 276D of HC 395, a period of  continuous
residence, as defined in paragraph 276A(a), is not broken  in  circumstances
where a person with leave to remain in the United  Kingdom  obtains  further
leave from an Entry Clearance Officer while temporarily outside  the  United
Kingdom prior to the expiry of the leave to remain. The IDI  Chapter  18  on
Long Residence at paragraph 2.1.3 neither binds the Tribunal nor states  the
position correctly.
                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a British national (Overseas) citizen.   She  appealed
    to an Immigration Judge against the Secretary of State's decision of 17
    October 2007 to refuse to vary leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom.
    The appellant had applied for indefinite leave to remain on the grounds
    of long residence in the United Kingdom.

2.   The Immigration Judge set  out  the  appellant's  immigration  history.
    She was born on 5 August 1984.  She came to the United Kingdom for  the
    purpose of her education on 10 January 1997 with leave to  enter  until
    30 June 1997.  Thereafter she has continued her studies in  the  United
    Kingdom with periods of return at various times to Hong Kong  over  the
    ensuing ten years.

3.   The essential issue  in  this  case  concerns  what  was  said  by  the
    Secretary of State regarding breaks in  the  continuity  of  residence.
    Essentially, on both of these occasions, respectively in 2003 and 2006,
    the appellant left the United Kingdom with leave to remain, which leave
    expired whilst she was out of the country, and she  obtained  leave  to
    enter from the Entry Clearance Officer in Hong Kong prior to  returning
    to the United Kingdom.  There is no question, therefore, of her  having
    ever entered the United  Kingdom  without  leave.   On  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State it was argued that because she had not  returned  on
    those two occasions with the same leave which she had when she left the
    United Kingdom, there was a break in continuity and therefore she could
    not satisfy the requirements of the ten year rule.

4.    The  Immigration  Judge  gave  consideration  to  this   argument   at
    paragraphs 22 - 25 of his determination.  He concluded,  firstly  as  a
    consequence of his interpretation of the wording of the  relevant  sub-
    paragraph of paragraph 276A of HC 395, which is set out below, and also
    as a consequence of what was said at paragraph 2.1.3 of the Immigration
    and Nationality Directorate's Instruction Chapter 18 of Long  Residence
    dated 4 May 2007, that the decision was in accordance with the law  and
    the Immigration Rules and there had been the two breaks  in  continuity
    as contended for by the Secretary of State.  He also gave consideration
    to an Article 8 claim and concluded that Article  8  was  not  engaged,
    setting out his reasoning at paragraph 26 of the determination.

5.    The  appellant  sought  reconsideration,  arguing  that  on  a  proper
    interpretation of paragraph 276A of HC 395 there had been no  break  in
    continuity.  The interpretation placed on the Rule by  the  Immigration
    Judge was, it was argued, not in accordance with the actual wording  of
    the Rule which was said to be specific and exhaustive, and also,  leave
    to remain was said to lapse only if a person left the United Kingdom in
    circumstances specified in the statute and it would be inimical to  the
    statutory intention to imply other circumstances where leave to  remain
    would lapse.  Reconsideration was ordered by a Senior Immigration Judge
    on the basis of the matters set out in the grounds.

6.   The hearing before us took place on 8 February 2008.  Mr M S  Gill  QC,
    instructed by Harvey Son & Filby, Solicitors, appeared on behalf of the
    appellant.  Mr N Smart appeared on behalf of the Secretary of State.

7.   Mr Gill provided us with  a  supplementary  note  to  the  grounds  for
    reconsideration, and also a copy of the decision of the House of  Lords
    in Ghaidan v Godin-Mendoza(FC) [2004] UKHL 30.

8.   Mr Gill relied upon and developed the points made in  the  grounds  and
    in his supplementary note.  He argued that all was  needed  was  for  a
    person in the appellant's position  to  have  leave  at  the  point  of
    departure and leave at the point of return, and that they did not  have
    to have the same leave continuing to cover both periods.   He  referred
    to  paragraph  2  of  his  note  as  to  the  relevant   interpretative
    principles.  The Immigration Rules were not akin to a  statute  and  it
    was appropriate for there  to  be  a  purposive  interpretation.   With
    regard to the submissions that were likely  to  be  made  by  Mr  Smart
    concerning the decision of the Court of Appeal in Ishtiaq  v  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department [2007] EWCA Civ 386, Mr Gill relied on
    paragraph 31 in that judgment concerning the proper purposive approach.
      An  interpretation  consistent  with  human  rights  principles   was
    required, as had been  said  by  the  House  of  Lords  in  Ghaidan  at
    paragraphs 31 and 32.  This was so much more the case  with  regard  to
    rules of practice such as those involved in this case.

9.   Mr Gill argued that it was not a matter of  finding  the  Rules  to  be
    ultra vires.  It was a question of assessing the proper purpose of  the
    Rule.  The old concession reflected the purpose.  It was clear from the
    decision of the Tribunal in OS [2006] UKAIT 00031 that  the  concession
    continued side-by-side with the Rule, but the  concession  was  removed
    after  the  decision  in  OS.   The  language  of  the  Rule  was   not
    unambiguous.  Paragraph 276A had to be read as a whole.  There  was  no
    requirement in the Rule that a person had to have the same leave before
    and after the period when they left the United Kingdom.  There was  not
    even an ambiguity therefore within the Rule.

10.  In the alternative, it might  be  argued  that  the  Tribunal  had  the
    jurisdiction to find the  Rule  ultra  vires.   That  would  need  more
    detailed submissions and it was understood that a case was  shortly  to
    be heard by the Tribunal exploring this issue.

11.  Otherwise there was  a  question  of  Article  8.   The  appellant  had
    clearly developed a private life in the time she had been in the United
    Kingdom, and the Immigration Judge's assessment of this at paragraph 26
    of the determination was flawed since although what was said there  was
    true, it did not address the issue of interference with the  particular
    private life of the appellant.

12.  In his submissions, Mr Smart argued  that  if  the  Tribunal  disagreed
    with the Immigration Judge, this would amount to  a  finding  that  the
    Rule was ultra vires.  He argued that there was  in  fact  no  material
    error of law in the determination.  The Immigration Judge  was  clearly
    entitled to attach weight to the use of the  word  "and"  in  paragraph
    276A(a).  He referred to the sixth edition of  Macdonald's  Immigration
    Law and Practice at page 37 to page 38, where it was said, quoting from
    Pearson v Immigration Appeal Tribunal [1978] IAR 212, that although the
    Immigration Rules were not delegated legislation or Rules of Law,  they
    were Rules of Practice laid down for the guidance  of  those  entrusted
    with the administration of the Immigration Act 1971, and had the  force
    of law for those hearing immigration appeals.  In Ishtiaq was  set  out
    the legal basis for the Rules and the IDIs also and how they were to be
    treated.  He relied on paragraph 58 in Ishtiaq where it  was  expressly
    said that the AIT had no  power  to  declare  paragraph  289A(iv),  the
    provision under consideration in that case,  to  be  ultra  vires.   Mr
    Smart accepted that this was an issue being debated at the moment,  but
    contended that this authority was of weight on the  point.   He  argued
    that there was no ambiguity in  the  Rule  and  therefore  he  had,  in
    effect, already dealt with the  issues  of  the  proper  interpretative
    approach and the human rights approach.  Although the IDIs did not have
    the force of law, they provided guidance for case workers and  for  the
    Tribunal.

13.  As regards Article 8, Mr Smart accepted the private  life  element  but
    argued that there was no error in the Immigration Judge's assessment at
    paragraph 26 of the  determination.   There  was  also  a  question  of
    whether if the appeal was allowed under Article 8 what relief would  be
    provided.   A  person  would  normally  get  a  three  year  period  of
    discretionary leave, but in this case  the  application  had  been  for
    indefinite leave to remain.  In any event there was no  material  error
    of law in the determination.

14.  By way of reply, Mr Gill said, with reference  to  the  quotation  from
    Macdonald, that it was not disputed that the Immigration Rules could be
    treated as a source of law,  but  that  did  not  take  the  issue  any
    further.  The Rules were not delegated legislation or rules of law of a
    normal sort.  He  disagreed  with  Mr  Smart's  argument  that  if  the
    Tribunal differed from the Immigration Judge that would have the effect
    of declaring  the  Rule  to  be  ultra  vires.   It  was  a  matter  of
    interpretation only.  The IDIs were  no  more  than  the  Secretary  of
    State's view and were of even less weight than the Rules.   Often  they
    had not been put in place at the time when the Rule was  placed  before
    Parliament under the negative resolution  procedure.   This  particular
    IDI was only introduced after  OS  was  promulgated  and  it  would  be
    necessary rather to look at the old long residence concession as  being
    the equivalent of the IDI at the time.  As  regards  Article  8,  there
    would be no reason why the Tribunal could not give  a  direction  under
    Section 87 of the 2002  Act  for  indefinite  leave  to  remain  to  be
    granted.  The Tribunal was in as good a  position  as  the  Immigration
    Judge to decide the Article 8 issue.

15.  We reserved our determination.

16.  This appeal raises a question of interpretation of  paragraph  276A  of
    HC 395, and it is therefore convenient if we set out  the  entirety  of
    that provision before going on to consider the proper  meaning  of  the
    Rule.


         "276A.   For the purposes of paragraphs 276B to 276D:

                  (a)  "continuous residence" means residence in the  United
                      Kingdom  for  an  unbroken  period,  and  for   these
                      purposes a period shall not  be  considered  to  have
                      been broken where an applicant  is  absent  from  the
                      United Kingdom for a period of 6 months  or  less  at
                      any one time, provided that the applicant in question
                      has existing limited leave to enter  or  remain  upon
                      their departure and return, but shall  be  considered
                      to have been broken if the applicant:

                      (i)  has been removed under Schedule 2  of  the  1971
                           Act,  Section  10  of  the  1999  Act,  has  been
                           deported or has left the  United  Kingdom  having
                           been refused leave to enter or remain here; or

                      (ii) has left the United Kingdom and,  on  doing  so,
                           evidenced a clear intention not to return; or

                      (iii)    left the United Kingdom in circumstances  in
                           which he could have had no reasonable expectation
                           at the time of leaving that he would lawfully  be
                           able to return; or

                      (iv)  has  been  convicted  of  an  offence  and  was
                           sentenced to a  period  of  imprisonment  or  was
                           directed to be detained in an  institution  other
                           than  a  prison  (including,  in  particular,   a
                           hospital or an institution for young  offenders),
                           provided that the sentence in question was not  a
                           suspended sentence; or

                      (v)  has spent a total of more than 18 months  absent
                           from the United  Kingdom  during  the  period  in
                           question.

                  (b)   "lawful  residence"   means   residence   which   is
                      continuous residence pursuant to:

                      (i)  existing leave to enter or remain; or

                      (ii) temporary admission within  section  11  of  the
                           1971 Act  where  leave  to  enter  or  remain  is
                           subsequently granted; or


                      (iii)     an  exemption  from  immigration   control,
                           including where an exemption ceases to  apply  if
                           it is immediately followed by a grant of leave to
                           enter or remain."

17.  We have not found it  necessary  to  set  out  the  chronology  of  the
    appellant's immigration history in this case, since the issue before us
    resolves  itself  into  the  relatively  narrow  point  that  we   have
    identified above, namely whether a proper interpretation  of  paragraph
    276A(a) the term "existing limited leave to enter or remain upon  their
    departure and return" encompasses the situation  of  the  appellant  in
    this case of having twice left the country with leave to remain,  which
    leave expired while she was out of the country, but who  prior  to  the
    expiry of that leave obtained leave to enter from  an  Entry  Clearance
    Officer and returned on the basis of  that  leave;  or  whether  it  is
    limited, as the Secretary of State contends,  to  the  situation  of  a
    person who both leaves and returns on the basis of the same  leave,  in
    other words leaves the United Kingdom during the course of a period  of
    leave to remain and returns to the United Kingdom before that leave has
    expired.

18.  The Immigration Judge founded his decision in favour of  the  Secretary
    of State on two bases.  The first of these was his reading of the  part
    of paragraph 276A(a) that we have quoted above.  He said, at  paragraph
    22 of the determination, that it seemed to him to  be  clear  from  the
    conjunctive "and" that the proviso required the same leave to exist  at
    both the point of departure and the point of return.

19.  He then went on to quote, as we have seen, from the IDI which at  2.1.3
     "Time Spent Out of the UK", says,

          "continuity shall not be considered to have been broken  where  an
         applicant is absent from the United Kingdom for  a  period  of  six
         months or less at any one time, provided  that  the  applicant  has
         existing limited leave to enter or remain upon  his  departure  and
         return.  To benefit from this, an applicant must have current leave
         covering the whole of the period spent out of the country and  will
         have been readmitted, on return from his absence, to continue  that
         period of existing leave."


20.  The question then before us is whether the Immigration Judge was  right
    to place that interpretation on paragraph 276A(a).   Before  addressing
    that point, it is convenient if we deal with a couple of other  matters
    first.  The first of these is the question of whether  if  we  disagree
    with the Immigration Judge we would be in effect declaring the Rule  to
    be ultra vires.  We agree with Mr Gill that it is essentially a  matter
    of interpretation rather than a declaration of ultra vires.  We do  not
    therefore need to address the  question  of  whether  or  not  we  have
    jurisdiction to declare an Immigration Rule ultra vires.

21.  In Ishtiaq the Court of Appeal at paragraph 3 referred  to  the  nature
    of IDIs.  They were said to contain guidance to case workers as to  how
    they should apply the Immigration Rules when  they  make  decisions  in
    individual cases (see also NA (Iraq) [2007] EWCA Civ 759 at  paragraphs
    25 and 26).  IDIs are not,  as  Mr  Gill  pointed  out,  placed  before
    Parliament at any stage, and they represent in our view no more than an
    internal guidance for Home Office officials.  They can in no  sense  be
    said to bind the Tribunal and any decision as  to  the  correctness  or
    otherwise of the guidance contained  in  an  IDI  or  in  IDIs  by  the
    Tribunal does  not  in  any  sense  raise  questions  of  jurisdiction.
    Clearly IDIs will have been drafted  as  a  consequence  of  a  careful
    consideration of an Immigration Rule or Rules and the circumstances  in
    which it or they should be applied and though they are, as we say,  not
    binding  on   the   Tribunal,   nevertheless   they   deserve   careful
    consideration.

22.  It is relevant in considering this matter to bear in  mind  the  points
    made in Mr Gill's supplementary note.  Although he is clearly right  to
    make the point that the Immigration Rules are  not  to  be  treated  as
    statute they are more than simply  Rules  of  Guidance  to  Immigration
    Officers.  As the quotation from Pearson makes  clear,  they  have  the
    force of law for those hearing immigration appeals.   Nevertheless,  we
    agree with Mr Gill that the Rules are to be interpreted purposively  in
    a rational and logical manner, and also consistently with human  rights
    legislation.  But, in particular we  consider  the  Rules  have  to  be
    construed in accordance with their natural meaning.  Paragraph  276A(a)
    is clear that a period of continuous residence shall not be  considered
    to have been broken when an applicant is absent from the United Kingdom
    for six months or less at one time,  with  the  proviso  that  we  have
    referred to above.  The sub-paragraph then goes on  to  define,  as  we
    have seen, five circumstances in which continuity will be considered to
    have been broken.  It is common  ground  that  none  of  those  factors
    applies in this case.  It is relevant also  to  note  the  contrast  at
    paragraph 276B between the requirements for indefinite leave to  remain
    on the grounds of long residence in the case of a person who has had at
    least ten years lawful residence in the United Kingdom and a person who
    has had at least fourteen years  continuous  residence,  excluding  any
    period spent in the United Kingdom following the service of  notice  of
    liability to removal or notice of  a  decision  to  remove  by  way  of
    directions or a notice of intention to deport from the United  Kingdom.
    Various factors are set out to be taken into account with regard to the
    fourteen year period requiring regard to be had to the public  interest
    in concluding that there are no reasons why it would be undesirable for
    the person to be given indefinite leave to remain on the ground of long
    residence.  Those factors do not  apply  to  the  person  coming  under
    276B(i)(a) who has had at least ten years continuous  lawful  residence
    in the United Kingdom.

23.  The principle, as it seems  to  us,  under  paragraph  276A,  is  that,
    subject to stated exceptions, a person who has had at least  ten  years
    continuous lawful residence  in  the  United  Kingdom  is  entitled  to
    indefinite leave to remain.  Such  indeed  is  what  is  spelt  out  at
    paragraph 276B.  But it seems to us to be inconsistent with the purpose
    of the provision to write into it, as it were,  a  further  requirement
    that a person who is absent for a period of six months or less  at  any
    one time both left and returned with the same leave.  If  it  had  been
    thought to be sufficiently important to make that a requirement of  the
    Rule, then we can see no reason why it would not have been  drafted  in
    those terms.  There is no suggestion that  the  appellant  has  behaved
    unlawfully in this case at any stage.    She  has,  on  both  occasions
    which are in  issue  before  us,  obtained  further  leave  before  the
    previous leave expired.  The only difference is that she happened to be
    out of the country at the time when she renewed that leave rather  than
    being within the country.   We  do  not  take  the  same  view  as  the
    Immigration Judge about the use of the words "and".  We do not  see  it
    as requiring the same leave to exist at the point of departure and  the
    point of return that the Immigration Judge considered that it required.
     It is at least as consistent with the interpretation we put on it, and
    we consider that our interpretation is more consistent with the purpose
    and spirit of this particular Rule.

24.  Nor do we consider that we should come to any  different  view  on  the
    basis of the IDI.  We have indicated above the nature of IDIs and their
    purpose and their status.  We are not bound by the IDI, and there is no
    indication  as  to  why  it  was  thought  that  that  was  the  proper
    interpretation to place on  paragraph  276A,  in  the  absence  of  any
    wording to support that interpretation.

25.  Accordingly we  conclude  that  the  Immigration  Judge  erred  in  his
    interpretation of paragraph 276A in this case.   It  is  not  necessary
    formally for us to go on and consider the situation  under  Article  8,
    but on the basis of our interpretation it can hardly be  said  that  if
    the decision of the Secretary of State is not in  accordance  with  the
    Immigration Rules, it is nevertheless in accordance with Article 8.  We
    therefore conclude that the appellant has made out her claim under both
    paragraph 276A and under Article 8, and therefore for the  decision  of
    the  Immigration  Judge  dismissing  the  appeal  on  both  grounds  is
    substituted a decision allowing the appeal on both grounds.




Signed                                  Date


Senior Immigration Judge Allen
