
SD (treatment of post-hearing evidence) Russia [2008] UKAIT 00037

                       ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at: Field House
Date of Hearing: 29 January 2008

                                   Before:


                         Mr Justice Hodge, President
                      Senior Immigration Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

                                     SD
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the Appellant:           Mr G. Hodgetts, instructed by Wilson & Co.
For the Respondent:          Mr J. Gulvin, Home Office Presenting Officer

In the rare case where an immigration judge, prior to the promulgation of  a
determination, receives a submission of late  evidence,  then  consideration
must first be given to the principles in Ladd v Marshall [1954]  1WLR  1489.
Under those, a tribunal should not normally admit fresh evidence  unless  it
could not have been previously obtained with due diligence for  use  at  the
trial, would probably have had an important influence on the result and  was
apparently credible.  If, applying that test, the judge was satisfied  there
was a risk of serious injustice because of something which  had  gone  wrong
at the hearing or this was evidence that had been overlooked,  then  it  was
likely to be material.  In those circumstances, it will be necessary  either
to reconvene the hearing or to obtain the written submissions of  the  other
side in relation to the matters included in the late submission.

                                    NOTE


1.    This is a reconsideration of the appeal of SD, born 7 October 1973,  a
      citizen of Russia.  In a determination served on  29  September  2006,
      Immigration Judge Markham David dismissed  the  appellant's  claim  on
      asylum grounds and  on  human  rights  grounds.   Reconsideration  was
      ordered  in  October  2006  by  a  senior  immigration  judge.    This
      reconsideration was adjourned for health reasons when it first came on
      for hearing on 5 June 2007.

2.    The appellant arrived in the United  Kingdom  on  14  July  1996  with
      leave to enter stamped in his passport, limiting his employment  to  a
      period of three months with Kelsey Farms.  The visa was extended on 15
      August 1996, enabling the appellant to work until 30 November 1996.

3.    On 27 November 1996, the appellant applied for  asylum.   He  was  not
      interviewed in relation to this claim until 15 September 2000,  nearly
      four years later.  His asylum claim was refused on 11 October 2000 and
      the appellant appealed in time.  That appeal was not progressed by the
      respondent until they sent the papers to this Tribunal on 10 May 2006.
       There is no explanation in the papers from the respondent as  to  why
      the asylum interview was delayed for some four years, and  the  onward
      submission of the appeal was delayed for approximately five and a half
      years after the adverse decision.

4.    The appeal was heard on 7 September 2006.  It was  argued  before  the
      immigration judge that the appellant had continuously resided  in  the
      UK for ten years while his asylum claim had been  under  consideration
      and so had developed  a  strong  private  life  in  the  UK.   It  was
      submitted that interference with that private life by enforced removal
      would be disproportionate, and that, therefore, the  appellant  should
      succeed in his claim under Article  8  ECHR.   The  immigration  judge
      rejected this argument on the basis that the appellant  had  "not  had
      any form of leave after his temporary admission".

5.    On 8 September 2006, immediately after the conclusion of the  hearing,
      the appellant's then counsel put in additional evidence on  behalf  of
      the appellant concerning the long residence  rule  contained  in  para
      276A Immigration Rules (HC395 as  amended).   It  was  said  that  the
      appellant did in fact satisfy the "lawful  residence"  requirement  of
      the Rules.  The evidence was he had had continuing leave to remain  in
      the UK for a period in excess of ten years.  In those circumstances it
      was said to be disproportionate to reject the  appellant's  Article  8
      claim, given that the Immigration Rule in relation to  long  residence
      of over ten years appeared to have been wholly satisfied.

6.    This new evidence and the submissions on it  reached  the  immigration
      judge by post on 14 September 2006, when his  determination  had  been
      prepared and dictated and sent for typing.  He declined  to  take  the
      submissions into consideration, setting out the following reasons:

      "1.   No leave was sought at the hearing of this appeal to submit  any
             further arguments in writing after the hearing of  the  appeal,
             nor was this possibility suggested at all at any time.

        2.  I do not consider that I have  jurisdiction  to  consider  these
             submissions in the course of this appeal.  They can properly be
             put before  the  Secretary  of  State  in  the  course  of  the
             appellant's application for indefinite leave to remain  on  the
             basis of  long  residence,  and  if  this  application  is  not
             successful, it can be argued subsequently before an immigration
             judge on appeal.

          3. If I thought I had jurisdiction to consider these  submissions,
             I would have had to reconvene the hearing of this appeal in any
             event."

7.    It is the appellant's case that the immigration  judge  was  wrong  in
      law to reject this additional evidence and the  submissions,  and  the
      error was material.


Post-hearing evidence and submissions

8.    It is the duty of all advocates  to  ensure  that,  when  they  appear
      before a court or tribunal, they are in a position to inform the court
      or tribunal of all  relevant  cases  and  statutory  provisions.   The
      duties are clearly spelt out in the Bar Code of Conduct 2004  at  para
      708, and in the Solicitors' Code of Conduct at para 11.01.   The  duty
      applies equally  to  Home  Office  Presenting  Officers  and  to  OISC
      representatives.

9.    An obvious requirement at any final hearing before  the  AIT  is  that
      both parties put before the Tribunal all and any relevant  matters  on
      which they intend to rely, both factual and legal.  As a general  rule
      it is not in the interests of the parties or of the administration  of
      justice for there to be post-hearing submissions.  Nor should  parties
      attempt to submit  post-hearing  evidence  save  in  very  exceptional
      circumstances.

10.   In E and R v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2004]  EWCA
      Civ 49, the Court of Appeal among a number of other matters considered
      whether the then Immigration Appeal Tribunal could  "take  account  of
      material which becomes available between the date of the  hearing  and
      the date of the promulgation of its decision".  The Court concluded at
      para 27:

             "As we understand it, the agreement on both sides has proceeded
             on the basis that, up until the date of promulgation,  the  IAT
             would have been at liberty to admit further  evidence  (whether
             or not it was under any duty to do so).   That  seems  correct.
             In accordance with ordinary principles, the IAT remains  seized
             of the matter until the decision is  formally  communicated  to
             the parties."

11.   The Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 provide  at
      paras 22 and 23 as follows:

       "22(1) Except in cases to which Rule 23 applies, where the  Tribunal
             determines an appeal it must serve on  every  party  a  written
             determination containing its decision and the reasons for it.

        23(1)    This rule applies to appeals under s 82 of  the  2002  Act
             where:

             a)  The appellant is in the United Kingdom and
             b)  The appeal relates in whole or in part to an asylum claim.

               (4)   The  Tribunal  must  serve  its  determination  on  the
          respondent."

12.    So  in  asylum  cases,  the  determination  must  be  served  on  the
      respondent, who then has a duty to serve it on the appellant.  In  all
      other  cases,  the  Tribunal  must  serve  both   parties   with   the
      determination.  Importantly, in both types of case, Rule 22  and  Rule
      23 both provide that the Tribunal must serve  the  determination  "not
      later than ten days" after either the hearing finishes or, where there
      has been no hearing, after the matter is determined.  In the cases  of
      both E and R there was a delay of some months between the  hearing  of
      the appeal and the serving of the determination.  A delay of more than
      ten days after a  hearing  before  the  determination  is  served  now
      breaches  the  AIT  Procedure  Rules  and  ought  to  be  rare.    The
      requirement that any determination be served  within  ten  days  of  a
      hearing reinforces the absolute need on the part of all parties to put
      all the facts and matters on which  they  rely,  together  with  their
      legal submissions, before the Tribunal at the hearing.

The immigration judge's ruling

13.   Here the late evidence submitted was that the ten year residence  rule
      had been satisfied and submissions  were  made  on  that.   The  first
      reason given by the immigration judge for not taking the late evidence
      and submissions into account was that  no  leave  was  sought  at  the
      hearing to submit late material, nor  was  the  possibility  suggested
      during the hearing.  That is correct so far  as  it  goes.   Had  such
      leave been given, the judge would have been obliged  to  consider  any
      material put in within such time limit as might have  been  suggested.
      If any such agreement is made, and if the judge considers the material
      might affect any determination, then, in fairness, the respondent  may
      need to be given an opportunity to deal with it, either in writing or,
      if necessary, by reconvening the hearing.  The practice of agreeing to
      post-hearing  evidence  or  submissions  should  only  be  adopted  in
      exceptional circumstances, given the general obligation to present all
      relevant  material  at  the  hearing  itself  and  the  likelihood  of
      significant delay and a breach  of  the  Procedure  Rules  where  such
      permission is given.

14.   The immigration judge was therefore right so far as  it  goes  to  say
      that if he did have jurisdiction to consider the late submissions,  he
      "would have had to reconvene the hearing of this appeal in any event".

15.   In his second reason for refusing to consider  the  late  submissions,
      the immigration judge said he did not have  jurisdiction  to  consider
      them.  He was wrong.  E and R makes it plain that he was  "at  liberty
      to admit further evidence".  The late  submission  contained  evidence
      which suggested that the Tribunal  had  been  wrongly  told  that  the
      appellant  had  not  had  "any  form  of  leave  after  his  temporary
      admission".  The Court of Appeal in E and R left it open as to whether
      the Tribunal in such circumstances is under a duty  to  admit  further
      evidence.  But it did give guidance as to how to proceed.

16.   As is well known, in E and R the  Court  of  Appeal  accepted  that  a
      mistake of fact giving rise to  unfairness  was  a  separate  head  of
      challenge on an appeal on a point of law in the context of asylum  and
      immigration  appeals  "where  the  parties  shared  an   interest   in
      cooperating to achieve the correct result".  In relation to  the  then
      Immigration Appeal Tribunal, the Court concluded at para 92  that,  in
      exercising the discretion to direct a rehearing  in  relation  to  new
      evidence received before the decision had been  formally  notified  to
      the parties, "the principle of finality would be important" and:

      "To justify reopening the case the  IAT  would  normally  need  to  be
             satisfied that there was a risk of serious  injustice,  because
             of something which had gone  wrong  at  the  hearing,  or  some
             important  evidence  which  had   been   overlooked;   and   in
             considering whether to admit new evidence it should  be  guided
             by Ladd v  Marshall  principles,  subject  to  any  exceptional
             factors."

17.   Hence, in the rare case where  an  immigration  judge,  prior  to  the
      promulgation  of  a  determination,  receives  a  submission  of  late
      evidence, then consideration must first be given to the principles  in
      Ladd v Marshall [1954] 1WLR 1489.  Under those, a tribunal should  not
      normally admit fresh evidence unless it could not have been previously
      obtained with due diligence for use at the trial, would probably  have
      had an important influence on the result and was apparently  credible.
      If, applying that test, the judge was satisfied there was  a  risk  of
      serious injustice because of something which had  gone  wrong  at  the
      hearing or this was evidence that had been  overlooked,  then  it  was
      likely to be material.  In those circumstances, it will  be  necessary
      either to reconvene the hearing or to obtain the  written  submissions
      of the other side in relation to the  matters  included  in  the  late
      submission.

Material error of law

18.   Both the appellant and the respondent failed the immigration judge  in
      this case.  The appellant had, by September 2006, clearly had leave to
      remain in the United Kingdom for a  period  of  over  ten  years.   He
      arrived in July 1996 and was given leave to enter to work.   That  was
      extended.  Prior to the end of  the  extension,  he  had  applied  for
      asylum.  The effect of that application was to continue the  leave  to
      remain.  The adverse decision in relation to  the  asylum  application
      made in October 2000 had not put an end to the leave to remain, as the
      appellant had exercised his right to appeal against that decision in a
      timely manner.    The  long  subsequent  delay  meant  that  that  the
      appellant had been  here  for  ten  years  with  leave  to  remain  in
      September 2006.  The respondent has a general duty to the Tribunal  as
      set out above to draw relevant matters to  its  attention,  and  these
      factors were within the knowledge of the Secretary of State and should
      have been communicated to the immigration judge.  The appellant's late
      submission of the information could have cured the  position  but  the
      immigration judge mistakenly disregarded that.

19.   The mistake of fact as to the appellant having  ten  years'  leave  to
      remain in the UK was, as it turns out, in the words of  E  and  R  "an
      established fact which was uncontentious and objectively  verifiable".
      The failure to recognise this fact  has  resulted  in  unfairness  and
      amounts to an error of law.  Had the immigration judge been  aware  of
      this fact, he would have  had  to  weigh  that  in  the  balance  when
      considering the proportionality of  the  claim  that  the  appellant's
      right to private life under the  provisions  of  Article  8  ECHR  was
      engaged.

20.    It  is  clear  to  this  Tribunal  that  the  appellant   meets   the
      requirements of 276B(i)(a) of the Immigration Rules, as "he has had at
      least ten years' continuous lawful residence in the  United  Kingdom".
      There is a public interest test in para 276B(ii) which  the  appellant
      will have to satisfy, as he will need to show that "having  regard  to
      the public interest, there are no reasons why it would be  undesirable
      for him to be given indefinite leave to remain on the  ground  of  his
      long residence", and in making that decision account has to  be  given
      to a series of issues set out from (a) to (g) in para 276B(ii).

21.   We acceded to the request from the Secretary  of  State  that,  as  no
      consideration appears to have been given to the public interest issue,
      the matter should be sent back for a further hearing for  this  aspect
      of the matter to be considered.

22.   We have noted that there is nothing in the papers to suggest that  the
      appellant has not satisfied the public interest test, but that may  be
      a matter for further consideration.   We  have  also  noted  from  the
      immigration judge's decision that the appellant may also have  already
      made an application for indefinite leave to remain at some stage prior
      to the hearing in September 2006.  If he has,  and  the  Secretary  of
      State has still not decided on that application, this further delay in
      a case already full of lengthy delays will not doubt be  a  factor  in
      considering the issue of proportionality.

Conclusion

23.   The immigration judge made a material error of law in  this  case  for
      the reasons given.  The matter is to be considered at a  second  stage
      reconsideration.






                                                            MR JUSTICE HODGE
                                                                   PRESIDENT
                                                          Date:  22 February
                                                                        2008
