
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


                TR (CCOL cases) Pakistan [2011] UKUT 33 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 5 November 2010                            |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                       SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE STOREY
                      SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                     tR
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms L Ong, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr I Ahmed, Solicitor


   1) Just because findings of fact made by the Tribunal in a reported  case
      are not binding does not mean that immigration judges are free to take
      account or not to take account of  such  findings  at  will:  (a)  the
      determination may contain an account of the record  of  evidence;  (b)
      the Tribunal may have made findings of fact and if these relate to the
      same factual matrix then they should be followed  unless  there  is  a
      good reason to revisit them: see A (Somalia) [2007] EWCA Civ 1040.

   2) In cases in which the Secretary of State alleges that a claimant falls
      foul of para 320(1A) of Statement of Changes in the Immigration  Rules
      HC 395 as amended, it will be important to follow the  guidance  given
      by the Court of Appeal in  AA  (Nigeria)  [2009]  EWCA  Civ  773  that
      knowing deception is needed to show false representations.

   3) Given the nature and extent of the evidence found by the  Tribunal  in
      NA and Others (Cambridge College of Learning)  Pakistan  [2009]  UKAIT
      00033 to point overwhelmingly to a conclusion that CCOL never ran  any
      Postgraduate Diploma in Business Management or in IT, a  claimant  who
      relies solely on documents  specific  to  his  or  her  own  (claimed)
      studies in order to maintain the contrary  must  expect  these  to  be
      scrutinised closely.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1. This is an appeal against the determination  of  Immigration  Judge  (IJ)
Elvidge notified on 13 August 2009 allowing the respondent's (hereafter  the
claimant's) appeal against a  decision  by  the  appellant  (hereafter  "the
SSHD") dated 26 January 2009 refusing to vary leave to  remain  in  the  UK.
The  claimant's  application  was  based  on  his  having   undertaken   and
successfully completed a Postgraduate Diploma in Business Management  (PgDip
in BM) at Cambridge College of Learning (CCOL)  between  17  September  2007
and 15 August 2008.

2. This is far from being the first  appeal  to  come  before  the  Tribunal
involving CCOL.  Following a  lengthy  hearing  before  a  panel  comprising
three Senior Immigration Judges in  June  2009  the  Tribunal  reported  the
decision of NA and Others (Cambridge College of  Learning)  Pakistan  [2009]
UKAIT 00031 whose head note stated:

        "Cambridge College of Learning  (CCOL)  never  ran  a  Postgraduate
        Diploma in Business Management course or a Postgraduate Diploma  in
        IT course.  Accordingly for a person applying for leave  to  remain
        under the Tier 1 (Post-Study Work) scheme to rely on a  certificate
        of an award of such a diploma following a course will amount  to  a
        false representation and so will fall foul of para 322(1A)  of  the
        Statement of Changes in Immigration Rules HC 395.   Such  a  person
        will also be unable to meet the requirements of para  245Z  because
        he or she could never have undertaken such a course."


3. Notwithstanding the unequivocal findings made  in  NA  and  Others  there
continue to be a number of appeals pursued  before  the  Tribunal  in  which
claimants insist they did undertake PgDip studies at CCOL.  This is  one  of
them.  Although we are only concerned with this appeal,  it  raises  several
points of recurring importance, which we shall try to address shortly.

Our decision on whether there was a material error of law

4. The SSHD appealed on the ground that in allowing the appeal  the  IJ  had
failed to take into account the decision in NA and Others.  If he  had  done
so, the grounds averred, he would have  found  (1)  that  the  claimant,  in
claiming to have undertaken a course of study  leading  to  a  PgDip  BM  at
CCOL, and relying on a purported certificate of an award of such a  diploma,
had knowingly made a false representation so that his  appeal  stood  to  be
refused under para 322(1A) and para 320(7A) of the Immigration Rules HC  395
as amended; and (2) that the claimant did not meet the requirements of  para
245Z because he could never have undertaken such a course.

5.  The  IJ  heard  the  claimant's  appeal  on  6  August  2009   and   his
determination of it was signed on 12 August and notified on 13 August  2009.
 Those dates are significant because  NA  and  Others  was  reported  on  11
August 2009, i.e. five days after the hearing but one day before  he  signed
his determination and two days before it was notified.

6. The IJ stated that he was aware that there were a "number of  test  cases
pending on CCOL", but that these had not yet been decided and  that  "I  can
only decide this appeal on  the  evidence  before  me,  which  concerns  one
individual student".  Noting that the Home Office evidence  before  him  had
not been tested by oral evidence and that  the  absence  of  a  Home  Office
Presenting Officer meant that the claimant's evidence could  not  be  tested
by cross-examination, the IJ concluded:


        "18.     I found the appellant to be credible in his evidence.   He
             was able to name  the  modules  he  had  followed.   Even  more
             importantly he was able to produce the four assignments he  had
             written for the course.  I have studied these  carefully.   The
             first thing to note is that they are written in  good  English,
             are logical and well argued.  They  are  of  a  high  standard.
             They may well have been largely based on what is  available  on
             the internet, but this requires application and methodology  in
             itself.  The appellant was able in  oral  evidence  to  give  a
             description of the contents of the  two  of  the  modules,  and
             would have gone on to give others if I had not  indicated  that
             that was enough.  The appellant's lecture notes are dated,  and
             start on 22.10.07 with  a  definition  of  management,  and  an
             account of strategic management  processes.   The  notes  cover
             lectures given on different dates, some of the dates are given,
             and continue to be about different related  subjects.   I  find
             that they are clearly genuine lecture notes taken over a period
             of time, and all to do with business management.  The  spelling
             is excellent.  They fill a small ring backed notebook


        19.      I find that, whatever the  position  after  the  appellant
             received his diploma, that he was genuinely studying there  and
             received a genuine diploma, which the college was authorised by
             the respondent to issue.  His case has been given no individual
             consideration, since he is caught by the blanket ban imposed by
             the respondent as Mr Stewart describes.  It may  well  be  that
             many diplomas were being issued that were  false.   However,  I
             conclude on all the evidence before  me  that  the  appellant's
             diploma was genuine and was the fruit of going to many lectures
             and producing written work.  He went there because the  College
             was on the approved list, and he ought not to be  disadvantaged
             by the removal of the College from the approved list  after  he
             left.  Since I find that the diploma was genuine and not false,
             the respondent has not acted in accordance with the law and the
             Rules, and so I must allow the appeal."


7. We should note that we know from the case of NA and Others that CCOL  was
taken off the Department for  Innovation,  Universities  and  Skills  (DIUS)
Register on 4 December 2008: that is what the IJ must mean  in  para  19  by
the college being on "the approved list" at the relevant time.

8. Mr Ahmed submitted that the IJ committed no error of law in deciding  the
appeal as he did.  Although he noted in his determination  that  test  cases
on appeals involving CCOL (which  were  reported  as  NA  and  Others)  were
pending, he properly confined himself to the  evidence  before  him  in  the
instant appeal.  Mr Ahmed said he accepted that if  there  exists  a  higher
court or starred Tribunal decision on a  matter  of  law,  that  is  legally
binding and an IJ must be taken  to  err  in  law  if  he  applies  the  law
contrarily, even if in fact he is unaware  of  such  a  decision.   He  also
accepted that similar principles must apply when an IJ decides a case  in  a
way that is  at  variance  with  Tribunal  country  guidance.   However,  he
submitted, NA and Others was neither a higher court  or  starred  case,  nor
was it a country guidance case.  There were two cogent reasons  why  the  IJ
should not  be  seen  as  having  erred.   First,  there  was  a  reason  of
practicality.  It was not reasonably practical  to  expect  an  IJ  who  has
heard a case to check anything further between that date  and  the  date  of
notification.  The judicial norm was and should be to  decide  the  case  on
the basis of the case as presented at the hearing.

9. Second, submitted Mr Ahmed, even if NA and Others had  been  reported  by
the date of the hearing and the IJ had been  referred  to  it,  it  was  not
incumbent on the IJ to treat its findings of fact as binding.   The  IJ  had
done precisely what every judge is supposed to do in an  immigration  appeal
- he had decided the case on the facts of the particular case.  He  reminded
us that in this case the claimant had not  simply  relied  on  the  standard
documents which he  had  submitted  to  the  respondent  when  applying  for
variation of leave to remain (the original of his award by CCOL of  a  PgDip
in BM; a transcript of his marks in various  subjects;  and  a  letter  from
CCOL).  The claimant had also adduced:

      (i)   A witness statement dated 18 March 2009.  This explained,  inter
        alia, how he came to choose  CCOL  as  his  institution  of  study,
        noting that [at that time] it was listed on the DIUS  Register  and
        also had the approval of the British Accreditation  Council  (BAC);
        identifying the course structure  (eight  modules  split  into  two
        semesters); giving the names of his three  regular  lecturers  (who
        included the course co-ordinator (Mr Saif Ullah);  explaining  that
        the course teaching consisted  in  lectures  and  group  work  with
        private study  in  the  library;  stating  that  his  modules  were
        assessed by way of assignments, each 2,000-3,000 words  in  length;
        and specifying that he  attended  three  days  a  week,  Monday  to
        Wednesday.

       (ii)   The  originals  of  four  assignments:  on   making   informed
        decisions; strategic management; improving marketing strategy;  and
        leading change in organisation respectively.   The  IJ  noted  that
        these assignments were:

             "headed PGD - Business Management, give the name of the module,
             and state that this is an assignment for 2007/2008.  The  group
             is stated to be Touseef, Afzal, Zahid, and Waqar".


      (iii) His lecture notes.

    (iv)    His oral evidence.  This broadly covered the same ground as his
        witness statement.


10. We asked the  parties  to  address  us  on  the  adequacy  of  the  IJ's
treatment of the Home Office evidence as it was before the IJ. We  explained
that although not expressly identified  as  a  ground  in  the  respondent's
grounds the latter clearly considered the IJ's approach to the  evidence  to
be flawed. Ms Ong submitted that the IJ had not dealt with  this  aspect  of
the IJ's treatment of the evidence properly, Mr Ahmed  argued  that  the  IJ
had analysed it satisfactorily and was entitled to find it wanting.

11. We consider that the IJ's determination is vitiated by legal error  even
without reference to the case  of  NA  and  Others.   In  the  case  we  are
considering the SSHD had relied on a witness statement from Mr Jon  Stewart,
a Higher Executive Officer of UKBA together with statements  from  two  CCOL
teachers, Mr Malik and Miss S  Ullah  (not  to  be  confused  with  Mr  Saif
Ullah).

12. Mr Stewart's evidence included  (1)  an  account  of  the  circumstances
which had led to the relevant section of the UKBA becoming concerned  during
2008 about the high number of PgDip certificates from CCOL  being  submitted
in support of Tier 1 Post Study Work  applications  (far  greater  than  the
likely capacity of the college) and eventually  issuing  an  instruction  to
caseworkers on 31 October 2008 to put such applications on hold; and (2)  an
account of the findings made by officers who had conducted an  intelligence-
led enforcement visit on 2  December  2008:  "As  a  result  of  this  visit
evidence was collected to  prove  that  the  following  qualifications  have
never been taught by the college [he then specifies the PgDip in IT and  the
PgDip in BM]".  Clearly evidence of this kind from a relatively senior  UKBA
official confirming concerns serious enough to lead  to  suspension  of  the
processing  of  all  CCOL-related  applications  and  recording  unambiguous
results  of  an  on-site   investigation   was   potentially   evidence   of
considerable weight and significance.  It was not simply evidence about  one
or two individual cases but about a  widely  observed  problem  within  UKBA
arising with all CCOL-related applications involving PgDips followed  up  by
an  on-site  investigation.   As  such  it  merited  careful  consideration,
notwithstanding that Mr Stewart was not produced as  a  witness  before  the
IJ.

13. The IJ's treatment of Mr  Stewart's  evidence,  however,  was  decidedly
uncareful.  The only specific  comment  he  made  related  to  Mr  Stewart's
acknowledgment that listed colleges (as CCOL was for a period) were able  to
issue their own diplomas without external  assessment.   Noting  that  there
was a conflict between the evidence of Mr Stewart on this point and that  of
another of the Home Office witnesses, Ms  Ullah, he said: "his evidence,  on
that point, I find is to be preferred to that of Ms Ullah".   Otherwise  the
only comment made was that the  statements  from  Mr  Stewart  and  the  two
tutors "have not been tested by oral evidence".   That,  with  respect,  did
not amount to any real  engagement  with  Mr  Stewart's  evidence.   It  was
certainly  not  a  reasoned  basis  for  the  IJ's  later  finding,  clearly
departing  from  Mr  Stewart's  own  (and  Mr  Stewart's  own  department's)
assessment that all PgDips issued by CCOL were  false.  Nor  was  there  any
apparent evidential basis for the IJ's surmise that "it may well be" that  a
change in ownership since the time the appellant  secured  his  diploma  had
"led to the selling of diplomas thereafter".  When one analyses  further  on
what basis the IJ decided the claimant's  PgDip  in  BM  in  particular  was
genuine, it is clear that it was simply  on  the  basis  of  the  claimant's
written and oral evidence  appearing  to  him  to  be  genuine  taking  that
evidence very much at face value. He stated  that  the  appellant  had  been
able to give a relatively detailed  account  of  modules,  assignments  etc.
But he did not show that he had in any way sought to ask  the  claimant  any
obvious questions designed to test his evidence.  Of course, given that  the
SSHD was not represented,  he  was  required  by  the  Surendran  guidelines
[contained in an annex to MNM v SSHD [2000] INLR 576] not to enter into  the
arena, but he had to ensure that the claimant had at least tried  to  answer
the substance of the respondent's case. If it was  not  dealt  with  in  the
claimant's witness statement he, in the absence  of  a  Presenting  Officer,
had a responsibility to ask a limited number of questions designed  to  test
the evidence, particularly in a case where he was seeking  to  rely  on  the
fact that he had not had the opportunity of testing the written evidence  of
the other party's witnesses (the SSHD).  Assuming that the IJ was  right  to
proceed to hear the case  (i.e.  that  he  was  right  to  consider  he  had
sufficient evidence before him to determine the appeal), he was  correct  to
say that his decision had to be made on the basis  of  the  evidence  before
him, but wrong to proceed as if the claimant's evidence could be  considered
in isolation from  the  SSHD's  evidence  and  taken  at  face  value.   The
evidence before him did not simply concern "one individual student".   These
shortcomings in the IJ's determination amounted to a material error of law.

Discussion
14. Before turning to the points in contention we should clarify that  since
the case of NA and Others was decided there have been two  Court  of  Appeal
judgments having impact on the legal matters addressed in that case.  In  AA
(Nigeria) [2009] EWCA Civ 773, Rix LJ, whilst approving   the  view  of  the
Tribunal in NA and Others at para 146   that  for  deception  to  arise  the
false representations must have been  made  knowingly,  disagreed  with  its
view that false representations within the meaning of para  322(1A)  of  the
Immigration Rules could cover innocent representations or matters that  were
simply untrue or incorrect: on the contrary, "[d]ishonesty or  deception  is
needed, albeit not necessarily that of the applicant himself,  to  render  a
"false representation" a ground for mandatory  refusal."(para  76).  We  are
given to understand that the Court of Appeal may  take  the  opportunity  in
pending cases to give further guidance on the application of  para  322(1A),
but what we can say here, subject to any further guidance from  this  Court,
is that on the facts as found in NA  and  Others  the  difference  over  the
interpretation of para 322(1A) did not matter because the Tribunal (1)  made
a clear finding that the respondent had  shown  that  the  three  appellants
concerned had used deception (see  paras  149-150)  and  (2)  made  a  clear
finding that no person claiming to have undertaken a PgDip course in  IT  or
BM at CCOL can have done so without knowing that such a claim amounted to  a
false representation (see para 147). In effect, (2) was a  finding  that  no
person can innocently undertake a non-existent  course.  However,  following
AA (Nigeria) it will be important for immigration judges dealing  with  CCOL
cases in which a para 322(1A)  ground  of  refusal  is  raised,  to  make  a
specific finding on whether or not it has been shown that knowing  deception
(albeit not necessarily on the part of the applicant himself) was  involved.
This links to what we go on to say at para 25 below.
15. In Pankina  [2010]  EWCA  Civ  719  Sedley  LJ  held  that  in  applying
provisions of the Immigration Rules dealing with the  Points  Based  System,
it was wrong to treat  provisions  set  out  by  the  respondent  in  Policy
Guidance as mandatory: extrinsic guidance  could  not  be  used  to  make  a
material or substantive change in existing immigration  policy  without  the
negative resolution procedure set out in s.3(2) of the Immigration Act  1971
being implemented.  Whilst in  NA  and  Others  the  Tribunal  had  taken  a
different view concerning the status of Policy Guidance  -  in  reliance  on
another case also called  NA  and  Others  (Tier  1  Post-Study  Work-funds)
[2009] UKAIT 00025 - its reference to such matters was  obiter.  The  reason
why the three appellants failed was because they fell foul of  para  322(1A)
and failed to meet mandatory requirements of para 245Z;  such  reasons  were
unconnected with the Policy Guidance.
16. We turn then to the matters in contention in this appeal. Given that  we
have found a legal error in the IJ's treatment of the evidence he  did  have
before him, it is not strictly necessary  for  us  to  rule  on  whether  he
should have had regard to evidence he did not have before him, in  the  form
of the decision in NA and Others.

17. That way of formulating matters may help clarify why  we  think  the  IJ
could not be said to have erred in law in failing to have regard to  NA  and
Others.  When he signed the determination on 12 August  NA  and  Others  had
still not been reported.  NA and Others was not a country guidance  case  or
one that was declaratory as a matter of law (we note this is  a  point  that
was made by the Rt Hon. Sir  Richard  Buxton  when  granting  permission  to
appeal in the case of CW (Sri  Lanka)  Ref:  C5/2010/1225)  on  22  December
2010).  Nor was it a starred case.  Hence it was not a decision that the  IJ
was legally bound to follow and apply (even if unaware that it had  in  fact
been reported shortly before his decision had been notified).  Even  had  it
been a starred case, it would only have been legally binding as to the  law,
not as to facts.

18. But it may be useful for us to set out what we consider the position  to
be in a case involving a student claiming to have undertaken  a  CCOL  PgDip
where the IJ was or is aware of the reported decision in NA and Others.


19. Just because findings of fact made by the Tribunal in  a  reported  case
are not binding does not mean that  immigration  judges  are  free  to  take
account or not to take account of such  findings  at  will.  There  are  two
reasons for this.
20. The first is free of controversy. It  is  that  the  reported  case  may
contain a record of relevant evidence. The fact  that  it  was  given  in  a
different case might impact on the weight that should be given it but it  is
still evidence that has to be considered. A division of  the  Tribunal  will
not be assumed to know all the evidence in all of its reported cases in  the
way that it will be assumed to know the law, but evidence in reported  cases
(cf the ratio of the decision) is admissible as  evidence  in  other  cases.
Any evidence relevant to an issue the  Tribunal  has  to  decide  should  be
taken into account in any cases where it  comes  to  the  attention  of  the
Tribunal and the Tribunal must explain in each case what weight it  attaches
to the evidence in the reported case when  making its  decision.  This  will
range from "peripheral" to "almost conclusive" depending on a wide range of
factors. Accordingly, not to take account of that evidence may  well  amount
to a failure to  take into account relevant matters.
21. The second reason relates to the  reported  case  as  an  evaluation  of
relevant evidence. In seeking to identify the correct  legal  principles  to
be applied in this situation it is  instructive  to  consider  the  guidance
given by the  Court  of  Appeal  in  respect  of  a  different  but  closely
analogous situation that  arises  when  a  second  judicial  fact-finder  is
considering findings  of  fact  made  by  a  previous  judicial  fact-finder
involving the same factual  matrix.  In  A  (Somalia)  v  SSHD  [2007]  EWCA
Civ1040, having reviewed previous authorities including LD (Algeria)  [2004]
EWCA Civ 804 and Ocampo [2006] EWCA Civ 1276, Carnwath LJ for  the  majority
stated:


      "Consistency as a principle of public law
     1. As I understand his submissions, Mr Kovats  for  the  Secretary  of
        State does not accept that a previous decision should be given  any
        particular weight,  at  least  in  a  case  involving  a  different
        appellant. The tribunal may have  regard  to  it,  but  it  is  not
        obliged to follow it, whether or not there  is  new  evidence;  its
        duty is simply to decide the case on its own merits on the evidence
        before it.
     1. I could understand this submission on the basis of the  law  as  it
        stood before Ocampo. The normal principle is that previous tribunal
        decisions do  not  establish  a  precedent  (see  Mukarkar  v  Home
        Secretary [2006] EWCA Civ 1045). "Country  guidance"  cases  are  a
        well-recognised exception (see S v Home Secretary [2002]  EWCA  Civ
        539). In Otshudi v Home Secretary  [2004]  EWCA  Civ  893,  a  case
        involving inconsistent decisions arising  out  of  appeals  by  two
        brothers. Sedley LJ noted that no legal submission had  been  based
        on the discrepancy as such, and commented:
        "This is not the class of case which  involves  what  Laws  LJ  has
        called a "factual precedent" - for  example  a  finding  about  the
        political situation in a given country at a given moment. It is  an
        illustration,  if  an  alarming  one,  of   the   fact   that   two
        conscientious decision-makers can come  to  opposite  or  divergent
        conclusions on the same evidence. But it is no more material to the
        legal soundness of the present  adjudicator's  decision  than  hers
        would be to the soundness of the second adjudicator's decision...."
        (para 11)
        As he made clear later in the judgment, he regretted that position:
        "The discrepancy between the two decisions, while giving rise to no
        legal challenge, must  be  a  matter  of  concern.  If  the  second
        adjudicator is right, this appellant's life too is at risk.  If  he
        is wrong, of course, neither brother may be at risk; but asylum law
        - for example by demanding something less  than  proof  positive  -
        deliberately errs on the side of caution...." (para 23)
        He noted that normally arrangements would have been made  for  such
        linked cases to be heard together. He invited the  Home  Office  to
        reconsider the case on humanitarian grounds.
     1. That, however, was before the decision in TK  (Georgia),  that  the
        Devaseelan principles could be extended to such  a  situation,  and
        before that extension had been approved by this court in Ocampo. In
        the light of that decision I do  not  see  how  we  can  accept  Mr
        Kovats' argument. I note that Hooper LJ, who was himself a party to
        Ocampo, takes a different view of its  significance.  Respectfully,
        however, the reasoning of Auld LJ's judgment seems to me  carefully
        considered and entirely clear. Whether or  not  it  is  technically
        binding, I would not think it right to  depart  from  it  unless  I
        thought it clearly wrong, which I do not.
     1. On the contrary the reasoning is in line with the principles relied
        on by the Secretary of State himself, through Miss Giovannetti,  in
        Devaseelan (see above). They in turn reflect  the  well-established
        principle of administrative law, that "persons should be  uniformly
        treated  unless  there  is  some  valid  reason   to   treat   them
        differently". As was said in Matadeen v Pointu [1998] 1  AC  98  PC
        (per Lord Hoffmann):
        "Their Lordships do not doubt that such a principle is one  of  the
        building  blocks  of  democracy  and  necessarily   permeates   any
        democratic constitution. Indeed, their Lordships would  go  further
        and say that treating like cases alike and unlike cases differently
        is a general axiom of  rational  behaviour.  It  is,  for  example,
        frequently invoked by the courts in proceedings for judicial review
        as a ground for  holding  some  administrative  act  to  have  been
        irrational:  see  Professor  Jeffrey  Jowell  QC,  Is  Equality   a
        Constitutional Principle? [1994] Current Legal  Problems  1,  12-14
        and De Smith, Woolf and Jowell, Judicial Review  of  Administrative
        Action, paras. 13-036 to 13-045." (p 109C-D)
        The same principle was relied  on  by  this  court  in  the  asylum
        context R(Iran) v Home Secretary [2005] EWCA Civ 982  para  22,  in
        the context of country guidance cases. Looking  at  the  matter  in
        2004, I might have shared Sedley LJ's doubts as to the  application
        of such principles outside the context of country  guidance  cases.
        However, I would have also shared his  concerns  at  the  potential
        unfairness which that limitation can cause. Now that the  jump  has
        been made, I see no reason to question it, or to regret it.
     1. In one of the present cases, Mr Ockelton appears to have had second
        thoughts about the width of the approach taken in TK. In AA he  was
        party to a lengthy discussion of the question  why  a  decision  of
        fact in one appeal should be considered  of  any  relevance  in  an
        appeal by a related claimant. The discussion included reference  to
        decisions in administrative law (including  one  of  my  own,  R  v
        Cardiff County Council ex parte Sears [1998]  3  PLR  55),  and  to
        cases  under  the  general  law  of  evidence   relating   to   the
        admissibility of a previous court decision (such  as  Hollington  v
        Hewthorn [1943] KB 587). The latter line of authority seems to have
        led the tribunal, while not in terms departing from TK, to  express
        rather more doubt as to the  relevance  of  previous  decisions  in
        cases between different parties, suggesting that it is no more than
        "background" (para 66-71).
     1. Unfortunately, the decision in that case was given in July 2006,  a
        few months before Ocampo. Had the tribunal had the benefit of  that
        decision  much  of  the  discussion  might   have   been   rendered
        unnecessary. Furthermore, I think the doubts were misplaced.  As  I
        have said, the  basis  of  the  Devaseelan  approach,  and  of  its
        extension (if correct), must be found, not in the civil or criminal
        law of evidence, but in general principles of administrative law.
        Qualification
     1. While I do not think it is open to us to depart from Ocampo I would
        suggest two qualifications, which seem to me  consistent  with  it.
        First, Auld LJ said that the guidelines are relevant to "cases like
        the present" where the parties are not the same  but  "there  is  a
        material overlap of evidence".  The  term  "material"  in  my  view
        requires some elaboration. It recognises I think that exceptions to
        the ordinary principle that factual decisions do not set precedents
        (see above) should be closely defined. To extend the  principle  to
        cases where there is no more than an "overlap of evidence" would be
        too wide, and could introduce undesirable uncertainty. In  all  the
        cases in which the principle has been  applied  so  far,  including
        Ocampo, the claims have not merely involved  overlapping  evidence,
        but have arisen out of the same factual matrix, such  as  the  same
        relationship or the  same  event  or  series  of  events.  I  would
        respectfully read  Auld  LJ's  reference  to  "cases  such  as  the
        present" as limiting the principle to such cases.
     1. Secondly, in applying the guidelines to cases  involving  different
        claimants, there may be a valid distinction  depending  on  whether
        the previous decision was in favour of or against the Secretary  of
        State. The difference is that the Secretary of State was  a  direct
        party to the first decision, whereas the claimant was  not.  It  is
        one thing to restrict a party from relitigating the same issue, but
        another to impose the same restriction  on  someone  who,  although
        involved in the previous  case,  perhaps  as  a  witness,  was  not
        formally a party. This is particularly relevant to  the  tribunal's
        comments, in Devaseelan,  on  what  might  be  "good  reasons"  for
        reopening the first decision. It suggested that such cases would be
        rare. It referred, for example, to  the  "increasing  tendency"  to
        blame representatives for unfavourable decisions  by  Adjudicators,
        commenting:
        "An Adjudicator should be very slow  to  conclude  that  an  appeal
        before another  Adjudicator  has  been  materially  affected  by  a
        representative's error or incompetence..."
        I understand the force of those comments where the second appeal is
        by the same claimant, but less so where it is by a different party,
        even if  closely  connected.  Although  I  would  not  exclude  the
        Devaseelan principles in such cases (for example, the  hypothetical
        series of cases involving the same family, cited in TK), the second
        tribunal may be more readily persuaded that there is "good  reason"
        to revisit the earlier decision. "
22. We derive from this guidance that, subject to being satisfied  there  is
a common factual matrix (and also subject to the  "more  readily  persuaded"
qualification set out in para  70  of  A  (Somalia)),  it  is  incumbent  on
immigration judges to follow findings of fact made  by  the  Tribunal  in  a
reported case dealing with the same factual  matrix  unless  there  is  good
reason to revisit the earlier decision.

23. Applying the guidance given in A  (Somalia)  to  the  present  case,  we
would make three observations. First, we think  the  IJ  should  have  taken
more care to check the latest  position  regarding  the  test  cases  before
signing the determination.   By  having  himself  described  them  as  "test
cases" the IJ must clearly have appreciated that they would involve a  panel
that would very likely have regard to a great deal more  evidence  than  was
available to him and that would make findings having relevance to all  CCOL-
related cases.  There was clearly going  to  be  a  common  factual  matrix.
Further, what his determination stated about them -  that  "these  have  not
yet been decided" - was factually incorrect at the time of promulgation.  It
might well be said that an IJ cannot be expected to  keep  an  eye  out  for
every freshly reported case, but even if that is so, for  that  very  reason
an IJ should not say a case has not been decided without checking.

24. Second, both at the level of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (FTT)  and  the
Upper Tribunal (UT) there is a clear objective and interest  in  like  cases
being decided alike.  If a jurisdiction has taken active steps  to  identify
test cases and  to  conduct  a  hearing  for  that  purpose,  it  is  highly
desirable that all other judges then seek to decide their own cases  in  the
light of them.  Whether  or  not  such  cases  should  then  be  treated  as
determinative will depend (following A (Somalia)  on  whether  there  exists
any good reason for departing from the findings made in that case;  but  not
to have regard to those findings or (absent good reason) to  make  divergent
findings on the same evidence is erroneous.

25. At the same  time,  certainly  when  the  Tribunal's  findings  of  fact
concern college courses, it must always be recalled that the  focus  of  any
appeal is a decision made against  an  individual  applicant.  That  entails
that in order to decide the relevance of  those  findings  of  fact  to  the
appeal, individual consideration must be given  to  the  case  made  by  the
appellant and the evidence he or she produces in support of  it.  There  can
be no mechanical deduction from general findings of  fact  made  in  another
case that the  appellant  in  the  instant  case  must  automatically  fail.
Indeed, given that (1) in cases in which the respondent  considers  that  an
applicant has not submitted genuine educational qualifications (in the  CCOL
context, genuine PgDips) it is common for para 322(1A) to  be  invoked;  and
(2) that for immigration judges to find  false  representations  within  the
meaning of this paragraph have been  made  by  a  person  claiming  to  have
undertaken a PgDip at CCOL he or  she  must  be  satisfied  that  there  was
knowing deception (see above para 14), the need for focus on the  individual
appellant and his or her state of mind  is  even  more  essential.  To  that
extent (but to that extent only) it remains the case, as Hooper  LJ  in  the
minority stated in A (Somalia),  that  the  fundamental  obligation  of  the
judge independently is to decide the  second  case  on  its  own  individual
merits.

26. We would also add that we are surprised  that  this  IJ,  deciding  this
case when he did, did not at least consider whether  he  should  adjourn  or
delay promulgation in order to see whether it was necessary to reconvene  so
he had NA and Others available.  We appreciate that  immigration  judges  do
their best to work to strict time limits and  targets,  and  we  acknowledge
that there may have been listing considerations in play that may have had  a
bearing and might explain  the  non-adjournment,  but  there  is  no  public
interest in reaching decisions in cases  where  it  is  known  that  a  very
relevant test case decision from a panel of judges is imminent.

27. Having decided that the IJ materially erred in  law  we  concluded  that
his decision should be set aside.  Our attention turns to  the  question  of
what decision we should make in its place.

28. To this end the claimant was called to give oral  evidence.   In  cross-
examination he was reminded that whereas he had said to the IJ that  he  did
eight assignments, he had only produced four.  The claimant  said  that  the
other four had been saved on CCOL  laptops  and  he  had  not  kept  copies.
Asked why none of the four assignments submitted dealt  with  any  practical
examples,  the  claimant  said  the  other   four   dealt   with   practical
applications.  Asked why none of the four assignments submitted  showed  any
signs of having been marked, the claimant  said  that  the  tutors  recorded
marks separately on a mark sheet which was put up on a notice board.

29. In response to questions from the Tribunal the claimant said  all  eight
of his  assignments  were  the  collective  work  of  him  and  three  other
students.  The  tutors  gave  each  of  the  four  the  same  marks.   These
assignments accounted for 40% of the total course marks.   The  tutors  gave
him and the others feedback on them during lectures; there were  no  written
comments.  Asked about the notebook he had produced he said  it  represented
the entirety of the lecture notes he had taken during the  duration  of  the
course (which he said, in reply to a further  question  stretched  over  two
semesters of twenty weeks each for three days a week).  He  later  added  in
reply to a follow up question from Ms Ong, that  he  had  attended  all  his
lectures.  Asked twice why his notebook only seemed to contain notes  for  a
handful of lectures, he was unable to offer any reply, although he  did  add
shortly after that that perhaps his notebook was  only  his  main  notebook.
Asked if he had tried to contact any of the three  other  students  who  had
named as having done the assignments with him,  the  claimant  said  he  was
still in contact with one of them but he had  not  asked  that  person.   He
himself had moved house once so he had not kept past materials such  as  the
syllabus, course notes and handouts once he got his diploma.   The  claimant
said he considered his lecturers/tutors to be good teachers.

30. In closing submissions Mr Ahmed emphasised that the Tribunal should  not
hold against the claimant that  CCOL  did  not  appear  to  have  very  good
teaching methods.  Even if 40% of  students'  marks  were  allotted  on  the
basis of group work, there were also individualised  exams  the  results  of
which had been specified in a document signed by the college  and  submitted
to UKBA with his application.  The notebook he had  produced  was  only  his
main notebook.  The claimant had  explained  why  he  had  not  kept  course
materials and it was now 2-3 years ago.  If there was fraud at  the  college
it is likely it occurred after the time this appellant studied there.

31. Ms Ong  contended  that  the  claimant's  evidence  was  improbable  and
contained nothing to justify the Tribunal taking a different  view  of  CCOL
PgDip cases than that taken in NA & Others.

Our Assessment

32. Now we are deciding what decision to re-make, we  must  have  regard  to
all the evidence including  that  identified  and  referred  to  in  NA  and
Others. We must also apply the guidance given by the Court of Appeal  in  AA
(Nigeria) and in Pankina: see above paras 14-15.

33. It follows from our earlier observations on the status of NA and  Others
that we think it would be an error for an Immigration  Judge  to  dismiss  a
CCOL-related appeal solely on the basis that NA and Others  made  a  finding
of fact that the college never ran PgDip courses.  A fortiori  it  would  be
wrong to base the  dismissal  on  para  322(1A)  grounds  without  examining
whether the particular individual concerned  did  or  did  not  use  knowing
deception. There is still a fundamental duty of individual consideration.

34. It would therefore be wrong for Immigration Judges to  seek  to  dismiss
CCOL-related  cases  on  the  basis  of  template  decisions  that  make  no
reference to the individual  circumstance  of  each  applicant  and  do  not
engage with the evidence he or she has produced, with a  view  to  comparing
that with the findings reached in NA and Others before reaching a  decision.
 No judge should wholly shut his or her mind to  the  possibility  at  least
that findings of fact made in another case  were  wrong.  (Whether  however,
pro forma dismissals of this kind amount to a  material  error  of  law  may
still depend on what evidence the appellant has produced in support  of  his
or her appeal.)

35. Equally, however, Immigration Judges must have regard  to  the  findings
made in NA and Others  in  two  different,  interrelated,  ways.  First,  as
already adumbrated, quite separately from its findings, the case contains  a
record of evidence considered. The decision makes clear  that  the  Tribunal
had extensive documentary evidence,  including  evidence  from  senior  UKBA
officials and results of their  own  analysis  of  relevant  data,  evidence
about the results of an on-site investigation titled  "Operation  Asterion",
evidence relating to CCOL's dealings with accrediting  bodies,  evidence  of
materials placed on the CCOL  website,  evidence  of  e-mail  correspondence
between CCOL staff on the one hand and members  of  UKBA  officials  on  the
other, a number of witness statements from former tutors at CCOL  (including
further witness statements from two of the tutors whose  witness  statements
were before the Immigration Judge).  It also had the benefit of  examination
by experienced Counsel of the evidence of Mr  Stewart,  Mr  Malik  and  Miss
Ullah  as  well  as  the  benefit  of  detailed  submissions  by  the   same
experienced Counsel.

36. Second, NA and Others also  contains  an  evaluation  of  this  body  of
evidence, setting out its reasons for concluding that  CCOL  never  ran  any
PgDip courses. The findings of the panel in that case represent,  therefore,
a considered view based on an extremely detailed assessment.  The fact  that
these findings were also the subject of a reported case, reflects  the  fact
that it had been considered within the Tribunal judiciary to be  a  suitable
case for citation and wider dissemination.

37. It will also be important for immigration judges to bear  in  mind  that
following the reporting of NA and  Others,  a  large  number  of  appellants
whose cases  were  still  pending  were  sent  directions  by  the  Tribunal
judiciary  informing  them,  inter  alia,  that  this  decision   had   been
published. By this means they were surely alerted to  the  need  to  produce
further evidence and/or reasons, if any, why the Tribunal  should  not  come
to the same conclusion as the Tribunal in NA and Others.

38. In consequence, it is right to  expect  that  if  a  claimant  seeks  to
maintain notwithstanding the findings made in NA and Others that he  or  she
did study on a PgDip course at CCOL  he  will  be  able  to  produce  cogent
evidence.


39. Potentially that evidence could be of several kinds, including (but  not
necessarily limited to): (1) evidence directly  impugning  the  evidence  of
the UKBA research made into CCOL PgDip applications and the SSHD  witnesses,
which the  Tribunal  in  NA  and  Others  found  persuasive;   (2)   witness
statements from one or more other tutors   at  the  college  or  other  CCOL
staff in a position to verify by credible evidence what  courses  were  run;
(3) evidence from the DIUS  relating to the decision  to  take  the  college
off the register[1] (or from experts in a position to comment on the  merits
of that decision); (4) evidence from independent persons or bodies  who  had
had direct dealings with CCOL (e.g. accrediting bodies); (5)  evidence  from
the CCOL website over  the  relevant  period  (given  the  ease  with  which
internet documents can be  copied,  it  would  be  important  for  any  such
evidence to be submitted in original form); and (6) documents specific to  a
person's  own claimed studies.

40. If a claimant in seeking to produce evidence  and  /or  reasons  why  an
Immigration Judge should not  come  to  the  same  conclusions  as  did  the
Tribunal in NA and Others relies solely on documents  specific  to  his  own
claimed studies he or she must expect that evidence to  be  scrutinised  and
compared and contrasted with the  multi-sourced  and  diverse  documentation
and evidence considered and analysed in NA and Others.  As noted in  NA  and
Others when it turned from a consideration of the evidence  relied  upon  by
the three appellants in that case to the wider evidence:

        "132.    By contrast, the respondent  was  able  to  assemble  some
             significant pieces of evidence from his own research.  We  note
             that the UKBA had formed the view  in  October  2008  that  the
             evidence relating to such certificates was anomalous since,  as
             was noted by a UKBA Executive Officer, Robin Smith,  they  were
             being received in high numbers, well beyond the capacity for  a
             relatively small college (some 2,542 in the two months  leading
             up to 22 December 2008).  The documentation  submitted  was  of
             poor quality, in varying colours, some  letters  had  not  been
             signed by an individual but  just  a  'Programme  Leader',  the
             wording in some letters  from  the  college  was  identical  to
             others,  and  there  were  several  cases  where  the  overseas
             national had entered the UK as a student at another college but
             had submitted a qualification from CCOL whilst still registered
             with that other college.  In addition, UKBA  had  undertaken  a
             study of a sample of supporting documents submitted by students
             claiming to have been awarded  a  CCOL  certificate  in  either
             PgDip  in BM or IT on 20 August 2008.  An Executive Officer, Mr
             K Ara, found that of 29 individuals who had all submitted PgDip
             in BM or PgDip certificates, the  accompanying  'Transcript  of
             Academic Record', showed that a significant number had obtained
             identical pass marks to one another, regardless of  the  course
             start date, in eight subjects.  We would add that  all  of  the
             certificates refer to candidates 'having satisfied the board of
             examiners'.  We had no evidence to  suggest  that  the  college
             ever had any 'board of examiners'.


        143. Then there is the evidence we have from several of the college
             teachers.  In particular we have the evidence of Mr  Malik  and
             Miss Ullah which included their oral  evidence.   Mr  Macdonald
             did not challenge that evidence in  any  important  particular.
             They were very clear that CCOL has never run such  courses  and
             that, if they had, they would have known about it.  There  were
             also statements from several other teachers none of  whom  knew
             of the existence of such courses.  We bear  in  mind  that  the
             CCOL was a relatively small college occupying  a  ground  floor
             and a basement, having no more than 8 classrooms and consisting
             in approx. 150-300 students.  It is inconceivable that  courses
             said to have run on dates between late 2007 and late 2008 could
             have taken place, without Mr Malik and Miss Ullah and  probably
             the other teaching staff who gave statements, knowing about it.


        144.     Of some interest also is  the  evidence  in  the  form  of
             statements from two individuals who said they had been able  to
             purchase bogus CCOL  PgDips  in  BM  or  IT:  Opeoluwa  Atinuke
             Ehindero  and  George  Ratnaraj.   Although   not   playing   a
             significant part in our assessment, they give some insight into
             at least one of the ways in which it came  about  that  a  very
             large  number  of  individuals  in  the  second  half  of  2008
             submitted Post-Study Work or student applications to UKBA based
             on CCOL PgDips in BM or IT.  They describe agents selling  them
             bogus certificates.  Their description is similar to that given
             in news articles exhibited to us.  Mr Macdonald would  have  it
             that these show no more than that there were bogus as  well  as
             genuine applications made on the basis of such courses.  In our
             view however, it is far more likely that they form  part  of  a
             wider picture showing that these courses never ran."

41. In the claimant's case, not only was his own evidence not  supported  by
any of the other types of evidence specified in (1)-(5) in  para  37  above,
but we are unable to attach any credence to the materials  he  did  produce.
On the basis of his own answer, given  twice  before  us,  the  notebook  he
produced contained all his lecture notes for the  entire  course.   However,
that claim even if taken to mean (as he sought to assert  belatedly  in  his
oral evidence to us) that this was only his "main notebook"  is  simply  not
plausible.  On his own evidence he attended all his lectures.   We  did  not
establish how many lectures he had on each of the  three  days  he  said  he
attended but he did refer to attending "lectures" on  each  of  those  three
days and to each of the two semesters being twenty weeks.  Hence, at a  very
minimum,  he  must  have  attended  over  60  lectures.   Yet  his  notebook
contained only 29 A4 pages occupied by large, extremely neat,  double-spaced
writing.  The first page begins with an entry "22/10/07";  three and a  half
pages later there is  an  entry  "31/10/07";  half  a  page  later  one  for
"06/11/07"; another two pages on, one for "21/11/07";   another  two  and  a
half  pages  on,  one  for  "28/11/07";  another  two  pages  on,  one   for
"02/12/07"; four pages on, one for "18/12/07"; another three pages  on,  one
for "09/01/08"; another six pages  on,  one  for  "15/01/08";  another  four
pages on, one for "11/02/08".  There are then 10 pages without any  further
date entry.  At the end of the notebook there are several pages of workings-
out.  There are therefore only eleven entries with dates.  Although  the  IJ
appeared to think the appellant  may  not  necessarily  have  remembered  to
enter all the lecture dates, we consider, given the extreme brevity  of  the
existing entries, that they  at best suggest materials  relating  to  eleven
lectures.  (We also wondered, given how short some of the entries  for  each
date were, how it was that the appellant could  describe  his  lecturers  as
good; but we decided in the end not to take any point regarding this, as  we
recognise that (sadly) teaching of low quality is  not  unknown  in  today's
colleges.) The claimant did not produce or refer to there being  any  course
handouts or textbooks that might perhaps have  been  thought  to  supplement
the lectures and thus reduce the need for taking his own notes. Nor  did  he
seek to suggest he was so confident of his own abilities  that  he  did  not
take lectures and taking lecture notes seriously.

42. As regards the assignments, none of the four  produced  were  marked  or
bore any sign of having been commented on and,  indeed,  on  the  claimant's
own  evidence it was the same with  the  other  four.   We  find  it  highly
implausible that the appellant  could  have  submitted  written  assignments
amounting to 40% of the potential marks counting  towards  the  award  of  a
PgDip without receiving any written comments either made on the  assignments
themselves or in a separate personalised note.  We are aware  that  on  many
courses  in  IT  and  business  studies,  students  are  assessed  for  some
assignments on the basis of group work, but the notion  that  all  of  eight
assignments making up a PgDip in BM award  be  joint  products  is  hard  to
swallow.  In any event, the assignments themselves were in general  textbook
form and made no  reference  to  any  specific  examples,  relating  to  the
performance of e.g. of individual firms. In this regard we  simply  fail  to
understand why the IJ appeared to think that  these  assignments  showed  on
the part of the appellant at least "application and methodology in  itself":
if they had  simply  been  cut  and  pasted  from  the  internet,  the  only
"application and methodology" would have been on the part  of  the  original
author(s). That makes it even  harder  to  accept  that  they  were  genuine
assignments on a course of  this  type.   The  IJ  appears  to  have  viewed
positively the fact that the English expression in these assignments was  of
a good  standard,  yet  in  our  view  that  only  highlights  the  lack  of
resemblance they bear to the appellant's own much less  proficient  standard
of English, at least as shown by his oral evidence.

43. Given that the claimant knew in advance of the hearing before  us  about
the case of  NA  and  Others  and  was  notified  by  the  Tribunal  of  the
importance of submitting any further evidence, we find  it  very  surprising
that he said he had not taken steps to contact fellow  students  to  see  if
they could assist with course materials etc, nor had he taken any  steps  to
contact former tutors.  He has known since January 2009 that  his  claim  to
have pursued a PgDip in BM at CCOL was not accepted by the SSHD and  yet  he
failed to mention taking any steps at that stage to assemble and  keep  safe
such materials as course syllabus, course handouts, lecture  timetables  and
correspondence with tutors.

44. In short, we found the claimant's oral evidence  deeply  unsatisfactory.
Considering  that  evidence  together  with  the  written  evidence  he  had
produced and placing that evidence alongside  the  evidence  identified  and
analysed in NA and Others, we are satisfied that he has deliberately  sought
to use deception by producing materials that have no relation to  any  PgDip
course undertaken at CCOL. We see no good reason evinced by his evidence  to
depart from the unequivocal finding made in NA and Others  that  CCOL  never
ran any PgDip courses.

45. The effect of the findings we have made are that we  are  (1)  satisfied
that the respondent discharged  the  burden  on  him  of  proving  that  the
claimant  had  made  false  representations;  (2)  that  in  any  event  the
appellant failed to show that he met  the  requirements  contained  in  para
245Z of the Immigration Rules that the appellant had undertaken study for  a
PgDip in BM at CCOL.

46. To conclude:

The Immigration  Judge  materially  erred  in  law  and  we  set  aside  his
decision.

The decision we remake is to dismiss the appellant's appeal.




Signed                                             Date



Senior Immigration Judge Storey
(Judge of the Upper Tribunal)

                           -----------------------
[1] Since the period when  CCOL  was  still  operating  as  a  college,  the
register of education and training providers published by the DIUS has  been
replaced - as from 31 March 2009 - by the UKBA  register  of  sponsors.  The
register of sponsors lists all organizations that the UK Border  Agency  has
licensed to employ migrant workers or sponsor migrant students.

