
               EA (Azerbaijan male - Armenian ethnicity - risk) Azerbaijan
CG [2007] UKAIT 00032

Asylum and Immigration Tribunal


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 10 January 2007                              |On 26 March 2007           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       Senior Immigration Judge Allen
                    Designated Immigration Judge Coleman


                                   Between



                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Collins, Counsel, instructed by Sheikh & Co.

For the Respondent:        Ms K Lonsdale, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

An Azerbaijan male of Armenian ethnicity who has come to  the  attention  of
the authorities in Azerbaijan faces a real risk of persecution.

1.   This is the reconsideration  of  the  appellant's  appeal  against  the
    Secretary of State's decision of 9 June 2003 refusing  leave  to  enter
    the United Kingdom.  The appellant is  a  national  of  Azerbaijan  who
    claims to be at risk  on  return  to  that  country.   His  appeal  was
    initially  heard  by  an  Adjudicator  who  had  dismissed  it   in   a
    determination promulgated on 13 January   2004.    An  application  for
    permission to appeal to the Immigration Appeal Tribunal  was  received,
    it seems, on 23 July  2004.   Thereafter the matter did not come before
    a Senior  Immigration  Judge  until  5  April   2005.   As  the  Senior
    Immigration Judge noted, the application was almost six months  out  of
    time and he averted to the further  problems  that  appeared  to   have
    existed in obtaining the file given delay between the  application  for
    permission and the placing of the  file  before  a  Senior  Immigration
    Judge.   The  Senior  Immigration  Judge   accepted   the   appellant's
    explanations as to why it was that the  application  was  so  late  and
    considered that it would be unjust in the circumstances not  to  extend
    time and therefore he extended  time.   Thereafter  he  considered  the
    reasoning of the  Adjudicator  to  be  arguably  perverse  and  ordered
    reconsideration.   At a hearing on 6 November 2006 it was agreed  "that
    the Adjudicator had materially erred in law in failing  to  assess  the
    risk to the appellant from the KGB. Clear findings on  all  aspects  of
    the appellant's claim were needed". The hearing was therefore adjourned
    for a second stage reconsideration.

2.   We heard evidence from the appellant.   He adopted his statement  of  9
    April 2003 which he was content to stand as part of his evidence.  With
    regard to a matter raised  at  paragraph   11(a)  of  the  reasons  for
    refusal letter, he was asked to confirm how it was that he came  to  be
    released on 9 January 2003.   He  said  that  they  made  him  sign  an
    undertaking to work with them and then they took him back to Genja.  He
    also adopted the answers he had given at interview on 8  May  2003  and
    the contents of his statement of 4 January 2007.

3.   He was referred to the statement of evidence form at 1.15.    There  he
    said he had come to the United Kingdom in a caravan. He clarified  that
    he meant a lorry.

4.   He was then referred to his answer to  question  64  at  interview.  He
    confirmed that he was hidden and that was how he  avoided  immigration.
    As to what the agent had told  him to do about claiming asylum, he said
    that he had taken him to a solicitor and he had given him a letter  and
    told him to go to the Home Office and apply there.

5.   It was clear, he said, that  he  was  of  Armenian  ethnicity  and  his
    wife's ethnicity was also  Armenian.   He was asked  what  problems  he
    experienced in Armenia prior to  his detention in 2002 and he said that
    there were always problems and there were problems between Muslims  and
    Christians. The problems he experienced, however, were  not  enough  to
    cause him to leave  Azerbaijan at that time. By problems he  meant  for
    example that if there were good jobs going  they  would  always  go  to
    their own ethnic nationals and children  might  throw  stones  at  your
    windows saying you  were  Armenian.    He  referred  also  to  problems
    between Muslims and Christians.

6.   He was referred to various matters contained in  the  first  statement,
    as we shall refer to it, of 9 April  2003.   He  was  asked  why,  with
    reference to paragraph 9 of that statement, the Omon (the police) asked
    him and his wife why they had not gone  to  vote  in  the  election  if
    Armenians were not able to vote in such an  election.    He  said  that
    these were just excuses to harass them.  They did not have  Azerbaijani
    passports.  He was asked why  on  this  occcasion  he  thought  he  was
    detained and not just harassed and he said they were accused of causing
    disturbances in a particular area of the town.  These  were  the  areas
    where the ethnic minorities would gather.  He said he and his wife were
    not involved but the Omon were looking for an excuse.  By  saying  they
    were not involved he said they never went there.   But they  could  not
    prove this. The place in question was one where people got together for
    meetings.  He had always kept away  from  political  issues.   In  this
    regard he was referred also to his answer to question 30  at  interview
    where he had said he had never been deeply involved  or  interested  in
    politics.  He repeated that that had always been the case. He was asked
    why therefore the authorities focussed on him on 8 November 2002 and he
    said that that was the election day.

7.   He was referred to paragraph  15 of the first  statement  concerning  a
    book found at his  house by the Omon, being a book  written  by  a  man
    called Guliev. He said that they had smashed their way in and found the
    book by Guliev, which is about a freedom fighter who escaped them  i.e.
    the Azerbaijani regime, and went to the USA. He was asked why the  book
    would cause him such problems and he said it was illegal.  It concerned
    the Azerbaijani President Aliev, and was against him.  It described all
    the criminal acts and violence against minorities  including  Armenians
    which had been ordered by the President.

8.   He was asked why  he  as  a  person  of  Armenian  origin  who  had  no
    political involvement would be wanted by the KGB (i.e.  the  Azerbaijan
    secret police) to work for them. He said that they would do anything to
    undermine Armenians to the rest of the  world.   They  caused  friction
    between Armenians and other groups to cause the  Armenians to be blamed
    for trouble.  There had in the past been conflict between  Armenia  and
    Azerbaijan which had led to a war.

9.   He was then referred to paragraph  20 of the  statement  where  he  had
    said he had promised to go to the solicitors' building.  He  said  that
    in the undertaking document he had said that he had  to  go  after  his
    release to a building which was a centre of solicitors and  they  would
    tell him what to do and he would have to do it.

10.  It was suggested to him that, as had been said at paragraph 12  of  the
    refusal letter, this might be thought to  lack  credibility  since  the
    Secretary of State believed that the  KGB  would  have  put  him  under
    surveillance and therefore did not believe it would have been  possible
    for him to escape as he claimed.   He said that  he  had  to  sign  the
    paper or they would not release him and they had released him  when  he
    signed.  The document which he had signed was distributed  by  them  to
    all former Soviet Union states and he could be arrested within a day if
    he had stayed there. It was suggested to him that  the  refusal  letter
    queried why they would do all that  when  they  could  keep  him  under
    surveillance and he said that no-one could question the KGB as  to  why
    they did what they did.

11.  The concern of the Secretary of State expressed  at  paragraph   13  of
    the  refusal  letter  was  put  to   him   concerning   the   contended
    implausibility  of him not knowing that the KGB building  was  occupied
    by KGB agents though it was only 500m from where he lived. He said that
    they never wrote on this building that it was KGB  building  and  would
    only do that in Baku where there was a big building which said it was a
    KGB building.

12.  He was asked whether he could have moved elsewhere  in  Azerbaijan  and
    he said one could not get away from  the  KGB  and  it  would  make  no
    difference.

13.  He was asked why he had not stayed on in St. Petersburg where  he  said
    he had gone to stay with  his sister for a while.  He said  that  again
    he feared the KGB. They would have given notice to every  part  of  the
    country.  Because he owned a house there perhaps they did not think  he
    would leave his house and get out.  He had made reference in  his  most
    recent statement to his house now being sold.   He was asked  why   the
    authorities would do that and he said he did not know the  details  and
    probably it was as he had promised to work for the KGB and they were  a
    very important part of the state.    As  the  house  was  owned  by  an
    Armenian they could sell to another Armenian and this was a  matter  of
    internal regulation in the state. He was asked why there would still be
    an interest in him four years on and he said that even after four years
    it would be the same.  You could not get away from the KGB when you had
    made a previous undertaking to them.

14.  When cross-examined by Ms Lonsdale the appellant was asked  whether  he
    had had problems  with the  authorities prior to his detention in 2002.
      He said no, the most  direct  problem  was  that  they  felt  tension
    because they were of Armenian ethnicity.  When he was detained in  2000
    he was never taken before a court or charged with an offence.  The  KGB
    told him that for causing a  disturbance  in  public  he  could  get  a
    sentence from three to nine years. If he had been taken to a prison for
    only a month he would have died under  torture.    He  had  never  been
    given any legal  representation  during  the  two  months  he  was   in
    detention.

15.  With reference to the book by Mr Guliev,  he was asked whether  he  had
    been aware that  it  was  illegal  and  he  said  yes  it  was  on  the
    television.  He was asked why he had the book given that he had said he
    had avoided politics in Azerbaijan.  He said  it  was  an   interesting
    book.  He had not thought that they would come and  search  the  house.
    The book was about the cause of  Armenians  and  the  misdeeds  of  the
    President.  He  was  aware  that  he  could  be  in  trouble  with  the
    authorities just for having the book. It was the case not only for  him
    but for anyone who possessed it.  He was again asked  why,  if  he  was
    avoiding politics, he had the book in his possession when he was  aware
    of the danger and he said it was interesting to read and pictures in it
    showed how Armenians were killed.

16.  He was asked whether he gave any explanation when they told   him  they
    knew he had the book.  He said that they had not questioned  him  about
    the book but used it as an excuse to force him to work  for  them.  The
    book had been well hidden inside the  house but they had  searched  the
    whole house.

17.  He was asked whether while he was detained they had  asked  him  if  he
    was involved in any political movement. He said yes, they asked him  if
    he knew anyone and mentioned certain names, but he said he did not know
    these people. They had intended to create fear  in  him  so   he  would
    agree to work for them.  As to what exactly they had asked him  to  do,
    he said that they had said they would pay him  and  that  he  would  be
    given a map and he was to go to the ethnic minorities . He did not know
    what he was supposed to do.  Perhaps the minorities or  the  KGB  would
    have killed him.  That was all they had told him.  He was to go to  the
    solicitors' office and they would tell him what to do.   He  was  asked
    whether he had not asked more about what he would have to do  and  they
    said that at the solicitors  he should do what they told him, just give
    his name and they would tell him what to do.  They had  not  given  him
    any money at that time.

18.  He was asked whether he was aware of the contents  of  the  declaration
    he had signed and he said it  was  an  undertaking  and  it  was  their
    document to say that he was  prepared  to  work  for  the  KGB  and  do
    anything  they  told  him  to  in  the  interest  of   the   Azerbaijan
    authorities.   He had not been give a copy of the document.

19.  What had happened  then was that two  people  took  him  to  Genja  and
    those two people were KGB officers. They had told him to go home and to
    go the solicitors' office the next day.

20.  He was asked how long he was at home before he  left   Azerbaijan.   He
    said that it was about four or five o'clock and dark when he got  home.
     He had left that night on the same day.     He was in such a state  he
    probably did not even remember his own name. It was the same night when
    they left.  He had taken with him what funds he  had.   This  had  been
    money in the house, some $600 or $700, which was not enough to get  him
    to a destination but enough to get away. The money had been  hidden  in
    the house. He did not have any other money. He  had obtained the  money
    from his business selling clothes and shoes.

21.  He had travelled to Tbilisi initially and then to Minvodi and  then  to
    St. Petersburg. He could not remember exactly how long  he  had  stayed
    with  his sister in St. Petersburg, but it was about a month.  They had
    been looking for  someone  to  help  them  escape.  He  had  been  very
    frightened even there and had been in a very  bad  state.  He  had  not
    experienced any problems while in St. Petersburg.    It was put to  him
    that in his statement he had said he was there fore two months  and  he
    said he could not remember.  He was asked  why  if  he  experienced  no
    problems had he come to the United Kingdom  and he  said  he  had  been
    staying  in the house  and  was  too  frightened  to  go  out  and  was
    frightened the KGB would find him there.   When he had left  Azerbaijan
    his neighbour had taken him to Tbilisi.    His sister had to pay  $4000
    for both him and his wife to go to St Petersburg. Her  husband   worked
    in business and they had money and $4000 was not a lot of money  in  St
    Petersburg in comparison to Genja.

22.  He was asked whether he  had been in contact with anyone in  Azerbaijan
    since he came to the United Kingdom.  He said that a man telephoned his
    sister and  she  telephoned  him  about  the  sale  of  his  home.   He
    identified this man but said he preferred not to give his name  because
    it could be dangerous for him. He identified this man as E.   The  full
    name was given in the appellant's most recent statement.

23.  On re-examination the appellant was asked why it was dangerous to  give
    this man's name to them and said  that  if  they  found  he  had  given
    information out of the country to the appellant he would be  prosecuted
    or tried. He would be in trouble because the  appellant's  problem  had
    been with the KGB and they might put this man under  some  pressure  to
    say where he was.  Selling the house was a  state  matter  and  he  had
    informed the appellant while he was outside the country and he could be
    accused of helping them to flee Azerbaijan.  It was this  man  who  had
    told him about the house sale over the telephone.

24.  As to why he had gone to St Petersburg if he was so frightened  of  the
    KGB, he said he had nowhere else to go. He said he had it  in  mind  to
    flee. He had his sister there and he wanted to  leave  Russia.     With
    regard to the question of whether he was in St Petersburg for  a  month
    or two months, he said he could not remember exactly and they were in a
    very bad state and he had felt as though he  had  a  noose  around  his
    neck.  It was suggested to him that surely he would remember  now  when
    he was not in a situation of such tension and  he  said  he  could  not
    remember whether it was a month or two months and at the  time  he  had
    not even known what day it was. They had never left the  house.

25.  He was referred to  the book by Guliev.  He had realised the  book  was
    illegal to own. He knew this because it had been on television. He  had
    not thought that they would smash the  door  in  and  ever  search  the
    house.  He was 100% certain that if they had not found  the  book  they
    would have planted something, narcotics or a bomb, so as to accuse  him
    of something. The book was just their excuse.  It was hidden downstairs
    on the book shelf behind bigger books.  The money had been kept in  the
    basement which was a place where people kept money.   He was asked  why
    they would not find and take the money if they searched the house.   He
    said they did not find it.  They did not find the jewellery either.  He
    did not know.  Perhaps they had found it and did not take it.   He  was
    asked why he said that and he said  as  they  were  not  interested  in
    finding $600.  They could not do anything with it.  Or perhaps they had
    found the book and that was enough.

26.  We asked the appellant to clarify what he was saying as to what he  was
    told he would do for the KGB. He said that they had said  that  he  had
    been given a map and would be given all the detail at  the  solicitors'
    office. He had been worried in case it was narcotics and they  said  it
    was only money and they would give  him a map.

27.  On further examination by Mr Collins the appellant said that the  money
    would have been for him to pass on to the ethnic  minorities.   He  had
    not  known  any  more  than  that.   He  had  to  go  and  receive  his
    instructions.  If you touched KGB money with a red colour then it would
    not wash off.

28.  In her  submissions  Ms  Lonsdale  argued  that  the  appellant  lacked
    credibility. He had given different accounts as to whether he had known
    the  book was illegal.  Even if he had known  he would not  have  taken
    the risk of keeping it in his home.  Also it  lacked  credibility  that
    the KGB would not be have found  the  money  and  jewellery  when  they
    searched his  home.  There was no credible reason  why  the  KGB  would
    have trusted him to work for them. Nor was it credible  that  he  would
    have gone to St Petersburg when he said he felt  in  danger  there.  He
    could have gone to another area and his  sister  could  have  sent  the
    money to him.   It was not necessary to go to  St  Petersburg  for  the
    length of time he did and in any event the accounts he had given as  to
    how long he stayed with his sister varied.   He was  likely  to  be  an
    economic migrant.

29.  Otherwise  Ms  Lonsdale  referred  to  the  decision  she  had  put  in
    Sarkisian [2002] UKIAT 01257, in particular at  paragraph   10.    With
    regard to the authorities put in by Mr  Collins,  she  argued  that  GM
    [2005] UKAIT 00147 was concerned with  politically  active  individuals
    and the appellant would not be so viewed,  and  as  regards  the  other
    case, Teymor [2002] UKIAT 03404, there were particular risk factors  in
    that case which were different from those in this case.

30.  In his submissions Mr Collins referred first of all to s.8  issues  but
    argued that the explanation given by the appellant for not claiming  on
    arrival should be accepted.

31.  Thereafter Mr Collins addressed the  various  matters  in  relation  to
    which the appellant's credibility  had  been  doubted  in  the  refusal
    letter and in Ms Lonsdale's submissions. He argued that the appellant's
    credibility should be accepted and  that  any  discrepancies  were  not
    material.

32.  As regards the objective evidence, Mr Collins first  of  all  addressed
    us on the general human rights issues in Azerbaijan.   The  appellant's
    account was clearly consistent  with  what  was  said  in  the  various
    reports in the bundle. There were both general  human  rights  problems
    and specific problems for people such as  the  appellant  who  were  of
    Armenian ethnicity.

33.  With regard to  the  case  law  put  in,  Teymor  was  relevant.    The
    appellant there had been out of Azerbaijan for a number  of  years  but
    that would also, albeit to a lesser extent, be true  of  the  appellant
    and by now there were fewer Armenians in Azerbaijan than had  been  the
    case when the Tribunal considered the objective  evidence  then.   Also
    the Tribunal had benefited from the assistance of expert evidence.   It
    was not argued that the appellant was at risk purely on account of  his
    Armenian ethnicity, and as had been pointed out  at  paragraph   10  of
    Sarkisian, each case must turn on its own facts, and it had  been  said
    there that some might have merit. The  analysis  in  Teymor  should  be
    preferred.    Although  GM  did  not  concern  a  person  of   Armenian
    ethnicity, it was consistent with  the  objective  evidence  relied  on
    today and there were also references to Mr Guliev, at paragraph   6  in
    that determination concerning his attempt to return to Azerbaijan.

34.  The Azerbaijan state was essentially a police state. If  the  appellant
    was found to be credible then he was a person  who  had  reneged  on  a
    promise to help the KGB and in whose possession a book critical of  the
    President had been found.  He  would  come  to  the  attention  of  the
    authorities on return.  The objective evidence amply  demonstrated  the
    grim climate of human rights in Azerbaijan. The appellant would face  a
    real risk on return.

35.  We reserved our determination.

Reasoning and conclusions
36.  We take the appellant's account of his claim from  the  interview,  the
    two statements and the oral evidence before us.  We bear in  mind  that
    it is for him to show a real risk of breach  of  his  protected  rights
    under the Refugee Convention, the Qualification Directive as set out in
    the amended Immigration Rules  and  regulations  and  under  the  Human
    Rights Convention.   Mr Collins accepted that there was no human rights
    claim going beyond the Refugee Convention claim in this case, and it is
    clear that that particular claim  is  one  based  on  ethnicity  and/or
    imputed political opinion.

The appellant's claim
37.  The appellant is an Azerbaijan national of  Armenian ethnicity,  as  is
    his wife.  He is aged fifty-three and he is a Christian.  He  does  not
    claim to have  experienced   particular  problems  on  account  of  his
    Armenian ethnicity prior to the particular events that led him to leave
    Azerbaijan which he said commenced on 8 November  2002.   He  had  felt
    tension on account of his Armenian ethnicity  but  had  experienced  no
    problems with the authorities.  The  appellant  was  self-employed  and
    bought shoes from Georgia and sold them in  Azerbaijan   and  his  wife
    worked in a hospital. On 8 November 2002 they went  to  the  market  in
    Genja which is the town where they lived.  The  police,  known  as  the
    Omon, were at the gates to the market and closed the market  gates  and
    started to check people. It seems that there was an election  going  on
    and because the appellant and his wife did not have passports  and  had
    only got ID cards showing their names they did not have  the  right  to
    vote.  It was the day of the  city/town  election  and  the  Omon  were
    checking to see who had gone to vote and who had  not. They  asked  the
    appellant and  his wife why they had not gone to vote in  the  election
    and took them to the police station.

38.  They were separated and he was taken to a room and kept for a  day  and
    next day a policeman took him to Baku. There he  was  taken  to  a  KGB
    building by two guards and kept there for two months. During that  time
    he did not see his wife or know of her whereabouts.    He was kept in a
    small room. He was fed and there was a sink and toilet in the room.  If
    he ever asked if he could leave the room he was hit with the butt of  a
    gun.   On 8 January 2003 he was  taken  to  the  basement  of  the  KGB
    building and questioned. He was told that when the police searched  his
    home they had found a book written by a man called Guliev. The book, he
    said, was mainly about Aliev,  the  President  of  Azerbaijan   and  it
    described him as a dictator. He said in his statement  that  this  book
    was prohibited literature.  At interview, he said when asked whether he
    was allowed to keep such material that they were not allowed to a  have
    this book but there was no official declaration of  banning  the  book.
    In oral evidence he said that the book was illegal. He had known it was
    illegal. It had been said that this was the  case  on  the  television.
    He said that Guliev was the leader of the Freedom Party. He  said  that
    he had the book because it was an interesting book. It  was  about  the
    case of Armenians and about the President. He had not thought that they
    would come and search his house. He had kept  the  book  hidden  behind
    other books in a book case.

39.  The plainclothes man told him that because the book by Guliev had  been
    found in his home he had been sentenced to between three to  nine years
    imprisonment but he would not be imprisoned if he listened to  him  and
    followed what he asked him to do.    He then went  on  to  say  that  a
    minority group of the Muslims were called Hamams who  were  opposed  to
    Aliev.  It was suggested to him that he should join this group and  act
    as a courier taking various items such as maps and money  in  order  to
    trap the Hamams.  He accepted this because he said he knew  he  had  no
    other way out and feared he would be imprisoned  for up to  nine  years
    and ill-treated and indeed quite possibly killed in prison.

40.  He was taken back to Genja on 9 January 2003 and said he was to  go  to
    what he described as a solicitors'  building   which  it  seems  was  a
    building where a number of firms  of  solicitors  practiced,  where  he
    would be given instructions as to what to do.  He  was  left  in  Genja
    after he had signed to say he would not run  away  and  had  agreed  to
    cooperate with them.

41.  He went home and found his wife there.  She had  been  kept  for  three
    days after her arrest and had a  court   hearing  on  the  fourth  day.
    Initially they said they would detain her for two months but then  said
    that as it was her first offence they would detain her for  two  weeks.
    She was kept in a place like a prison chamber and treated  very  badly.
    She said that when she returned home her door had been  broken  in  and
    everything was all over the place.

42.  On the evening of the day when the appellant came  home  he  went  with
    his wife to Georgia by car, driven by a neighbour who was  a  Georgian.
    They stayed in Tbilisi for a week and then went  on  to  St  Petersburg
    where his sister lives. In the statement he said that he  went  to  his
    sister's home for just over two months, whereas  in  oral  evidence  he
    could not remember and thought it  was  a  month.    He  said  that  he
    collected some $600 or $700 from his home  before  leaving.   That  had
    been hidden in the basement together with  some  jewellery,  which  had
    also not been found by the KGB.  As to why the KGB had  not  found  the
    money and the jewellery, he surmised that it was not what they had gone
    to find and perhaps they had found it and left  it,  or  alternatively,
    that perhaps having found the book they did not deem  it  necessary  to
    search any further.  He said that his sister and her husband, who is  a
    businessman, had money, and in relative terms to Genja it was not a lot
    of money for them in St Petersburg.  He then went on  to  describe  the
    arrangements by which he came to the United Kingdom.  They  arrived  on
    31 March  2003 and the agent took them to London, to  a  solicitor  who
    gave  him a letter and because it was late he had  to  wait  until  the
    next day to  claim  asylum  and  because  on  the  next  day  they  had
    difficulties finding the Home Office they were not able to claim asylum
    until 2 April 2003, at  Croydon.

The background evidence
43.  The US State Department Country  Report  on Human Rights  Practices  in
    Azerbaijan  for 2005 describes the government's human rights record  as
    remaining poor and it continued to commit numerous abuses.  There  were
    credible reports that security forces had beaten detainees  to  extract
    confessions while in custody.  Prison  conditions  remained  harsh  and
    life-threatening despite improvements in the prison  infrastructure  in
    recent years.  Harsh prison conditions resulted in  107  deaths  during
    the year and at least four of these were  said  to  be  the  result  of
    torture or abuse.  Although the  law  prohibits  arbitrary  arrest  and
    detention, the government generally did not observe these  prohibitions
    in practice, and impunity remained a problem. There was also a  problem
    of law enforcement corruption.    The  police  often  levied  spurious,
    informal fines for traffic and other  minor  violations  and  extracted
    protection money from local residents.  It is  also  said  that  police
    officers acted with impunity, and in most  cases  the  government  took
    little or no action.   Although the law  states  that  people  who  are
    detained  arrested or accused of crime should be advised immediately of
    their rights and reasons for arrest and accorded due  process  of  law,
    the government did not respect these provisions in practice.  A  number
    of examples are given of arbitrary behaviour  by  the  police  and  the
    government.  There is a serious problem of lengthy pre-trial  detention
    of between three and six months.   Although the  law  provides  for  an
    independent  judiciary,   in   practice   judges   did   not   function
    independently of the executive branch.  The judiciary is  described  as
    being corrupt and inefficient.  Although the  constitution  allows  for
    searches of residences only with a court order or in cases specifically
    provide by  law,  authorities  in  practice  often  conducted  searches
    without warrants.

44.  There is specific mention  of  a  relative  of  the  exiled  opposition
    leader Rasul Guliev having been detained at the airport on  charges  of
    carrying a gun. This lady, Almaz Gulieva, a British citizen,  collapsed
    when airport police showed her the supposed weapon. She  was  taken  to
    hospital and  released after she recovered three weeks later. She  left
    the country immediately thereafter.   International  observers  doubted
    the credibility of the evidence in the case.  There is also mention  of
    the arrest of a nephew of Mr Guliev who was sentenced to  three  months
    imprisonment for threatening the police with  a  weapon  in  connection
    with Guliev's planned return to Azerbaijan.  The  authorities  did  not
    charge the nephew with a specific crime at  the time of his arrest  and
    his confession was obtained by prosecutors only after detaining him  on
    unrelated charges for several days.

45.  Although the law provides  for  freedom  of  assembly,  the  government
    restricted  this  right  in  practice.    There  is  widespread  public
    perception of corruption throughout all facets of society including the
    civil  service,  government  ministries  and  the  highest  levels   of
    government.  There are said to be only some twenty thousand citizens of
    Armenian descent living in the country. They complain of discrimination
    in employment, schooling, housing, provision of   social  services  and
    other areas. It is said that Azerbaijani citizens  who  are  ethnically
    Armenian often conceal their identity by legally  changing  the  ethnic
    designation in their  passports.

46.  This unattractive picture is repeated in other reports.  For  example,
    the Amnesty International report of 23 May  2006  on  Azerbaijan  gives
    examples of security forces using excessive  force  to  break  up  both
    authorised and unauthorised demonstrations in  Baku.  A  Freedom  House
    report, Freedom in the World 2006: Azerbaijan, states that  the   1993,
    1998  and  2003  Presidential  and  the  1995  and  2005  parliamentary
    elections were  considered  neither  free  nor  fair  by  international
    observers, and the 2005 parliamentary elections were likewise afflicted
    by extensive  irregularities.    There  are  again  references  to  the
    corruption  and  inefficiency  of  the  judiciary  and  the  fact  that
    arbitrary arrest and detention are common  and  prison  conditions  are
    reportedly severe.  There is  further  reference  to  some  members  of
    ethnic  minority  groups,  including  the  small  Armenian  population,
    complaining  of  discrimination    of   areas,   including   education,
    employment and housing.


47.  There appear to be ongoing problems between Armenians and Azerbaijanis
    which is  not without relevance to the perception  of  Azerbaijanis  of
    Armenian ethnicity.   Thus  there  is  a  report  at  page  14  of  the
    appellant's first objective evidence bundle of fresh exchanges of  fire
    between Armenians and Azerbaijani forces and there has been an  upsurge
    of cross border skirmishes during March 2006 which is the date  of  the
    report.


48.   In  the  most  recent  bundle  is  the  United  Kingdom  Foreign  and
    Commonwealth Office Human Rights Annual  Report   2006  of  Azerbaijan,
    dated 12 October  2006. It is said that,  despite  some  progress,  the
    Azerbaijan human rights record remains poor,  the  judiciary  does  not
    function independently of the executive and is widely perceived  to  be
    inefficient and corrupt. In the Operational Guidance Note on Azerbaijan
    of 4 December 2006 there is reference to the government  continuing  to
    commit numerous abuses including restrictions on the right of  citizens
    to peacefully change their government, torture and beating of   persons
    in custody, leading to four deaths,  arbitrary  arrest  and  detention,
    particularly of political  opponents,  police  impunity  and  pervasive
    corruption in the judiciary.  With regard to the situation of Armenians
    and those of  mixed  Armenian  and  Azerbaijani  ethnicity,  and  those
    involved in a mixed marriage,  at paragraph  3.6, it is  said  that  as
    this category of claimants' fears is of ill-treatment or persecution by
    the  state  authorities  they  cannot  apply  to  the  authorities  for
    protection, and nor is internal relocation feasible.  The conclusion in
    the Operational Guidance Note on the basis of what is  said  there  and
    the case law to which we shall come in a moment, is that in general the
    discrimination experienced by  ethnic  Armenians  does  not  amount  to
    persecution and will not breach Article 3 of the ECHR.


49.  We turn to the case law. None of the cases to which we  were  referred
    is or has been  country guidance, but they provide helpful guidance  as
    to the  country  conditions at the  relevant  times.  The  claimant  in
    Sarkisian  was  an  ethnic  Armenian  of  Azerbaijan  nationality.  The
    Adjudicator had found that he was at risk per se on  that  basis.   The
    Tribunal did  not  agree.   It  assessed  the  objective  evidence  and
    concluded that an ethnic Armenian could not establish even to  the  low
    standard of proof applicable, a well-founded  fear  of  persecution  on
    return to Azerbaijan on the grounds of ethnicity per se.   The point is
    made at paragraph  10 that of course each case must  turn  on  its  own
    factors and some may have merit.


50.  In Teymor, which was heard some three months later, the  Tribunal  had
    the benefit of expert evidence from Mr Robert Chenciner. He described a
    culture of discrimination and hostility towards ethnic Armenians  based
    on a  climate  of  bitterness  resulting   from  the  very  significant
    expulsion of Azeri refugees from Armenia and Armenians from Azerbaijan.
      He considered that the appellant in  that  case,  who  was  of  mixed
    ethnicity as his father was an Azeri and his mother an Armenian,  would
    be  recognised  as  half  Armenian  and  would  not  be  provided  with
    Azerbaijani papers.  The claimant had left Azerbaijan in 1990  when  he
    would have been aged around sixteen. The objective evidence before  the
    Tribunal suggested that  there  were  some  thirty  to  forty  thousand
    Armenians remaining in Azerbaijan and there was evidence  that  98%  of
    these were women and therefore there were very few males of the  age of
    the appellant.   The Tribunal concluded that the appellant,  though  he
    was not at risk of  persecution  from  the  fact  solely  of  being  of
    Armenian origin, was at risk on the basis  that he was a male aged  now
    twenty-six who had been out of Azerbaijan for some twelve  years  which
    would place him at risk on return.


51.  Finally, there is the decision in GM.  This was not concerned with  an
    ethnic Armenian but with risk  to  senior  members  of  the  Azerbaijan
    Democratic Party. The Tribunal concluded that  senior  members  of  the
    party  had  been  arrested  and  imprisoned  in  an  effort  to  stifle
    opposition  to  the  government  in  circumstances  that  amounted   to
    persecutory treatment, and there was background  evidence  that  family
    members of such people were also at risk.  At paragraph  19 he Tribunal
    noted that the situation in Azerbaijan had deteriorated as far  as  the
    Democratic Party was concerned.


52.   We  consider  that  the  appellant's  claim  is  consistent  with  the
    objective evidence.   It is relevant to note that he does not  complain
    of  anything  amounting  to  more  than  discrimination  prior  to  the
    particular events which he claims took place which caused him to  leave
    Azerbaijan. The general tenor of the evidence and the findings  of  the
    Tribunal in the above cases is that ethnic Armenians are  not  at  risk
    per se, and Mr  Collins did not seek  to  argue  to  the  contrary  but
    rather argued, as had been found on  the  facts  in  Teymor,  that  the
    appellant's case is one which puts him at risk.

53.  The first issue in relation  to  which  Ms  Lonsdale  argued  that  the
    appellant lacked credibility was the question of whether he  knew  that
    the book about Mr Guliev was illegal or not.  As we have set out above,
    at the  hearing before us he said he did know about this and  this  had
    been effectively publicised on television whereas it is argued that his
    answer to question 35 is inconsistent with that in that he  said  there
    was no official declaration banning the book. Mr  Collins  argued  that
    there was no inconsistency here. Though there was a difference in  what
    he said, essentially there is  in  our  view  no  material  difference.
    Certainly it is the case that the appellant said at interview that they
    were not allowed to  have the book.  In practice therefore we  consider
    that the difference between that and any formal ban making  it  illegal
    would make little material difference to the risk that having the  book
    found in one's possession could give rise to problems.  Accordingly  we
    do not consider that this is a matter adverse to the appellant.

54.  Nor do we consider it damaging to his credibility that  he  would  have
    kept the book in his home. The  book  does  after  all  deal  with  the
    problems experienced by Armenians and the appellant could reasonably be
    expected to find that, as indeed he said it was, of  interest  although
    clearly on his evidence he took case to conceal it, albeit as it  seems
    not very successfully, but  so that at least it was  not  on  immediate
    view, behind other books in a bookcase. We  do  not  consider  this  is
    inconsistent with  his claimed lack of involvement in politics  in  any
    way.   We consider it perfectly  understandable that a person  such  as
    the appellant with his ethnicity would have an interest  in  this  book
    and would keep it at home.   After all, as  he  said,  on  the  day  in
    question, he and his wife had simply gone shopping and did  not  expect
    that the authorities while they were out would smash the door of  their
    house down and search the house and find the book.

55.  There is next the issue of whether it is credible that the  authorities
    having found the book would not  be  also  have  found  the  money  and
    jewellery or indeed might have found the  money  and  jewellery  before
    they found  the  book.  Here  one  can  only  surmise.   The  appellant
    understandably said that one could not legislate in effect for the KGB.
    It may be that the jewellery and money were more effectively hidden, as
    they are items which might be of greater interest to a  burglar,  quite
    apart from officials, as opposed to the book,  which would only  be  of
    interest to  the  officials.   We  cannot  speculate  about  this.  The
    appellant's surmise as we have set out above that it may be that taking
    money and jewellery as they found it was beyond their remit  or  simply
    that they found the book and did not deem  it  necessary  to  look  any
    further.  Again this is a matter bearing in mind the  low  standard  of
    proof which we do not see as being adverse to the appellant.

56.  The next point made by Ms Lonsdale was why  the  KGB  would  trust  the
    appellant when he had never  been  involved  in  such  matters  before.
    Again it is a matter of speculation which is not satisfactory,  but  we
    consider that there are a number of reasons why  the  KGB  might  think
    that a person over whom they had such a  hold, as they would  have  had
    over the appellant, would be prepared to work for them.   He might have
    been able to find some useful information, alternatively he might  have
    been identified and disposed of by the Hamams.  They  might  have  seen
    real advantage to using a person who on his own account had never  been
    political and therefore  would  not  be  likely  to  be  regarded  with
    suspicion. As we say, we do not know, but again we do not  consider  it
    is lacking in credibility that the KGB would regard the appellant as an
    appropriate person to make use of in this particular  way.   We  accept
    that he would not have known the building to  which  he  was  taken  in
    Genja was a KGB building. It is credible that the  KGB would  not  have
    advertised the  fact,  and  there  was  no  reason  otherwise  why  the
    appellant would have been aware of it.

57.  The next issue raised by Ms  Lonsdale  was  the  question  of  why  the
    appellant went to St Petersburg to his sister when he could  have  gone
    elsewhere, where he might have felt safer and have the money  forwarded
    to him by his sister.  Clearly he had said that the  information  about
    him would be likely to be circulated among all the former Soviet  Union
    states and therefore, it must be assumed,  to  Russia.  As  Mr  Collins
    argued, he might reasonably be regarded as having  taken  that  as  the
    easiest way out given that his sister was there and would  be  able  to
    fund him. The period of time that might  have  been  taken  to  forward
    money to him is unclear, and at least in St Petersburg  he  would  have
    the home of a relative to go to and the opportunity to raise the  money
    directly, albeit except he must have apprehended an element of risk  in
    going to a family member.  It is however entirely unclear  whether  the
    authorities would have known that he had a  sister  in  St  Petersburg.
    Again this is not a matter  which we consider  to  be  adverse  to  the
    appellant.

58.  It follows from  the  above  analysis  that  we  find  the  appellant's
    account to be credible.  As we have also  noted above, the account fits
    in well with the objective evidence.  The appellant has, as Mr  Collins
    argued, not sought to embellish his claim.   If returned  he  would  in
    our view be at risk on account of what he said  happened  to  him.   He
    does not have a passport and there is a real  risk  that  he  would  be
    immediately identified as being of Armenian ethnicity.  It has not been
    contested that that is  his ethnicity.  As such he is one, it seems, of
    a very small number of males of Armenian ethnic origin  in  Azerbaijan.
    It is not unreasonable to suppose that the KGB would hardly be  pleased
    with a man who had failed to follow their instructions and had  instead
    fled the country. They can hold over him the charge they threatened him
    with of being prosecuted in relation to possession of the  Guliev  book
    or alternatively for creating public disorder, as it seems it was  also
    suggested to him might form the basis of a prosecution, on the election
    day when he was arrested.  He  is  therefore  in  our  view  an  ethnic
    Armenian Azerbaijani national who, as was said in Teymor, has  specific
    features about his case  which  put  him  at  risk.   The  more  recent
    objective evidence subsequent to Sarkisian and  Teymor  which  we  have
    been able to consider does not materially change the picture before the
    Tribunal in those cases, and  in  particular  is  consistent  with  the
    evidence of Mr Chenciner in Teymor.  Accordingly, we conclude that  the
    appellant has made out his claim. This appeal is allowed.


Decision
59.  The original Tribunal made a material  error  of  law.   The  following
    decision is substituted.

     The appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.
     The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds (Article 3).





Signed                                  Date
Senior Immigration Judge Allen
USSD Country  Report  on Human Rights Practices: Azerbaijan: 8 March 2006
Amnesty International Report 2006 : Azerbaijan: 23 May 2006
Freedom House, Freedom in the World: Azerbaijan: 6 September 2006

UK Foreign and Commonwealth Office,  'Human  Rights  Annual  Report  2006  :
Azerbaijan', 12 October 2006

UK Home Office Immigration and Nationality Directorate: 'Operational
Guidance Note: Azerbaijan',  4 December 2006.
