
JC (double jeopardy: Art 10 CL) China CG [2008] UKAIT 00036

|Asylum and Immigration Tribunal      |


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                 |
|On 21-23 January 2008                |

                                   Before

                        Senior Immigration Judge Warr
                      Senior Immigration Judge Gleeson
                       Dr T Okitikpi, non-legal member



                                   Between


                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:           Mr Alastair Mackenzie, Counsel,
                       instructed by A J Paterson, solicitors

For the Respondent:    Ms Samantha Broadfoot, Counsel,
                       instructed by Treasury Solicitors


1.  There is a risk of prosecution or reprosecution under Articles 7 and  10
   of the Chinese Criminal Law for overseas  offenders  returned  to  China.
   However, the use of those provisions is discretionary and extremely rare.
   Absent particular aggravating factors, the  risk  falls  well  below  the
   level required to  engage  international  protection  under  the  Refugee
   Convention, the ECHR, or humanitarian protection. The risk of prosecution
   or reprosecution will be a question of fact in individual  cases  but  is
   more likely where (a) there has been  a  substantial  amount  of  adverse
   publicity within China about a  case;  (b)  the  proposed  defendant  has
   significantly  embarrassed  the  Chinese  authorities  by  their  actions
   overseas; (c) the offence  is  unusually  serious.  Generally,  snakehead
   cases do not have the significance they have in the West and are regarded
   as ordinary (but  serious)  crimes  requiring  no  special  treatment;(d)
   political  factors  may  increase  the  likelihood  of   prosecution   or
   reprosecution;  and (e)  the  Chinese  Government  is  also  particularly
   concerned about corruption of Chinese officialdom.

2.   Prosecution  under  Article  7  or  10  is  a  fresh  prosecution.  The
   discretion to prosecute is exercised in the light of the opinion  of  the
   Chinese  authorities  as  to  whether  the  foreign  jurisdiction   dealt
   properly, and without undue leniency, with the offence.  It can no longer
   be said that there is no information available on the use of that  power:
   the Chinacourt database  of  cases  and  the  NPC  website  guidance  are
   maintained directly by the Chinese Government and provides  guidance  for
   judges and lawyers on the use of these powers.
3.  The burden of proof does not shift to the Secretary of State  in  double
   jeopardy cases.  The Court of Appeal decision  in  Adam  v  Secretary  of
   State for the Home Department [2003] EWCA Civ 265 is  not  authority  for
   such a proposition, particularly where the decision  to  re-prosecute  is
   discretionary.
4.  In the light of our findings above, the decisions  in  WC  (no  risk  of
   double punishment) China [2004] UKIAT 00253 and SC (double jeopardy -  WC
   considered) China CG [2006] UKAIT 00007 are no longer factually  accurate
   and SC should no longer be treated as country guidance.


                                  Contents


      |Description                                               |Page        |
|Introduction and conclusions on first stage               |3           |
|reconsideration setting out the material error of law.    |            |
|The issues.                                               |8           |
|The appellant's case, including consideration of the      |9           |
|appellant's evidence and that of his sister               |            |
|Provisions of Articles 7 and 10 of the Chinese Criminal   |16          |
|Law 1997 (overseas offences provisions) and sources of    |            |
|online case reports in China.                             |            |
|Country expert reports from:                              |            |
|A.  Professor Jerome Cohen                                |17          |
|B.  Professor Michael Palmer                              |21          |
|C.  Dr Mei Lin Gechlik,                                   |26          |
|D.  Dr Michael Dillon (including oral evidence)           |29          |
|E.  Dr Jackie Sheehan (including oral evidence) and       |36          |
|F.  Professor Fu Hualing (including oral evidence) .      |41          |
|Documents                                                 |            |
|1.  The Foreign and Commonwealth Office letter of 15      |49          |
|August 2005 ('double jeopardy' letter)                    |            |
|2.  The arrest warrant and the Foreign and Commonwealth   |49          |
|Office response                                           |51          |
|3.  2007 Country of Origin Information Report on China    |            |
|Respondent's submissions on the appellant's case and the  |52          |
|background evidence (Miss Broadfoot)                      |            |
|Appellant's submissions on the appellant's case and the   |58          |
|background evidence (Mr Mackenzie)                        |            |
|Overseas offences prosecutions (including reprosecutions) |64          |
|in China                                                  |67          |
|Removal of Chinese snakehead defendants (some convicted   |            |
|with the appellant and some for factually similar         |            |
|offences)                                                 |            |
|General conclusions on the background evidence and expert |67          |
|reports, as assessed, when set against the issues         |            |
|identified.                                               |67          |
|1.  WC and SC                                             |69          |
|2. Double jeopardy:  assessing the experts and their      |73          |
|evidence                                                  |75          |
|3.  In what circumstances will reprosecution occur?       |            |
|4.  Prison conditions                                     |            |
|Summary of findings.                                      |76          |
|Application of the general conclusions to the appellant's |79          |
|case and decision.                                        |            |
|s.72 certificate decision                                 |79          |
|Credibility and findings of fact                          |80          |
|Paragraph 364 of the Immigration Rules (HC 395 (as        |81          |
|amended))                                                 |            |
|Double jeopardy and Article 10 re-prosecution             |81          |
|Conclusions on the continuing applicability of existing   |82          |
|cases.                                                    |            |
|Funding decision                                          |82          |
|Appendix of documents considered.                         |83          |


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

1. This is the reconsideration, with permission granted  to  the  appellant,
   of  the  determination  of  the  Tribunal  notified  on  30  August  2006
   dismissing his appeal against  notice  of  liability  to  deport  to  the
   People's Republic of China (PRC) and the Secretary of State's decision to
   refuse refugee recognition, humanitarian protection or leave to remain on
   human rights grounds.    The Secretary  of  State  seeks  to  deport  the
   appellant, on the ground that deportation  is  conducive  to  the  public
   good. The appellant is a Chinese national. Paragraph 364 of  HC  395  (as
   amended) is the applicable provision:

      "364.        Subject  to  paragraph  380,  while  each  case  will  be
      considered on its merits, where a person is liable to deportation  the
      presumption shall be that the public  interest  requires  deportation.
      The  Secretary  of  State  will  consider  all  relevant  factors   in
      considering whether the presumption is outweighed  in  any  particular
      case, although it will only be in exceptional circumstances  that  the
      public interest in deportation will be outweighed in a case  where  it
      would  not  be  contrary  to  the  Human  Rights  Convention  and  the
      Convention and Protocol relating to the Status of Refugees to  deport.
      The aim is an exercise of the power of deportation which is consistent
      and fair as between one person and another,  although  one  case  will
      rarely be identical with another in  all  material  respects.  In  the
      cases detailed in paragraph 363A  deportation  will  normally  be  the
      proper course where  a  person  has  failed  to  comply  with  or  has
      contravened a condition or has remained without authority....



      380. A deportation order will not be made against any  person  if  his
      removal in pursuance of the order would  be  contrary  to  the  United
      Kingdom's obligations under the Convention and  Protocol  relating  to
      the Status of Refugees or the Human Rights Convention."
2. In this case, the sentence was 14 years, of which  the  appellant  served
   seven before being released on licence.   He was given an opportunity  to
   demonstrate that he could rebut the presumption that he was a  danger  to
   the community of the United Kingdom, as set out in s.72(6).   His  rights
   of appeal against the sentence were exhausted by the time the deportation
   decision was made.

3. The appellant's solicitors, A J Paterson, responded, contending that  the
   appellant was entitled to  a  substantive  consideration  of  his  asylum
   application  before  deportation  could  properly  be  contemplated.   He
   remained deeply aggrieved about  his  conviction  and  he  was  still  in
   prison.  The letter quoted at length from the report of  the  appellant's
   Probation Officer, Ms Ludgam, on 24 April 2005, which is still  the  most
   recent assessment of the risk of reoffending before the  Tribunal  today.
   The report indicated that the appellant had pursued his education  during
   his sentence and had not been in any trouble in  prison.   His  behaviour
   had given no cause for concern.   Ms Ludgam knew him well and her opinion
   should be respected as the appellant had been in that  particular  prison
   for 17 months by the time she wrote her report.

4. The appellant's  solicitors  reminded  the  Secretary  of  State  of  the
   undertaking to give substantive consideration to the  asylum  application
   which had been signed by the appellant and the  Presenting  Officer  when
   the previous asylum appeal was withdrawn on  28  September  2001.    They
   also reminded the Secretary of State  of  the  close  links  between  the
   appellant and his sister, who was then within a year  of  being  able  to
   apply for indefinite leave to remain in the United Kingdom. They enclosed
   a medical report on his skin condition,  attributing  it  to  torture  in
   China, and noted  that  the  appellant's  mental  state  appeared  to  be
   deteriorating under the strain of possible deportation.

5. On 1 August 2005, the Secretary of State refused the asylum claim on  the
   basis of s.72.  The decision to make a deportation order was made  on  21
   September 2004 and the appellant had a right of  appeal  on  the  asylum,
   human rights and deportation elements of that refusal, which he exercised
   promptly, on 27 September 2004, citing also Articles 3, 5, 6 and 8  ECHR.
   By this time he had been outside China for over 9 years.

The asylum claim

6. The appellant's asylum  claim  arises  from  two  separate  sequences  of
   events.  In 1994, before he came to the United Kingdom, he  says  he  was
   involved in rural protests in his home village in Fujian; that his sister
   who was a birth control inspector brought home an abandoned baby and  was
   dismissed from her post; and that his  home  was  destroyed  and  he  was
   beaten by the local officials during the destruction, while he  attempted
   to defend his home.  The appellant's area of Fujian  formed  part  of  an
   area designated for commercial development and  many  people's  land  was
   confiscated for that purpose.  Many other families lost their  homes  and
   land.   The  appellant  and  his  sister  also  attempted   to   interest
   authorities in an incident of serious ill-treatment by local police of  a
   school friend of the appellant who  had  offended  the  son  of  a  local
   village.  This part of the account is challenged as to credibility by the
   Secretary of State.

7. What is not in dispute is that  in  1999,  the  appellant  and  12  other
   Chinese men were convicted following trial  upon  indictment  of  various
   offences relating to their capture of a group of  trafficked  individuals
   from China who had been brought illegally into the United  Kingdom  by  a
   rival gang.  Gangs  involved  in  this  unlawful  migration  from  China,
   coupled  with  extortion  and  kidnapping  for  ransom   are   known   as
   'snakeheads'.  There were other groups of snakehead kidnappers  operating
   in the United Kingdom at around that time and  the  evidence  before  the
   Tribunal identifies at least one other unrelated group who  were  charged
   with similar charges, convicted, and of whom  six  men  returned  without
   protest to China.

8. The appellant and the other gang members held the rival  gang's  hostages
   for ransom, forcing them to  telephone  relatives  in  China  and  making
   terrifying threats in telephone conversations with the Chinese relatives.
    They also ill-treated the hostages at a  level  which  the  trial  judge
   described as 'torture'. The sentencing judge's remarks make it clear that
   the appellant was one of five  men  regarded  as  at  the  heart  of  the
   conspiracy.  The appellant has always disputed this: he admitted  he  was
   present for all of the events underlying the prosecution but claimed that
   this was accidental and that he had no real involvement.   That  was  not
   believed and the Tribunal was entitled  to  prefer  the  credibility  and
   factual assessment of the trial  judge  as  set  out  in  the  sentencing
   remarks, which was upheld on appeal to the Court of Appeal.

9. The appellant and his co-defendants were convicted  of  three  counts  of
   conspiracy all contrary  to  s.1  (1)  of  the  Criminal  Law  Act  1977:
   conspiracy to kidnap; conspiracy falsely to imprison; and  conspiracy  to
   extort money from Chinese nationals  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  their
   Chinese relatives.  Many of the  defendants,  including  this  appellant,
   appealed  to  the  Court  of  Appeal.    The   appellant's   appeal   was
   unsuccessful; at least one of  the  others  had  a  sentence  reduced  on
   appeal.   Several  of  the  appellant's  co-defendants  have  since  been
   returned to China. There is no evidence that they have come to harm;  but
   again, there is no direct evidence that they have not.

S.72 certificate.

10. The  Secretary  of  State  certified  this  appeal  under  s.72  of  the
   Nationality Asylum and Immigration Act 2002 (particularly serious crime).
    The effect is that the appellant cannot  be  considered  for  asylum  or
   humanitarian protection unless he can rebut the presumptions that he  has
   been convicted of a particularly serious crime (one carrying  a  sentence
   of more than two years) and that he remains a danger to the community  of
   the United Kingdom.

11. The  appellant  cannot  dispute  that  he  was  indeed  convicted  of  a
   particularly serious crime.  That is  a  question  of  fact.   He  lodged
   information seeking to show that  he  was  no  longer  a  danger  to  the
   community and the Tribunal was required to consider  first  whether  that
   information successfully rebutted the presumption that a  person  with  a
   conviction of this kind is a danger to the community and unable to  claim
   asylum or humanitarian protection on that basis.

Tribunal's determination

12. The appeal was heard on 26 July 2006  by  Designated  Immigration  Judge
   Wilson and Mr M E Innes, a Non-Legal Member, who dismissed it on  asylum,
   immigration and human  rights  grounds.   They  did  not  deal  with  the
   question of humanitarian protection.

13. Professor Palmer  had  been  intended  to  give  oral  evidence  at  the
   hearing, as had  been  agreed  at  a  CMR  and  recorded  in  directions.
   Instead, he provided a written report on the day  of  the  hearing.   The
   Presenting Officer asked for the hearing to be  adjourned  for  Professor
   Palmer to attend.  Having considered the position, the  Tribunal  allowed
   the report into evidence (although it was late) but declined to  adjourn.
   Professor Palmer's report was given such weight as could be  ascribed  to
   it in his absence.

14. The Tribunal dealt first with the  problems  the  appellant  had  before
   leaving China in 2004/5.  The agreed that the account given was clear and
   detailed, but considered it very strange.  They allowed for the delay  in
   hearing factual evidence and the difficulty of persons required  to  give
   oral evidence of matters  occurring  in  China  some  12  years  earlier.
   Nevertheless, even to  the  lower  standard,  they  did  not  accept  the
   appellant's account of his difficulties in China at all.  In  particular,
   they considered that a purported arrest warrant which the  appellant  had
   supplied (with covering letters from his cousin  in  the  police  station
   hoping it would help with his asylum appeal) was not genuine.

15. The Tribunal then considered the double jeopardy issue under Article  10
   of the Chinese Criminal Law (CL).  They referred to the country  guidance
   decisions in WC (no risk of double punishment) China [2004]  UKIAT  00253
   and SC (double jeopardy - WC considered) China  CG  [2006]  UKAIT  00007,
   which both held that there was no evidence of any such  prosecutions  and
   no risk.  Professor Palmer had given evidence in  WC.    They  considered
   the report of Professor Palmer prepared for the present appeal  took  the
   matter no further and that the materials on which he relied were outdated
   secondary analysis rather than primary evidence.   They  were  unable  to
   place much weight on Professor Palmer's evidence.

16. In oral submissions, the appellant's Counsel relied on Mohammed  Adam  v
   Secretary of State for the Home Department [2003] EWCA Civ 265,  a  Court
   of Appeal decision relating to  the  risk  of  punishment  in  Sudan  for
   evasion of military service.  There is a suggestion in that decision that
   the burden of proof shifts  to  the  Secretary  of  State;  the  original
   Tribunal in this appeal did not handle  that  particularly  clearly.   We
   deal further with the Adam decision below.

17. The Tribunal  then  considered  the  deportation  decision  against  the
   criteria set out in paragraph 364  as  amended  in  July  2006  with  the
   following presumption:

      "364. Subject to paragraph 380, while each case will be considered  on
      its merits, where a person is liable to  deportation  the  presumption
      shall be that the public interest requires deportation..."

   The Tribunal set out all the relevant circumstances  and  concluded  that
   there was nothing in the  compassionate  circumstances  to  outweigh  the
   public interest presumption.

18. The Tribunal dealt with s.72, but not first as  they  were  required  to
   do; they erroneously directed  themselves  that  the  Article  33(2)/s.72
   point did not arise because the appellant had  failed  to  establish  his
   case to the lower standard of proof.  They went on to say  that  had  the
   account been  credible,  they  would  have  found  that  the  appellant's
   evidence in rebuttal was insufficient and upheld the certificate.

19.  The  Tribunal  dismissed  the  asylum,  immigration  and  human  rights
   appeals.  They did not deal with humanitarian protection; however, in the
   light of their indication of the s.72 decision they would have made, that
   would plainly have fallen with the asylum claim.

Reconsideration application

20. The appellant challenged the Tribunal's determination, arguing that  the
   evidence on the risk of re-prosecution had not been properly  considered,
   especially in the light of a  letter  by  the  Foreign  and  Commonwealth
   Office on 15 July 2005 (the 'double jeopardy' letter) which was partially
   quoted in the then current  Country  of  Origin  Information  Report  for
   China.  The Tribunal had not mentioned that letter in the  determination.
    It appeared to indicate that, contrary to the Tribunal's findings in  WC
   and in SC, the Secretary of State now accepted that there  was  at  least
   some risk of re-prosecution in certain circumstances, though not  in  all
   cases.

21. The next point concerned the Adam  decision.   The  appellant  submitted
   that this  decision,  cited  in  his  skeleton  argument,  established  a
   principle that the burden was on the Home Office to show that  there  was
   no  reasonable  likelihood  that  re-prosecution   would   in   fact   be
   implemented.

22.  In relation to Professor Palmer's  evidence,  the  grounds  for  review
   contend  that  the  Tribunal's  approach  was  erroneous.   Experts  were
   entitled to have regard to just exactly the  sort  of  general  materials
   which the Tribunal had criticised this expert for  consulting.   Further,
   the Tribunal had failed to take account of the expert's  own  involvement
   with Chinese legal development (set out at paragraph 16  of  the  report)
   over 20 years.  That was his expert opinion and should  have  been  given
   weight, especially as it appeared to be  supported  by  the  Foreign  and
   Commonwealth Office 'double jeopardy' letter.

23.  Under  s.72,  the  appellant  argued  that  the  Tribunal  should  have
   determined  the  exclusion  issue  as  a  preliminary  issue.   Lack   of
   credibility in the appellant's account was irrelevant; the  question  was
   whether he now constituted a danger to the community.  The mere  fact  of
   conviction was not enough.

24. In relation to credibility as whole, the appellant  made   a  number  of
   points:  the Tribunal had erred in finding that the appellant said he was
   illiterate and misdirected itself as to his poster writing activities  in
   consequence;  it was  unclear  whether  the  Tribunal  had  accepted  his
   claimed leadership r�le, albeit not 'at first blush';  rural protests had
   been widespread in China at that time  and  did  not  appear  to  require
   education;  the appellant never said  he  was  the  only  leader  of  the
   protest; the respondent had specifically accepted that the appellant  was
   injured trying to prevent his house being destroyed  by  the  authorities
   and it had not, therefore, been open to the Tribunal to find  that  there
   might have been   a  number  of  reasons  for  the  injuries  noted;  the
   appellant's ability to pay a large sum for his departure despite being  a
   person of modest means had not been put to him or his sister in  evidence
   and the Tribunal should not have relied  on  it  without  doing  so;  the
   Tribunal failed to consider their evidence regarding a cousin's help with
   the expenses of the trip; and finally, the veracity of the arrest warrant
   could not be considered after weighing all  the  other  evidence  in  the
   round.  It should have been considered as  part  of  that  exercise,  not
   after it.

25. The appellant invited the Tribunal to order reconsideration.

Reconsideration decision

26. Reconsideration was granted by SIJ Waumsley on  18  September  2006,  on
   all grounds.  SIJ Waumsley was just persuaded that all of  these  grounds
   taken together merited further consideration, in particular the first and
   second grounds which related  to  the  Foreign  and  Commonwealth  Office
   'double jeopardy' letter.

Material error of law decision

27. At the material error of law hearing  before  Senior  Immigration  Judge
   Gleeson, Mr A Mackenzie represented the  appellant  and  Mr  W  Khan  the
   Secretary of State.  The material error of law  reasoning  sets  out  the
   history of the appeal up to the end of 2006 and continues:

      "...5.      On 3 January 2007, this appeal came before me.  There were
      different representatives on that day.   I directed that the  stage  1
      reconsideration be listed before me as soon as possible, with  a  view
      to setting up a country guidance hearing on the double jeopardy point,
      having regard to the Foreign and Commonwealth  Office  evidence.   The
      appellant undertook to indicate within 14 days whether the credibility
      issue was pursued; that was not done.  The Tribunal's Article  8  ECHR
      findings and findings under the Immigration Rules are unchallenged, as
      is the decision regarding general risk on return (outwith  the  double
      jeopardy point).

      6.    I heard submissions from the  appellant.   He  argued  that  the
      Tribunal had failed to deal with the Foreign and  Commonwealth  Office
      evidence, although it had been on notice that he relied  upon  it.   A
      response  to  an  information  request  from  the  Country  of  Origin
      Information Unit quoted part of that letter.  The PRC  had  a  statute
      permitting double jeopardy prosecutions and his evidence had not  been
      properly weighed.  The Tribunal had overlooked the Adam point; in that
      decision, exceptionally, Schiemann LJ held that where the new evidence
      was in the hands of the Home Office throughout, the burden of  showing
      that it could not be relied upon was upon the  respondent.   He  asked
      the Tribunal to look at paragraphs 45 and 51 of WC which deal with the
      monitoring of returnees. [paragraphs cited]

      7.    The authorities with which the Tribunal was dealing all refer to
      lack  of  evidence  for  double  jeopardy  prosecutions  of   offences
      committed entirely  overseas.   That  is  not  the  position  of  this
      appellant, whose offence was committed in both countries.   It  was  a
      serious offence.  The Secretary of State has only latterly disclosed a
      paragraph from a letter from the Foreign and Commonwealth Office.  The
      whole letter must now be disclosed.  It was not before the Tribunal in
      WC  and  SC  and  in  failing  to  deal  with  it  at  all  in   their
      determination, there is no doubt that the  Tribunal  made  a  material
      error of law.  The appeal must be reheard."

28. This is that reconsideration.

The issues

29. The agreed questions for reconsideration were  -

           a) The weight to be given to the 'double jeopardy'  letter  from
              the Foreign and Commonwealth Office  regarding  the  risk  on
              return of prosecution for an offence for which  the  returnee
              had  already  been  convicted  and  punished  in  the  United
              Kingdom;
           b) Whether, in the light of that evidence, WC (no risk of double
              punishment) China [2004] UKIAT 00253 and SC (double jeopardy
              - WC considered) China CG [2006] UKAIT 00007, are still good
              law;
           c) The effect of the Court of Appeal's decision in Adam v
              Secretary of State for the Home Department [2003] EWCA Civ
              265;
           d) The weight to be given to the evidence of Professor Palmer;
           e) The respondent's  certification  of  the  appeal  under  s.72
              Nationality Asylum and Immigration Act 2002; and
           f) Whether the appellant is a credible witness.

30. Those questions were settled by agreement.  In particular, the  question
   of credibility was added to the list of issues for reconsideration  after
   discussion with both Counsel at a 'For  Mention  Only'  hearing.   It  is
   relevant  to  full  reconsideration  because  the  credibility   of   the
   appellant's account of events in China affects both the issue of internal
   relocation and our assessment of the likelihood of Article  3  ECHR  ill-
   treatment on return.  We have  considered  credibility  as  part  of  our
   overall assessment of this appeal.

Evidence before the Tribunal on reconsideration

31. The Tribunal received  into  evidence  bundles  of  documents  for  each
   party, together with the Home Office Country of Origin Information Report
   on the People's Republic of China for 2007 and a  bundle  of  authorities
   from the Secretary of State.  In total, the documents  before  us  number
   well over 1000 pages. We have had the benefit of significant and detailed
   expert evidence which has assisted us greatly, together with  a  mass  of
   useful documentary evidence.  The bundle includes written  evidence  from
   Professor Jerome  A  Cohen  given  to  the  United  States  Congressional
   Executive Committee on China in 2005 and 2006.  All of the other  experts
   acknowledged Professor Cohen as the world's leading authority on  Chinese
   law and  Professor  Cohen's  evidence  is  dealt  with  as  part  of  the
   Tribunal's expert evidence review in this determination.

32. We heard oral evidence from the appellant, the sister,  and  from  three
   experts,  two  for  the  appellant  and  one  for  the  respondent.   The
   respondent's  expert,  Professor  Fu  Hualing,  provided  three   written
   reports: his main report prepared in 2007 (the main report),  the  report
   he prepared for the appellant's side in WC in 2004 (the WC report) and  a
   commentary on the difference between the two reports prepared in  January
   2008 (the 2008 report).   The  main  report  and  the  2008  report  were
   prepared on the basis of redacted information which did not contain facts
   enabling the witness to identify  the  present  appellant  and  therefore
   lacked some details of the offences committed.

33. Professor Fu gave oral evidence from the British Embassy  in  Hong  Kong
   by telephone.  He  identified  himself  by  producing  relevant  identity
   documentation and was examined in chief and in cross-examination  over  a
   speaker telephone.  The Tribunal was able to ask him some  questions.  By
   agreement, Professor Fu was referred to some of the  omitted  detail  and
   given an opportunity to comment on that factual matrix  during  his  oral
   evidence.

34. The appellant relied on the evidence of Professor Cohen and  four  other
   experts, two of whom gave oral evidence:  Dr  Michael  Dillon  (who  gave
   evidence against his written report) and Dr Jackie Sheehan (who  provided
   a main and a supplementary report).  Neither Dr Dillon nor Dr Sheehan has
   legal training.  We received written reports from of Dr Mei  Yin  Gechlik
   and Professor Palmer, both experts on Chinese law.  All  of  the  experts
   except Dr Sheehan had taken the trouble to research the use of Articles 7
   and 10 although their database  access  varied.   All,  having  done  so,
   reached the conclusion that these Articles are used by the Chinese courts
   on occasion, though not frequently.  The divergence  between  the  expert
   evidence goes to the circumstances in which these Articles are  used  and
   the likelihood of them being used in respect of the present appellant.

35. We have considered all the documents in the bundles  but  in  particular
   those to which the parties directed us, and  all  of  the  oral  evidence
   before the Tribunal, as well as that recorded at previous  hearings.   We
   have taken into account  the  parties'  skeleton  arguments  and  written
   submissions.  We shall summarise the personal and expert evidence  before
   reaching conclusions on the questions set out at the  material  error  of
   law stage.

The Appellant's Case

36. The appellant provided a chronology to assist us  in  dealing  with  the
   specifics of this appeal.  The account as there summarised is this:   the
   appellant comes from a village in Fujian province.  His parents, and  his
   older sister, were Christians but the appellant is not.   He  is  in  his
   thirties now and has been raised by his older sister since he  was  about
   five years old.  When the appellant was about fifteen, his sister  became
   employed as a birth control inspector, tracing and dealing with births in
   breach of the one-child policy.

37. In 1994, the family's land was confiscated to be used  for  construction
   of a Japanese factory, without compensation, following a Government  area
   redevelopment plan.  About a month later, the appellant's  school  friend
   got into a fight with the village leader's son and was  detained  by  the
   police, assaulted and released after 18  days.   The  appellant  and  his
   sister went to the local police to complain, unsuccessfully.   In  August
   1994, the sister took home a baby abandoned on the doorstep of the  birth
   control inspectorate; when her bosses found  out,  she  was  sacked.   In
   October 1994, the family home was destroyed and the appellant was  beaten
   up by a group of people, apparently in reaction to his sister's  informal
   adoption of the abandoned baby.

38. About a week later, the appellant claims to  have  organised  a  protest
   during a visit by Provincial Governor Chen Guang Yi, during which  stones
   were thrown at his official car. Two days later, the sister was  arrested
   and forced to sign a confession so that the appellant could  be  arrested
   for that protest; the authorities threatened to arrest him if she did not
   sign.  The same day, the two of them fled, first to a  place  in  Hu  Bei
   province, then on to Beijing by  December  1994.   The  purported  arrest
   warrant is dated 16 October 1994 and was obtained for them  by  a  cousin
   who worked at the local Police Station, and who  also,  when  they  left,
   took over care of the baby which was  the  source  of  all  the  sister's
   troubles.

39. They travelled through Moscow, arriving in the United Kingdom  in  early
   January 1995 and making a prompt asylum claim.  On  15  March  1995  they
   received a letter from the cousin, asking whether the arrest warrant  had
   been useful, saying he had passed "Little Sister" on  to  somebody  else,
   and telling them not to contact him again.

The United Kingdom offences

40. The appellant and his gang members were tried on  kidnapping,  extortion
   and conspiracy charges.  The appellant was  identified  as  one  of  five
   ringleaders of the group.  All five of the hostages were tortured:   four
   were kept for just over a week, one for just  less  than  a  week.  Their
   relatives in China were telephoned and

      "...deliberately made to hear the torment and sufferings of  the  poor
      persons who were at the other end of those phones."

   Substantial sums were demanded from the relatives.

41. A considerable  amount  of  thought  and  planning  had  gone  into  the
   kidnapping, including a detailed telephone schedule, and regular shopping
   trips for  large  amounts  of  food.   Mitchell  J's  sentencing  remarks
   reflected a sense of public outrage in relation to the offences which the
   appellant was found to have conspired with others to commit.  He accepted
   that

      '...nobody is saying that everybody used violence,  but  violence  was
      obviously  implicit  and  necessary  in  the  carrying  out  of  these
      conspiracies.  I accept that in  certain  cases  there  is  no  direct
      involvement in violence to the hostages - in certain cases.  You, [the
      appellant, and defendants 1-4] ...without a doubt fall  into  the  top
      category in this case and demand the highest sentence.  ...the  period
      of custody that I think appropriate in your cases is 14 years on count
      1, 14 years on count 2 and eight years on count 3.   It  seems  to  me
      that they all ought of course to be concurrent..."

42. A substantial sentencing discount was  given  to  those,  not  including
   this appellant, who pleaded guilty and thus shortened the trial.  All the
   sentences were also reduced to  reflect  the  difficulties  for  Chinese-
   speaking appellants in an English-speaking prison in a country which  was
   not their own and the lack of available visitors during the sentence. The
   judge continued:

      "It seems to me that it is not a  matter  for  this  Court  to  decide
      whether or not [the defendants if deported] face execution,  or  trial
      again, in China; that is a matter for the Secretary of State  and  his
      advisers.  In this sort of case, which is organised crime, I  have  no
      hesitation - and that one reason is enough in my view -  to  recommend
      all of you, where appropriate, for deportation  once  these  sentences
      have come to an end....

      After your release you will be subject to supervision on licence until
      the end of three quarters of the total sentence.  You will  be  liable
      to be recalled to prison if your licence is  revoked,  either  on  the
      recommendation of the Parole Board or, if it is thought  expedient  in
      the public interest, by the Secretary of State."

   The present appellant was released at the halfway point in  his  sentence
   and, his Counsel accepted by an oversight, has  not  been  supervised  on
   licence.  There is, therefore, no evidence but his own (and  very  little
   of that) as to how he has conducted himself since his release.

43. In 2005, ahead of the  appellant's  release  from  HMP  Ashwell,  Prison
   Probation Officer Mel Ludgam prepared  a  Parole  Report,  based  on  one
   lengthy interview and  a  number  of  previous  interviews  in  the  last
   seventeen  months  of  his  sentence.   For  the  final  interview,   the
   appellant's English was good enough to require no interpreter.  There was
   no detailed account of the index offences available and  the  appellant's
   solicitor was unable to provide any.  The information which Ms Ludgam had
   was that:

      "... [The appellant] was seen to be part of an organised Chinese  gang
      called the 'snakeheads' who were trying to take over the business of a
      rival gang.  They were holding the rival gang's group of immigrants to
      ransom for �12000  each.   I  understand  it  was  alleged  that  some
      violence was used although no weapons were used."

44. That significantly understated the offences.  Ms  Ludgam  recorded  that
   the appellant was aware that victims were threatened  with  chopping  off
   their arms and so forth if their relatives did not pay,  but  he  claimed
   not to have seen any violence or been involved.  He told her that he  was
   portrayed as a co-instigator because his sister would not  give  his  co-
   defendants an alibi and that a witness who identified him as being in the
   kidnap vehicle was mistaken.  He claimed never to have met the other nine
   defendants before and to have been accidentally caught up in the offence.
    The jury found otherwise.   Ms  Ludgam  noted  that  the  appellant  now
   recognised that some at least of his involvement was wrong;  that  was  a
   long way from full repentance or recognition of guilt.

45. The report recorded the usual sort of courses attended by the  appellant
   in prison:  Basic Skills entry Level 3 in Numeracy; Level 2 in  Literacy;
   OCR Level 1 in Numeracy; and various  social  and  life  skills  courses,
   together  with  Citizenship  and  Budgeting,  Personal  Development   and
   Assertiveness; and Decision Making.  If he  had  not  taken  the  courses
   voluntarily they would have been compulsory after his  Sentence  Planning
   Board in December 2005.  Copies of the certificates for these courses are
   in the bundle, along with a letter granting the sister exceptional  leave
   to remain (which enabled her later to achieve indefinite leave to  remain
   in the United Kingdom), and Land Registry Office  Copy  Entries  for  the
   Chinese takeaway restaurant she runs, together with a menu.  The sister's
   asylum statement is before us also.

46. The probation report states that the  appellant  never  tested  positive
   for drugs, was polite and respectful and 'one of the quieter prisoners on
   the unit'.  His  sister  relocated  away  from  the  original  gang  (she
   purchased and runs a Chinese restaurant) and would employ him on  release
   if she were allowed to do so.  Because of distance, she could  not  visit
   much but they spoke almost every day on the  telephone.   There  were  no
   medical problems; he was in  good  health.   There  was  a  21%  risk  of
   reoffending (which was considered to be low) within 2 years;  if  he  re-
   offended the Prison Probation Officer, Mel Ludgam, considered that:

      'The risk would appear to be further gang involvement and consequently
      further very serious offending".

47. Ms Ludgam considered the risk of re-offending to be  low,  although  she
   acknowledged that this might be contradicted by witness statements or the
   sentencing judge's view,  to  neither  of  which  she  had  access.   She
   considered that if the were allowed to remain in the United  Kingdom  and
   released on parole, Multi-Agency Public Protection  Arrangements  (MAPPA)
   would be required (this did not happen).  The report concluded:

      "6.1  If [the appellant] had been granted  leave  to  remain  in  this
      country and home circumstances had been investigated by the home area,
      with them supporting release, then I would recommend  [the  appellant]
      for parole.  Clearly, to recommend  him  for  parole  in  the  current
      circumstances is infeasible."

Appellant's oral evidence

48. The appellant gave oral evidence.   He was  provided,  at  his  request,
   with a Mandarin Chinese interpreter.  It was not suggested that he  could
   manage without one.  He adopted his evidence to date and  confirmed  that
   he now had no contact with the other gang members.

49. The appellant was tendered for cross-examination. He confirmed  that  he
   still did not consider himself a Christian,  though  in  his  village  in
   China he was perceived as one because of his family connections.  He  had
   not personally contacted the police station cousin  since  leaving  China
   and his understanding was that contact had ceased after  the  March  1995
   letter to his sister.  Dealing  with  the  problems  between  his  school
   friend and the village chief's son, the appellant said that  he  and  his
   sister had attended the higher authority three times to complain; on  the
   third occasion they were told to go away as they were troublemakers.  The
   appellant said for the first time that the village chief was  present  on
   the third occasion and  they  then  realised  that  there  was  no  point
   pursuing it further as the authorities were in cahoots with  the  village
   chief.

50. In relation to the incident with his sister and the baby, the  appellant
   said he had dropped out of school when he was about 13 and thereafter  he
   worked on the family farm until the family  lost  its  land.  His  sister
   brought home a very young baby in August 1994.  She did not work for long
   after doing so but during that short period the appellant gave  the  baby
   milk, and some rice porridge, and cared for it while his  sister  was  at
   work.

51. His home area became an Economic Development  Zone  in  March  or  April
   1994. The Government had taken away  a  lot  of  people's  land  and  not
   compensated them.  Many  people's  livelihood  was  affected.   In  early
   October 1994, the appellant's home was destroyed  with  thirty  to  forty
   villagers watching but not daring to  intervene.   On  about  10  October
   1994, during the Inauguration Ceremony, the appellant said  he  protested
   with others.  His account became confused here. There were  many  posters
   and he could not really remember the slogans.  He personally  was  trying
   to protest all his family's ills. His account of organising  the  protest
   amounted to mentioning it and others joining in. His sister did not  join
   in; she tried to stop the appellant going to the protest. Someone  behind
   him threw a rock, and his sister thought it was the appellant.   Governor
   Chen Guang Yi got back into his  official  car  and  left  swiftly.   The
   sister took him home; others were arrested, but he was not.   His  sister
   had been arrested two days later and forced to sign a confession that the
   appellant was at the demonstration.  He was unable to  explain  why  they
   did not just arrest him and ask him to confess.

52. His police station cousin got him the arrest warrant.  The  wording  was
   -

      "[Appellant], male, residing in this area, is of Han race. His date of
      birth was [date given].  This person is dissatisfied with the  Chinese
      Communist Party, was violent to the duty personnel, organised  unrest.
      As from 16 October 1994 this person is wanted for arrest."

   The appellant insisted that the warrant  was  genuine  and  referred  the
   Tribunal to his sister for an account of how she got it.

53. While the two of them were in  Hu  Bei,  the  sister  worked  a  little,
   cooking for people, without a hukou or other appropriate documents.   The
   appellant worked a little on a construction site.  It was two  days  from
   his home village, by boat, train and coach but the foreman heard that the
   police were about to track them down there.  They returned to  a  village
   in Fujian province where they spent a short time with  another  Christian
   friend, while the sister and the police  station  cousin  arranged  false
   passports for them to travel on.  There was no  re-examination.   At  the
   Tribunal's request, the appellant's representative produced the  original
   alleged arrest warrant, in red and white and looking quite fresh.

The sister's oral evidence

54. The sister was outside  Court  during  the  appellant's  evidence.   She
   adopted her evidence to date and was tendered for cross-examination.  She
   explained that the baby had been very young.  Her boss told her to put it
   back outside for someone else to claim, but nobody did, and at the end of
   the day she simply took it home. She fed it on milk (there was no mention
   of rice porridge); she was sacked from her birth control  inspection  job
   after a  week.   During  that  week  not  only  the  appellant  but  also
   neighbours cared for the baby.  The neighbours  helped;  the  sister  was
   unable, despite repetition of the question,  to  explain  adequately  why
   they would do so given the risk  to  them.   The  baby  they  had  called
   "Little Sister" was not hers.  Despite being a birth  control  inspector,
   the sister claimed she had no idea what happened to  women  who  had,  or
   adopted,  babies  when  they  were  not  married.   It  was  outside  her
   experience; it simply had not happened  before.   Nevertheless,  she  had
   been insecure about keeping "Little Sister" because  of  all  the  things
   that had happened. When the appellant and his sister  fled,  they  passed
   "Little Sister" on to the police station cousin. She had  not  taken  any
   interest in what happened to the baby after that.

55. Timing problems in her evidence about the events  of  that  summer  were
   put to the sister; she said she was dismissed 'a week' after her home was
   destroyed, but she was dismissed in August  and  her  home  destroyed  in
   October. Her response was unsatisfactory.  She  could  not  and  did  not
   explain the difference of about two months.

56. The sister blamed her former boss and his cronies for the damage to  the
   family home, although it seems it followed on the seizure of the family's
   land under the area redevelopment plan.  The sister said that many people
   were  angry  about  losing  the  land  and  that  she  had  attended  the
   demonstration with the  appellant.   She  did  not  know  if  anyone  had
   organised it; her brother certainly had not  and  she  denied  vigorously
   that he had told the Tribunal so.  She saw police  at  the  demonstration
   but it was all rather chaotic.  She did not know whether anyone had  been
   arrested on the day.  In relation to the forced confession,  the  witness
   said that she was threatened that her brother would be  arrested  if  she
   did not sign a confession strengthening their power to arrest  him.  That
   is contradictory; the sister was unable to explain why she would  sign  a
   confession in those circumstances, or the point of doing so if they could
   arrest him without her confession.

57. In Hu Bei she cooked, but the appellant only worked a little because  he
   was in poor health.  Her cooking was not paid; they  got  their  keep  in
   return.  The  sister  heard  about  the  police  tracing  them   to   the
   construction site from the man they were staying with.  On  her  account,
   the police had already been to  the  construction  site  asking  for  the
   siblings by name.

58. They  used  false  documents  to  exit  China.   Their  cousin  obtained
   passports in someone else's name  for  them,  with  no  exit  visas  (her
   evidence was that none was needed) and tickets  to  Moscow  in  the  same
   names.  It cost the cousin RMB 20000 and she had paid it all  back  since
   coming to the United Kingdom. Nevertheless, the sister  denied  buying  a
   false arrest warrant; she insisted it was genuine and that the cousin got
   it from the rubbish bin at the Police Station.  She  did  not  know  when
   exactly.

59. If returned to  China,  the  sister  said  that  her  brother  would  be
   arrested and could even be executed, by reason both of  the  offences  in
   China and those in the United Kingdom.

60. There was no re-examination.

Country Background Evidence

People's Republic of China  Criminal  Law  1997  (CL):  Articles  7  and  10
(overseas offences)

61. Articles 7 and 10 of the CL permit the Chinese state to prosecute or re-
   prosecute Chinese  citizens  for  offences  committed  abroad  ('overseas
   offences').   Their  operation  and  context  is  helpfully  set  out  in
   Professor Fu's main report  -

      "Article 7 and Article 10 of the Criminal Law (CL)
      1. The power to re-prosecute in Article 10 of the Criminal Law (CL)
      derives from Article 7 of the CL.


      2. Article 7 of the CL provides:

           "This Law shall be applicable to any  citizen  of  the  People's
           Republic of China who commits a crime  prescribed  in  this  Law
           outside the territory and territorial waters and  space  of  the
           People's Republic of China. However, if the  maximum  punishment
           to be imposed is fixed-term imprisonment of not more than  three
           years as stipulated in this Law, he may  be  exempted  from  the
           investigation for his criminal responsibility. This Law shall be
           applicable to any State functionary or serviceman who commits  a
           crime  prescribed  in  this  Law  outside  the   territory   and
           territorial waters and space of the People's Republic of China."

      3. This provision reflects the personality principle  and  allows  the
      extra-territorial application of the CL. Because of this  application,
      the CL follows Chinese citizens wherever they go, and  Chinese  courts
      always have jurisdiction to punish Chinese citizens who have committed
      crimes overseas upon their return.

      4. Even if a Chinese citizen has already been tried (and punished)  in
      a foreign country, Chinese government can  re-prosecute  the  relevant
      citizen upon his return.


      Article 10 of the CL provides:

           "Any person who  commits  a  crime  outside  the  territory  and
           territorial waters and space of the People's Republic of  China,
           for  which  according  to  this  Law  he  should  bear  criminal
           responsibility, may  still  be  investigated  for  his  criminal
           responsibility according to this Law, even  if  he  has  already
           been tried in a foreign country.  However,  if  he  has  already
           received criminal punishment in the foreign country, he  may  be
           exempted from punishment or given a mitigated punishment."


      5. The rationale behind Article 10 of the  CL  is  that  China,  as  a
      sovereign state, refuses to recognize foreign penal  judgments  unless
      such recognition arises in accordance with any international agreement
      which China has signed. The rule  against  double  jeopardy  does  not
      apply in China in principle.


      6.  Importantly,  decisions  to  prosecute  or  re-prosecute  offences
      committed  overseas  under  both  Article  7  and   Article   10   are
      discretionary. Under  Article  7,  CL  normally  applies  to  a  crime
      committed by a  Chinese  citizen  overseas  only  if  the  offence  is
      relatively serious (and attracts a maximum sentence of more than three
      years) unless the offender is a civil  servant  or  a  serviceman,  in
      which case all offences may, in theory, be prosecuted.


      7. Article 10 is intended to avoid a  situation  in  which  a  foreign
      court treats a Chinese offender with undue lenience. The article gives
      the procuracy the discretion  to  prosecute  or  not  to  prosecute  a
      Chinese citizen who was tried  by  a  foreign  court  for  an  offence
      committed  overseas  depending  on  the  seriousness  of  the  offence
      committed and penalties imposed by the  foreign  courts.  The  Chinese
      procuracy may re-prosecute  the  offender  for  the  same  offence  to
      compensate for the undue lenience. The same  article  also  authorizes
      the court to exempt the offender, when re-prosecuted, from any further
      punishment in China and give only mitigated penalties depending on the
      seriousness of the overseas offence and the severity of  the  overseas
      penalty."

62. Further  guidance  was  available  on  the  website  maintained  by  the
   National People's Congress (NPC), China's highest parliamentary body  and
   legislative authority.  The NPC itself met only once a  year  but  had  a
   Standing Committee working throughout the year.  The NPC website guidance
   on Articles 7 and 10, published in 2002, was as follows -

      "May offences committed outside China's territory which  have  already
      been adjudicated by a foreign court still be ascertained for  criminal
      responsibility under China's Criminal Law?

      According to the provisions of Article 10 of the CL,  any  person  who
      commits a crime outside PRC territory and according  to  the  Criminal
      Law of the PRC should bear criminal responsibility, even if she or  he
      has been tried in a foreign country, may still  be  investigated  [for
      criminal responsibility] according to the Criminal  Law  of  the  PRC.
      China is an independent sovereign state, possessing independent  power
      of criminal jurisdiction.  It does not accept  the  binding  force  of
      foreign adjudication, and the power of  its  jurisdiction  over  crime
      cannot be lost just because such criminal conduct has  been  subjected
      to adjudication in another country. This  provision  in  the  criminal
      law,  is  a  concrete  manifestation  of  the  principle  of   Chinese
      sovereignty  and  a  concrete  manifestation  of  the   principle   of
      protection in the CL.

      According to the provisions of the CL, crimes  committed  outside  the
      territory of the People's Republic  of  China  should  carry  criminal
      responsibility. Most important are the provisions of Article 7 of  the
      CL, under which the provisions of the Criminal Law [of  the  PRC]  are
      applicable when Chinese citizens, state personnel and members  of  the
      armed  forces  commit  offences  outside   Chinese   territory;    the
      provisions of Article 8, under which the  provisions  of  the  CL  are
      applicable to foreigners, who outside  PRC  territory,  commit  crimes
      against the PRC state or against  its  citizens;  and  other  concrete
      provisions in the criminal law concerning criminal responsibility.  In
      accordance with the basic provisions of  PRC  criminal  law,  criminal
      responsibility should be borne, even if  a  [case  has]  already  been
      tried by a foreign  court,  including  where  the  foreign  court  has
      delivered a verdict of not guilty or a verdict of guilty, and also  if
      the foreign court has imposed a criminal punishment or  exempted  [the
      offender] from criminal punishment.  The  PRC  is  not  bound  by  the
      foreign judgements, and in accordance with the  criminal  law  of  the
      PRC, the  PRC  judicial  organs  may  still  decide  if  such  conduct
      constitutes a crime and the punishment to be  imposed.  The  following
      points should be given attention in such circumstances:  the PRC "may"
      in accordance with the CL determine [criminal responsibility] but does
      not have to determine [criminal responsibility] - it is that the power
      to prosecute is retained to the extent that it decides whether  it  is
      desirable or not want to again [try the case] in accordance  with  PRC
      criminal law and necessarily decide [the case] in accordance with  the
      concrete  case  and  concrete  circumstances.  For  example,  where  a
      convicted person has already  been  tried  by  a  foreign  court,  and
      sentenced to a certain punishment, although with reference to the same
      crime even if the punishment  is  still  a  little  heavier,  but  the
      offender admits guilt, [and] in the enforcement of the sentence  shows
      effective repentance, then the PRC may [decide] not  to  carry  out  a
      determination [of guilt].

      In order to achieve the purpose of effective education and change  the
      [outlook of the] offender, and at the same  time  to  respect  foreign
      law, the Criminal Law also provides that in cases in which  there  has
      already been criminal punishment then if the PRC  must  in  accordance
      with the Criminal Law carry out  a  fresh  trial,  then  the  criminal
      punishment may be exempted or reduced.  In  this  stipulation,  it  is
      important to consider that the offender has already been tried by  the
      foreign court and received criminal punishment, so that when  the  PRC
      court  handles  the  case,  then  in  accordance  with  the   concrete
      circumstances of the case, the court may exempt punishment  or  reduce
      punishment. Of course, the provisions of the CL [state] "may" but this
      is not "should", and if the  foreign  court's  decision  is  obviously
      partial, resulting in an abnormally light sentence, the PRC of  course
      may not be bound by the [decision] in  which  there  is  exemption  or
      reduction of the criminal punishment. (Dated: April 17, 2002)."




Case reporting in China

63. Much of the information about the Chinese Court case law  and  reporting
   system provided by the expert witnesses in this appeal is entirely novel.
    In particular, and surprisingly in the light of the reputation which the
   PRC has for secrecy, all the witnesses referred us to at least  one,  and
   several to more than one, web-accessible database of decided  cases.  The
   website  most   frequently   mentioned   was   http://www.chinacourt.org/
   ('Chinacourt'), which is sponsored by  the  Supreme  People's  Court  and
   contains, in its Chinese  version,  over  25000  cases  approved  by  the
   Supreme People's Court and edited for publication.  Chinacourt is  freely
   available  to  individuals  and  researchers  all  over  the   world,   a
   significant advance on the position set out in WC and  in  SC.   It  came
   into existence in the early 21st century, as did the  BAILII  website  in
   the United Kingdom.

64. Professor  Fu  also  had  access  to  the  www.chinalawinfo.com  website
   ('Chinalawinfo') maintained by the Law Faculty of  Peking  University,  a
   subscription-only site with much  better  indexed  information  and  more
   decisions (50,000 and rising).

65. We were told by all the experts of published  guidance  on  the  website
   maintained by the NPC Standing Committee  ('the  NPC  website'),  and  in
   particular of what amounts to a practice direction held there since 2002,
   giving guidance to judges and lawyers on the application  of  Articles  7
   and 10 of the CL.

Expert evidence on double jeopardy prosecution in China

66. We next considered the expert evidence.  The trial bundles  include  two
   important written reports by Professor Jerome Cohen in 2005 and 2006  for
   the United States Congressional-Executive Commission on  China.   All  of
   the other experts acknowledged Professor Cohen  as  the  leading  Western
   authority on the legal system in China.  Unfortunately, Professor Cohen's
   was not called on by the Commission after 20 September 2006 (that appears
   to have been its most  recent  sitting)  and  after  September  2006  the
   Tribunal  must  seek  to  establish  the  present  situation  and   later
   developments in China from the materials and evidence before us.

A.     Professor  Cohen's  evidence  to  the  United  States  Congressional-
Executive Committee

67. Professor Jerome Cohen is Professor of Law, New York  University  School
   of Law; Adjunct Senior Fellow on Asia, Council on Foreign Relations;  and
   'of Counsel' with Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton  &  Garrison.   He  is  a
   leading  expert  on  the  Chinese  legal  system  and  the  international
   relations of East  Asia.     There  follows  a  summary  of  the  written
   evidence given by Professor Cohen to  the  United  States  Congressional-
   Executive Commission on China on 26 July  2005  and  20  September  2006,
   which appears in bundle D of the documents before the Tribunal, at  pages
   33-47.

68. In 2005, Professor Cohen accepted that China had a formal  legal  system
   which had made significant progress compared with the situation in  1978.
   An increasingly robust NPC and its Standing Committee had enacted a  huge
   amount of legislation, supplemented by regulations of the State  Council,
   China's  leading  executive  institution,  the  central  ministries   and
   commissions under that, and the provincial and local People's  Congresses
   and  governments.   The  Supreme  People's  Court  and  Supreme  People's
   Procuracy were now vigorous organisations, all being subordinate  to  the
   NPC.  The Supreme People's Court  and  the  Procuracy  had  issued  large
   numbers of interpretations and other guidance which are  the  substantive
   equivalent of supplementary legislation.  There were now  many  bilateral
   agreements between the People's Republic of China and other  governments:
   China now adhered to  multiple  multilateral  treaties  on  international
   business law and human rights.

69. Professor Cohen described a  nationwide  Court  system  with  over  3000
   basic Courts and almost 200,000 judges, now increasingly  recruited  from
   law school graduates.  The Supreme People's Court had  laboured  mightily
   to mould this group into professionally competent, honest, impartial  and
   independent decision makers.  Legal scholarship  flourished;  there  were
   over 90 law magazines, full of law reform proposals, nationwide  internet
   legal discussions, shelves of legal treatises and teaching materials  and
   self-help books for those who preferred not to use  lawyers.   The  legal
   developments  were  led  by  foreign  trade,  technology   transfer   and
   investment.

70.  There  was  a  burgeoning  popular  awareness  of   law   and   'rights
   consciousness'.  Women, minorities, the disabled  and  other  victims  of
   discrimination invoked China's Administrative Litigation Law and  related
   legislation  and  farmers  used  the  Courts  to   stop   official   land
   requisitions or financial imposition by local  cadres.   Urban  residents
   used the law to try to prevent development and seek  compensation.   Such
   efforts  failed  often;  legislation  was   inadequate   and   internally
   contradictory between national and local norms.  There were still too few
   able lawyers and they were vulnerable to political pressure or disbarment
   if they were too bold in the cases they took.  Judges were vulnerable  to
   corruption, political control  and  the  pressures  of  'guanxi'  (social
   connections).

71. The weakest point in the new legal structure was the criminal  law.   No
   fewer than 68 statutory provisions  authorised  execution;  the  Criminal
   Procedure  Law  provided  few  or  ineffectual  protections;  police   or
   prosecutorial investigators needed no authorisation to detain  a  suspect
   and there was no bail equivalent for most criminal  cases.     Access  to
   lawyers was not a given, there was no right to silence, and those who did
   not confess were frequently subjected to  torture  although  the  Chinese
   Criminal Law expressly prohibited it.  On the  prospect  of  further  law
   reform, Professor Cohen said this:

      "Yet we can expect robust law reform efforts  to  continue  in  China,
      even in the field of criminal justice. The PRC  is  still  considering
      whether or not to ratify  the  International  Covenant  on  Civil  and
      Political Rights (ICCPR), which it signed in 1998. Ratification  would
      commit the PRC to changes in law and practice in the criminal  justice
      area as profound  as  those  changes  in  economic  law  and  practice
      required by  the  PRC's  entry  into  the  WTO.  Regardless  of  ICCPR
      ratification, the Chinese Government, under strong domestic  pressures
      to eliminate some of the most glaring defects  in  the  CPL  [Criminal
      Procedure Law] and some  of  the  worst  distortions  of  the  CPL  in
      practice, has already made clear its determination again to revise the
      CPL. Although optimists  predict  that  the  newly-revised  CPL  might
      appear by next year, we should not underestimate the magnitude of  the
      task.  A  multitude  of  controversial  issues  awaits  the  NPC,  and
      achieving a meaningful reconciliation of the conflicting views of  the
      Ministry of Public Security,  the  Ministry  of  State  Security,  the
      Ministry of Justice, the Supreme People's Court, the Supreme  People's
      Procuracy, the All China  Lawyers  Association,  influential  academic
      experts  and  relevant  Party  organizations  will  require   enormous
      legislative skill, time and energy.

      Pending comprehensive revision of the CPL, the NPC may decide to  make
      certain urgently-needed reforms earlier. For example, should  the  NPC
      do something about "re-education through labor" ("laojiao")? It is  an
      administrative punishment that is not authorized  by  NPC  legislation
      (as now required by other NPC legislation) and that  is  dispensed  by
      the police, who can send someone to labor camp for three or four years
      without the participation of lawyers or the approval of the  procuracy
      or the courts. Although the  Ministry  of  Public  Security  has  been
      waging a public relations and lobbying campaign to  retain  "laojiao",
      even  conducting  limited  experiments  to  allow  lawyers  into   the
      proceeding in an effort to  avoid  losing  this  major  sanction,  its
      continuing existence is blatantly inconsistent with  the  premises  of
      the  CPL  and  the  Law  on  Legislation,  as  well  as  perhaps   the
      Constitution itself, as many Chinese judges,  officials,  lawyers  and
      academic experts have pointed out.

      Perhaps we can also expect  an  expanded  role  for  the  courts,  and
      further strengthening of the courts and the legal profession in  order
      to  enable  the  courts  to  play  this  expanded  role.  The  Chinese
      Government is plainly facing a domestic crisis of confidence caused by
      the failure of its institutions to deal adequately with a rising  tide
      of public grievances relating to environmental pollution, real  estate
      manipulation,  unauthorized  local  financial   demands,   corruption,
      discrimination  and  other  official  abuses.  Increasingly,  interest
      groups, fueled by a shared sense  of  injustice,  are  taking  to  the
      streets and even rioting. These protests threaten political,  economic
      and social stability and indeed the  common  people's  belief  in  the
      legitimacy of Communist rule. Too  often,  for  example,  the  courts,
      instead of enforcing national laws against lawless local officials  or
      conflicting local regulations, serve as the instruments of  the  local
      elite against the victimized populace. And  lawyers  brave  enough  to
      assist the protesters in their efforts to resort to courts in order to
      vindicate their rights are often detained or intimidated by the  local
      police and prosecutors."

72.  In further written evidence  on  20  September  2006,  Professor  Cohen
   returned to that theme.  He noted that ICCPR ratification seemed to be on
   the back burner and that several impressive drafts of a revision  to  the
   CPL had not been enacted yet, despite the upcoming 2008 Beijing Olympics.
   There was a very conservative climate for law reform.  However,  pressure
   from practitioners to reform the CPL remained:

      "A  large  number  of  Chinese  criminal  justice  experts  from   the
      judiciary, the procuracy, the defense bar, the  Ministry  of  Justice,
      the Ministry of Public Security, the NPC staff and academic life  have
      been making impressive efforts to develop a national  consensus  on  a
      broad range of understandably  contentious  issues.   Should  suspects
      generally be granted bail during the investigation period  instead  of
      languishing in detention as at present? Should they have  a  right  to
      keep silent and not incriminate themselves? Should  a  presumption  of
      innocence be  confirmed  and  its  implications  spelled  out?  Should
      defense lawyers be allowed to monitor police  interrogations,  conduct
      their own investigation prior to indictment and freely  meet  detained
      clients?  What  steps  should  be  adopted  to  make  defense  lawyers
      available to accused who more often than not  go  unrepresented?  What
      protections should be enacted to reduce the likelihood  that  suspects
      will be tortured and to  curb  widespread  overtime  detentions?  What
      measures should be prescribed to strengthen the current  insignificant
      legislative barriers to  arbitrary  search  and  seizure?  Should  all
      illegally-obtained evidence  be  excluded  from  trials?  Should  plea
      bargaining be fostered? Should prosecution witnesses  be  required  to
      appear at trial in order to make  meaningful  the  existing  right  to
      cross-examine one's accusers? What kind  of  appellate  review  should
      replace the current perfunctory procedure? None of these issues, which
      have long cried out for legislative resolution, is likely to be  dealt
      with by the NPC in the near future.

      Nor does the NPC seem ready to abolish the notorious, supposedly "non-
      criminal", administrative punishment of "re-education  through  labor"
      (RETL), which allows the police unilaterally to  ship  people  off  to
      three or even four years of  confinement  in  circumstances  that  are
      similar to those of the conventional criminal  punishment  of  "reform
      through labor". Two or three years ago, many Chinese  reformers,  even
      within the Ministry of Public Security (MPS),  seemed  confident  that
      the NPC was about to abolish or at least  substantially  revise  RETL.
      There was widespread agreement among the experts that  its  continuing
      existence undermines the significance of the  Criminal  Procedure  Law
      (CPL), since it allows the police to circumvent the protections of the
      CPL,  including  review  by  the  procuracy  and   the   courts,   and
      nevertheless to send people to  long  periods  of  what  is,  for  all
      intents and purposes, criminal punishment. But the apparent opposition
      of the Central Party Political-Legal Committee and the  leadership  of
      the MPS, which believes that it continues to need this weapon to  help
      quell social unrest, has been sufficient  to  block  adoption  of  the
      draft legislation that now lies dormant in the NPC."

73. Professor Cohen noted that the Supreme  People's  Court  was  trying  to
   sustain the momentum for law reform and in January 2007  had  taken  back
   from the provincial High Courts the responsibility for  final  review  of
   all death penalty cases.  300-400 new Supreme People's Court judges  were
   being  recruited  to  deal  with  death  penalty   reviews.    Each   new
   interpretation issued by the NPC after January 2007 had to be filed  with
   the NPC's Standing Committee, which had the power  to  amend  it.   Since
   July 1 2006, all death penalty appeals required a formal  Court  hearing.
   Standards for the application of the death penalty  were  in  preparation
   which would call for the imposition of the death penalty only subject  to
   new and detailed conditions.  Restraints and pressures on  trial  lawyers
   in sensitive cases  had  increased  and  the  Party's  r�le  in  criminal
   investigations had become more visible.

74.  Professor  Cohen's  report  concluded  with  a  consideration  of   the
   immediate future and what the United States should do in relation to  the
   Chinese legal system as a whole -

      "This is a gloomy time in China for  the  administration  of  criminal
      justice and related legislative and judicial reform. The NPC seems  to
      be frozen in this area, and the only significant systemic reform - the
      SPC's effort to improve procedures in death penalty cases - is moving
      slowly and toward an uncertain outcome. In too many cases, the  police
      operate with reckless disregard for existing criminal procedures,  and
      in making their decisions courts are the helpless tool  of  Party  and
      government leaders and the objects  of  other  distorting  influences.
      Although the nation's leaders continue to use the abstract rhetoric of
      the "rule of law", they increasingly emphasize that the  Western-style
      laws, institutions and procedures that the Party has introduced  since
      1978 are not to be applied in a Western manner. They  want  the  legal
      system to repress the  rising  tide  of  social  unrest  generated  by
      China's rapid success rather than effectively process the new disputes
      and grievances that are being brought to  it  for  solution.  This  in
      itself has added to social instability. The  failure  of  the  highly-
      touted "socialist rule of law" to meet popular needs and its  frequent
      use as an instrument of repression have fueled feelings of frustration
      that are being  transformed  into  what  has  accurately  been  called
      "rightful resistance."


75. Unfortunately, the Congressional-Executive Committee does not appear  to
   have taken evidence after September 2006;  thereafter,  we  rely  on  the
   other evidence before the Tribunal.



B.    Professor Palmer's report

76. Professor Michael J E Palmer, LLB (Cantab) BSc (Econ)  MA  LLD  (London)
   is a senior Professor of Law with the  School  of  Oriental  and  African
   Studies at the University of London (SOAS), and in 2006 was joint head of
   its LLM Course on 'Modern Chinese Law'.  He has knowledge of Chinese law,
   society and custom; in the past he has given expert evidence  in  various
   court proceedings (including WC and SC) and tribunal  hearings  in  which
   matters of Chinese law have been at issue in England, Hong Kong  and  the
   United States.  He is currently on sabbatical from SOAS.  He  speaks  and
   reads Mandarin Chinese.  From 1990-1993, Professor Palmer was seconded to
   Hong Kong as a fulltime advisor on Chinese law in the Hong Kong  Attorney
   General's Chambers.  He was Secretary to, and a member of, the Hong  Kong
   Governor's Working  Party  on  legal  aspects  of  civil  and  commercial
   relations between Hong Kong and the mainland People's Republic of  China.
   In 1999, he was a member of a Special Mission of the United Nations  High
   Commissioner for Human Rights (UNHCHR), which visited the PRC  to  advise
   what changes to the law were necessary to enable  it  to  accede  to  the
   International Covenant on Civil and Political  Rights  (which  China  had
   signed the previous year).

77. Professor Palmer visited a  number  of  "Reform  through  Labour",  "Re-
   education through Labour" and other correctional institutions during  the
   course of regular official visits to the PRC.  He  has  worked  with  the
   Lord Chancellor's Fellowship Programme for  Young  Chinese  Lawyers,  the
   Great-Britain-China Centre,  the  PRC  Supreme  People's  Court  Training
   Programme for Young Chinese Judges, and the  British  Council's  EU-China
   Legal and Judicial Co-operation Programme.

78. Professor Palmer's report showed reasonable, if not full,  knowledge  of
   the nature and character of the appellant's criminal past. He set out the
   text of the 1997 People's Republic of China Criminal  Law  (CL)  Articles
   239 and 318 (kidnapping and people smuggling  offences).   Under  Article
   239, kidnapping for blackmail carries a sentence of 10 years to  life  in
   prison, plus fines and/or property confiscation.   Higher  penalties  are
   contemplated where a kidnap victim is a child, or  dies.   Under  Article
   318 (people smuggling) an ordinary smuggler is liable to sentence of  2-7
   years and a fine; where the defendant is a ringleader or the offence  has
   aggravating features, the sentence is 7 years to life.  If both  offences
   are committed, multiple offence provisions  apply.   Transporting  people
   over the border entails a sentence up to 5 years,  with  5-10  years  for
   repeat  offences,  unsafe  transport  vehicles,  huge  profits  or  other
   exceptionally serious circumstances. In  the  light  of  the  appellant's
   organised crime offence, Professor Palmer considered that a  sentence  at
   the higher end of the scale, life imprisonment, would have been  imposed,
   and that the Chinese authorities would regard 14 years as  unduly  light.
   That comment was not sourced but we have regard to  the  expertise  which
   Professor Palmer has accrued over the years.

79. The report then dealt with Articles 7 and 10 of the Criminal Law,  which
   allow re-prosecution of overseas offences.   In particular, we  are  here
   concerned with Article 10, which permits re-prosecution  even  where  the
   offender was convicted and sentenced abroad:

      "10.   There  is,  however,  an  absence  of  reported  cases  of  re-
      prosecution under Article 10 of the revised Criminal Law of  the  PRC,
      1997. This reflects, in my view, not an absence  of  such  cases  but,
      rather, a problem of reporting - reflecting in part the problem of the
      secrecy that pervades important areas in the operation  of  the  legal
      system in the PRC. Secretiveness is part of a general approach to  law
      and governance in the PRC, and the failure of the  PRC  government  to
      acknowledge and deal with the SARS epidemic reflected, continued close
      control over and censorship of the media by the PRC authorities. Legal
      reforms in the PRC have prompted the Chinese legal system to become  a
      little more open and transparent than it was two decades ago. However,
      secrecy  continues  to  be  a  critically  important  feature  of  the
      operation of the Chinese legal system. Very important is the secretive
      nature of the workings of the court  adjudication  committee,  despite
      its active involvement in trial decision-making."

80. Professor Palmer cited two recent North American  articles  in  relation
   to judicial training and precedent in China:

      "11...Discussing sources of law with reference  to  the  role  of  the
      courts under the heading "The Emergence  of  Case  Law",  one  of  the
      leading authorities on Chinese law in North America,  Stanley  Lubman,
      has recently pointed to the particular and limited role given to "case
      law" in the PRC:

           Chinese  doctrine  firmly  rejects  the  doctrine  of  precedent
           (panli),  denying  any  binding  force  to  judicial  decisions.
           Although the prior cases may be considered instructive  examples
           (anli), they  are  not  binding  and  are  not  supposed  to  be
           considered a source of law.  In practice  the  Supreme  People's
           Court has been publishing decisions in its  Gazette  since  1985
           for their "reference and educational value". Most of the  lower-
           court decisions were  carefully  chosen  and  substantially  re-
           written in  order  to  transmit  to  the  lower  court  [Supreme
           People's] Court's views of the issues involved.

           Other reports of decisions circulate to the lower courts through
           internal   channels,   but   only   the   most    "mature"   and
           "representative" are  selected  for  open  publication  (LUBMAN,
           Stanley [1999) Bird in a Cage: Legal Reform in China after  Mao,
           Stanford, Calif: Stanford University Press, at pp. 284-5).

      12.   Discussing sources of law with  reference  to  contract  law,  a
      politically much less sensitive area than  criminal  justice,  another
      leading authority on Chinese law in North America, Pitman Potter,  has
      more recently pointed to the particular and limited role given to case
      analysis in the PRC:

           The formalism evident in Chinese official legal culture  remains
           a  dominant  characteristic   of   judicial   decision   making.
           Collections  of  judicial  decisions  to  be  used  in  judicial
           training  programs  give  primary  emphasis  to  uniformity  and
           consistency in judicial decisions. As well, the process of  case
           analysis begins with a review  of  statutory  provisions,  which
           themselves reflect the instrumentalist character  of  state  law
           and regulation. Little attention is paid to  close  analysis  of
           pertinent facts, or to the subtleties of fact cum law  analysis.
           Thus the importance of formalistic compliance with state law  is
           instilled in judicial decision makers  from  early  on  (POTTER,
           Pitman B. [2001] The Chinese  Legal  System:  Globalisation  and
           Local Legal Culture, Routledge: London & New York at p. 54)."

   It is clear that there are collections of decisions available to  Chinese
   researchers and for judicial training, and that they are used in judicial
   training  programmes  with  the  emphasis  on  judicial  uniformity   and
   consistency.

81. Professor Palmer emphasised  how  small  decision  collections  were  in
   relation to the vast number of cases heard across China.   No  statistics
   are provided; these,  we  now  understand,  are  not  readily  obtainable
   outside China.   A Chinese source, Liu Nanping,  described  by  Professor
   Palmer as 'the leading academic authority on sources of PRC  law'  stated
   that:

      "Most of the cases reported in the [Supreme  People's  Court]  Gazette
      are from decisions of lower  courts  which  reach  the  Supreme  Court
      through "the internal reporting channel". Traditionally,  every  lower
      court, particularly every higher  provincial  court,  is  supposed  to
      submit to the Supreme Court  those  of  its  decisions  which  involve
      either important or complex  issues  ...  these  submissions  are  not
      required by law, nor do decisions reach the court by  way  of  law  or
      review.

      The Court does not simply publish verbatim  what  it  regards  as  the
      important  opinions  of  lower  courts,  Instead,  the  Court,   after
      selecting desirable cases will substantially edit or rewrite  most  of
      the selected cases in order to make them understood and  followed  the
      way the Court wants...

      One cautionary note is that the decisions eventually published in  the
      Gazette constitute no more than a fraction  of  the  cases  the  Court
      transmits to the lower courts as guidance in their decisions.  Besides
      the open channel of publication in the Gazette, the Court continues to
      use a traditional "internal channel" ...[Decisions published] are also
      mostly not the Court's own decisions,  but  are  selected  from  lower
      court opinions and edited and rewritten by the Court ... the  internal
      channel is more likely to  be  used  to  relay  cases  that  are  less
      significant ... [but] ... sometimes cases  selected  ...  for  special
      purposes are also sent through the internal  channel  ...(LIU  Nanping
      [1991] " 'Legal Precedents' with  Chinese  characteristics:  Published
      Cases in the Gazette  of  the  Supreme  People's  Court,"  Journal  of
      Chinese Law, Vol. 5, pp. 107-129, at pp. 115-116)."

82. Professor Palmer explained that Chinese  judicial  decision  making  was
   not transparent;  judgments  provided  only  minimal  information  as  to
   reasoning, with the supporting materials (notes of judicial  discussions,
   replies to enquiries by superior courts and/or the  Political  and  Legal
   Committee of the Communist Party) retained on the  'internal  volume'  of
   the case file and not  subject  to  disclosure.   The  Communist  Party's
   Political and Legal Committee appointed and removed judges  as  necessary
   and might intervene in or determine the outcome of a particular case.  He
   explained the NPC website guidance, and in his opinion,  the  purpose  of
   that document for those working in the criminal  justice  system  was  to
   guide actual practice.  Professor Palmer considered that the NPC  website
   guidance would not have been given  to  those  working  in  the  criminal
   justice system if it were not intended to guide actual practice.

83. The report next considered the death penalty, repeating the emphasis  on
   the secrecy of Chinese legal proceedings.  Professor Palmer  referred  to
   an Amnesty International report 0f March 2004,  reporting  the  extensive
   use of the death penalty in the 'strike hard' campaigns.   The  following
   excerpt from that  report is helpful:

       "...Luo Gan, a politburo standing committee member  and  director  of
      the Central Committee for the Management of Public Security, has urged
      security organs to "[...] continue to  adhere  to  the  'strike  hard'
      principles" in on-going security work.  Luo Gan also  called  for  the
      campaign to be extended for another year on 18 July 2003, (6) although
      it is unclear whether this resulted in an actual policy  decision  for
      the campaign to continue on a national level. Xiao Yang, president  of
      the Supreme People's Court, also  called  in  December  2003  for  the
      campaign to continue in response to continually rising levels of crime
      in China.

           "Any crime which the law regards  as  serious  should  certainly
           receive serious penalties, and any crime which is punishable  by
           the death penalty according to the law, should certainly receive
           the death penalty. This will  ensure  the  healthy  progress  of
           strike hard".

      Hu Jintao, former Secretary of  the  Standing  Committee  of  the  CCP
      Central Political Bureau (Legal Daily 4 May 1996),  now  President  of
      the People's Republic of China and Chairman of the CCP.

      According to official national statistics, the conviction rate for all
      crimes for the five years from 1998  to  2002  was  99.1%.  An  almost
      'perfect' conviction rate  is  deeply  worrisome  in  the  context  of
      factors demonstrated in this document, such  as  increased  detentions
      and arrests, torture to extort confessions, restricted access to legal
      representation, the absence of a  presumption  of  innocence,  extreme
      pressure on the police, Procuratorate and courts to secure convictions
      during "strike hard", and courts passing  guilty  verdicts  through  a
      sense of political obligation and a desire to maintain resolve  rather
      than rigor. Under such  circumstances,  miscarriages  of  justice  are
      inevitable, and it is possible that people are executed 'in error'  on
      an almost daily basis ..."

84. Professor Palmer's opinion was that there was a risk to  a  person  such
   as this appellant:

      "...although it is impossible to say to what extent he is at risk, and
      even though the offences for which  he  has  been  convicted  in  [the
      United Kingdom] do not carry the death penalty."

85. Professor  Palmer  next  considered  prison  conditions.   His  analysis
   distinguished  helpfully  between  laogai  (reform  through  labour)  and
   laojiao  (re-education  through  labour).    Laodong   gaizao,   commonly
   abbreviated to laogai, was a penalty intended for serious offences  where
   the appellant failed to recognise his crime and repent  it.   For  lesser
   offences, laodong jiaoyan, abbreviated to laojiao, was an  administrative
   penalty without trial which could be imposed by the police, of  up  to  4
   years in a labour camp.  Previous powers to impose unlimited laojiao  had
   been curtailed by the higher courts and  4  years  was  now  the  maximum
   period.

86. Information as to the operation  of  laogai  and  laojiao  was  hard  to
   obtain because of the political sensitivities  of  the  Communist  Party,
   censorship and State  secrets  law.   The  institutions  which  Professor
   Palmer had been able to visit were carefully prepared model institutions.
    Conditions in them were very Spartan, the atmosphere oppressive and  the
   prisoners fearful, but he saw no obvious signs of maltreatment  in  those
   particular detention facilities.  Other evidence  indicated  that  prison
   conditions could be extremely poor and breach international standards, in
   particular -

           a) the books of Harry Wu:  "Bitter Winds: A Memoir of  My  Years
              in China's Gulag" (1994) and "Troublemaker: One Man's Crusade
              Against China's Cruelty" (1996));
           b) a report on a laogai camp  in  Western  Sichuan  province  by
              James Cox of Global  Network  (Prison  Camp  or  Death  Camp,
              February 8 1999);
           c) the 2001 Amnesty International report  based  on  a  petition
              smuggled out by prisoners at Hunan No  1  Prison  in  Central
              China , reporting appalling conditions there;
           d) the  Hong  Kong  information  centre  for  Human  Rights  and
              Democracy report of December 2001 reporting  an  outbreak  of
              tuberculosis in Liaoning's Tieling  Prison  which  killed  57
              prisoners  and  unsympathetic  attitudes  to   outbreaks   of
              tuberculosis and Hepatitis B at Eastern  Zhejiang  Province's
              no 1 prison in October 2001;  and
           e) from Labour Rights Now, an independent human rights group for
              employment  and  human  rights  issues,  a  report   on   the
              maltreatment of Trade Union activists in Hunan Province No  1
              Prison.

87.  Professor  Palmer  considered  these  reports  strongly  suggestive  of
   unacceptable prison conditions and treatment throughout  China.  Finally,
   Professor Palmer referred to the 2005 report of Manfred Nowak, the  UNHCR
   Special Rapporteur on torture  and  other  cruel  inhuman  and  degrading
   treatment or punishment, as follows -

      "The Special  Rapporteur  on  torture  and  other  cruel,  inhuman  or
      degrading treatment or punishment undertook a visit to China  from  20
      November to 2 December 2005, at the invitation of the Government.   He
      expresses his appreciation to the Government for the full  cooperation
      it provided him throughout the visit.  The report contains a study  of
      the legal and factual aspects regarding the situation  of  torture  or
      ill-treatment in China.

      The Special Rapporteur bases his finding on a thorough analysis of the
      legal framework, individual communications and on written  information
      from and interviews with a wide array of sources, including Government
      officials,  non-governmental  organizations,  lawyers,   victims   and
      witnesses,  as  well  as  from  on-site   inspections   of   detention
      facilities.  Accordingly, he recommends a number  of  measures  to  be
      adopted by the Government in order to comply with  its  commitment  to
      prevent and suppress acts of torture and other forms of ill-treatment.

      Though on the  decline,  particularly  in  urban  areas,  the  Special
      Rapporteur believes that torture  remains  widespread  in  China.   He
      welcomes  the  willingness  of  the  Government  to  acknowledge   the
      pervasiveness of torture  in  the  criminal  justice  system  and  the
      various  efforts  undertaken  in  recent  years  at  the  central  and
      provincial levels to combat torture and ill treatment.  In the opinion
      of the Special Rapporteur, these measures have contributed to a steady
      decline of torture practices over recent years.

      Many factors contribute to  the  continuing  practice  of  torture  in
      China.  They include rules of  evidence  that  create  incentives  for
      interrogators to obtain confessions  through  torture,  the  excessive
      length of time that criminal  suspects  are  held  in  police  custody
      without judicial control, the absence of a legal culture based on  the
      presumption of innocence (including the absence of an effective  right
      to remain  silent),  and  restricted  rights  and  access  of  defence
      counsel.  The situation is aggravated by the lack  of  self-generating
      and/or self-sustaining social and political institutions including:  a
      free and investigatory press, citizen-based independent  human  rights
      monitoring organizations, independent commissions visiting  places  of
      detention,  and  independent,   fair   and   accessible   courts   and
      prosecutors.

      While the basic conditions in the  detention  facilities  seem  to  be
      generally satisfactory, the  Special  Rapporteur  was  struck  by  the
      strictness of prison discipline and a palpable level of fear and self-
      censorship when talking to detainees.

      The criminal justice system and  its  strong  focus  on  admission  of
      culpability, confessions and re-education is  particularly  disturbing
      in relation to  political  crimes  and  the  administrative  detention
      system  of  "Re-education  through  Labour".    The   combination   of
      deprivation of liberty as a sanction  for  the  peaceful  exercise  of
      freedom of expression, assembly and religion,  with  measures  of  re-
      education  through  coercion,  humiliation  and  punishment  aimed  at
      admission of guilt and altering the personality of detainees up to the
      point of breaking  their  will,  constitutes  a  form  of  inhuman  or
      degrading treatment or punishment, which is incompatible with the core
      values of any democratic society based upon a culture of human  rights
      (Commission on Human Rights, E/CN.4/2006/6/Add.6; 10 March 2006)".

88. That concluded the evidence of Professor Palmer.  We have  not  had  the
   opportunity to examine him orally.  That is regrettable:  in March  2007,
   his chambers website records that Professor Palmer was made  an  Honorary
   Professor at the People's University Law School in Beijing.   That  would
   have given him increased database access (see  Professor  Fu's  evidence)
   but we do not have a later report from  Professor  Palmer  prepared  with
   that access.

C.    Dr Gechlik's report

89. Dr Mei-Ying Gechlik, LLM, JSD, MBA (Finance) (n�e Veron  Mei-Ying  Hung)
   is a law lecturer and Microsoft Rule of Law Fellow at Stanford University
   Law School.  She teaches two courses:  Introduction to the Chinese  Legal
   System and Chinese  Law  and  Business.   Her  undergraduate  degree  was
   awarded by Hong Kong University and she holds postgraduate qualifications
   from Washington College of Law, Stanford University Law  School  and  the
   University of Pennsylvania.  She is a member of the Bar  in  England  and
   Wales, Hong Kong, and in the United States  in  both  New  York  and  the
   District of Columbia.  She also was a visiting Professor at the  People's
   University of Beijing.

90. Dr Gechlik is Chinese, born in Hong Kong where she lived for  almost  30
   years before relocating to the United States.  She has married in America
   and has a daughter.  The rest of  her  family,  mother,  siblings,  their
   spouses and all their children,  are  Hong  Kong  residents.  Dr  Gechlik
   speaks fluent Mandarin Chinese  and  Cantonese  Chinese,  and  she  reads
   newspapers and magazines from Hong Kong and  mainland  China  every  day.
   Since her childhood, she has made regular visits  to  mainland  China  to
   visit relatives or research the Chinese legal system;  she  has  observed
   court trials and interviewed hundreds of judges,  officials,  professors,
   attorneys, and litigants.

91. Like Professor Palmer, Dr Gechlik was appointed by the UNHCHR  in  2001,
   to advise on implementing human rights technical cooperation programs  in
   China, including presenting a paper to a  conference  of  senior  Chinese
   officials  in  Beijing,  explaining  why  laojiao   breached   not   only
   international but Chinese legal principles and urging  abolition  of  the
   system, or at least  reform.   The  paper  was  later  published  in  the
   Columbia Journal of Transnational Law.  After this  project,  Dr  Gechlik
   was twice appointed by the UNHCHR  to  work  with  Chinese  officials  to
   discuss Chinese prison reform.  She presented  a  paper  on  training  of
   prison  staff  in  China  and  also  served  as  an   expert   consultant
   accompanying a Chinese  delegation  to  Switzerland  for  discussions  on
   prison reform and prison visits there.    The Chinese authorities invited
   Dr Gechlik to help with training on the theme "China:  WTO  and  Judicial
   Review".  The training was delivered  to  legislative  affairs  officials
   from China's provinces and to the State Council,  the  country's  highest
   executive organ.

92. Dr Gechlik testified before United States  Congressional  Committees  on
   topics including human rights, legal  reform,  and  political  reform  in
   China and has published widely on these specialist areas.   Unfortunately
   we have not had the opportunity  of  hearing  from  Dr  Gechlik  in  oral
   evidence but it is clear that she has significant expertise with which to
   assist the Tribunal.

93. Dr Gechlik's report first considered internal re-prosecution of  Chinese
   citizens who had not left China.   Unfortunately, that throws no light on
   these proceedings.  Dr Gechlik next  dealt  with  the  interpretation  of
   Articles 10 and 7.  There was no system of precedent in Chinese  law  and
   the reasoning parts of Chinese judgments were relatively short.  However,
   judges of the SPC often wrote articles or books to discuss  legal  issues
   which, although  not  legally  binding  were  considered  persuasive  and
   reflective  of  how  law  was  applied  in  judicial   practice.    These
   publications were read  closely  to  understand  judicial  analysis.   Dr
   Gechlik quoted at length from a useful article written by two SPC  judges
   and a Professor from the National Judges' College  in China, dealing with
   'China's theory and practice on ne bis in idem'.   The article  concerned
   the application of Article 10 CL and, after concluding  that  ne  bis  in
   idem as a  doctrine  was  inapplicable  to  re-prosecution  for  overseas
   crimes, set out the operation of Article 10  as  a  species  of  negative
   recognition of overseas judgements -

      "...Article 10 of CL 1997 stipulates that any  person  who  commits  a
      crime outside the territory and territorial waters and  space  of  the
      People's Republic of China, for which according to this law he  should
      bear criminal  responsibility,  may  still  be  investigated  for  his
      criminal responsibility according to this law, even if he has  already
      been tried in a foreign  country;  but  if  he  has  already  received
      criminal punishment in the foreign country, he may  be  exempted  from
      punishment  or  given  a  mitigated  punishment.  ....  Clearly,  this
      provision  is  aimed  at  protecting   the   State   sovereignty   and
      safeguarding the interests of the State, as well as national citizens.
      Therefore, some scholars hold that  it  is  unreasonable  for  Chinese
      judges to recognize the criminal judgments made by foreign courts.  In
      their opinion, such foreign criminal judgments  are  considered  as  a
      type of fact and only have consultative use. Actually, this opinion is
      doctrinally not persuasive in our view. Taking a comprehensive view of
      the Article 10 of the CL 1997, which provides that a criminal who  has
      already received criminal punishment in the  foreign  country  may  be
      exempted from punishment or given a mitigated punishment, one can find
      that Article 10 of the CL 1997 does not purely exclude the recognition
      of foreign criminal judgments. On the contrary, this is still  a  kind
      of recognition that can be treated as negative  recognition.  Although
      such kind of recognition does not affect or restrict the  State  power
      of criminal punishment, the results of the trial  by  national  courts
      are still affected by the nature of the execution of foreign  criminal
      judgments. Similar provisions exist in  the  criminal  legislation  of
      other countries such as Japan. Therefore, it cannot be concluded  that
      Article 10 of the CL 1997 directly excludes the principle of ne bis in
      idem."

94.   Dr Gechlik  considered  it  significant  that  when  the  article  was
   republished in Chinese in 2006, the authors added two more  sentences  at
   the end of the passage above -

      "Of course, the regulation in  Article  10  of  the  Criminal  Law  is
      conservative.  In judicial practice, this provision is not often  used
      in specific cases."

95. The authors considered whether Article 10 should be abolished:

      "... From a state sovereignty point of view,  immediate  abolition  of
      Article  10  of  the  Criminal  Law   is   not   likely   appropriate.
      Consideration must be given to both the protection of human rights and
      the maintenance of state sovereignty, and it might  be  reasonable  to
      revise Article 10 of  the  CL  1997  from  the  doctrine  of  negative
      recognition to the doctrine of  positive  recognition.  The  so-called
      doctrine of positive recognition stipulates  that  criminal  judgments
      handed down by foreign courts must be recognized by courts  in  China,
      except when the judgment  is  apparently  partial  for  some  unlawful
      reasons."

96. The authors offered no explanation as to what was meant  by  'apparently
   partial for some unlawful reasons' but Dr Gechlik argued that its natural
   meaning was 'unlawful in Chinese law'.  Article 81(2) of the Criminal Law
   excluded serious offenders in some cases from parole -

      "81(2) No parole shall be granted to recidivists or criminals who  are
      sentenced to more than 10 years of imprisonment or  life  imprisonment
      for crimes of violence such as homicide, explosion, robbery, rape  and
      kidnap."

97. Dr Gechlik argued that the decision to release the appellant after  only
   7 years of a 14 year sentence would  likely  be  considered  unlawful  in
   Chinese terms, entailing a risk of Article 10 re-prosecution  on  return.
   Article 142(2) of Criminal Procedure Law stipulates that:

      "142(2)          With respect to a case that is minor and the offender
      need not be given criminal punishment or  need  be  exempted  from  it
      according to the Criminal Law, the People's Procuratorate  may  decide
      not to initiate a prosecution."

98. Dr Gechlik considered that Article  142  would  not  avail  the  present
   appellant  as  his  offence  was  not  minor  and  that  accordingly  the
   Procuratorate lacked discretion as to whether  to  initiate  an  overseas
   offences prosecution under Article 7 or Article 10 CL.  She undertook  an
   extensive internet search to try to find examples of the use  of  Article
   10 of the  Criminal  Law.   Strikingly,  she  could  not  find  any.   In
   particular, Dr Gechlik searched Chinacourt, which  then  contained  23100
   criminal judgments reviewed and rewritten by the Supreme  People's  Court
   for the guidance of Chinese  lawyers  and  judges.   She  could  find  no
   Article 10 cases at all on that database.

99. Dr Gechlik acknowledged that improvements in transparency had been  made
   by the Chinese Courts especially since China  joined  the  WTO  in  2001.
   However, she considered that the transparency remained incomplete (giving
   an example of a public pronouncement relating  to  disclosure  of  Patent
   Court decisions which had only been complied with in about 30% of cases).
    It was possible that unreported cases were considered to  involve  State
   secrets or individual privacy.  Elsewhere in her research, Dr Gechlik did
   find three  possible  Article  10  examples,  which  at  best,  could  be
   described  as  inconclusive.    Finally,  Dr   Gechlik   considered   the
   possibility  of  laojiao  (the  administrative  penalty  of  re-education
   through labour).  The  police  had  a  wide  discretion  and  Dr  Gechlik
   considered that they were likely to use it  if  the  appellant  were  not
   otherwise prosecuted.   The problem was  particularly  serious  in  rural
   areas or lower levels of government where respect for the law was  scant.



100. There had been considerable public criticism of the laojiao  system  in
   the press and the Chinese Government was considering reforming  it.    In
   January 2007, the China Daily published an article  entitled  "End  Legal
   Black Hole" inviting its repeal:

      "Rushing an immature draft into law is not in  our  interest.  But  we
      cannot afford any more foot-dragging on this  one.  We  badly  need  a
      substitute for the re-education-through-labor mechanism.

      Through   its   existence   since   1957,   re-education-through-labor
      institutions have contributed  to  maintaining  order  and  preventing
      crime. The system's inadequate concern for civil  rights  as  well  as
      lack of jurisprudence protection have made it increasingly out of step
      with the country's progress in protecting human rights.

      Re-education through labor is a  Chinese  invention  that  applies  to
      minor law violations that do not  constitute  crimes  or  qualify  for
      criminal punishment.

       Since police authorities can independently decide to send  a  citizen
      for such re-education and the terms of re-education can be as long  as
      four years, there have been legitimate worries as well as examples  of
      abuse.

      Although the re-education system was designed for minor offenses  that
      do not deserve penalties prescribed in the Criminal Law,  re-education
      through labor can be more severe than  what  the  law  stipulates  for
      crimes. This is a major injustice that has to be resolved.

      The largely unrestrained latitude of the police in deciding  the  term
      of re-education, the lack of oversight, and absence of clearly defined
      procedures make suspects of  minor  offenses  vulnerable.  Some  would
      rather face trial and serve a criminal sentence than be  sent  to  re-
      education.

      We strongly hope the widely anticipated draft can  appear  before  the
      national lawmakers as scheduled. It is an imperative legislative task.

      Disagreements are no reason for keeping it from legislative  scrutiny.
      The NPC Standing Committee is the  best  place  to  address  different
      opinions."

101. The article reinforced the message that laojiao related only  to  minor
   offences.  This, on any view, was not a minor  offence.   That  completed
   the evidence of  Dr  Gechlik.  Again,  the  Tribunal  did  not  have  the
   advantage of hearing her oral evidence.

D.    Dr Dillon's reports and oral evidence

102. Dr.  Michael  Dillon  BA  PhD  (Chinese  Studies)  FRHistS  was  Senior
   Lecturer in Chinese History at the  Department  of  East  Asian  Studies,
   University of Durham when he prepared his report on 8 August 2007.    His
   primary research interest was  the  Muslim  minorities  of  north-western
   China, particularly the Hui and the Uyghurs.   Dr  Dillon  reads  Chinese
   fluently and speaks Mandarin. In addition, he had some knowledge of other
   Chinese languages  and  of  the  languages  of  some  of  China's  ethnic
   minorities. Dr Dillon had been teaching and researching on  the  PRC  for
   over thirty years, and his  expertise  was  based  both  on  the  written
   materials available (the Chinese press and other reports from China)  and
   on interviews and information obtained  during  regular  academic  visits
   over that long period, some independent, and some in cooperation with the
   Chinese Academy of Social Sciences and Chinese  universities.  Dr  Dillon
   had made research visits to many regions of China  including  the  remote
   regions of Gansu, Ningxia and Xinjiang in the north-west.

103.  Dr  Dillon's  most  recent  visit  to  the  PRC  was  in  July   2005.
   Thereafter, he kept up-to-date via various organisations such as Minority
   Rights Group, whose conference he addressed in New York in July 2006.  Dr
   Dillon had been preparing reports for British courts for returned  asylum
   seekers and other Chinese nationals since 2004.

104. Dr Dillon explained that the modern Chinese  legal  system  dated  back
   only to 1978, after the  previous  Soviet-style  model  used  since  1949
   collapsed and during the opening up of China to the West, when  a  system
   of lawyers and Courts was constructed on  the  Western  model.   He  drew
   heavily on Professor Cohen's reports, which we have  already  considered,
   and on the UNHCHR Special  Rapporteur  report  of  Professor  Nowak.   Dr
   Dillon noted international concerns about the Chinese  legal  system,  in
   particular torture, detention in  conditions  not  meeting  international
   norms, and the number of death sentences (albeit hard  to  compute  given
   the lack of organised information provided by  the  Chinese  Government).
   Dr Dillon described the court system in China:

      "The court system in China has four levels. The Supreme People's Court
      which sits in Beijing is the highest judicial organ in  China  and  is
      formally responsible to the National People's Congress (NPC)  and  its
      Standing Committee. It tries the most significant cases, hears appeals
      against  the  decisions  of  lower-level  courts  and  supervises  the
      operation of local courts and special courts. The second tier consists
      of approximately thirty Higher Courts  which  sit  in  provincial  and
      autonomous region capitals and in the major  cities  which  have  been
      accorded independent municipal status.

      The third tier courts are the 400 or so Intermediate  People's  Courts
      which are based in the administrative centres of prefectures,  certain
      other towns and the districts of larger cities. Basic or primary-level
      People's Courts, of which there are over 3000, are  the  lowest  level
      courts and sit in all counties and  in  many  cities.  They  have  the
      authority to establish People's Tribunals to handle local cases and it
      is estimated  that  there  are  as  many  as  20,000  such  tribunals.
      Intermediate People's Courts try criminal cases and have  jurisdiction
      in cases carrying the death sentence subject to appeal to  the  Higher
      Court."

   From that summary it appeared that criminal cases belonged  at  least  in
   the Intermediate People's Courts (in  administrative  centres,  nominated
   towns and districts in  larger  cities),  rather  than  in  the  People's
   Tribunals in rural areas which dealt with less serious offences.

105. In relation to prison conditions, Dr Dillon referred  to  many  of  the
   same texts as Professor Palmer:  Harry Wu  "Laogai:  the  Chinese  Gulag"
   Boulder: Westview, 1992; Harry Wu (with Carolyn Wakeman) "Bitter Winds: a
   memoir of my years in China's Gulag" New York: John Wiley, 1994; Jean-Luc
   Domenach "Chine: l'archipel oubli�"  Paris:  Fayard,  1992  and  he  drew
   similar conclusions as to the history of China's prison  camps.   All  of
   these books antedate the westernisation which Professor Fu  described  as
   having accelerated in the late 1990s.  However, their historical accuracy
   is widely accepted.

106. On the openness of the criminal process as a whole, Dr Dillon stated:

      "Although there have been many changes in the Chinese media since  the
      1980s, the State still exercises a great deal of control, particularly
      over matters which are judged to have an impact on national  security.
      Serious and organised  crime  and  its  consequences  fall  into  this
      category. Court cases are not routinely reported in the press  in  the
      way that they are in the West. They are only reported in the  national
      and provincial level daily  press  when  they  are  deemed  to  be  of
      political significance and the government intends that a lesson should
      be drawn from them. There are often more detailed reports in the local
      daily and evening  press  and  on  local  television  stations,  so  a
      resident or visitor might have access to this  information.  Many,  if
      not most, trials are effectively held in camera.

      Local  newspapers  have  always  been  formally  classified  as  neibu
      (internal)  rather  than  gongkai  (open   or   public).   These   are
      classifications that have applied to all publications within  the  PRC
      since  1949  and  reflect  the  military  and  clandestine   political
      background of the regime. Although these designations are not  adhered
      to as rigidly as they were, the option of declaring that documents are
      restricted is still  open  to  the  regime.    Neibu  approximates  to
      "classified"  or  "restricted"  in  western   concepts   of   document
      availability and although local newspapers are on sale publicly in the
      areas that they serve and have regularly made their way  abroad,  high
      profile cases, notably the case of Rebiya  Kadeer,  have  demonstrated
      that the government views information  in  them  as  "State  secrets".
      Collecting such newspapers to send out of China or  publicising  their
      contents  outside  China  could  be  regarded  as  an  offence.    The
      transmission of "State secrets" to foreigners is considered  to  be  a
      serious crime punishable by long terms of imprisonment.   It should be
      noted that the south-eastern coastal province  of  Fujian  from  which
      many asylum seekers originate  is  an  especially  sensitive  area  in
      military and political terms, not only because of the  recent  history
      of illegal emigration, but also because it faces the island of  Taiwan
      which has been in political (and occasionally military) conflict  with
      China since 1949.

      The authorities publicise the fact that individuals are  charged  with
      offences such as sending unauthorised material abroad by the selective
      reporting of such cases both in the press and on television.

      There  is  considerable  local  variation  in   the   application   of
      legislation, up to and including the death penalty and the  fact  that
      there are agreements at national government level does  not  guarantee
      that the provisions of such agreements will  be  carried  out  at  the
      local level.  There  is  no  provision  for  the  monitoring  of  such
      agreements by western governments or NGOs.

      There has been no attempt by the government of the  PRC  to  make  the
      criminal process more transparent and it would  be  fair  to  conclude
      that the processes of decision-making in the police, the procuracy and
      the courts are deliberately concealed from public view."

107. In relation to the specific risk of overseas  offences  prosecution  in
   any one case, Dr Dillon's opinion was that it was most likely  where  the
   accused was deemed to pose a particular threat to social order in  China;
   where the authorities wished to make a public example of an individual or
   a group of individuals; or where the case was considered to  tarnish  the
   image of China. Trial and sentence  in  such  cases  were  likely  to  be
   publicised in the media (which  was  State-controlled),  specifically  in
   local television news, in which case there would  be  no  written  record
   available. It was likely that the authorities would not wish to publicise
   them outside  China.   Where  extorting  telephone  calls  were  made  to
   relatives in China, such that part  of  the  commission  of  the  offence
   occurred within China, Dr Dillon considered that this might persuade  the
   authorities that an overseas offences prosecution was more justified than
   in other cases.

108. In relation to the NPC website guidance, Dr Dillon considered  that  it
   reflected current political attitudes in China, consistent with a growing
   nationalism which had become apparent since the late 1970s:

       "It is difficult to see what evidence the Home Office could adduce to
      support the claim that Article  10  is  not  likely  to  be  put  into
      practice, or that it is only likely to be put into practice in limited
      circumstances, since it is impossible to gain access to reliable  data
      on this matter."

109. Dr Dillon  considered  the  Foreign  and  Commonwealth  Office  'double
   jeopardy' letter to be of little assistance:

      "The confirmation that the FCO are unable to monitor Chinese  citizens
      when they have returned to China is clearly accurate. Guarantees  made
      by the police,  legal  or  government  authorities  in  China  on  re-
      prosecution or the treatment of returnees cannot be verified. There is
      no reason why the Chinese government  should  consider  itself  to  be
      obliged  to  inform  Western  courts  or  governments  about   a   re-
      prosecution. The presumption of the Chinese political system is one of
      secrecy or at least confidentiality. This is  not  restricted  to  the
      legal  system:  information  is  considered  to  be   privileged   and
      publication abroad of any material deemed sensitive is  only  approved
      when there is political advantage  in  doing  so.  Although  there  is
      considerably more openness now than there was twenty or  thirty  years
      ago, this attitude has not changed fundamentally."

110. On return, the appellant could expect to be monitored  by  the  Chinese
   authorities:

      "He would certainly belong to the category of person that  the  police
      would wish to monitor on the grounds that he would be  likely  to  re-
      offend. It is possible, although unlikely, that  he  would  be  simply
      able to get on with his life. The authorities would  wish  to  monitor
      him in some way but the precise method of supervision would depend  on
      local conditions and local  attitudes.  The  options  available  would
      include surveillance, re-prosecution or sending him to a laojiao camp,
      which would not require formal prosecution. It is not possible to know
      what has happened to convicted criminals who  have  been  deported  to
      China as that information is not openly available.

      This risk is increased by the  fact  that  the  victims  were  Chinese
      nationals in the UK. Even if this crime has not been reported  in  the
      official media in China, news would  have  spread  through  unofficial
      channels and the authorities may well feel  obliged  to  prosecute  to
      demonstrate their concern for their own nationals abroad."

111. Those statements are not sourced.  Dr  Dillon  did  not  feel  able  to
   state with confidence the likely sentence for this appellant  on  return.
   The information simply was not available outside China.  Organised  crime
   had a long history in China and Fujian was known as a  centre  of  people
   trafficking, since it faced the  island  of  Taiwan.   He  thought  that,
   dependent on the status of the officer involved,  the  involvement  of  a
   police officer might increase the risk of overseas  offences  prosecution
   under either Article 7 or 10 CL.  Such evidence as  existed  of  overseas
   offences prosecution was anecdotal and Dr Dillon was unable  to  be  more
   specific.  He had never heard of a civil law right  for  the  victims  of
   kidnap-related crimes to bring proceedings themselves.

112. Dr Dillon did not consider laojiao to be a likely approach  because  of
   the seriousness of the  appellant's  crimes.   Prison  conditions  varied
   between model prisons which met Western standards,  and  poor  conditions
   elsewhere, but there was consistency in the reports of  poor  conditions,
   ill-treatment and  brutality  in  prisons  and  laojiao  facilities.   He
   considered that the arrest  warrant  which  the  appellant  had  produced
   looked authentic for its date and the charges in it were in line with the
   appellant's account.   The  appellant's  account  of  his  original  1994
   difficulties was plausible.

113. Dr Dillon explained that the hukou system  of  personal  identification
   was currently being reformed and was  no  longer  an  effective  tool  of
   social control.   Its application was now erratic -

      "The hukou system of household  registration  which  was  designed  to
      control the rural areas and restrict the migration of peasants to  the
      cities has come under great  pressure  since  the  growth  of  migrant
      labour in the 1980s and 1990s. It is currently being reformed and,  in
      advance of these reforms, it is being implemented  more  leniently  in
      some areas than others. The evidence suggests however that it is still
      being enforced in a draconian fashion in some  rural  areas  where  it
      suits the interests of local officialdom. Many people  are  relocating
      to other parts of China, mainly the cities, some  legally  but  others
      illegally."

114. Dr Dillon gave oral evidence to the Tribunal, and adopted that  report.
   He had read Dr  Gechlik,  Dr  Sheehan  and  Professor  Fu's  reports  and
   maintained his  own  position  after  reading  them.   He  was  aware  of
   Professor Fu and of Professor Cohen, whom he described  as  an  extremely
   well-known academic in the United States.  Dr Gechlik was  not  known  to
   him; Dr Dillon commented in his oral evidence that a very large number of
   people had been granted the honorary title of Visiting Professor  at  the
   People's University of Beijing.

115. Dr Dillon  was  asked  supplementary  questions  about  Professor  Fu's
   commentary on the differences between the WC report  and  his  main  2007
   report.  Dr Dillon agreed with the earlier report but disputed  the  2007
   analysis.  In particular, he considered that the Chinese authorities were
   particularly concerned about organised  crime  at  present  and  remained
   secretive and unwilling to publicise the outcome of criminal  cases.   In
   relation to the effectiveness of hukou, Dr Dillon agreed that there  were
   80-120,000,000 migrant workers in China, some  of  whom  did  have  hukou
   registration where they worked, and some did not.  There had been a  huge
   migration, making it  difficult  for  the  authorities  to  maintain  the
   system.  There was a strong lobby both  from  the  police  and  from  the
   Public Security Bureau to retain it and moves in other places to  abolish
   it.  Although its effectiveness was patchy, hukou could not be ruled  out
   as a factor when considering internal relocation.

116. In cross-examination, Dr Dillon was asked to confirm that  the  Article
   10 re-prosecution power was discretionary, not mandatory.    He  referred
   to the NPC website guidance.  He had not analysed the relevant  statutory
   provisions himself; he was not a lawyer.  He was not entirely  sure  that
   discretionary and mandatory were  useful  or  sensible  concepts  in  the
   Chinese context. The Courts had Article 10 available and if  they  wanted
   to use it, they would do so.

117. Torture still existed but he was aware that the Chinese  President  was
   very much against it and senior figures in the Chinese Government did not
   consider torture to be a good idea any longer.  Dr Dillon stated that:

      'It is perfectly clear to me that a large group of modernising lawyers
      are pushing for practical abolition of torture and are being heard  in
      Government at present'.

118. Overall, the trend was one of improvement.   There  was  great  support
   for modernisers within  the  legal  system  in  China  and  awareness  in
   political and legal circles of the concerns of the West and of the UN.  A
   lot of change had occurred when China was negotiating to join  the  World
   Trade Organisation in the period 1986-2001,  the  accession  having  been
   approved in 2001.  Dr Dillon accepted that  there  had  been  changes  in
   criminal justice practice since 2003/4 but the  Government  remained  the
   same.  Any real change was wishful thinking.  There  was  no  extradition
   Treaty between the United Kingdom and China, nor with the United  States.



119.  International  cooperation  on  criminal  matters  was  generally  not
   available, although China sought it, because  of  international  concerns
   about China's use of  the  death  penalty,  particularly  for  cases  not
   involving any violent crime.   The written procedures might be  changing,
   especially as many Chinese lawyers had been trained abroad,  but  Chinese
   patriotism and national pride made it very reluctant to be dictated to by
   foreigners in the interpretation of its legal system and the changes were
   more apparent than real.   Normally these matters were  not  made  public
   and if China  were  reasonably  sure  a  matter  would  come  to  foreign
   attention, it would be  likely  to  deal  with  it  quietly.   China  was
   desperately trying to keep closed any  information  on  prisons  and  the
   prison camp system.

120. Dr Dillon confirmed the distinction  between  laogai  and  laojiao  and
   that kidnapping offences were likely to  be  tried  by  one  of  the  400
   Intermediate People's Courts in larger urban centres. Serious crimes were
   more likely to be punished by laogai than laojiao.  Laogai  prisons  were
   well away  from  major  urban  areas  and  the  prying  eyes  of  foreign
   journalists  and  academics.   Dr  Dillon  observed  that   the   Special
   Rapporteur had been well aware of only being shown the star prisons,  and
   even those were not particularly good.

121. There was certainly a move towards  more  reporting  of  Chinese  Court
   judgements in the media, either because they had  political  impact  (for
   example,  trials  of  alleged  separatists  in  other  countries)  or  by
   journalists who had acquired  a  reputation  for  reporting  despite  the
   risks.  Dr Dillon had not been able to find a single published  reference
   to Article 10 CL on the Chinacourt database or elsewhere on the internet;
   he had researched a number of databases but not kept a  record  of  which
   ones he had used.

122. There had been a significant change in availability  of  court  reports
   in China over the  last  ten  years,  due  in  part  to  improvements  in
   technology.  Dr Dillon accepted that Chinacourt had on it 23100  criminal
   judgements or thereabouts.  That was a drop in the  ocean.   (By  way  of
   comparison, the principal public websites  for  United  Kingdom  judicial
   decisions date back to the same period,  the  late  1990s  and  the  open
   access website of the British and Irish Legal Information  Institute  was
   available only from 2000).

123. Dr Dillon was not a lawyer and had no  knowledge  of  technical  issues
   relating to the distinctions  between  complete  and  inchoate  offences.
   There were powerful domestic reasons not to publish outside China details
   of overseas offences prosecutions.  It was put to Dr Dillon that this was
   contradictory, if the purpose of prosecuting overseas  offences  were  to
   deter Chinese nationals from offending outside China.   His response  was
   that if the Government perceived that its political interests were served
   by publicising the effect of Article 7 or 10 prosecutions  outside  China
   they would do so; he  accepted  that  his  evidence  on  this  point  was
   completely hypothetical.  He had read through the  six  overseas  offence
   cases identified  by  Professor  Fu;   they  demonstrated  that  overseas
   offences prosecution was possible when the Chinese authorities considered
   it necessary, sometimes for political rather than legal reasons,  as  for
   example in the Kuwaiti case (relations between Kuwait  and  the  PRC  had
   been difficult at that time).

124. Dr Dillon was aware  that  the  Chinese  Embassy  in  London  collected
   information on the Chinese community in London and on offences  connected
   with that community.  There was also police cooperation;  British  police
   officers had been seconded to the British Embassy in Beijing to help  the
   British  Government  to  deal  with  trafficked   individuals   and   the
   trafficking gangs.  It was unlikely to be a formal arrangement, given the
   lack of an extradition Treaty. Anyone thought likely to  re-offend  would
   at least be monitored.

125. Dr Dillon was asked what would be on a person's hukou files.   He  said
   that the hukou was held by the  local  Public  Security  Bureau  and  its
   contents were not available to locals, still  less  to  foreigners.   His
   understanding was that it included who lived in the house,  their  names,
   relationships, and jobs, and from accounts he had read he understood that
   it would also include details of criminal convictions and  other  matters
   which the police might consider to  be  antisocial  activities.   He  had
   never personally seen a hukou or  Public  Security  Bureau  file.   If  a
   person's name had been drawn to the attention  of  the  authorities,  for
   example as a result of local public order disturbances, he  would  expect
   that to be on the Public  Security  Bureau  file.   Similarly,  he  would
   expect arrests to be recorded.

126. Dr Dillon accepted that it was now  not  unusual  for  people  to  work
   illegally in the big cities.  People did migrate around  China  for  work
   and for 20-25 years it had been known that many people would 'go  black';
   there was a shadow world of people not known to the authorities,  working
   without hukou, and in some cities there was a thriving black market.   Dr
   Dillon was aware of the Chinese authorities' focus on corruption; he  had
   been involved with the case of a corrupt official  whom  the  authorities
   would have liked to reach overseas.  Corruption was a  very  longstanding
   problem. It was  possible  that  there  was  now  less  focus  on  people
   trafficking; he referred to his previous evidence about  liaison  between
   the British police seconded to the  Beijing  British  Embassy  and  local
   police.  If a major case occurred, it would become more high profile.

127. In answer to questions from the Tribunal, Dr Dillon said  that  members
   of the Communist Party were very  close  to  local  businessmen  and  the
   legality of payments  to  them  was  often  in  question.   There  was  a
   relationship between the Party  and  Government  on  the  one  hand,  and
   between the Party and local business on the other.   Many  Party  members
   were now involved in business themselves.

128. For a Chinese national returning from abroad, re-entry  would  be  very
   complex.  People were picked up at immigration  and  questioned;  he  had
   experienced it himself.  The immigration authorities at the point of  re-
   entry would be able to  check  with  the  Public  Security  Bureau  in  a
   person's home area and might be requested to return him to the home  area
   to be dealt with there.  There might be a short period  of  detention  in
   Beijing while they worked out which Court was most  appropriate;  Beijing
   would be delighted to get rid of a defendant to another  area  but  might
   consider that a Chinese  individual  returning  from  abroad  had  useful
   information to give them first  as  to  what  was  happening  to  Chinese
   nationals outside China.

129. Dr Dillon was aware of a certain number of Article  7  and  Article  10
   cases but considered that he did  not  properly  understand  the  Chinese
   authorities' motivation; he was not certain that it was deterrence,  more
   a question of national pride and patriotism.  If an overseas  prosecution
   case were dealt with in Beijing, NGOs and Governmental organisations from
   abroad could  probably  track  it.   However,  re-prosecution  in  Fujian
   province by a lower level Court would render it  extremely  difficult  to
   find out what happened.  Torture was  less  likely  in  Beijing  than  in
   Fujian.

130. In re-examination, Dr Dillon confirmed his strong  agreement  with  the
   2004 Fu report, especially at paragraphs 13-14 where Professor Fu  stated
   that Fujian province would interrogate under duress or even torture.   He
   could have written those paragraphs himself.

E.    Dr Sheehan's reports and oral evidence

131. Dr Jackie Sheehan, BA,  PhD  is  Associate  Professor  in  Contemporary
   Chinese Studies in the School of Contemporary Chinese Studies, University
   of Nottingham.  She studied at Cambridge for her undergraduate degree and
   SOAS for her doctorate.   Her specialist area is the People's Republic of
   China (PRC) since 1949,  in  particular  the  development  of  autonomous
   social organizations in the PRC and the  legal  and  political  treatment
   they receive, the  Chinese  Communist  Party  Government's  responses  to
   grassroots   political   initiatives,   opposition   and   dissent,   and
   contemporary  Chinese  concepts  of  and  legal  protection  for   civil,
   political, social and economic rights.  She visits  China  two  to  three
   times a year and both reads and  speaks  Mandarin  Chinese.   Dr  Sheehan
   prepared her report with the benefit of the  reports  of  both  Professor
   Palmer and Dr Dillon.  Broadly, she agreed with both reports,  commenting
   that in her opinion the most likely penalty would be life imprisonment or
   possibly death -

      "It is my strongly held view that it is not safe to  assume  from  the
      absence of known examples of re-prosecution that it does not  in  fact
      take place in the PRC, or even that it is rare. Far too few  cases  of
      any kind are known to outsiders to make this a reasonable  deduction."
      [Paragraph 6]

132. Dr Sheehan considered that the  NPC  website  announcement  would  have
   been placed there for guidance and to indicate that  Articles  7  and  10
   might be used in appropriate  circumstances.   The  Chinese  authorities'
   approach to the power to mitigate prosecution in Article 10 could perhaps
   be gauged by considering their approach to a similar power in Article  18
   in relation to deaf-mute and blind citizens.  In the case of Jin  Ruchao,
   who was deaf-mute, and who was prosecuted for causing the deaths  of  108
   people by setting off four bombs within an hour (by taking taxis  between
   the sites), he was convicted on the basis of his own confession and those
   of three corroborative witnesses who all admitted to supplying  him  with
   explosives.  All four were executed.  Mitigation was not always  applied,
   especially in a high-profile case.

133. Dr Sheehan endorsed Professor Palmer's opinion  that  the  most  likely
   penalty if this prosecution had occurred in China instead of  the  United
   Kingdom would have been life imprisonment. Although she spent  some  time
   in her report on the possibility of the death penalty, at its highest she
   considered that it  'cannot  be  completely  ruled  out'  but  that  life
   imprisonment was a much more likely outcome. She  also  agreed  that  the
   offence was probably too serious for laojiao. Dr  Sheehan's  opinion  was
   that  punishment  of  people  traffickers  was  harsher  than  for  those
   trafficked-

      "10.  The emphasis of the PRC authorities in  dealing  with  snakehead
      cases has for some years now been  on  harsher  punishment  for  those
      involved in organizing people-smuggling rather than for those actually
      migrating. The trend was noted in a 2001 report by Dr Pierre  Picquart
      for the European Commission  on  Chinese  illegal  immigration,  which
      referred to sharply increased sentences, up to life imprisonment,  for
      snakeheads and  their  accomplices,  with  the  death  penalty  always
      applied in cases where migrants had died while being smuggled  abroad.
      The Canadian Immigration and Refugee Board provides  similar  evidence
      in a slightly older  report  which  cites  Chinese  press  sources  to
      confirm that "the primary targets of the public  security  authorities
      are the organizers or 'snakeheads'". The state-run Xinhua News  Agency
      similarly  reported  that:  "The  [senior  Public  Security  Ministry]
      official said that the fight against snakeheads is the most  important
      part of the battle and that they need to be given harsh  penalties  in
      accordance with the  law",  while  interviews  conducted  by  Canadian
      diplomatic staff with PSB officials  in  Fujian  also  confirmed  that
      "penalties for smuggling ... seem to increase in severity the  greater
      the involvement of the accused with the organization of smuggling."

134. Dr Sheehan considered that the Chinese authorities  would  consider  14
   years very lenient for such a crime and further, that release after  only
   7 years of what Western authorities consider 'good behaviour'  would  add
   to that impression -

      "12.  Chinese law does provide for early release from prison sentences
      in certain circumstances, though it is far from  being  the  norm  for
      convicted prisoners to be released approximately halfway through their
      sentence simply for avoiding further offending, obeying  prison  rules
      and cooperating with rehabilitation programmes where available, as  is
      common in the UK. Chinese law and practice  sets  the  bar  for  "good
      behaviour" somewhat higher, in Article 78 of the Criminal Law of 1997,
      requiring prisoners to inform  on  or  prevent  other  major  criminal
      activity, risk their lives  coming  to  the  aid  of  others,  produce
      significant   inventions   or   technological   innovations,   perform
      "remarkable  actions"  in  combating  natural   disasters   or   major
      accidents, or "make  other  major  contributions  to  the  country  or
      society." Even where such a reduction  of  sentence  is  granted,  the
      prisoner must serve more than half the original sentence, or at  least
      10  years  in  cases  of  life  imprisonment.  The  release  of  [this
      appellant] after serving  only  seven  years  of  his  sentence  would
      increase the impression of UK leniency in  the  eyes  of  the  Chinese
      authorities."

135. The lack of any confession would make  the  offence  worse  in  Chinese
   eyes and increase the risk of torture -

      "13...Even where eye-witness testimony of guilt is  available  to  the
      prosecution, a confession by the defendant is still seen as  important
      in legitimizing conviction and punishment. Police and prosecutors  put
      pressure on defendants through the practice of "leniency for those who
      confess, severity for  those  who  resist"  (tanbai  congkuan,  kangju
      congyan). It is also well documented that torture is  frequently  used
      within the Chinese legal system  to  obtain  confessions.  Confessions
      obtained by torture are still admissible as evidence  in  the  Chinese
      courts, provided they are not the sole evidence on which a  conviction
      rests.  ...


      14.   The  Chinese  authorities  deny  that  the  use  of  torture  is
      systematic there, but they do admit that it is widespread. A September
      2000 report from the  Standing  Committee  of  the  National  People's
      Congress  based  on   inspection   tours   of   six   provincial-level
      administrations to assess how the revised Criminal Procedure  Law  was
      working in practice, found major flaws in its operation in three  main
      areas: officials' disregard for detention time limits; defence counsel
      being prevented from performing their professional duties in  criminal
      cases; and widespread use of  torture,  which  had  reached  "epidemic
      proportions".  Statements  by  top  national  officials  such  as  the
      Minister for Public Security confirm the prevalence of torture, as  do
      frequent reports in China's domestic state-controlled media.  "China's
      top police official has acknowledged that  law  enforcement  officials
      routinely use torture to obtain confessions", and that cases of  death
      or injury from torture are covered up  "so  as  not  to  'tarnish  the
      reputation of the security organs'".  It  should  be  noted  that  the
      definition of torture used  in  the  PRC  is  not  the  same  as  that
      enshrined in the UN CAT to which China is a signatory, since  it  only
      refers to treatment resulting in permanent injury or disability or the
      death  of  a  detainee.  There  is  also  some  ambiguity  in  Chinese
      regulations against torture of detainees  by  "officials"  as  to  who
      exactly should be classed as an "official".  This loophole allows some
      categories of staff to commit acts of torture with impunity."

136. Dr Sheehan noted that a person would need to come to the  attention  of
   the Chinese authorities on return before  there  would  be  a  risk,  but
   considered that where an overseas Chinese  national  was  deported,  that
   would be axiomatic as

      "18... The UK authorities will presumably need to apply to the Chinese
      embassy for a passport in his name, and computerised  records  systems
      have been in use at every international border crossing into the  PRC,
      including even the more remote land borders with Central Asia, for  at
      least 12 years.  Since [the appellant] left China, the domestic police
      (who are not responsible for border security)  have  begun  developing
      China's first national police computer network, which would also  make
      it more difficult for him to evade notice.  ..."

137. Dr Sheehan considered that the risk in the appellant's home area  would
   be increased if he were  related  to  a  member  of  the  Chinese  Public
   Security Bureau-

      "18... In the Chinese system decisions to prosecute  and  charges  are
      generally decided by the police,  rather  than  by  the  less-powerful
      Procuratorate, and the police can exercise significant influence  over
      trials, e.g. by  declaring  a  particular  case  "major  or  complex",
      resulting  in  a  reduction  in  the  suspect's  rights  and   harsher
      punishment on conviction."

138. If the appellant's account of his history in his home area  were  true,
   Dr Sheehan considered it likely  to  put  him  at  increased  risk  as  a
   troublemaker. The facts were  consistent  with  what  she  knew  of  what
   happened in the rural areas, particularly Fujian province:

      "19.  ... Disputes over changes in land use,  inadequate  compensation
      to farmers and/or corrupt diversion of compensation funds have  become
      extremely common since the early 1990s, and now represent one  of  the
      most frequent causes of public protest  in  China.  As  Fujian  was  a
      pioneer province in economic reforms, one would expect these pressures
      to have been felt there earlier than e.g.  in  some  of  the  interior
      provinces. It can be assumed that many more such incidents occur  than
      are ever heard about  outside  China,  although  since  they  are  now
      occasionally  filmed  or  photographed  on  mobile  phones,  sometimes
      extreme examples such as the fatal  shooting  of  three  villagers  in
      Dongzhou township, Shanwei, Guangdong province, in December  2005  are
      reported in e.g. Hong Kong."

139. Dr Sheehan gave oral evidence.  She had read  Professor  Fu's  evidence
   but maintained her position. She was asked some supplemental questions by
   the appellant's Counsel.  Dr  Sheehan  stated  that  there  were  over  4
   million criminal cases annually in the Chinese  Courts,  as  set  out  in
   China Daily, a state  controlled  English  Language  newspaper  based  on
   reports from the Xinhua  news  agency,  an  official  Chinese  Government
   Department.  The published criminal conviction figures  did  not  include
   minor public order offences.   She  accepted  that  use  of  torture  was
   declining in major cities such as Beijing, Shanghai and Guangdong, but it
   remained a major problem because of the pressure on police forces to  get
   confessions and wrap cases up quickly.  The use of torture was a criminal
   offence and always had  been  (provided  it  was  physical  torture  with
   lasting  consequences).  Judges  liked  confessions  and  punishment   by
   imprisonment was considered not really legitimate without  a  confession.
   She did not deal with re-education through labour (laojiao).

140. Dr Sheehan referred to the NPC website guidance, which  she  considered
   quite a strong statement of China's right to  retry  overseas  offenders.
   China was enacting enormous amounts of new law and there  was  tremendous
   legal debate; there were many books, of which  only  this  one  had  been
   chosen; the placing of that excerpt for general access was a statement in
   itself.  Most databases on Chinese legal decisions were fairly recent and
   the majority were subscription-only or inaccessible, unless  one  were  a
   member of the Law  Department  of  a  Chinese  University  which  had  an
   institutional subscription.  Chinacourt, although public, held less  than
   25000 records for a period in which there were over 26  million  criminal
   cases, and was highly selective.   Only  20-35%  of  all  prisoners  were
   released early from prison; they were eligible after half the term but it
   was hard to say how that worked  in  practice.   Sometimes  there  was  a
   political motive and people  might  be  released  very  early  then.   Dr
   Sheehan felt unable to give any general guidance; it  was  possible  that
   all prisoners were released half way through  their  sentences,  or  that
   some might still be serving their entire sentences.  Time  off  for  good
   behaviour  in  China  required  something  positive  such  as  help  with
   conviction, an invention, or heroism, rather than simply not getting into
   further trouble.

141. In cross-examination, Dr Sheehan was asked further questions about  the
   NPC statement.  The CL was sparely drafted with no examples; this excerpt
   from a published book gave both  examples  and  criteria.   She  did  not
   consider that its publication indicated that there would be any increased
   use of Article 10.  Nothing should be read into it other  than  that  the
   law remained in force and some guidance was given as to how it  might  be
   applied.  Similar excerpts had been published for other provisions of the
   Criminal Law and Dr Sheehan considered it to be an  attempt  to  fill  in
   some of the unanswered questions with which one was  left  after  reading
   the CL. Her view of Article 10 after reading it, and  the  NPC  guidance,
   was that its application was discretionary.

142. It was her understanding that an Article 10  prosecution  was  a  fresh
   prosecution, which would require evidence but not necessarily the  United
   Kingdom evidence underlying the  British  conviction.   Where  there  was
   insufficient  evidence  in  China,  a  request  could  be  made   through
   diplomatic channels for access to the United Kingdom information. It  was
   her understanding that during the trial of JC, the Fujian police were  in
   direct contact with  the  British  police.   She  did  not  know  of  any
   situation where such contact occurred without diplomatic intervention; it
   was simply outside her expertise.

143. Dr Sheehan concurred  with  Professor  Fu's  premise  that  there  were
   special procedures for foreign-related cases and that the r�le of Article
   10 was diminishing because of  the  need  for  China  to  be  assured  of
   international cooperation, especially with the Olympics approaching.  She
   was  aware  of  some  bilateral  agreements  between  China  and  Western
   countries (specifically Spain and  France)  where  information  could  be
   transferred.    She gave an example from  2003/4  of  a  person  who  was
   extradited from Thailand with an undertaking not  to  execute  him,  then
   executed.  There had been no recent high profile cases of multiple deaths
   involving snakehead gangs since the Morecambe cockle pickers in 2004.

144. Dr Sheehan considered that appeals  of  the  type  considered  in  this
   appeal fell to be treated as high profile because of the organised  crime
   element involved with snakehead abductions and extortion.  She knew of no
   media reports in China about the particular  case;  she  considered  that
   they would not have extended further than  the  local  papers  in  Fujian
   province.  Chinese people outside Fujian would not have access  to  those
   accounts.  It was put to Dr Sheehan that  the  Government's  interest  in
   organised crime related to corruption amongst civil servants, rather than
   the present type of case.  She disagreed; the Government was  capable  of
   interest in more than one topic and they remained interested in those who
   organised people smuggling.   They  were  much  less  interested  in  the
   customers of such people.

145. Dr Sheehan did not have access to the Peking Law Faculty website.   She
   was aware that  there  were  publicly  available  and  subscription  only
   databases but had confined her  own  research  to  printed  material,  in
   particular in relation to Article 18, for which she used a report in  the
   South China Morning Post which she had in her office; the deaf-mute  case
   had interested her, but she had not sought out any other Article 18 cases
   for comparison.  Dr Sheehan confirmed that  anyone  in  the  position  of
   Professor Fu, working in Hong Kong (now part of China) and for a  Chinese
   University, belonging to the Chinese Faculty  of  Social  Sciences  would
   have access to parts of the Chinese system which  she  did  not,  whether
   legal, academic or governmental.

146. Dr Sheehan was  then  asked  about  the  border  procedures.   She  has
   crossed into and out of China many times.  Her experience  was  that  the
   border police used computerised systems  into  which  passport  data  was
   manually entered, taking  quite  a  long  time:   name,  date  of  birth,
   address, the usual information.   That  would  then  bring  up  any  visa
   information but not hukou information.   Police  records  were  gradually
   being added to computerised databases but she had not  seen  evidence  of
   linkage between the local police data and  that  of  the  border  police.
   They were still separate.  When Harry Wu, the  author  of  'Troublemaker'
   and 'Bitter Winds' returned to China he was detained at the  border,  and
   had to be extricated with the help of the United  States  Government  (Wu
   was a naturalised American citizen  when  he  returned  to  China).  Wu's
   situation was unusual since he had become very well-known, and  his  case
   high  profile,  because  he  wrote  books  in  the  West.   The   Chinese
   authorities knew about him already and were prepared for his return.

147. Dr Sheehan reminded the Tribunal that  reports  by  Mary  Robinson  and
   Manfred  Nowak  (the  UNHCHR  Special  Rapporteur)  had  mentioned  self-
   censoring and palpable levels of fear.  The main risk in this appeal,  in
   her opinion, related not to the claimed public order offences in  Fujian,
   but was of Article 10 CL re-prosecution  for  the  people  smuggling  and
   kidnap offences.  Dr Sheehan  considered  it  very  improbable  that  the
   sister's account of not understanding the risks of  taking  home  a  baby
   from the birth control clinic (see below) was  true;  any  rural  Chinese
   woman would know that to take in an abandoned baby  invited  scandal  and
   complications, in particular the risk of compromising your entitlement to
   a natural child under  the  one  child  policy.   There  were  very  many
   abandoned babies in orphanages in  China  who  would  never  be  adopted,
   precisely for that reason.  A birth inspector such  as  this  appellant's
   sister would certainly know that.

148.  Dr Sheehan was asked about changes  in  the  interrogation  procedure:
   Professor Cohen's  report  indicated  that  the  Chinese  Government  had
   implemented  a  system  of  simultaneous  audio-video  recording  of  the
   interrogation of criminal suspects  (by  1  October  2007);  in  Beijing,
   Shanghai, Guangdong and Jiangsu, more and more  Public  Security  Bureaux
   had implemented it for homicide cases.  Dr Sheehan  considered  that  the
   introduction of audio-visual recording of hearings was too recent for any
   assessment of its operation.

149. In answer to questions from the  Tribunal,  Dr  Sheehan  said  that  if
   there were no police interest in this appellant in his home  province,  a
   person with a  foreign-connected  case  would  likely  be  tried  at  the
   Intermediate Court not in Beijing.  However, if Fujian province wanted to
   try him, he could be forcibly  transferred  there  even  for  an  offence
   outside Fujian; if a serious penalty (such as the death penalty,  whether
   or not suspended) were imposed, the case might well be  transferred  back
   to the higher levels in Beijing.  Torture would only occur if there was a
   prosecution in China requiring a confession to be obtained.

150. It was true that since the mid-1980s the  Supreme  People's  Court  had
   published a range of judicial decisions, initially in its Gazette and now
   also on Chinacourt.  There was debate within China as to whether a system
   of precedent was being constructed.  The decisions which  were  published
   were heavily edited  and  could  not  be  cited  in  legal  argument  but
   decisions published in the Gazette  were  treated  as  guidance  for  the
   purpose of shaping the jurisprudence of the lower courts.   She could not
   assist  the  Tribunal  as  to  the   selection   method   used   by   the
   Gazette/Chinacourt or the University  databases  when  deciding  what  to
   publish.  Dr Sheehan did not agree  that  putting  a  case  on  a  public
   database or in the Gazette would make an example of the person convicted.
    Members of organised crime syndicates did not  read  such  publications;
   the Chinese media had an express public education  function  and  if  you
   were seeking to influence the general public,  the  press  and  broadcast
   media were where you would expect to find  publication.   Publication  on
   University websites or in the Gazette or on Chinacourt would be  for  the
   guidance of judges and lawyers.

F.    Professor Fu's reports and oral evidence

151. Professor Fu Hualing, LLB, MA, JD is an  Associate  Professor  at  Hong
   Kong University.  Professor Fu gave his  evidence  in  English  over  the
   telephone from the British Embassy in Hong  Kong.   As  an  'insider'  in
   Chinese terms, he had access both to the Chinacourt database and  to  the
   better organised and more extensive Peking University database,  as  well
   as his own knowledge.  His undergraduate degree was awarded by the South-
   Western  University  of  Political  Science   and   Law   in   Chongqing.
   Thereafter, he took his Masters at Toronto University and  his  Doctorate
   at Osgoode Hall Law School, also in Toronto.   He is currently  Associate
   Professor  at  Hong  Kong  University  and  a   Visiting   Professor   at
   Washington  University   Law   School;   his   taught   courses   include
   constitutional  law,  criminal  law,  criminology,   cross-border   legal
   relations between Hong Kong and Mainland China, human  rights  in  China,
   People's Republic of China legal system, and introduction to Chinese law.
    He is also a practising lawyer in Hong Kong, and an editor of  the  Hong
   Kong Law Journal (Chinese Law) since 2003.  He has published widely, both
   books and articles, and undertaken consultancy for the  Asian  Foundation
   (on legal aid projects in China in 2005), the  Danish  Centre  for  Human
   Rights (a criminal justice research project in  Guangzhou  University  in
   2005), the Foreign and Commonwealth Office (evaluating six of its rule of
   law projects in the mainland and  Hong  Kong  in  2007),  and  the  Raoul
   Wallenberg Institute (advising on its police and prosecution  cooperation
   project in the Haidian District of Beijing in 2005 and 2007) .

152. We considered Professor Fu  reports  sequentially.   In  2004,  in  his
   written evidence  for  the  appellant  in  WC,  Professor  Fu  cited  two
   instances of re-prosecution involving hijackers who had hijacked  Chinese
   aircraft flying from China to Taiwan. He went on to consider the risk  of
   re-prosecution for this appellant:

      "Illegal immigration is an embarrassment to  China,  and  the  Chinese
      authorities have been using criminal law extensively as an  instrument
      of deterrence. [The appellant] was an illegal immigrant and  committed
      a very serious criminal offence in the  UK,  the  combined  effect  of
      these factors make a prosecution more likely upon  [this  appellant's]
      return to China. The national authority and/or authorities  in  Fujian
      are likely to have been aware of [this  appellant's]  case  given  his
      frequent  contact  with  his  family  in  Fujian.  Since   the   local
      authorities have already shown interest in [the appellant's] case, the
      risk of prosecution in China increases drastically. [The appellant] is
      likely to be detained and prosecuted even without any notification  by
      the Chinese Embassy in the UK."

153.  Professor  Fu  referred  to  prolonged  detentions,  overcrowding  and
   unsanitary conditions, noting that according  to  official  reports  only
   15.1% (369) of the detention centres in China achieved the country's  own
   minimum standards.  The WC Tribunal did not place a great deal of  weight
   on his evidence as he had not had access to much  information  about  the
   offences.   Professor Fu did not give evidence in SC.

154. In his 2007 main report, Professor Fu set out Article  10  of  the  CL.
   China asserted sovereignty over Chinese people overseas, even  those  who
   had adopted another nationality.   Offences  committed  abroad  therefore
   engaged Chinese law.  China had few international agreements requiring it
   to recognise foreign penal judgements:

      "5. The rationale behind Article 10 of the CL  is  that  China,  as  a
      sovereign state, refuses to recognize foreign penal  judgments  unless
      such recognition arises in accordance with any international agreement
      which China has signed. The rule  against  double  jeopardy  does  not
      apply in China in principle.

      6.  Importantly,  decisions  to  prosecute  or  re-prosecute  offences
      committed  overseas  under  both  Article  7  and   Article   10   are
      discretionary. Under Article 7,  [CL]  normally  applies  to  a  crime
      committed by a  Chinese  citizen  overseas  only  if  the  offence  is
      relatively serious (and attracts a maximum sentence of more than three
      years) unless the offender is a civil  servant  or  a  serviceman,  in
      which case all offences may, in theory, be prosecuted.

      7. Article 10 is intended to avoid a  situation  in  which  a  foreign
      court treats a Chinese offender with undue lenience. The article gives
      the procuracy the discretion  to  prosecute  or  not  to  prosecute  a
      Chinese citizen who was tried  by  a  foreign  court  for  an  offence
      committed  overseas  depending  on  the  seriousness  of  the  offence
      committed and penalties imposed by the  foreign  courts.  The  Chinese
      procuracy may re-prosecute  the  offender  for  the  same  offence  to
      compensate for the undue lenience. The same  article  also  authorizes
      the court to exempt the offender, when re-prosecuted, from any further
      punishment in China and give only mitigated penalties depending on the
      seriousness of the overseas offence and the severity of  the  overseas
      penalty."

155. The requirement  to  prosecute  imposed  by  Articles  141-142  of  the
   Criminal Procedure Law was modified by Article 15 of that statute,  which
   exempts from mandatory investigation:

      "15. (6)      if other laws provide an exemption from investigation of
      criminal responsibility."

   Professor Fu considered that Articles 7 and 10 of the CL constituted such
   an exemption, since their operation was discretionary.

156. The mechanism of Article 10 gave rise to  a  new  criminal  prosecution
   which must be proved in  all  its  elements  to  the  relevant  standard.
   Professor Fu considered that the difficulty of collecting  evidence  from
   abroad would be a substantial disincentive to the police in most cases in
   entering into Article 10 prosecutions. The Chinese Court was permitted to
   take account of the foreign sentence, but not to infer from or apply  any
   evidence which was before the foreign Court.   A  special  procedure  for
   'foreign-related cases' was set out in  interpretation  guidance  in  two
   documents both entitled "Interpretation of the Supreme People's Court  on
   Several Questions Concerning the Implementation of the Criminal Procedure
   Law of the People's Republic of China" and issued  on  20  December  1996
   (Article 291) and 29 June 1998 (Article 313).

157. In practice, it  was  often  indispensable  for  the  Chinese  criminal
   justice organs to seek  assistance  of  the  foreign  jurisdiction  while
   gathering  evidence  for  re-prosecution  (witness   statements,   expert
   conclusions, confession statements made by the  defendant,  exhibits  and
   documentary evidence).   Overseas offences prosecution under Article 7 or
   Article 10 was most likely when the Chinese victims of  the  offence  had
   also returned to China and could provide direct evidence.   Crime  was  a
   serious social problem;  the  police  were  overloaded  and  an  ordinary
   criminal offence committed 7 years ago was unlikely  to  attract  serious
   police attention unless the victims or their representatives could  exert
   strong influence.  A police relative or friend was  not  enough;  serious
   local influence was needed.

158. Professor Fu considered that the r�le of Article  10  was  diminishing;
   China needed international cooperation and  increasingly  was  moving  to
   accept international  norms  in  order  to  secure  it.  In  the  Spanish
   extradition agreement, China agreed not to seek repatriation of political
   offenders or to impose the death penalty.   In the  Bulgarian  Treaty  on
   mutual legal assistance, China agreed that extradition could be  declined
   where a person had been convicted or acquitted  on  the  same  charge  in
   Bulgaria. The more bilateral agreements were signed, the less  use  would
   be made of Article 10 in his opinion. Professor Fu  identified  only  one
   example of a factually similar overseas offence prosecution:  Xiang,  who
   was prosecuted in China (under Article 7 as he had not been prosecuted in
   Yugoslavia) for a completed rather than an inchoate offence of kidnapping
   and extortion.   Xiang was sentenced to 14  years  laogai  (prison).   He
   appeared to have been acting independently not with a gang, and  to  have
   kidnapped only one person.

159. Professor Fu was asked to comment on  the  NPC  website  guidance  from
   2002.  He said it was an extract  of  a  book,  'Xingfa  Wenda  (Zongze)'
   (Questions and Answers about Criminal Law (General Provisions), published
   and edited in 2001 by the Legislative Affairs Commission of the  Standing
   Committee of the NPC. There were other excerpts from the same book on the
   NPC website. Publication, he considered,  was  intended  to  restate  the
   meaning of Article 10 of the CL, to support popularisation of law (pufa),
   and for ease of reference.   The  publication  of  this  chapter  neither
   enhanced nor diminished the effect of Article 10.

160. The CL was in a process of fundamental change.  The focus  had  shifted
   and continued to shift from the circumstances of the offence to its legal
   elements.  Special circumstances might warrant prosecution but even then,
   Chinese Courts would undertake a  balancing  exercise,  between  harm  to
   China's international image and the facts of the case.

161. Professor Fu's written assessment of the likelihood  of  re-prosecution
   for this particular appellant, including factors which would increase  or
   decrease that likelihood, was prepared on the  basis  that  the  offences
   were inchoate.  An inchoate offence was an attempt or a conspiracy or  an
   incitement to commit an offence, which fell short of  commission  of  the
   offence.  There was an error of fact underlying this  part  of  Professor
   Fu's opinion with which he dealt in his oral evidence. Overall, Professor
   Fu considered the present crime to be a rather ordinary one.   There  was
   nothing in it to attract special official attention. China's criminal law
   had moved away from a focus on the status of the person who committed the
   offence to a more objective view, 'gradually abandoning the  practice  of
   scrutinizing  the  motivation  and  personal  status  of   offenders   in
   determining liability and  sentence'.   Political  offences  remained  an
   exception, but only for cases with out of the ordinary features.   Taking
   part in rural protests would not have that effect; it  was  too  ordinary
   and low-level.  Professor Fu did not consider it likely that  the  police
   still had any knowledge about or interest in  a  demonstration  14  years
   earlier, when so many were then taking place.

162. Professor Fu  considered  the  likely  sentence  should  re-prosecution
   occur. Article 239 of the CL says that:

      "239  Whoever kidnaps another person  for  the  purpose  of  extorting
      money or property or kidnaps another person  as  a  hostage  shall  be
      sentenced to fixed term imprisonment of not less than 10 years or life
      imprisonment and also to a fine or confiscation  of  property;  if  he
      causes death to the kidnapped person or kills the kidnapped person  he
      shall be sentenced to death and also to confiscation of property."

   The penalty for kidnapping and extortion could therefore range between 10
   years and death,  depending  on  the  circumstances.    The  seven  years
   already served might be taken into account.  Reduction  of  sentence  was
   commonly used in China's prison sentence with  about  20-35%  of  inmates
   receiving reduction of their prison terms and early release  (conditional
   or unconditional) for good performance  after  half  the  term  had  been
   served.

163. Re-education through labour (laojiao) was used for minor  offences  and
   the rehabilitation of drug addicts.  Its legality was controversial; many
   Chinese academics and policy makers considered  it  unconstitutional  and
   illegal.  It was unlikely to be imposed in a foreign-related case  for  a
   serious offence, as here.

164. In order to work legally  in  the  cities,  a  person  should  have  an
   identification document issued through the police force in his local area
   (the hukou).  In practice, the hukou was less  significant  than  in  the
   past:  Professor Fu noted that almost 10% of China's  working  population
   worked away from their home areas without a proper hukou (100 million  of
   a total of 1,330 million). They were not monitored  by  the  authorities;
   although they lacked the legal right to  be  in  the  cities  where  they
   lived, they remained, nevertheless, for as long as  they  wished.   Hukou
   now mainly functioned as a means of delivery  of  education  and  medical
   care for hukou holders rather than as an effective  mechanism  of  social
   control.

165. Professor Fu's noted that the power of the police  to  monitor  special
   groups of potential criminals was also much reduced:

      "50. Traditionally, police paid special attention to special groups of
      population, including people with a serious crime  record.  Under  the
      Regulation on Targeted People Management issued on 21 March  1989  and
      amended on 25 May  1998,  "residents  suspected  of  serious  criminal
      activities" including "people suspected of having  violated  citizens'
      physical and personal rights through activities such as murder,  rape,
      bodily injury, and trafficking of women and children" are put into the
      blacklist of targeted people of the  local  police  and  subjected  to
      police surveillance. However, as Fei-Ling Wang noted, given  the  high
      mobility of people in contemporary China, police control over targeted
      people  has  become  much   more   difficult   and   less   effective.
      Additionally, according to Wang, factors such as "the  changed  social
      environment in  China,  which  has  led  to  the  public  increasingly
      despising secret dossiers, informants, intolerance, and persecution by
      association and suspicion" were considered by the police to be another
      significant reason undermining the  effectiveness  of  the  police  in
      monitoring the targeted population.  There is no longer  an  effective
      legal mechanism to monitor a person who is in  the  criminal  process.
      Virtually, anyone can vanish in Chinese cities  without  being  traced
      (even by the authorities) if he or she wishes  to  do  so."  [Emphasis
      added]

166. Professor Fu set  out  the  limitation  period  for  various  types  of
   criminal offence in Chinese law:

      (a)   For offences carrying a maximum prison term of five  years,  the
      limitation period was also five years;
      (b)   for 10 year sentences, it was 10 years;
      (c)    for  fixed  term  imprisonment  in  excess  of  10  years,  the
      limitation period was 15 years; and
      (d)   for offences carrying a possible sentence of  life  imprisonment
      or death, it was 20 years.
   For potential capital or life  sentence  offences,  if  prosecution  were
   considered necessary outside the 20-year limitation period,  the  Supreme
   People's Procuratorate would be asked to examine and approve any proposed
   prosecution.

167. Professor Fu agreed with the other experts  that  re-education  through
   labour or laojiao was extremely unlikely given the serious nature of  the
   offence. Laojiao was used for minor offences, and as a  means  of  social
   control.  Further, this was a case with a foreign element and the Chinese
   authorities were reluctant to impose laojiao on cases  occurring  abroad,
   or on foreigners, because of the international  implications.   The  main
   report ended with a proper summary of the duties of an expert witness.

168. Professor Fu's January 2008 commentary  explained  the  change  in  his
   expert view between 2004 (the report in WC for the  appellant)  and  2007
   (the report for the respondent in the present appeal).   He had not  been
   able to look at the WC report when preparing the main report  because  he
   had lost a number of old files in a computer crash.  He had been provided
   with another electronic copy to refresh his memory.  His explanation  was
   accompanied by copious  footnotes,  sourcing  the  information  on  which
   Professor Fu relied to explain his modified  opinion:  he  explored  four
   areas of difference between the two reports:

     a) In the WC report (paragraph 12) Professor  Fu's  opinion  had  been
        that there was too little reporting of such prosecutions to  enable
        a view to be formed as to when the Chinese  authorities  would  use
        Article 10.   In  the  main  report  (paragraph  21)  he  discussed
        evidential difficulties and the reluctance of the Chinese police to
        pursue  matters  which  required  foreign  evidence  to  found  the
        prosecution.  The WC report had been written against the background
        of a number of high-profile cases in  2004  in  the  West,  and  no
        information from China.  Professor Fu's explanation for the  change
        in his view was a combination of more information (the evolution of
        Chinese law and available databases) and more time to consider  his
        opinion in the intervening four years.

     b) In the WC report (again at paragraph 12) Professor Fu's opinion was
        that Article 10 re-prosecution  was  very  likely  because  of  the
        Chinese  authorities'  focus  on  illegal  immigration.   In   2007
        (paragraph 23) he regarded it as an ordinary crime and,  since  the
        police were overloaded, considered it unlikely  they  would  pursue
        the appellant.  In his explanation for the difference, Professor Fu
        set out a chain of illegal migration deaths which had made  it  top
        of the Chinese authorities'  agenda  in  2004.   In  the  meantime,
        interest had died down and the Chinese authorities  were  now  very
        much more interested in their own corruption  problem  rather  than
        migration issues which were much more of a  problem  for  the  host
        countries.  They were having severe difficulties in getting corrupt
        officials returned from abroad and  the  attitude  of  the  Chinese
        authorities had changed:

           "To show its determination  to  combat  the  ever  deteriorating
           situation of official corruption, in recent  years  the  Chinese
           government has started to strengthen its  cooperation  with  the
           international community in the hope of having greater chance  to
           get  back  the  fugitive  corrupt  officials.  To   secure   the
           cooperation with foreign countries, and  the  western  developed
           countries in particular, China  has  no  choice  but  to  accept
           certain international norms, such  as,  as  I  mentioned  in  my
           Opinion on the present case, the  political  offences  exception
           and the death penalty exception. China has been insistent on not
           having an express death penalty exclusion clause in any document
           it signed with foreign countries. However, its attitude began to
           change in November 2005  when  it  signed  its  first  bilateral
           extradition treaty that has an express death  penalty  exception
           clause with  Spain.  Thereafter,  it  also  signed  two  similar
           agreements with France and Australia respectively in  March  and
           September of 2007. The above mentioned agreements apply  to  all
           criminal offences and are not limited to corruption.

           As  a  result  of  the  enhanced  international  cooperation  in
           criminal matters, China has also agreed to comply with the  rule
           against double jeopardy where there are bi-lateral  treaties  in
           place. It is therefore increasingly unlikely that China will re-
           prosecute offences that have occurred overseas in  general,  and
           inchoate offences in particular."

     c) In paragraph 14 of the WC report, Professor Fu opined that WC would
        be likely to confess under duress or even  torture.   In  the  main
        report in 2007  (paragraph  22)  his  opinion  was  more  sanguine,
        observing that the Civil Procedure Law stated clearly that  a  mere
        confession was insufficient to convict an appellant -

           "There have been  important  changes  in  the  criminal  justice
           practice since 2003/04. There was a new  government  and  a  new
           Minister of Public Security, which initiated a series of  police
           reforms in response to a number of high-profile police scandals.
           In 2003, media exposures of police scandals  were  unprecedented
           in both quantity and quality. The public outcry was overwhelming
           and these were rare occasions in China in which public  opinions
           led directly to government action.  The  reform  under  the  new
           Minister was the most systemic in China  since  1978,  targeting
           particularly torture and  unlawful  detention.  The  reform  was
           regarded as largely successful  in  reducing  the  incidents  of
           torture during interrogation. While torture has  always  been  a
           criminal offence in China, it is much less likely for police  to
           use torture  during  interrogation  after  2003/04  than  before
           2003/04. See Fu Hualing, "Zhou Yongkang and Recent Police Reform
           in  China"  (2005)  Australian  and  New  Zealand   Journal   of
           Criminology."

     d) Finally, Professor Fu commented on the change in his  view  of  the
        risk of laojiao.  He set out the levels of public protest and  some
        legislative moves to  limit  laojiao.   He  did  not  consider  the
        present appeal to be a situation where laojiao would be appropriate
        due to the serious nature of the index event.

169. Professor Fu gave oral  evidence.   He  confirmed  that  his  view  now
   accorded with that set out in the main report and the 2008 report,  which
   expanded and qualified the views he had  expressed  in  2004  in  the  WC
   report.  He confirmed that he had seen, and had with him, a  copy  of  Dr
   Dillon's report.   He was then  tendered  for  cross-examination  by  the
   appellant's Counsel.

170. Professor Fu was unaware of the article, 'China's theory  and  practice
   on ne bis in idem' but  agreed  with  its  conclusion,  and  that  of  Dr
   Gechlik, that Article 10 was used sometimes, but not often.  Chinese  law
   did not recognise national boundaries, either for change  of  nationality
   or legal  responsibility  for  criminal  acts  committed  outside  China.
   Professor Fu was asked whether he would have considered the  risk  to  be
   the same for a person in the present appellant's  position, had  he  been
   asked in 2004; he drew the (incorrect) distinction that WC had  committed
   a completed offence and the present appellant was  involved  only  in  an
   inchoate offence.  The punishment was  very  different  for  a  committed
   offence.  He agreed with  the  other  experts  that  publication  on  the
   National People's Congress website had no  particular  significance;  the
   law was the law and the Article 10 guidance only served to inform, not to
   indicate any increase or decrease of actual re-prosecution.

171. In relation to secrecy, Professor Fu confirmed  his  opinion  that  the
   Chinese courts increasingly publicised  criminal  cases  which  were  not
   politically  sensitive,  meaning  that  they  did  not  involve  national
   security law.   All the courts had websites now, though the country court
   websites were poorly maintained.   The  likelihood  of  online  reporting
   depended on where the trial took place.  Professor Fu told  the  Tribunal
   that  lawyers  preferred  to  use  the  University  databases   such   as
   Chinalawinfo, which were better indexed  and  contained  more  decisions,
   rather than the SPC website Chinacourt:

      "Most of the resources we get now are not from the Court website,  but
      from an unofficial database from the university  law  school  websites
      which are more systematic. They have the centralised resources  to  do
      it in the universities. They have the resources to build a really  big
      database of  Chinese  decisions,  50,000  cases  now  on  the  website
      Chinalawinfo.com maintained by Peking  University  Law  School.   Last
      time I looked it was 50,000, and it is getting bigger all the time.  I
      do not know how frequently they add cases but I know that they collect
      cases, classify them and put  them  there.   There  are  less  than  1
      million criminal cases a year in China,  about  700000,  there  are  7
      million cases in Chinese Courts overall per year with  criminal  cases
      about 10%.   The Chinalawinfo website database is a drop in the ocean?
      Yes, and I do not know their premise of case selection.
      You have mentioned a number of cases in  your  main  report  from  the
      Chinalawinfo website?  Yes.  Did you check city court websites?   Yes,
      we checked the Supreme People's Court, larger city courts but not  the
      county courts."

   Chinalawinfo was  the  most  comprehensive  online  database,  containing
   government regulations, all the judicial decisions given by  the  courts,
   and full copies of all case reports.

172. Professor Fu explained  that  he  had  not  checked  the  county  court
   websites, partly because they were poorly updated, but also  because  the
   county courts were the most basic level of court and would have little to
   add.  There  was  a  controversy  between  Professor  Fu  and  the  other
   witnesses as to the number of criminal cases  in  China  each  year.  His
   opinion, which we accepted, was that of 7 million cases  in  the  Chinese
   courts  each  year,  only  700,000  were  criminal  cases.   That  figure
   originates from the government news agency Xinhua.   It  was  surprising;
   but the evidence was properly sourced by a practitioner in daily  contact
   with the relevant materials and we preferred it to the estimates provided
   by the appellant's witnesses, whose research was much  less  careful  and
   thorough.

173. Article 10 was unique.  Professor Fu was aware of a  total  of  between
   10 and 20 cases in the past 10 years where a similar ability to prosecute
   Chinese who committed crimes in Hong Kong had been used.  The  discretion
   to prosecute an overseas offence under Articles 7 and 10 CL was  for  the
   prosecutor to exercise on a case by case basis.  Professor  Fu  explained
   that although torture had reduced in frequency, it  still  could  not  be
   ruled out.  At this point in his evidence, it was apparent that Professor
   Fu's perception of the appellant as probably being a poor man  committing
   ordinary crimes and the offences as being inchoate was operating  on  his
   perception of the likely outcome.  The  redacted  information  which  the
   Secretary of State provided to Professor Fu excluded the details  of  the
   offence, the brother-sister relationship, and the overall gravity of  the
   offences.  Mr Mackenzie wished to ask more detailed questions  about  the
   precise details of this offence.

174. The Tribunal adjourned to discuss with  the  representatives  how  much
   more information it was appropriate to provide to Professor Fu about  the
   gravity of the offence and its particular circumstances, and how that was
   to be managed,  given  that  he  was  testifying  over  an  international
   telephone line.  We then reconnected the telephone  call  and  an  agreed
   version of the facts underlying this conviction was put to Professor  Fu.
   He indicated straight away that  he  needed  to  consider  the  situation
   carefully.  He considered that a  completed  kidnap  would  require  more
   serious punishment and would be more likely to be investigated.  The more
   serious the crime, in his opinion, the more likely  it  became  that  the
   authorities would indeed take an interest in the appellant.  However,  he
   considered that the police would  still  have  difficulty  obtaining  the
   information  they  needed  to  mount  a  prosecution.  If   the   Chinese
   authorities successfully requested the United  Kingdom  material  through
   diplomatic channels, then in his opinion properly certified copies of the
   witness statements, the evidence in the case, the record  of  prosecution
   and the judgment  would  be  accepted  as  part  of  the  Chinese  police
   investigation to build a case for a fresh overseas  offences  prosecution
   under Article  10  CL.   He  considered  that  the  police  would  remain
   reluctant to engage  in  such  a  complex  process  without  very  strong
   motivation, especially given the high conviction rate  expected  for  any
   prosecution (over 90%).

175. In relation to laojiao, Professor Fu maintained his  position;  it  was
   retained on the statute book in China to enable the authorities  to  deal
   with things like the recurrence of mass movements such as Falun Gong.  It
   was a routine law enforcement tool.  In re-examination, Professor Fu said
   that re-prosecution had no deterrent value, as the reporting of cases was
   for lawyers, not the public. In answer to a question from  the  Tribunal,
   Professor Fu said that the court was under  a  statutory  requirement  to
   consider the sentence imposed abroad and  shorten  the  Chinese  sentence
   accordingly.

176.     Professor Fu was asked to explain  the  reporting  system  in  more
   detail.  He said that that  the  Supreme  People's  Court  would  appoint
   judges  in  local  Courts  as  their  correspondents,  who  would  report
   interesting cases to the  Supreme  Court  for  publication.  The  Supreme
   People's Court would then choose from these the  most  interesting,  edit
   and publish them as guideline cases so that the Courts  throughout  China
   could look at those cases for guidance if  they  needed  it.  There  were
   millions and millions of criminal cases in the system; those  which  were
   reported were the more interesting, which were considered  important  and
   engaged public law issues.

Documents

1.    The Foreign and Commonwealth Office 'double jeopardy' letter

177. On 15 July 2005, in response to an enquiry from the Country  of  Origin
   Information unit of the Home Office, the Research Analysts of  the  North
   Asia and Pacific Research Group of the Foreign  and  Commonwealth  Office
   (based in London) wrote setting  out  the  position  in  Chinese  law  in
   relation to Articles 10 and 7 of the 1997 Chinese Criminal Code:

      "Following  our   recent   correspondence,   I   am   confirming   our
      understanding that the concept of  double  jeopardy  is  addressed  in
      Chinese law.

      Article 10 of the 1997 Criminal Code of the PRC states  that  "If  any
      person commits a crime outside the territory  of  the  PRC  for  which
      according to this Law he would bear criminal  responsibility,  he  may
      still be dealt with according to this Law, even if he has already been
      tried in a foreign country.   However,  if  he  has  already  received
      criminal punishment in the foreign country, he may  be  exempted  from
      punishment or given a mitigated sentence."

      Article 7 states "This law is applicable to any citizen of the PRC who
      commits a crime outside the territory of the PRC that is specified  in
      this Law.  However, if for that crime this Law  prescribes  a  maximum
      punishment of fixed-term imprisonment of not more than three years, he
      may not be dealt with."

      The circumstances under which an individual would be punished in China
      for a crime committed in a foreign country, for which he  had  already
      been  punished  in  that  country,  are  unstipulated.   The   Chinese
      authorities are more likely to take  this  action  if  the  crime  had
      received a lot of publicity  in  China,  if  the  victims  were  well-
      connected in China, if there were a political angle  to  the  original
      crime or if the crimes were of a particular type that the  authorities
      wanted to make an example of [sic].  Our Embassy in Beijing is unaware
      of such instances.  The specific inclusion  in  the  Criminal  Law  of
      'exemptions' from second punishment  in  China  for  crimes  committed
      abroad suggests that the authorities would  not  take  further  action
      against ordinary criminal offences.

      I can also confirm  that  we  have  no  means  of  monitoring  Chinese
      citizens once they have returned to China."

178. The 'double jeopardy' letter was broadly in line with the  evidence  of
   Professor Fu.  It was  partially  cited  at  paragraph  10.14  of  the  3
   December 2007 Country of Origin Information Report on China  prepared  by
   the respondent.

2.    The arrest warrant and the Foreign and Commonwealth Office response

179. There was doubt about the weight to be attached to the  claimed  arrest
   warrant.  We reminded ourselves of the guidance given  in  Tanveer  Ahmed
   [2002] UKIAT 00439:

        "39. In summary the principles set out in this determination are:
           1. In asylum and human rights cases  it  is  for  an  individual
           claimant to show that a document on which he seeks to  rely  can
           be relied on.

           2. The decision maker should consider whether a document is  one
           on which reliance should properly be placed after looking at all
           the evidence in the round.


           3. Only very rarely will there be the need to make an allegation
           of forgery,  or  evidence  strong  enough  to  support  it.  The
           allegation should not be made without such evidence. Failure  to
           establish the allegation on the balance of probabilities to  the
           higher civil standard does not show that a document is reliable.
           The decision maker still needs to apply principles 1 and 2."

180. The Tribunal must assess the reliability of this arrest warrant on  the
   oral and physical evidence before it, which may be summarised  thus:  the
   photocopy of the arrest warrant in the hearing bundle was improved at our
   hearing by the production of what the appellant said  was  the  original.
   The document produced was a red  and  white  piece  of  paper  which  the
   experts agreed resembled a Chinese arrest warrant.   On  the  appellant's
   own account, it was  never  served,  being  allegedly  retrieved  by  the
   appellant's  police  station  relative  from  a  wastepaper  bin  and  is
   completely  clean,  unmarked  and  uncrumpled  despite  the  passage   of
   approximately fourteen years since its creation.   The  'arrest  warrant'
   text was not very detailed, consisting only of the appellant's  name  and
   an assertion that he is not sympathetic to  the  aims  of  the  Communist
   Party.   Obviously, if the appellant and his sister had a relative in the
   police station, that relative could  easily  have  filled  in  an  arrest
   warrant form to send to the  United  Kingdom  (hence  his  letter  asking
   whether it had been useful).

181. Paragraph 36.05 of the December  2007  Country  of  Origin  Information
   Report on China sets  out  the  conclusion  of  the  Canadian  IRB  of  8
   September 2005 that forged documents of all kinds were easily  available.
   Paragraph 11.08 dealt with service of arrest warrants on  family  members
   (apparently a common practice) again  relying  on  a  response  from  the
   Canadian IRB, on 1 June 2004.

182. On 12  November  2007,  in  answer  to  a  request  from  the  Treasury
   Solicitor regarding authenticating Chinese arrest warrants,  the  Foreign
   and Commonwealth Office wrote to the  AIT  stating  that  Chinese  arrest
   warrants are produced in a standard format (name, date of birth,  offence
   and so forth) (the 'arrest warrant' letter).  They all look very similar,
   on paper with a printed three-character red header and a stamp  from  the
   prosecutor's office which issued the warrant:

      "However, a warrant  which  meets  these  criteria  isn't  necessarily
      authentic.  There is no  technical  verification  system,  such  as  a
      watermark or bar code, making them relatively easy to forge.  It would
      therefore be very difficult for an independent academic expert to give
      an opinion on the authenticity of a warrant,  beyond  commenting  that
      the format appeared to be standard.

      A more reliable way of checking  would  be  through  the  prosecutor's
      office which issued the warrant.  That office would be able to  verify
      it by checking the warrant number  against  their  records.   However,
      this would require a Formal Mutual Legal Assistance request."

183. Unfortunately, that verification method is of no  practical  assistance
   to the Tribunal. If such checks were made, the Fujian police  would  then
   be on notice that a person with this appellant's claimed old  history  of
   rural revolt intended to return to the area. Ms Broadfoot recognised that
   it would be irresponsible of the Secretary of State and contrary to  Home
   Office policy to increase the risk to the appellant in that way.   Having
   seen the warrant and heard conflicting accounts from  the  appellant  and
   the sister regarding events surrounding, we do not consider that we  have
   received a credible account of an arrest warrant being issued, let  alone
   served.  We place no weight on the alleged arrest warrant as probative or
   otherwise of the original offence.

3.    Home Office Country of Origin Information Report on China 2007

184. The material in the Country of Origin Information Report dates back  to
   2004 and has  been  consistently  so  recorded  in  all  recent  People's
   Republic of China Country of Origin Information  Reports.   The  relevant
   passages in the current  report  begin  at  paragraph  29.08  and  29.13.
   Paragraph 29.08 confirms that Fujian  is  the  main  source  of  overseas
   migration  from  China,  powered  by  economic  growth  (and   presumably
   compulsory purchase, as here alleged) in Fujian. There was also a  robust
   tradition of outward migration from Fujian, and to a lesser  extent  from
   Guangdong, Zhejiang, and recently from north-eastern provinces:

      "Chinese migrants

      29.08 As reported by Ronald  Skeldon  of  the  University  of  Sussex,
            writing on Chinese migration in April 2004:

                 "... any simple correlation between the total population of
                 China and the number  of  Chinese  overseas  is  deceptive,
                 because the majority of the latter trace their roots  to  a
                 very few regions within China. The three  southern  coastal
                 provinces of Guangdong, Fujian, and Zhejiang have dominated
                 the emigration,  and  within  those  provinces,  a  limited
                 number of districts and even  villages.  These  areas  were
                 marginal to the Chinese state and weak in  terms  of  their
                 resource base. However, most importantly, these areas  were
                 the earliest and most intensively affected by the  seaborne
                 expansion of European colonial powers, which linked them to
                 a wider global system. Furthermore, in contrasting  numbers
                 of Chinese overseas with  the  base  population  of  China,
                 Chinese  ethnicity  must  not  be  confused  with   Chinese
                 migration, because many of the Chinese overseas  were  born
                 outside China in the lands  chosen  by  their  parents  and
                 grandparents."
                 ...
      29.12 As reported by in the Guardian newspaper  on  7  February  2004,
            "People from Fujian  have  a  long  history  of  seeking  their
            fortune overseas. In extreme cases some villages  have  80%  of
            families with someone living overseas."


      Snakeheads (people smugglers)

      29.13 As reported by Channel News Asia on the 13 February 2004:

                 "The network of snakeheads, or human  smugglers,  operating
                 in China's Fujian province is 'huge', meeting  demand  from
                 locals attracted by the potential of earning  10  times  an
                 average Chinese wage in  Europe,  according  to  a  report.
                 'Many snakeheads belong  to  one  family,  and  others  are
                 friends,' a man who worked as a snakehead for 10 years told
                 the China Daily. 'They  cooperate  with  each  other,  take
                 charge of different areas of human smuggling, and get  rich
                 by sharing money from the stowaways.' The  issue  has  been
                 thrown into the spotlight by the drowning  of  19  presumed
                 Chinese picking cockles a week ago in  Britain's  Morecambe
                 Bay. Fifteen of them are believed to be from Fuqing city in
                 Fujian, natives of which have a long history  of  illegally
                 entering other countries." ...

      29.15 According to Dr Frank N. Pieke in  his  paper  entitled  Chinese
            Globalization and Migration to Europe,  published  on  9  March
            2004:

                 "American research (Chin 1999;  Zhang  and  Chin  2000)  on
                 Chinese human smugglers has revealed  that  snakeheads  are
                 not triad-like criminal organizations that can be countered
                 by   conventional   law-enforcement   methods   aimed    at
                 eliminating   the   organization's   leadership.    Rather,
                 snakeheads   are   independent   and   highly   specialized
                 entrepreneurs enmeshed in loose networks, only  cooperating
                 on   specific   consignments.   Consequently,    countering
                 snakeheads should focus on spoiling their market,  both  by
                 raising the risks and costs  of  their  operations  and  by
                 taking away the demand for their services.  The  key  issue
                 then becomes how many  Fujianese  a  country  should  admit
                 under a program of migration to make a sufficient number of
                 snakeheads abandon their trade for something less risky and
                 more profitable."

      29.16 As reported by the  US  State  Department  (USSD)  Report  2006,
            published on 6 March 2007, "When arrested and brought to court,
            human smugglers received five to ten-year  jail  sentences  and
            fines up to $6,000 (RMB 48,000). In very serious cases,  courts
            imposed life imprisonment or the death penalty".   As  reported
            by CEME  (Cooperative  Efforts  to  Manage  Emigration),  which
            brought together the findings  of  week-long  visit  to  Fujian
            undertaken in  June  2004,  "Persons  convicted  of  organizing
            smuggling  or  trafficking  can  be  fined  or,  if  convicted,
            sentenced to 2, 5, 10 years or life imprisonment." "

185. That was the Secretary of State's published position on snakeheads  and
   smuggling; that Fujian was the leading source of smugglers and  migrants,
   and that snakehead gangs were a form of private enterprise without  links
   to the triads, operating in a rather loose structure for personal gain.

Respondent's submissions on the appellant's case and the background
evidence

186. For the Secretary of State, Ms Broadfoot prepared a  skeleton  argument
   and also written  closing  submissions.   The  closing  submissions  were
   prepared overnight after the oral evidence had  closed,  superseding  and
   incorporating the skeleton argument.   After summarising the bundles  and
   evidence before us, the  history  of  the  appeal,  and  the  issues,  Ms
   Broadfoot turned first to the s.72 certificate.  S.72 was  the  statutory
   implementation of the Refugee Convention exclusion  from  non-refoulement
   (Article 33(2)), setting up a rebuttable presumption that  the  appellant
   is excluded from refugee protection.   On these facts, the appellant  had
   committed a "serious offence" and the only evidence to show that  he  was
   not dangerous was the 2005 Parole Report.   The  Parole  Report  was  not
   sufficient to rebut the presumption  of  dangerousness,  she  argued:  Ms
   Ludgam, who prepared it, did not have access to all the relevant material
   and was unaware of the seriousness of the offences, the identification of
   the appellant as a ringleader by the sentencing judge,  or  that  he  had
   been given a sentence at the highest end of  the  scale.    Further,  the
   report was now three years out of date.  In her  submission,  the  Ludgam
   Parole Report did not begin  to  rebut  the  presumption  and  should  be
   disregarded.  The s.72 certificate should be upheld:  the  appellant  was
   not entitled to the protection of the Refugee Convention and  his  asylum
   appeal should be dismissed.  The s.72 certificate was also fatal  to  any
   humanitarian protection claim.

187.   The  next  issue  was  credibility.   The  respondent  accepted  that
   credibility remained in issue.  Ms Broadfoot proceeded on the basis  that
   there was an error of law by the previous  Tribunal  on  credibility  (DK
   (Serbia) and others [2006] EWCA Civ 1747).  The respondent  reminded  the
   Tribunal of the credibility approach set out in Karanakaran v SSHD [2000]
   EWCA Civ 11, [2000] Imm AR 271, [2000] INLR 122, [2000] 3 All ER 449. The
   Tribunal:

      "...must not exclude any matters from its  consideration  when  it  is
      assessing the future unless it feels that it can safely  discard  them
      because it has no real doubt that they did  not  in  fact  occur  (or,
      indeed, that they are not occurring  at  present).  Similarly,  if  an
      applicant contends that relevant matters did not happen, the decision-
      maker should not exclude the possibility  that  they  did  not  happen
      (although believing that they probably did)  unless  it  has  no  real
      doubt that they did in fact happen."


188. The extension of the  Karanakaran test  to  Article  3  ECHR  had  been
   approved in MT (Algeria)  &  Ors  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
   Department [2007] EWCA Civ 808:

      "We would accept that the correct approach to the application  of  the
      Chahal test is  that  described  in  Karanakaran.  The  decision-maker
      should take a holistic approach; it should take  account  of  all  the
      relevant evidence and risk factors, giving to each matter such  weight
      as it warrants, bearing in mind its importance in the context  of  the
      case and the extent to which it has  been  satisfactorily  proved.  It
      will be proper to exclude from consideration those  matters  which  it
      can safely discard because it has no real  doubt  that  they  did  not
      occur. The decision-maker should also take account of the  absence  of
      satisfactory information relating to  matters  of  importance.  If  no
      evidence or information can be discovered on a matter  of  importance,
      its absence will be relevant to the assessment of future risk."


189. The respondent's letter of refusal, to  that  standard,  accepted  that
   the altercation in April/May 1994 between the appellant's friend and  the
   son of a local bigwig might have occurred and that recourse to the  local
   police had been fruitless; that on 2  October  1994  his  home  had  been
   attacked by persons connected with his sister's former  employer  because
   she had complained  of  her  dismissal;  that  his  shoulder  injury  was
   consistent with defending his home on that occasion (and with   a  number
   of other potential causes); and that on 10 October 1994 a  local  protest
   took place.

190. Having heard the oral evidence, the respondent now submitted  that  the
   protest account should be treated as wholly unreliable  in  view  of  the
   conflict between the evidence of the appellant and his  sister,  and  the
   vagueness of his evidence about it. On any view, the  appellant  was  not
   the organiser of that protest and the significance  ascribed  to  it  had
   varied with  the  passage  of  time  from  a  'fracas'  in  his  original
   statement, to a  violent  demonstration  in  his  second  statement,  and
   finally, in his oral evidence, to a brief  demonstration  which  did  not
   last long and dispersed when the officials drove off the crowd,  with  no
   violence and only one stone thrower  (indeed,  possibly  only  one  stone
   thrown, not by the appellant).   The  appellant's  participation  on  the
   latest account seemed minimal.

191. Ms Broadfoot argued that the sister's account of her  dismissal  should
   not be believed.  It was simply nonsensical.  Save for the destruction of
   his home as part of a land scheme, none of the claimed events  in  Fujian
   should be believed.  If that were accepted, then the  appellant  and  his
   sister were of no interest to the Fujian police, either in 1994  or  now,
   14 years later. The arrest warrant could not be genuine even if the paper
   was right (particularly since the police cousin had apparently discovered
   it in a rubbish bin at the police station).  The appellant and his sister
   were simply economic migrants when  they  came  to  the  United  Kingdom,
   perhaps prompted by the 1994 land seizures in Fujian province.

192. The appeal  would  therefore  have  to  stand  or  fall,  Ms  Broadfoot
   submitted, on the double jeopardy issue and/or the Refugee Convention  or
   Article 3 risk on return in relation to the 1994 events.   Dealing  first
   with the double jeopardy risk of an overseas offences  prosecution  under
   Article 10 CL, Ms Broadfoot argued that the Tribunal  should  prefer  the
   overwhelming evidence of all but one of the experts that  Article  10  CL
   was discretionary, discounting the contrary view  of  Dr  Gechlik,  whose
   evidence could not be tested in cross-examination and  whose  report  had
   omitted reference to the crucial provision of Article 141 (the  mandatory
   prosecution provision)  identified  at  paragraph  8  of  Professor  Fu's
   report.  Ms Broadfoot also observed that Dr Gechlik, who  had  notice  of
   Professor Fu's later report, had not contradicted his observations as  to
   the effect of the Article 141 exemption.

193. Ms Broadfoot submitted that the primary  issue  for  the  Tribunal  was
   whether there existed a real risk of re-prosecution of the  appellant  in
   China for crimes arising out of the same set of facts for  which  he  had
   been convicted and sentenced in the United Kingdom, and  if  so,  whether
   there was a real risk of Article 3 ECHR being breached in the  course  of
   such prosecution, including any investigation by the Chinese police.

194. The Secretary of State accepted that the Tribunal should  take  as  its
   starting point the  fact  that  overseas  offences  prosecutions,  either
   prosecution (Article 7) or re-prosecution and double punishment  (Article
   10) were legally possible in Chinese law.  However  the  Tribunal  should
   then go on to consider the likelihood, if at all,  of  either  occurring.
   The assessment of that likelihood was dependent upon the evidence  before
   it (MT (Algeria) & Ors v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
   [2007] EWCA Civ 808).

195. The Court of Appeal's decision in Adam v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ  265  was
   of only limited assistance. The  penalty  for  military  service  was  an
   ordinary criminal penalty, the existence of which had been set out in the
   Secretary of State's Country of Origin Report.  The Secretary of State in
   Adam, having stated in her country report that such a  penalty  would  be
   applied, therefore bore the burden of  showing  that  in  the  particular
   factual circumstances of the Adam case, there was  nevertheless  no  real
   risk of it being  applied  on  return.   Here,  in  contrast,  there  was
   discretion in the  relevant  statutory  provision  and  it  was  for  the
   appellant to show that it would in fact be applied to him. If the  matter
   were to be appealed further, the Secretary of State reserved her position
   on whether the Adam decision, with its apparent shift in  the  burden  of
   proof to the respondent, was good law.

196. Ms Broadfoot reminded the Tribunal of the  evidence  of  Professor  Fu,
   inviting us to prefer that to the  evidence  of  the  other  experts,  in
   particular with reference to the secrecy question.  She  noted  that  the
   other experts had  both  denied  that  there  had  been  any  significant
   announcements or changes in 2004, whereas both Professor Fu and Professor
   Cohen identified important changes and announcements on the reduction  in
   the use of torture at that time.

197. There was much more information available now regarding  the  operation
   of the Chinese legal system.     Professor  Fu  had  been  an  impressive
   witness, knowledgeable and  open  in  his  evidence,  giving  spontaneous
   answers and when more of the detail of the crime was put to  him  he  had
   considered it openly,  agreeing  that  certain  of  those  factors  would
   probably increase the risk of  an  overseas  offences  prosecution  under
   Article 10 CL.  Further, Professor Fu had better resource access than the
   other experts: he accessed  the  database  of  Peking  Law  School  which
   contains double the number of  cases  on  the  Supreme  People's  Court's
   website (which was generally accessible) as well as the main  city  court
   databases.  Dr Sheehan accepted that he was more like an  'insider'  than
   an  'outsider'  (where  this  was  defined  by  reference  to  access  to
   information). Professor Fu's evidence had increased in depth  over  time;
   that was to his credit and his evidence should be  given  greater  weight
   than that of Dr Dillon, Dr Sheehan, Professor Palmer or Dr  Gechlik  both
   because it was better sourced, and because he was prepared to  reconsider
   his opinion over time and in the light of changes in circumstances..

198. The Secretary of State did  not  accept  that  the  appellant,  if  re-
   prosecuted, would  be  found  guilty,  convicted,  and  sentenced  to  an
   additional  period  in  prison.   Even  if  he  were  found  guilty   and
   imprisoned, prison conditions in China, although harsh, did not reach the
   Article 3 ECHR standard. (Batayav v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
   Department [2005] EWCA Civ 366, TC (One Child policy - Prison Conditions)
   China [2004] 00138).  Professor Nowak had considered  the  conditions  in
   the prisons he inspected to be generally satisfactory in terms  of  food,
   medicine and hygiene.  Any sentence would be proportionate and would have
   regard to the sentence already served; Professor Fu's  evidence  on  that
   was clear. There was no real risk of laojiao being imposed.

199. In relation to the 1994 events, they also did not give rise to  a  real
   risk.  Millions and millions of people had been  involved  in  the  rural
   protests.  For example, in 2004, ten years after the appellant's  alleged
   activities, there were 74000 protests involving 3.5 million people.   If,
   despite her submissions, the Tribunal considered there was a real risk on
   this basis in the appellant's home area, he  could  relocate  internally;
   100 million  Chinese  were  living  in  the  cities  without  hukou.  The
   appellant was young and adaptable and could do the same  if  he  had  to;
   that was neither Robinson unreasonable nor unduly harsh.

200. In her oral submissions, Ms Broadfoot dealt first with the question  of
   s.72.  She accepted that the date of hearing was the appropriate date for
   assessment of risk and that the appellant had put  forward  materials  in
   rebuttal which the Tribunal would  need  to  evaluate.   However,  weight
   would also need to be given to the very  serious  nature  of  the  crime.
   Save for the discount for  his  national  origin,  the  trial  judge  had
   clearly considered that the appellant should be sentenced at the  highest
   level available for that offence.  There was no material after July  2005
   to assist the Tribunal and Ms Ludgam's report had clearly  been  prepared
   without a full understanding of the nature of the offences. The appellant
   had not shown remorse or understanding of the seriousness of his offence.

201. In this case, argued Ms Broadfoot, the appellant had not come close  to
   rebutting  the  presumption.   Although  describing  the  likelihood   of
   reoffending  as  low  in  2005  (without  full  knowledge  of  the  facts
   underlying the offences), Ms Ludgam had indicated that if  the  appellant
   re-offended it would be to commit another gang-related offence, a serious
   danger to the community and in that case the dangerousness test was  met.
   If the Tribunal were unsure, or a more  recent  report  would  have  been
   helpful, that  counted  against  the  appellant  because  the  burden  of
   rebutting the presumption  was  on  him.   Ms  Broadfoot  relied  on  the
   decision on Article 33(2), cessation and Article 1C (5) in SB  (cessation
   and exclusion) Haiti [2005] UKIAT 00036, at paragraphs 44 and 52-95.   Mr
   Justice Ouseley (then the President of the Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal)
   held that no question of balance arose  in  determining  whether  Article
   33.2 applied or in relation to s.72; dangerousness was not a question  of
   balance.  The decisive provision was in s.34 of the 2001 Act.

202. The Secretary of State continued to challenge  credibility  as  to  the
   1994 events, though not as to the events in the United Kingdom.  For  the
   reasons set out in the closing submissions, Ms Broadfoot argued that  the
   Tribunal should conclude that at its  highest,  the  protest  was  small,
   brief, insignificant and appellant's participation minimal.  The  account
   of the sister's baby was frankly incredible and inconsistent. The sister,
   a single woman and a birth control inspector, would have been well  aware
   of the risks.  A single woman taking home a child  would  invite  scandal
   and social isolation.  Having  grown  fond  of  the  child  it  was  most
   unlikely that she would have taken no interest in  what  happened  to  it
   after they left China.   There would be no outstanding interest in  these
   two people in Fujian province for reasons connected with the 1994 events.
    The appellant would not be at risk on return to  China  because  of  the
   lack of credibility of his 1994 account; if the  events  did  not  occur,
   there would be no record of them in his home area or on his hukou and  no
   reason at all for increased risk on return.

203. The arrest warrant was no such thing, even on the appellant's  account:
    it had never  got  beyond  the  police  station  wastepaper  bin.   Such
   documents were easily forged and the Secretary of State could not seek to
   authenticate it without increasing  the  risk  to  the  appellant  to  an
   unacceptable level.  In the second Foreign and Commonwealth Office letter
   dated 12 November 2007  the  Secretary  of  State  had  investigated  the
   possibility of authenticating the arrest warrant, stating that  the  most
   reliable way to do so would be  through  the  Prosecutor's  Office  which
   issued the warrant and this would  require  a  formal  mutual  assistance
   request and arguably put the appellant at  risk.  Ms  Broadfoot  accepted
   that this was not an option; it would be contrary  to  the  Secretary  of
   State's policy to increase the risk to the appellant in that way.

204. The next question was the  risk  of  double  jeopardy.   Article  7  CL
   should be distinguished; overseas offences prosecutions under  Article  7
   CL related to a crime where there had been  no  foreign  prosecution  and
   thus no question of double jeopardy.  The double jeopardy risk arose  out
   of Article 10 CL.  All the experts, and all the current  evidence  before
   the Tribunal indicated that China not only had,  but  occasionally  used,
   this power to re-prosecute.  All save Dr Gechlik agreed  that  the  power
   was discretionary (and Dr Gechlik had not  responded  to  Professor  Fu's
   observation that she had overlooked the crucial provision of Article  141
   CL).    The Tribunal should accept and  prefer  the  expert  evidence  of
   Professor Fu that both provisions were discretionary.

205. Ms Broadfoot referred to her written submissions in relation to BB  and
   to MT Algeria.  It was the Secretary of State's submission that the  lack
   of  reported  examples  of  overseas  offences  prosecution  was   highly
   significant.  Professor Fu found only six, three for Article 7 and  three
   for Article 10, despite a wide internet search of relevant websites.  The
   Secretary of State had identified 14 defendants in  two  similar  crimes,
   all of whom were recommended for deportation and six  of  whom  had  been
   deported  in  2003/4  at  the  height  of  the  international   snakehead
   kidnapping furore.  There had been sufficient time for re-prosecutions to
   have occurred and been reported but  all  these  experts,  who  had  been
   searching for  years,  had  found  no  such  evidence  and  nor  had  the
   defendants' legal advisers been informed of any.

206. The Adam  decision  should  be  distinguished:  in  Adam,  it  was  the
   evidential burden not the legal burden which passed to the  Home  Office.
    Desertion from the army was an offence certain whereas here the Tribunal
   was dealing with a discretionary  offence,  the  fundamental  distinction
   being that it was for the appellant to show a real risk that the  Chinese
   authorities will re-prosecute under Article 10 CL.  The existence of that
   discretionary power did not shift the burden of proof to  the  respondent
   as in Adam, where the Country of Origin Information Report  had  taken  a
   stance from which the  Secretary  of  State's  representative  sought  to
   depart on the particular facts of that appeal.

207. Ms Broadfoot contended that Professor  Fu  had  resolved  the  conflict
   between his report in WC  and  in  the  present  appeal.    Much  of  his
   evidence was not challenged, for example the requirement under Article 10
   for a fresh prosecution; the special procedure for foreign-related  cases
   under Articles 10 and 7 ; and that the Chinese authorities would need the
   assistance of the British authorities to prosecute, making Article 10 re-
   prosecution less likely.  If  such  re-prosecution  occurred,  diplomatic
   channels would be used to request the evidence, making it likely that the
   Foreign and Commonwealth Office would have been aware of  any  other  re-
   prosecutions arising out of these events.  No such  request  had  reached
   them and it was reasonable  to  assume  that  Article  10  had  not  been
   triggered for any of the six offenders who went home voluntarily.

208. Ms Broadfoot asked the Tribunal to accept that  the  present  offences,
   although  unpleasant,  were  ordinary  offences  less  likely  to  entail
   overseas offences  prosecution,  especially  since,  on  the  credibility
   findings she sought, there was no adverse history in  Fujian.   Snakehead
   crime was not necessarily politically significant, although Professor  Fu
   had accepted that a central figure in the kidnap was at greater  risk  of
   re-prosecution.  A completed kidnap was more serious than an inchoate  or
   incomplete offence, but on any view, overseas offences prosecutions  were
   vanishingly rare.

209. As regarded secrecy, Ms Broadfoot submitted that  the  Tribunal  should
   give significant weight to Professor Fu's levels of knowledge and access,
   which were much  better  (and  better  used)  than  those  of  the  other
   witnesses.   His account of the structure of the Chinese legal system and
   of the number of reported cases should be preferred.  There was  a  range
   of sentence possibilities from total exemption to 10 years  for  inchoate
   offences, and a 10-year minimum  for  a  committed  offence.    The  only
   analogous example was an Article 7 prosecution  of  a  similar  range  of
   offences, in which the Chinese Courts had imposed the same sentence of 14
   years, despite the lack of any confession.  On  that  basis  the  Chinese
   legal system was unlikely to regard the 14 years  to  which  the  present
   appellant had been sentenced as  unduly  lenient,  reducing  further  the
   likelihood that they would bother with all of the complications  required
   for re-prosecution.  Laojiao was most unlikely, as all the witnesses  had
   agreed in the end.  It was essentially a tool for public order and social
   control, not for this kind of offence.

210. There was a black market in hukou-free labour in all the  large  cities
   of China.  Millions of workers managed to arrange their lives  without  a
   hukou, which was largely a device for  delivering  education  and  social
   services now. The appellant, should there be any risk in  his  home  area
   (which the Secretary of State did not accept) was at liberty to  relocate
   to a large city and begin again there.

211. In addition  to  her  closing  statement,  Ms  Broadfoot  reminded  the
   Tribunal of the statements  of  Professor  Cohen  to  the  Congressional-
   Executive Commission on China in  2005  and  2006,  emphasising  progress
   (albeit with a  long  way  to  go).   Dr  Dillon  had  accepted  that  an
   unpublished decision did not make an  example  of  someone,  but  he  had
   argued that 'making an example' was more likely to be in the local papers
   rather than legal  websites,  which  were  for  lawyers  and  judges.  It
   depended whom one wanted to warn off.  His view overall was very negative
   and in particular, he had been defensive and in  places  inconsistent  in
   his approach to loss of face and the bilateral treaties.

212. Dr Sheehan's evidence  was  of  only  limited  assistance.   Her  brief
   Curriculum Vitae did not really meet the expert standard and as a  whole,
   her report was based on rather old information (2000-2001).  Her evidence
   about the border police  and  the  computerised  record  systems  was  of
   interest.  Ms Broadfoot asked  the  Tribunal  to  substitute  a  decision
   dismissing the appeal outright.

Appellant's submissions on the appellant's case and the background evidence
(Mr Mackenzie)

213. For the appellant, Mr Mackenzie prepared an amended  skeleton  argument
   and also made submissions.  In his skeleton  argument,  he  set  out  the
   appellant's reconsideration arguments and summarised the Tribunal's  task
   as follows:


      2.    Although the SSHD has disputed some aspects of  the  Appellant's
      account, much of what has happened to him, both before and  after  his
      arrival in the UK, is not in dispute.   The  principal  focus  of  the
      hearing is therefore on the risk of the following if [this  appellant]
      is returned to China:

           i.    Breach of the Refugee Convention and/or Articles 2, 3,  5,
           6 and/or 8 ECHR on account of his involvement in rural  protests
           before leaving China;

           ii.   Breach of Articles 3, 5 and/or 6 ECHR as a result  of  the
           risk of double punishment in China for the offence of  which  he
           was convicted in the UK.

      3.    Points previously pursued before the Tribunal  relating  to  his
      illegal departure from China and his relationship with his sister were
      not subject to an application for reconsideration  and  the  Appellant
      recognises that they cannot be pursued now.

214. Mr Mackenzie reminded the Tribunal that the Chinese authorities do  not
   recognise naturalisation to other nationalities: they continued to regard
   Chinese  citizens  overseas  as  being  subject  to  Chinese   punishment
   standards,  even  where,  like  Harry  Wu,  they  have  acquired  another
   nationality.  The appellant relied on a Canadian decision,  R v Min  Chen
   2006 CarswellOnt 4073, the Ontario Superior Court of  Justice  considered
   the position of a Chinese national who had been convicted  of  murder  in
   Canada.  Mr  Mackenzie  acknowledged  the  paucity  of  evidence  of  re-
   prosecutions under Article 10, as opposed to prosecutions  under  Article
   7.  He argued, following   Adam v SSHD [2003] EWCA (Civ) 265 and  Modinos
   v Republic of Cyprus ECtHR 22/04/1993 16 EHRR 485, (i)  that  the  burden
   was on the Secretary of State to show that there were no double  jeopardy
   prosecutions under Article 10 CL; and (ii)  that  the  total  secrecy  of
   Chinese jurisprudence meant that the Secretary of State  could  never  do
   so.


215. In the event of  an  overseas  offences  re-prosecution,  Mr  Mackenzie
   contended that the evidence showed that  the  cumulative  effect  of  the
   continuing use of torture to obtain speedy confessions, inadequate access
   to lawyers, lack of a presumption of innocence or a right to silence, and
   lack of 'independent, fair and accessible courts and  prosecutors'  which
   emerged from the expert evidence entitled the appellant to  international
   protection.  Should the appellant maintain his denial that  he  committed
   the offence, Mr Mackenzie argued that torture was virtually certain,  and
   more so outside the largest cities.  He relied upon  Article  6  ECHR  in
   relation to the trial process and the Secretary of State's OGN at 3.13 on
   the question of prison conditions.

216. Mr Mackenzie submitted that if not re-prosecuted, the  appellant  would
   be liable to the administrative penalty of laojiao (re-education  through
   labour) for which he could receive up to 3 years detention without trial.
    Finally, Mr Mackenzie's skeleton argument dealt  with  the  question  of
   internal relocation and hukou.  He directed the Tribunal to  the US State
   Department Report for 2006 (published March 2007) which stated that -

           "The system of national household registration (hukou) underwent
           further change during the year, as  the  country  accumulated  a
           more mobile labor force. Rural residents continued to migrate to
           the cities, where the per capita disposable income was more than
           quadruple the rural per capita cash  income.  Nonetheless,  many
           could not officially change their residence or workplace  within
           the country. Government and  work  unit  permission  were  often
           required before moving to a new city.  Most  cities  had  annual
           quotas for the number of new temporary  residence  permits  that
           would  be  issued,  and  all   workers,   including   university
           graduates, had to compete for a limited number of such  permits.
           It was particularly difficult for peasants from rural  areas  to
           obtain household registration  in  economically  more  developed
           urban areas.

           The household registration  system  added  to  the  difficulties
           rural residents faced in changing to urban residency, even  when
           they have already relocated to urban areas and found employment.
           There remained a floating population  of  between  100  and  150
           million economic migrants who lacked official  residence  status
           in cities. Without official residence status, it  was  difficult
           or impossible to gain full access to social services,  including
           education.  Furthermore,  law  and  society  generally   limited
           migrant workers to types of work considered least  desirable  by
           local residents, and  such  workers  had  little  recourse  when
           subjected to abuse by employers and officials. Some major cities
           maintained  programs  to  provide  migrant  workers  and   their
           children access to public education and  other  social  services
           free of charge, but migrants in some locations reported that  it
           is difficult to qualify for these  benefits  in  practice.  Many
           cities and provinces continued experiments aimed  at  abolishing
           the distinction between urban and rural residents  in  household
           registration documents."

217. Mr Mackenzie argued that Professor Fu's  report  was  partial,  placing
   insufficient weight on the evidence of Professor Cohen and the  documents
   set out  above.   Properly  analysed,  he  contended  that  the  risk  of
   persecution or ill-treatment would extend wherever the Appellant went  in
   China.  The appellant would find it very difficult to relocate because of
   hukou, and if he did, he would be known across the country as a dissident
   and/or a convicted criminal.

218. In his oral submissions, Mr Mackenzie expanded his  arguments  to  take
   account of the evidence the Tribunal had heard.  In relation to the  s.72
   point, Mr Mackenzie accepted the Secretary of State's analysis  that  the
   crime was 'particularly serious' but  argued  that  as  at  the  date  of
   hearing the Article 33(2) dangerousness test could be rebutted.   Serious
   offence alone was not probative and this part of the test was  essential.
   As at the date of hearing, the appellant had been out of prison for three
   years and had committed no further offences despite the unfortunate  lack
   of probation supervision.   The Secretary of State had not suggested that
   the appellant was lying when he said he had remained out of trouble since
   being released.

219. The appellant remained on licence.  His  conduct  in  prison  had  been
   excellent.  He had not  been  considered  suitable  for  courses  in  ATS
   (Advanced Thinking Skills) or Victim Awareness due to his  perceived  low
   risk of reconviction.  He had completed the set  courses  on  Citizenship
   and Budgeting,  Personal  Development  and  Assertiveness,  and  Decision
   Making.  The high dangerousness threshold which  SB  Haiti  entailed  was
   simply not made out, and there was no evidence before the  Tribunal  that
   the appellant constituted any ongoing risk to the public.

220. On the double jeopardy question, all  the  experts  now  accepted  that
   Articles 7 and 10 were used, though not often.  The  Tribunal's  previous
   position  that  Article  10   prosecutions   never   occurred   was   now
   unsustainable. The question was whether they would be used for this  type
   of case.   Mr Mackenzie asked the Tribunal to prefer the evidence of  the
   appellant's witnesses, in particular Dr Gechlik, a Chinese  national  who
   had practised law in China. It was unclear whether Professor Fu had  ever
   had a Chinese, as opposed to a  Hong  Kong,  practice.  Even  though  the
   Chinese Government was making progress in the right direction, that  must
   be considered against its previous catastrophic human rights position. WC
   and SC were no longer good law on the present evidence. The 2002  article
   by three senior judges was clear confirmation of  the  existence  of  re-
   prosecution  in  some  cases,  though  less  clear  when  it   would   be
   appropriate.  The  appellant's  experts  all  agreed  with  the  position
   Professor Fu had taken in WC, but not with his revised view in 2007/8. He
   asked the Tribunal to prefer the evidence of Dr  Sheehan  and  Dr  Dillon
   that the Chinese state remained interested in snakehead activities abroad
   as well as in political corruption at home.

221. The reference in Professor Fu's report to re-prosecution being  'highly
   unlikely' was unsustainable given the mistaken impression under which  he
   had been labouring.  In his oral evidence, Professor Fu had accepted that
   where an appellant was a central figure   in a snakehead kidnap plot that
   would be more serious both  in  terms  of  punishment  and  in  terms  of
   investigation.   Mr Mackenzie reminded the Tribunal that Professor Fu had
   not been aware that there was a  link  between  WC  and  this  appellant.
   Professor  Fu's  opinion  had  been  that  14  years  would   have   been
   particularly severe for an inchoate kidnap offence, but his  opinion  was
   shot through with references to inchoate offences whereas this  appellant
   had been a ringleader in a completed  offence.   The  error  was  natural
   given the redacted facts with which Professor Fu had been presented.

222. The Article 7 prosecution of Xiang,  the  only  example  given  by  the
   experts which was similar to  this  appellant's  case,  was  nevertheless
   distinguishable.  Xiang was not prosecuted in Yugoslavia and had only one
   victim.  There was no indication that he had been involved  in  organised
   crime.  He received a sentence of 14 years for a completed offence.   The
   NPC website guidance was at least an  indication  of  current  Government
   policy.  All the experts agreed that the publication of this guidance was
   neutral, just an announcement of Government policy. Mr  Mackenzie  relied
   on the December 2007 Country of Origin Information  Report  cited  above.
   It was difficult to verify Chinese Government data.   In  particular,  he
   relied on  the  March  2007  US  State  Department  Report  which  listed
   penalties for people smuggling (five  to  ten  year  jail  sentences  and
   fines, with life imprisonment or death in 'very serious  cases').   There
   was insufficient evidence to justify Professor Fu's change of opinion, he
   argued.

223. Mr Mackenzie reminded the Tribunal that the appellant had not  admitted
   his guilt, although he admitted to having been present  when  the  events
   took place and aware of what was going on; he had appealed his conviction
   (unsuccessfully as to conviction and sentence).   It  was  reasonable  to
   assume that he would continue to deny guilt, so  that  any  investigation
   would have to involve interrogation.   Despite the best intentions of the
   Chinese  Government,  torture  had  not  been  eradicated  and   remained
   widespread.  The Fu report did not deal properly with the findings of the
   Special Rapporteur, Dr Nowak, or with the Amnesty International  evidence
   cited in the Country of Origin Information Report.  In 2004,  in  the  WC
   report, Professor Fu had been  firmly  of  the  view  that  WC  would  be
   tortured but in the main report in these  proceedings  Professor  Fu  now
   considered the risk of torture well below the level of risk which engaged
   the various international protection conventions.  The  evidence  of  the
   other witnesses should be preferred on this issue.

224. It was not the  appellant's  case  that  he  would  definitely  be  re-
   prosecuted: Article 10 was discretionary.  On  a  proper  reading  of  Dr
   Gechlik's report, Mr Mackenzie argued that she was saying  no  more  than
   that.   The Canadian Courts appeared to have accepted  the  risk  of  re-
   prosecution in the child murder case.  In SC, the Tribunal  characterised
   the evidence of Dr Dillon as essentially speculative, but  that  was  not
   the proper approach to expert evidence; experts  were  entitled  to  give
   opinions based on their  own  experience  and  understanding  on  matters
   outside common human experience.  He  reminded  the  Tribunal  about  the
   observations on analysis of evidence in Karanakaran and  Kaja  (paragraph
   27).

225. Schiemann LJ in Adam had found that the existence of an extant law  was
   likely to create a real risk of its use in an individual case,  with  all
   that entailed, unless there existed clear evidence to the  contrary.   Mr
   Mackenzie accepted that Professor Fu's main report arguably did discharge
   the evidential burden of proof on the respondent but, he contended,  this
   case turned on the workings of the Chinese judicial system and  whichever
   way the evidential burden pointed, on the facts the answer would have  to
   be the same.   Plainly, the burden was not on the appellant  in  relation
   to the country  guidance  elements  of  establishing  the  categories  of
   persons who would be at risk; that was a shared burden.

226. Mr Mackenzie commended the Secretary of State's decision to provide  an
   expert of her own, following the advice given by the Court of  Appeal  in
   AH (Sudan) & Ors v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2007] EWCA
   Civ 297:

      "55.  ...But it is the Secretary of State who is likely  to  have  the
      most comprehensive knowledge of conditions in foreign  countries,  not
      least through diplomatic and consular channels, and if decisions  with
      the enhanced status of Country Guidance cases are  to  be  made  about
      those countries it might seem appropriate for the Secretary  of  State
      directly to contribute that knowledge."

227. Mr Mackenzie reminded the Tribunal that the  Foreign  and  Commonwealth
   Office letters could not be treated as evidence  written  in  tablets  of
   stone (LP (LTTE area, Tamils, Colombo, risk?) Sri Lanka CG  [2007]  UKAIT
   00076 at paragraph 45), particularly as it was unsourced.  They  required
   the same scrutiny as any other expert evidence:

      "45.  As to evidence, such  as  the  letters  from  the  British  High
      Commission, it is true to say that High Commissions and Embassies come
      within the auspices of the Foreign and Commonwealth Office. That, like
      the respondent, is an arm of the executive. In this case the  evidence
      in the letters has been  obtained  at  the  specific  request  of  the
      respondent. Little is known about the  information-gathering  process,
      where the raw data came from, or the  extent  to  which  it  has  been
      filtered. It  is  also  unclear  whether  more  than  one  source  was
      consulted and, whether competing views were sought. That all  goes  to
      how much weight can properly  be  put  on  the  evidence.  Immigration
      judges should be slow to find bad faith on either  side,  even  though
      they must approach the evidence with an open and enquiring mind as  to
      the appropriate weight to be put upon it. We comment  further  on  the
      BHC material later in this decision."

228. The high point of the Secretary of State's case was that  some  of  the
   other co-defendants had been returned without apparent difficulty, but Mr
   Mackenzie reminded the Tribunal that the Foreign and Commonwealth  Office
   had confirmed that they had no way of monitoring returnees and unless the
   Chinese police sought assistance, there was in practice no way of knowing
   whether any of those defendants had  been  re-prosecuted.   The  relative
   scarcity of reported examples would be significant only if  it  could  be
   shown that Western observers would know  of  re-prosecutions  which  took
   place, but because of lack of transparency in the  system,  Mr  Mackenzie
   suggested  that  the  evidence  was  that  they  would  not   have   that
   information.   Professor  Fu  had  agreed  that  there  remained   little
   reporting of  re-prosecutions,  despite  his  better  access  to  Chinese
   sources.  He had also agreed that the appellant, on the particular facts,
   would be at increased risk.  The examples Professor Fu had given  related
   to Hong Kong Chinese  being  prosecuted  on  the  mainland,  or  mainland
   Chinese offenders prosecuted in Hong Kong and were not Article 10  cases.
   He had not been able to assist the Tribunal as to what would happen if  a
   case did come to light.

229. Mr Mackenzie reminded the Tribunal also of the difficulty in  compiling
   local press reports without being  accused  of  violating  Chinese  state
   secrecy laws.  Information which was freely available in China might  not
   be available outside China; to take local newspapers abroad was sometimes
   a criminal  offence.   Amnesty  International  gave  an  example  in  its
   December 2004 article "China:  human rights defenders at risk" where  two
   documents faxed overseas, one by Xinhua,  China's  official  news  agency
   which were publicly available in China were later classified  as  Chinese
   state secrets  and  the  offender  prosecuted.   That  example  was  also
   reported in Professor Cohen's  evidence  to  the  Congressional-Executive
   Committee.     There was no bilateral Treaty with the United  Kingdom  to
   protect the appellant.  The hostages' relatives were still in  China  and
   the prosecutions in the public domain.  It would not  be  very  difficult
   for the Chinese authorities to mount a prosecution on those facts and the
   offence was serious.

230. Professor Fu in his oral evidence had accepted that 14  years  was  not
   particularly harsh for such offences in China; Dr Sheehan and  Dr  Dillon
   thought the appellant would be sentenced to life imprisonment.  It was of
   course possible that the Chinese authorities might be  satisfied  by  the
   United Kingdom sentence, but  much  more  likely  that  they  would  not.
   Article 10 prosecution remained a possibility in  appropriate  cases  and
   following the oral evidence of Professor Fu, Mr Mackenzie submitted  that
   all the witnesses had agreed that on the facts of  the  appellant's  case
   there was a heightened risk to him.

231. The appellant  would  not  receive  a  fair  trial.   There  was  ample
   evidence to support a finding that few if any of the standards of a  fair
   trial existed in  China,  including  at  paragraphs  10.05-10.06  of  the
   current  Country  of  Origin  Information  Report,  in   particular   the
   presumption of guilt, the very high conviction rate, the absence  of  any
   right to silence, the lack of procedure rules, and  the  intimidation  of
   defence lawyers. Professor Cohen, the  Special  Rapporteur,  and  the  US
   State Department Report had all dealt  with  this  issue.   At  paragraph
   11.03 of the Country of Origin Information Report, the report quoted  the
   US State Department Report indicating that there was no  system  of  bail
   and that pre-trial detention could  be  up  to  7  months.   The  Special
   Rapporteur had made similar points and Dr Dillon relied  on  his  report,
   which included evidence of flagrant procedural interference.

232.  Although  the  evidence  (in  particular  Professor  Cohen's  reports)
   indicated that the Chinese authorities intended to introduce audio-visual
   recording of hearings, there was as yet no evidence of that occurring and
   the Tribunal should be very  slow  to  conclude  that  the  intention  to
   introduce a system of recording could have any significant impact on  the
   likelihood of interrogation and torture.

233. In 1994, in the context of China-wide  rural  protests,  the  appellant
   had described an escalating sequence  of  problems  between  himself  and
   local officials, culminating in destruction of his home; that account was
   consistent with what happened  in  Chinese  villages  around  that  time.
   Although there were  some  discrepancies,  they  should  not  affect  the
   Tribunal's assessment of credibility: the appellant's evidence  and  that
   of his sister had been remarkably consistent over a long  period,  almost
   14 years.  There was no reason why the  local  police  should  not  still
   remember this appellant today.  The appellant did not claim to have  paid
   for the arrest warrant and the police cousin's question  whether  it  had
   been 'useful' was not enough to demolish its credibility.   Mr  Mackenzie
   reminded the Tribunal that the cousin had said in the  same  letter  that
   the appellant should neither return to  Fujian  nor  even  reply  to  the
   letter.  The cousin was clearly worried.

234. Mr Mackenzie reminded  the  Tribunal  that  the  Secretary  of  State's
   skeleton argument accepted that Chinese prison conditions were  generally
   harsh and 'sometimes' degrading.  The  Special  Rapporteur  found  prison
   conditions 'generally satisfactory' but was aware of  visiting  the  best
   prisons,  and  even  then  of  self-censorship  and  fear.   The  Special
   Rapporteur's requests were honoured (paragraph 9 of  the  Nowak  report),
   but at paragraph 10 of Professor Nowak's report,  he  had  recorded  that
   security and intelligence officials had attempted to restrict his access,
   and that potential informants were intimidated, placed under surveillance
   or instructed not to meet him.  That was not a wholly  open  attitude  on
   the part of the Chinese authorities.

235. Re-education through labour  or  laojiao  remained  very  controversial
   with strong pro- and anti-abolition factions within China.  Nevertheless,
   it  remained  available  to  the  authorities:  its  use  was  arbitrary,
   punishing  those  whom  the  authorities  considered  displayed  criminal
   tendencies even if not criminally liable.  Mr  Mackenzie  suggested  that
   laojiao would be  the  fall-back  position  if  the  appellant  were  not
   prosecuted.   Dr  Gechlik  had  considered  re-education  through  labour
   likely, but Professor Fu's opinion was that the police might be reluctant
   (paragraph 48, main report).  Professor Cohen's evidence in 2006 was that
   the   Ministry of Public Security was keen to retain it.  Use of laojiao,
   if it occurred, involved flagrant breach of Articles 5 and 6 ECHR and the
   treatment of offenders under  laojiao was no better  than  those  in  the
   prison system.   The Tribunal  should  assess  the  appellant's  offender
   profile; Mr Mackenzie argued that it was extremely unlikely that he would
   just be allowed to get on with his life.

236. Finally, on the question of internal relocation,  Mr  Mackenzie  relied
   on his skeleton argument.  The hukou system would prevent him  relocating
   and information would reach Fujian, such that people  would  be  sent  to
   pick him up. There had not been any vast change in the hukou system  (see
   the evidence of other academics to the Congressional-Executive  Committee
   in December 2005).  Professor Fu's opinion was that the  appellant  could
   vanish within the larger Chinese cities but it would be difficult for him
   to work without registering and the appellant should not be  expected  to
   commit an offence in order to exercise his internal relocation option.

237. In  conclusion,  Mr  Mackenzie  asked  the  Tribunal  to  substitute  a
   decision allowing the appellant's appeal.

Overseas offences prosecutions (including re-prosecutions) in China

238.  With  the  exception  of  Professor  Cohen  whose  evidence   to   the
   Congressional-Executive Committee is reviewed on a different  basis,  all
   of the experts were asked if possible to  provide  examples  of  overseas
   offences prosecutions under either Article 10 (re-prosecution) or Article
   7 (prosecution).  We summarise below the examples provided.  We  excluded
   the Article 18 CL example Dr Sheehan provided; Article 18 is an  internal
   Chinese prosecution exemption on an entirely  different  basis,  and  the
   single instance upon which she relied involved a bombing  campaign  where
   there had been a great  many  deaths.  Dr  Sheehan  made  no  attempt  to
   discover whether it  was  typical  of  the  application  of  Article  18.
   Disappointingly, Professor Palmer, Dr Dillon and Dr Sheehan  were  unable
   to identify any examples of the use of Articles 7 and 10 at all.

239. In WC, the Tribunal was given the following possible examples:

   "47.     Now, however, evidence has been adduced to the effect that there
   have been re-prosecutions. Extending the net to cover both points  raised
   before the Adjudicator and since, it  appears  there  are  five  possible
   candidates for case examples.

      (1) The possible case of three people who had returned to China  after
      having served sentence in Hong Kong pre-1997 and it was suspected they
      were considered not to have served enough imprisonment  and  may  have
      been imprisoned or sent to a re-education camp.   This  possible  case
      was considered by the Adjudicator at paragraph 25  where  he  observed
      that in his oral testimony Professor Palmer accepted he did  not  know
      whether in fact the convictions in this case were for  other  offences
      committed in China. It was not, therefore, a concrete case.

      (2) The possible case of Mr Chen Xiangui said by Professor  Palmer  in
      his July 22, 2003 statement to have  been  convicted  of  offences  in
      which he caused financial losses to a Chinese company in  Kuwait,  and
      to  have  been  sentenced  by  the  court  in  Kuwait  to  a  term  of
      imprisonment, as his conduct was considered to  have  had  an  adverse
      impact on China's reputation abroad, the Jintong Xiaon (Sichuan) Basic
      Leave Court deciding to reconvict him for those offences under Chinese
      law and for him to  serve  an  additional  three  years  imprisonment.
      However, before the  Tribunal  the  Professor  conceded  that  he  was
      mistaken in describing this as a re-prosecution case.

      (3) The possible case of Wu Xun who committed burglary  in  Japan  and
      was tried and sentenced to eleven years' imprisonment in Shanghai even
      though under Japanese law the maximum penalty for the offence was only
      seven years. This case was also cited in  Professor  Palmer's  2  July
      2003 letter. However, his own words in that  letters  were  that:  "It
      seems that he was not tried in Japan, although this is not  altogether
      clear form (sic) the report". If he was not  as  it  seemed  tried  in
      Japan,  then  this  was  not  a  case  of  re-prosecution  or   double
      punishment.  In  his  evidence  before  the  Tribunal  the   Professor
      confirmed this was not a case in point.

48.   Professor Hu [sic] documented two  further  cases  involving  Mainland
hijackers who had been repatriated from Taiwan to the Mainland.

      (4) A Chinese couple, Luo Changua and Wing  Yuing  hijacked  a  flight
      from Mainland  China  to  Taiwan  in  1993.  They  were  convicted  of
      hijacking  in  Taiwan  and  sentenced  to  nine   and   seven   years'
      imprisonment respectively. They were repatriated to  the  Mainland  in
      1999 and upon their return were sentenced to a further fifteen and ten
      years' imprisonment respectively by a local court on the mainland.

      (5) Huang Shugeng hijacked a flight to Taiwan also  in  1993.  He  was
      convicted and sentenced, in  Taiwan,  Huang  was  repatriated  to  the
      Mainland in  1997.  Upon  his  repatriation,  he  was  reconvicted  of
      hijacking and sentence to twenty years imprisonment.

  49. We do not  consider  upon  proper  analysis  these  latter  two  cases
      exemplify the use of re-prosecution or double  punishment  of  persons
      convicted  in  foreign  courts.  Even  though  there  does  exist   an
      extradition agreement between PRC and Taiwan under Article 2(2) of the
      Golden Gate Agreement, and even though for limited purposes Taiwan  is
      regarded by the international community as a separate country (i.e. by
      the World Trade Organisation), the  PRC  most  emphatically  does  not
      recognise Taiwan as a  separate  state  and  in  particular  does  not
      recognise  the  Taiwanese  courts.  Accordingly,  we  agree  with   Mr
      Underwood's final written  submission  that  the  hijackings  were  of
      flights of Chinese aircraft flying from China,  and  accordingly  were
      not regarded by  the  Chinese  authorities  as  constituting  offences
      taking place outside Chinese territory as a matter of law.


240. In the present appeal, only Professor Fu and Dr Gechlik  were  able  to
   identify a handful of examples.  In relation to  Article  7  (prosecution
   where there have been no overseas proceedings for a foreign offence), the
   following examples were identified:

      Article 7 Prosecutions

     a)  In 1996,   Chinese citizen  Chen  Xiangui  worked  for  a  Chinese
        construction company in Kuwait but became unhappy with the  working
        and living  conditions.  According  to  the  judgment,  he  incited
        workers to  assault  the  managers,  damaged  property  and  caused
        disorder in the workplace.  Chen  was  prosecuted,  in  China,  for
        organising  others  in  disrupting   social   order   and   causing
        substantial economic loss to the company. The court emphasized  the
        aggravating factor of negative international impact that case might
        have and sentenced Chen to 2 years' imprisonment.  (This  case  was
        also mentioned in WC).

     b) In 2001, Chinese citizen Yao Ping, a caretaker of  a  Chinese  monk
        who accompanied the monk to Nepal to work in a  temple  there,  was
        prosecuted in China for theft from the monk during his work in  the
        Nepalese monastery, of a notebook computer,  video  camera,  a  DVD
        player and a watch belonging to the monk.  In convicting  Yao,  the
        court balanced the aggravating factor of "undesirable impact to the
        Buddhist  community  and  internationally"  that  Yao's  crime  had
        created with the fact that Yao had returned all the  stolen  goods.
        The court finally sentenced Yao to 5 years' imprisonment and a fine
        of 1,500 RMB for theft.

     c) In 2002, Chinese resident Xiang Jianhua was prosecuted in China for
        conspiracy with another Chinese citizen Chen Guanping to kidnap and
        falsely imprison Chinese resident  Shen  Hong,  the  offence  being
        carried out in Yugoslavia, including instructing two other  Chinese
        citizens to open bank  accounts  in  false  names  in  Wenzhou  and
        Beijing to receive the ransom money.  Shen was assaulted during the
        course of detention. Xiang's co-defendant telephoned Shen's  family
        several times, threatening to kill Shen and demanding ransom in the
        amount of two million RMB, which was paid  by  Shen's  father.  The
        Yugoslavian Courts did not prosecute  Xiang;  he  was  returned  to
        China (it is unclear how), prosecuted and tried under Article  7 of
        the CL,  convicted   of  kidnapping  and  sentenced  to  14  years'
        imprisonment, deprivation of political rights for  4  years  and  a
        fine of 300,000 RMB.  Xiang  appealed  against  the  decision;  the
        appeal was dismissed on 9 October 2003.

      Article 10 Prosecutions

     a) In 1990, Ning Hong was  convicted  of  causing  serious  injury  to
        another  Chinese  citizen  in  Kuwait  in  1990  and  sentenced  to
        imprisonment (the term  is  unknown).  A  few  months  later,  Iraq
        invaded Kuwait. The prison was attacked. Ning escaped and  returned
        to China. After his return, he was  identified  by  the  person  he
        attacked. The victim called the police and  Ning  was  subsequently
        arrested, re-prosecuted, and re-convicted for the same  offence  in
        China (Professor Fu)


     b) In June 1996, the Shandong PSB was  considering  investigating  the
        criminal responsibility of a returned Chinese citizen  (Yao  Weiye)
        who had committed a crime and been tried and punished by a court in
        Ukraine. However, the prison term the citizen had  served  overseas
        might be taken  into  account  by  the  Chinese  authorities  as  a
        mitigating factor  in  determining  his  punishment.  There  is  no
        further information as to how this case was handled eventually  but
        the question of re-prosecution was at least considered.  (Professor
        Fu and Dr Gechlik)

     c) In July 2001, a news article identified the case of  LIN  Xuecheng,
        convicted in the United States of smuggling more  than  60  illegal
        immigrants to the United States, tried, and sentenced to 30  months
        imprisonment.  He served his sentence and returned to  China;  upon
        his return, he was arrested by the local Procuratorate.  Again, the
        final outcome of this case is unknown.  (Dr Gechlik);

     d) In September 2007, a  mainland  Chinese  citizen,  surname  Shi,  a
        convicted arsonist who had been sentenced to 9 months' imprisonment
        in the United States and then deported with a  warning  as  to  his
        mental illness from the United States authorities  to  the  Chinese
        authorities was given  lenient  treatment  by  the  Border  police.
        (Professor Fu)

     e) In February 2007, a news article  reported  that  a  Mr.  Yang  was
        convicted of trafficking illegal drugs to Japan and  was  sentenced
        to five years imprisonment.  He was released in late February  2007
        and deported to China by  the  Japanese  authorities.   Immediately
        upon his return, he was "handled in accordance with relevant  legal
        rules" by the authorities at the Shanghai border. It is  not  known
        whether that included re-prosecution. (Dr Gechlik)

241. The Tribunal notes that the examples given are extremely  sparse.   The
   only one which is at all similar to the offence of this appellant is that
   of Xiang prosecuted in 2002 under Article 7 for kidnapping and extortion.
    He, like  the  present  appellant,  received  a  sentence  of  14  years
   imprisonment.  If that is so, the sentence given to  this  appellant  may
   well not be regarded as disproportionate by the Chinese authorities.

Removal of Chinese snakehead defendants (some convicted with  the  appellant
and some for factually similar offences)

242.  The Tribunal, with the help of the Secretary of  State,  has  analysed
   what occurred after the release of a number of snakehead defendants tried
   and convicted in London.   We have details of eight removals and two  who
   were not removed, from  two  or  possibly  three  unconnected  groups  of
   offences.

243. Three from the same offender group as the appellant have  been  removed
   (one of these was described by the trial judge as a  ringleader,  as  was
   the appellant).  Two more defendants  probably  from  the  same  offender
   group, who were sentenced with  the  appellant,  were  also  removed.   A
   further five individuals were sentenced to 15 years.  They were  from  an
   offender group convicted in September 1997 (two  years  earlier)  of  the
   same offences: conspiracy to kidnap, blackmail  and  false  imprisonment.
   At the end of their sentences, the 1997 offender group individuals raised
   no objection to removal and were removed.

244. WC and SC have not been removed.  WC's offences  of  kidnapping,  false
   imprisonment and blackmail attracted  three  concurrent  sentences  of  6
   years.  He was probably not part of either appellant's offender group, or
   the September 1997 group.   SC  was  probably  part  of  the  appellant's
   offender group:  he was convicted and sentenced on the same date  as  the
   appellant, and his Court of Appeal hearing  was  the  same  day  as  this
   appellant's unsuccessful appeal.

245. Of the eight removed, at least five  voluntarily,  there  has  been  no
   indication whatsoever of difficulty on return.  The Tribunal  notes  that
   the Foreign and Commonwealth Office is unable to monitor returns, but all
   eight were legally represented and had there been any re-prosecution, the
   Tribunal considers it likely that representations would have been made or
   there would have been publicity outside China.  This  analysis  tends  to
   confirm Professor Fu's view that the snakehead cases are regarded by  the
   PRC as commonplace and, provided they are considered to have  been  dealt
   with properly abroad, are unlikely to attract further interest on  return
   once the foreign sentence has been served.

General conclusions on the  background  evidence  and  expert  reports,  set
against the issues identified

1.    WC and SC

246. WC was heard on 24 February 2004  and  the  information  on  which  its
   guidance is based is at least four years old.  The appellant  in  WC  did
   not satisfy the Tribunal that he was at risk of re-prosecution. So far as
   material to the present appeal, the Tribunal concluded as follows:

        "41.      It  is  plain  that  Chinese  law  does  allow  for   the
        possibility of double punishment. Article 7 of the CL  applies  the
        criminal law to any citizen of the PRC  who  commits  a  prescribed
        crime outside the territory (and territorial waters) of the PRC. It
        is equally clear however, that its application is not mandated. ...


      42.   It is not in dispute in this case that  under  Chinese  law  the
      offences which the appellant committed in the UK would be regarded  as
      serious. In China, as already noted, the offences of kidnapping, false
      imprisonment and blackmail carry sentences of ten years or more. ...


      45.   At the date of hearing the position  was  this.  Both  Professor
      Palmer and Mr Becquelin as well as UNHCR accepted that there had  been
      no cases of prosecution where a person  has  been  prosecuted  abroad.
      Since Professor Palmer also  accepted  that  there  had  been  persons
      convicted abroad who had  returned,  this  in  our  view  was  a  very
      significant piece of evidence. ...


      60.   Our principal conclusions are as follows. Firstly,  although  we
      have to consider evidence not all of which was before the Adjudicator,
      we do not consider that the appellant has established that  on  return
      he faces a real  risk  of  re-prosecution  or  double  punishment  for
      offences committed in the UK. Secondly, although we do accept he would
      be apprehended by the authorities on return and would face  conviction
      and punishment for illegal exit, we do not consider  that  this  would
      result in treatment contrary to Article 3 or a flagrant denial of  any
      other fundamental human rights. "


247. In SC, the Tribunal reconsidered and affirmed its approach in  WC  that
   on return to China, a Chinese citizen convicted of a crime in the  United
   Kingdom was not at real risk  of  a  breach  of  protected  human  rights
   whether by way of judicial or  extra-judicial  punishment,  even  if  the
   crime had a Chinese element.   After considering expert evidence from the
   same experts from whom we also have  heard,  and  the  international  law
   framework, the Tribunal in SC concluded as follows:

   "44.     We cannot ignore the absence of evidence in  this  case.  It  is
        clear that experts such as Dr Dillon visit China regularly and read
        local newspapers and listen to local radio, yet he, like  Professor
        Palmer who gave evidence in WC can point  to  no  examples  of  re-
        prosecution where a person has been prosecuted  abroad.  Dr  Dillon
        made the point that there was a distinction between there not being
        evidence of re-prosecutions and accepting  or  not  accepting  that
        there had been no cases of prosecutions, and we agree that there is
        a distinction there. But we have to be concerned with evidence of a
        real risk as opposed to speculation in coming to  our  conclusions.
        Much has been made of both the  general  attitude  of  the  Chinese
        authorities to human rights, the secretive nature of  that  society
        and the control exercised over the media, in seeking to persuade us
        that the absence of evidence should be regarded as unsurprising and
        not stand in the way of the case being made  out.  In  this  regard
        however we consider it is also relevant to bear in mind the absence
        of any evidence concerning the co-conspirators of the Appellant who
        have been returned to China over the last twenty months or  so  and
        the absence of any indication as to what  their  fate  may  be.  Dr
        Dillon no doubt properly raised the question as  to  whether  there
        was proof that they were all right, but he is  not  a  lawyer,  and
        that ignores the obvious point that the burden of proof is  on  the
        Appellant.

   45.            In coming to our conclusions we do not ignore the  profile
        of this case and the fact that there was clear cooperation  between
        the Chinese and the United Kingdom authorities. Nor  do  we  ignore
        the point of distinction that we have identified above at paragraph
        34 between this case and the facts of WC. We also bear in mind  the
        evidence concerning the preparedness of the Chinese state to act in
        defiance, if it may so properly be described, of the provisions  of
        the CL in cases which it deems to be appropriate, and the  apparent
        compliance of the Chinese courts with such an approach.  These  are
        clearly matters of significance which cannot properly  be  ignored,
        and in this regard we also bear in mind the points made  concerning
        extrajudicial punishments such as labour camps  which  exist  as  a
        further option, it seems, to the authorities. But in the end we are
        not persuaded that the Appellant has  shown  a  real  risk  of  re-
        prosecution in China with regard to the offences for which  he  was
        convicted in the  United  Kingdom  or  prosecution  for  any  other
        reason. ...the facts in the evidence in this case are not  such  as
        to show a real risk to  this  Appellant  on  return  of  breach  of
        Articles 3, 4, 5 and 6 of the Human Rights Convention. ...

        47.            We agree with the Tribunal in WC that the ne bis  in
        idem principle  (i.e.  the  principle  precluding  retrial  or  re-
        punishment for an offence for which the  person  has  already  been
        finally  convicted  or  acquitted)  does  not  yet   constitute   a
        peremptory norm prohibiting the punishment of a person twice in two
        different states for the same offence. We do not  however  consider
        that  if  the  appellant  were  sentenced  to  up  to  five   years
        imprisonment in China on return (on the basis taken by the Tribunal
        at paragraph 35 in WC) even  taken  with  the  evidence  of  prison
        conditions in China, [that] would give  rise  to  a  real  risk  of
        breach of his human rights. The risk alluded to in paragraph 37  of
        WC of the appellant being made a public example of seems to  us  to
        be unnecessarily speculative, bearing mind the absence of any  hard
        evidence before us  of  a  'strike  hard'  approach  such  as  that
        referred to in that paragraph. "

                                                            [Emphasis added]

248. That was the framework against which the expert and country  background
   evidence was reviewed.  It was clear from the evidence we heard that  the
   previous position that there  was  no  evidence  whatsoever  of  overseas
   offences  prosecutions  was  no   longer   sustainable.    However,   the
   significance of the evidence before the Tribunal was another matter:  the
   Tribunal heard and read a very much wider range  of  evidence  than  that
   available in WC or in SC.  We   heard afresh from the appellant  and  his
   sister; they were unable to assist us with the general  risk  on  return,
   since neither of them had lived in China  for  almost  14  years.   Their
   evidence went only to the credibility of  the  appellant's  account,  the
   assessment of paragraph 364 of the  Immigration  Rules,  and  whether  he
   could rebut the  s.72  dangerousness  presumption  and  claim  asylum  or
   humanitarian protection.

2.    Double jeopardy: assessing the experts and their evidence

249. We next consider what weight  to  attach  to  the  expert  evidence  we
   heard.  We reminded ourselves of the guidance in LP and bore in mind  all
   of the evidence before  us, written and oral:

      "37.  As Collins  J  said  in  Slimani,  experts  can  vary  in  their
      independence and expertise to a very large degree. Some are well known
      as reliable, others perhaps equally well known as unreliable.  In  the
      centre ground comes the majority. It is the task of  the  Tribunal  to
      decide what evidence they accept and what weight they can put upon the
      evidence they receive. ... In fact, in this jurisdiction, experts  are
      not merely the providers of raw data but they can be the  interpreters
      of it as well. Their interpretation, and any  opinion  based  on  that
      interpretation, can only be as good as the raw data itself. By that we
      mean not only the quality of the data, but the selection or filtering,
      of it.

      38.   We agree with the concept of the expert as a filter of evidence.
      A real problem arises in this jurisdiction from the use  of  the  word
      "expert". In this context an  "expert"  is  merely  a  witness  giving
      factual, hearsay and opinion evidence. No witness is  prohibited  from
      doing that. The question is not therefore  the  admissibility  of  the
      evidence (as it would be in the criminal and  civil  courts)  but  the
      weight to be given to it. The task for  us  is  therefore  to  decide,
      simply, how much weight is to be put on  the  conclusions  and/or  the
      filtered evidence  that  is  put  before  us.  The  fact  that  it  is
      demonstrably wrong may help to assess it. However, the fact that it is
      not demonstrably wrong does not engender reliance upon it, whether  or
      not the person giving the evidence is, or claims to  be  an  "expert".
      Additionally, in order to accept an expert as a competent and reliable
      filter mechanism it is necessary to  trust  the  expert  and  to  have
      confidence that he or she has filtered the  evidence  objectively  and
      independently, not partially. The extent to which that  trust  can  be
      established may depend on a number of factors including the reputation
      of the expert, and any established track record. It may also depend on
      the quality of the sources and whether there is a variety of  sources.
      ...The age of the source material and the number of  sources  is  also
      important. An expert may not have any track record with the  Tribunal,
      in which case particular care is needed in assessing the weight to  be
      put on the evidence, and any opinion said to be derived from it."

250. The evidence of Professor Cohen  stood  unchallenged  as  international
   expertise on Chinese legal reforms. However, it  did  not  take  us  past
   2006.  In 2005, he was very hopeful about Chinese legal reforms; in 2006,
   rather more pessimistic.  Reforms existed in draft form but  appeared  to
   be on the back burner in reality.  There was pressure towards reform from
   academics and practitioners, and growing  public  rights  awareness,  but
   also considerable resistance by the Chinese authorities to lose powers of
   social control, in particular laojiao.

251. In relation to Professor Palmer's evidence, we had some  sympathy  with
   the original Tribunal's assessment in WC and in SC  that  he  had  merely
   regurgitated older materials without adding his own expertise.  Professor
   Palmer is an eminent man with  significant  connections  and  experience.
   His report was useful for the materials it assembled (in  particular  the
   observations of Liu Nanping) and in general the evidence  on  sources  of
   law in China, and his literature survey on torture  and  laogai  (Chinese
   prison experiences).  In common with the other experts, he  drew  heavily
   on  the  report  of  the  UNHCHR  Special  Rapporteur,  Professor  Nowak.
   However,  given  Professor  Palmer's  enhanced  access  as  an   Honorary
   Professor at Beijing University, we would have hoped  for  more  specific
   assistance on the Article 10 issue.   We noted  his  views  but,  as  the
   original Tribunal did,  we  did  not  consider  that  they  advanced  our
   knowledge of Chinese prosecution of overseas offenders much  beyond  that
   set out in his evidence in WC.

252. The next expert was Dr Gechlik.  She retained strong links  with  China
   despite living in the United  States  and,  as  the  appellant's  Counsel
   observed, she was entitled to practise in Hong Kong, where she was  born.
   She has helped train prison staff and legislative affairs officials,  and
   accompanied a Chinese delegation to Switzerland to discuss prison reform.
    She retained a wide family connection to mainland China and  Hong  Kong.
   Dr Gechlik presented the evidence from the American  article  written  by
   two Supreme People's Court judges  and  a  Professor  from  the  National
   Judges' College, with its interesting Chinese language addition assessing
   the use of Articles 7 and 10 as 'conservative' and  'not  often  used  in
   specific cases'.   Like  Professor  Cohen,  Dr  Gechlik  recorded  strong
   pressure from the Chinese judiciary and legal profession for  the  reform
   of  Article  10  CL  to  move  from  negative  recognition  to   positive
   recognition of foreign judgements, and also a proposal further to  reform
   laojiao.  Dr  Gechlik  lacked  the  full  internet  access  available  to
   Professor  Fu  although  her  access  to  newspapers  and  magazines  was
   extensive, by reason of her family links to China.   She  was  unable  to
   trace a single instance of overseas offences prosecution.

253. Dr Dillon was not a lawyer.  He had not been to China since  July  2005
   and was unable to tell the Tribunal which websites he  had  used  for  an
   internet search for examples of  overseas  offences  prosecutions.     He
   drew heavily on Professor Cohen's report and that of the  UNHCHR  Special
   Rapporteur, Professor Nowak.  His summary of the court  system  in  China
   was  succinct  and  useful,  placing  criminal  cases  in  at  least  the
   Intermediate People's Courts where the rule of law is rather better  than
   in the rural People's Courts.  His literature survey encompassed the same
   books identified by Professor Palmer, for the same reasons, but  all  the
   books identified antedate the westernisation which Professor Fu described
   as having accelerated  in  the  late  1990s.  However,  their  historical
   accuracy was not in dispute.  Limited  improvements  to  availability  of
   case reports and death penalty trials were not emphasised in Dr  Dillon's
   report.

254. Dr Dillon considered that re-prosecution  was  most  likely  where  the
   accused was deemed to pose a particular threat to social order in  China;
   where the authorities wished to make a public example of an individual or
   a group of individuals; or where the case was considered to  tarnish  the
   image of China.  If the authorities wished to make an example of someone,
   he considered that publicity for the decision and the punishment would be
   strictly in the regional court's local media.  He asserted that there was
   simply no reliable data to support the NPC website  guidance,  which  was
   indicative of a growing Chinese nationalism.  In effect, his non-lawyer's
   perception was that China was more  likely  to  re-prosecution  now  than
   before.  He was unaware of the evidence  presented  by  Professor  Cohen,
   Professor Palmer and Dr  Gechlik  of  the  judicial,  legal,  and  social
   pressures to restrict and eventually abolish its use.  He agreed with the
   other experts that laojiao was not likely.  He was unable to assist us on
   the likely sentence.  The information simply was  not  available  outside
   China.

255. Dr Dillon was also unable to  give  much  assistance  on  the  question
   whether  re-prosecution  under  Articles  7  and  10  was  mandatory   or
   discretionary, or whether an  offence  was  completed  or  inchoate.   He
   thought it probably made less difference in Chinese law  than  in  United
   Kingdom law.  The question whether Articles 7 and  10  are  mandatory  or
   discretionary is, however, crucial to the question whether Adam is on all
   fours with the facts of this appeal.

256. Dr Dillon was aware  of  the  anti-torture  movement  from  modernisers
   within China, but like the other experts, was unable to say that  it  had
   yet had the desired effect.  Despite so many of its  lawyers  and  judges
   being overseas-trained, Chinese patriotism and  national  pride  made  it
   reluctant to be influenced by foreign views of its legal  system  and  he
   considered the changes to  be  more  apparent  than  real.   He  did  not
   consider that it was likely that  publication  on  the  growing  internet
   databases maintained by Chinacourt and others was to make an  example  of
   the defendant; local or national published media would be used for  that,
   and the databases were a technical resource for lawyers and  judges.   To
   his knowledge there were links between the Chinese Embassy and China, and
   between the United Kingdom and  Chinese  governments  on  the  diplomatic
   level, despite there being no international agreements.

257. Dr Dillon considered, as did Professor Fu, that  there  might  be  less
   interest in straightforward people trafficking now, with the focus  being
   more on corrupt officials.

258. The  next  witness  was  Dr  Sheehan.   Her  report  is  in  essence  a
   commentary on the reports of Professor Palmer and Dr Dillon. Her  example
   of the deaf-mute assassin prosecuted under Article  18  was  not  on  all
   fours, either as to gravity (108 deaths) or  as  to  the  nature  of  the
   Article 18 protection, which was that the authorities had a discretion in
   appropriate cases not to prosecute  a  deaf  or  mute  person.   All  the
   experts agreed that the death sentence  was  mandatory  where  death  had
   resulted from the crime; it was not a likely case  for  clemency  and  Dr
   Sheehan had not performed any kind  of  literature  survey  to  determine
   whether it was typical.   Like the other witnesses, she  considered  that
   torture remained a serious risk if an investigation  of  the  appellant's
   crimes was undertaken. She considered the NPC website  guidance  quite  a
   strong statement of intent in her written report;  however  in  her  oral
   evidence she accepted that it was merely a  restatement,  not  indicating
   any increased risk of the provisions being used.

259. There was  a  divergence  between  her  written  report  and  her  oral
   evidence in relation to the  likelihood  of  early  release.   Her  final
   position was that she simply did not  know.   She  endorsed  Dr  Dillon's
   opinion that the case was likely to be tried in an Intermediate Court not
   a rural People's Court or in a City Court.  She  had  no  access  to  the
   University websites and had undertaken no internet research at all.

260. Dr Sheehan considered that the sentence  imposed,  14  years,  was  not
   outside the range of  sentences  which  the  Chinese  Courts  would  have
   imposed, though the appellant would not have been paroled at less than 10
   years in China. A Chinese life sentence was about 10 years  and  convicts
   were paroled at the halfway point only for high-level good behaviour. The
   authorities  might  consider  that  the  United  Kingdom   sentence   was
   sufficient; however, they also might consider, where an appellant had not
   pleaded guilty and was held to have used violence, that these should have
   been treated as aggravating factors.   In  view  of  the  rather  limited
   nature of Dr Sheehan's researches, the  Tribunal  does  not  place  great
   weight on her analysis of the legal system, which was  derived  from  the
   other two reports and the work of Professor Cohen.   Nor  did  we  derive
   much assistance from her evidence on the likely penalty.

261. We  then  turned  to  Professor  Fu's  evidence.   Initially,  we  were
   concerned by the evolution from his opinion in WC (which Dr Dillon agreed
   with entirely and said he could have written himself) to the main  report
   for this appeal. We read the 2008 report  with  some  caution.   However,
   having heard the oral evidence of Professor Fu and  understood  the  care
   with which he researched the Chinese databases, we are satisfied that  he
   is a careful and reliable witness with much greater  practical  knowledge
   and database access than the other witnesses.  There is a  difficulty  in
   Professor Fu's written reports which all, because of the severe redaction
   of facts against which his opinion was written, erred in considering  the
   offence as an inchoate offence when it had been completed.  However, when
   this was put to him, Professor Fu's reaction  was  careful  and  cogently
   reasoned.  We are satisfied that we can rely on his evidence.

262. Professor Fu explained the databases available.   We  do  not  need  to
   repeat that evidence here.  He  considered  that  14  years  was  neither
   extreme nor lenient for a completed kidnap  with  extortion.   He  agreed
   with the other witnesses that laojiao was out of the question and  laogai
   used only rarely.  He did not consider this was one  of  the  rare  cases
   where re-prosecution would be undertaken, though given the altered nature
   of the factual matrix, he considered there to be more  risk  of  official
   interest than he originally thought.  We were particularly struck by  his
   dismissive  reaction  to  snakehead  kidnappings  in  general  as  rather
   ordinary crimes of which there were very many, not especially interesting
   to the authorities.  That is not the Western  perception  but  given  the
   significant  people-trafficking  industry  out  of   China   (Fujian   in
   particular)  the  Chinese  view  is  different.   If  there  were  a  re-
   prosecution, Professor Fu considered that the assistance of  the  British
   authorities  would  be  required  for  evidence.   The  police  would  be
   reluctant to bother unless they could get good evidence, given that  they
   were expected  to  produce  a  conviction  rate  in  excess  of  90%.  If
   investigated, torture could not be ruled out and  the  penalty  would  be
   ordinary incarceration (laogai) not laojiao.

In what circumstances will re-prosecution occur?

263. Much of the  appellant's  argument  is  directed  at  establishing  the
   purpose of the NPC website publication and whether the experts agreed  or
   disagreed that there were occasional prosecutions.  Neither seems  to  us
   now to be really in dispute.  The question we need  to  address  is  what
   distinguishes those cases where re-prosecution  takes  place  from  those
   where it does not.  In oral evidence, all the experts agreed that the NPC
   website publication was a  clarification  and  reassertion  of  the  law,
   rather than a change in policy.  Submissions in relation to the  risk  of
   re-prosecution relied on the NPC website restatement,  the  lack  of  any
   evidence that re-prosecutions did not occur, and the  'complete  lack  of
   transparency' in the Chinese legal system.   We note that there were very
   few examples available, and that the only factually similar case was of a
   prosecution for an unpunished crime  (under  Article  7),  not  a  double
   jeopardy case.  Save as to sentencing, that does not really assist us  in
   assessing the likelihood of a second trial and punishment  under  Article
   10 CL.


264. We considered the Canadian Min Chen decision.  That was a murder  case:
    all the witnesses in the present appeal agreed that where there had been
   death, the death penalty was likely.  In the Canadian  case,  the  Agreed
   Statement of Facts included the concession by  the  Canadian  authorities
   that:


      '... if he is deported he faces arrest and trial under Chinese law for
      this crime. He will receive an indeterminate sentence until the  state
      determines he is fit to return to society,  on  Counsel's  submission.
      There is a high level of certainty that  he  will  receive  additional
      time with his liberty restricted as a result of  this  crime,  a  fact
      that can be considered in determining the issue I have  to  deal  with
      today, although there is an element of  uncertainty  with  respect  to
      what will happen in the future.'

265. The question whether Min Chen would  be  re-prosecuted  was  not  fully
   argued before the Canadian court; further, this was a very  high  profile
   child abduction and murder case in Canada.  The Tribunal  derived  little
   assistance from that decision.

266. After noting the Tribunal's approach in WC  and  in  SC,  Mr  Mackenzie
   relied on obiter dicta in FL and others (Rule  30:  extension  of  time?)
   China [2005] UKAIT 00180 that it was open to an Adjudicator  to  consider
   that double punishment was a risk in at least some cases. That  misstates
   what the Tribunal decided in FL (which was not a country guidance case on
   the double jeopardy point):

      "26.  On the evidence relating to re-prosecution and the risk  to  the
      second Appellant if he were returned to China, the evidence  was  more
      complex and more voluminous. The Adjudicator clearly looked at it with
      some care. Whilst taking seriously the evidence of breaches  of  human
      rights including executions in China, she noted that the risk  of  re-
      prosecution  appeared  to  be  more  theoretical  than  real.  In  her
      determination, she pointed out that in the materials before her  there
      was "not one cited case on detention or  prosecution  on  a  returning
      Chinese citizen on account of  any  criminal  or  other  offence  that
      citizen may have committed abroad".

      27.   It appears to us that the evidence  before  the  Adjudicator  on
      this issue might well have been sufficient to enable her  to  reach  a
      conclusion different from  that  which  she  did  reach:  but  we  are
      entirely unpersuaded by the grounds of appeal or by anything Mrs  Sood
      said to us that the conclusion that she did  reach  was  a  conclusion
      which  materially  erred  in  law.  Indeed,  in  the  course  of   her
      submissions, Mrs Sood very frankly and properly said that her position
      was that the Adjudicator could have reached a different conclusion. We
      especially asked her whether she had said "could" or "should" and  she
      emphasised "could". That, as we say, may well be so; but it  does  not
      amount to an allegation of error  of  law.  For  this  and  the  other
      reasons given above, our conclusion is that in the second  Appellant's
      case the Adjudicator made no material error of law and we  order  that
      the Adjudicator's determination shall stand."

267. That decision does not, therefore, differ from the approach in  WC  and
   SC. The appellant in his skeleton argument warned  the  Tribunal  not  to
   dismiss the opinion of respectable experts as speculation (Karanakaran  v
   SSHD [2000] 3 All ER 449 at 472).  We have no intention of doing  so  and
   will give to the expert evidence the weight which it can  properly  bear.
   All of the experts  from  whom  we  heard  are  distinguished;  some  had
   prepared more thoroughly than others; some were better placed  to  access
   the new databases than others.  We  accept  that  they  all  agreed  that
   Article 10 is sometimes used.

268. The appellant also relied on the decision of the  Court  of  Appeal  in
   Mohamed Adam v SSHD [2003] EWCA (Civ) 265 which was not cited  either  in
   WC or in SC.  He contended that  in  the  light  of  that  decision,  the
   evidential burden of proving that there was no real risk of a potentially
   persecutory law being applied rested on  the  respondent.   The  relevant
   passage, set out in full,  from  the  decision  of  Schiemann  LJ  is  as
   follows:

    12. Miss Plimmer submits that the approach of the IAT in  paragraph  16
        of their determination is not supportable. The  Country  Assessment
        states in paragraph 5.69 that "the penalty for refusing to  perform
        military service is a fine and up to three  years  imprisonment..."
        This document was produced by the Home Office and placed before the
        adjudicator by their  representative.  In  those  circumstances  to
        place a burden on the appellant to show that there is a  real  risk
        that this penalty would be imposed on him is unfair.  I  agree.  It
        may well be that circumstances can arise when a law is shown to  be
        never enforced in which case there would  be  no  real  risk  to  a
        citizen that he would be imprisoned pursuant to  it.  But,  for  my
        part, I do not consider that it was open to  the  IAT  to  conclude
        from the evidence before it that the present was such a case.


        The appellant, relying largely  on  Home  Office  evidence,  showed
        that:


        i) he was a member of  a  community  suspected  of  supporting  the
        opposition and regarded by the Government as legitimate targets for
        life threatening activities;

        ii) there was a real risk that he would  be  discovered  as  having
        evaded military service;

        iii) the penalty for refusing to perform military service is a fine
        and up to three years imprisonment;

        iv) arbitrary as well as justified arrest and detention by security
        forces was common;

        v) in practice the  security  forces  torture  and  beat  suspected
        opponents of the government;

        vi) conditions in prisons are life-threatening.

    14. In the light of the Country Assessment it  seems  to  me  that  the
        evidential burden passed to the Home Office. If it was going to  be
        part of the Home Office case that there is no real  risk  that  the
        penalties prescribed by law would be exacted then they should  have
        produced the relevant evidence in advance  so  that  the  appellant
        might know what case he had to meet.  The  statement  in  paragraph
        5.69 of  the  Assessment  that  a  deserter  will  usually  be  re-
        conscripted does  not  meet  the  point  -  particularly  when  the
        appellant is a member of a persecuted minority and  might  thus  be
        expected to be a candidate for the unusual. To  expect  him  to  do
        more than point to the law is in my judgment unfair and unrealistic
        - c.f. Modinos v Republic of Cyprus ECtHR 22/04/1993 16 EHRR 485. "

269. Again, the point made is different from that which  we  consider  here.
   In the Adam decision, the Home Office evidence  was  in  the  appellant's
   favour and Schiemann LJ observed that where the appellant  had  made  his
   case based on evidence prepared by the Home Office, if the  Secretary  of
   State wished to assert the contrary position, he should have given proper
   notice of her intention  to  do  so.   That  is  a  perfectly  reasonable
   position but it does not amount  to  authority  that  the  burden  always
   shifts in favour of the Secretary of State in double jeopardy  cases,  as
   the skeleton argument contends.

270. Modinos v Republic of Cyprus ECtHR 22/04/1993 16 EHRR  485  is  a  case
   concerning whether a provision in Cypriot  law  criminalising  homosexual
   acts in private between consenting adults remains in force, despite being
   in conflict with Article 15 of the Cypriot  Constitution  and  Article  8
   ECHR.  It does not assist us greatly with the point in issue here.

   Prison conditions

271. In relation to prison conditions, even the Secretary  of  State  admits
   that they are 'harsh'.  The evidence in  the  Secretary  of  State's  OGN
   (paragraph 3.13) is that  conditions  in  Chinese  prisons  are  poor  in
   general, and extremely Spartan even in model prisons:

      " 3.13 Prison conditions ...

      3.13.11     Conclusion. Whilst prison conditions  in  China  are  poor
      with overcrowding, and abuse by prison officials  being  a  particular
      problem, conditions are unlikely to reach  the  Article  3  threshold.
      Therefore  even  where  claimants  can  demonstrate  a  real  risk  of
      imprisonment on return to China a  grant  of  Humanitarian  Protection
      will not generally be appropriate. However, the individual factors  of
      each case should be considered to  determine  whether  detention  will
      cause a particular  individual  in  his  particular  circumstances  to
      suffer treatment contrary to Article 3,  relevant  factors  being  the
      likely length of detention the likely type of detention  facility  and
      the individual's age and state of health. Where in an individual  case
      treatment does reach the Article 3 threshold a grant  of  Humanitarian
      Protection will be appropriate."

272. Whilst the Tribunal  has  received  evidence  from  the  experts  about
   prison conditions, it is not a question on which this appeal turns.   For
   the reasons we explain at the end of this decision, we  have  found  that
   the appellant would not be at risk of double jeopardy reprosecution under
   Article 10 CL if returned  to  China.   The  UNHCHR  Special  Rapporteur,
   Professor Manfred Nowak, was  satisfied  that  the  prisons  he  saw  met
   international norms. There was evidence of much lower  standards  in  the
   past, in particular in Professor Palmer's literature survey and the books
   of Harry Wu, but there was also  evidence  of  changes  in  the  criminal
   justice system and modernisation within the  Chinese  legal  system.   We
   concluded that there was insufficient evidence before us of  the  current
   conditions in the majority of Chinese prisons to oust the guidance  given
   in WC about prison conditions. That issue will need to be  considered  in
   detail in another appeal.

Summary of findings and general guidance

273. In the light of all the evidence and materials before the Tribunal,  we
   give the following general guidance.

   The Chinese legal system

        1) The Chinese Court system  comprises  four  tiers:   the  Supreme
           People's Court in Beijing, which is the highest judicial  organ,
           responsible to the National People's Congress and  its  Standing
           Committee, and  which  hears  appeals  from  the  lower  Courts,
           supervising their operation, now including automatic reviews  of
           all death sentences  passed  by  the  lower  courts,  with  oral
           argument;  approximately 30 Higher Courts (the City  Courts)  in
           provincial,  municipal  and   regional   capitals;   about   400
           Intermediate Courts based in administrative centres, towns,  and
           larger cities and  which  try  criminal  cases,  with  exclusive
           primary level jurisdiction in capital cases, subject  to  review
           by the Supreme People's Court; and approximately  3000  People's
           Courts which try minor matters in all Chinese towns and  cities.
           People's Courts can establish People's Tribunals (which are  not
           regarded as Courts) to handle local cases.

        2)  Judicial  databases  in  China  have  followed  much  the  same
           evolution as in the United Kingdom.  Since the late  1990s,  the
           Supreme People's Court  has  sponsored  a  database,  Chinacourt
           which now contains about 25000 selected decisions,  either  from
           the SPC or  referred by the lower  Courts  (approved,  rewritten
           and with  an  appropriate  headnote  through  an  SPC  reviewing
           Committee).  The database contains selected cases  and  not  all
           cases; the reported cases, as on the United Kingdom  BAILII  and
           other databases, represent the decisions which are considered to
           be  of  interest  and  not  the  vast  majority  of   decisions.
           Reporting in these databases is for  technical  reasons  not  to
           'make an example' of a particular individual.

        3) Chinese Universities maintain fuller databases with  more  cases
           and  better  indexing,  in   particular   Chinalawinfo   (Peking
           University Law School) which holds 50,000 decisions.   They  are
           available to members of the University and  by  subscription  to
           the professions but not otherwise.

        4) If the authorities wish to make an example, that would  be  done
           by journalistic reports in the local and  national  printed  and
           broadcast media  but  these  publications  are  hard  to  access
           outside China.  Only one witness spoke of such a report and that
           related to a different discretionary provision, Article 18 CL.

        5) The NPC website maintained by its Standing  Committee  publishes
           excerpts from textbooks written by SPC judges to  give  guidance
           on the application of rather sparsely written  Chinese  Criminal
           Law and Criminal Procedure Rules and has done so for Articles  7
           and 10 CL.

        6) There is pressure in the legal profession, supported by articles
           written by judges and one in particular by two Supreme  People's
           Court judges and a member of the Judicial Training  College,  to
           remove Article 10 from the statute  book  but  it  has  not  yet
           succeeded.  A similar movement to  reduce  or  abolish  torture,
           which was and remains unlawful, has had only limited  effect  in
           the larger cities; the pressure on police to obtain  convictions
           in the 90% levels very quickly means that they are still  likely
           to torture to obtain confessions.

        7) Chinese border  guards  have  computerised  systems  into  which
           passport data is entered manually (name, date of birth,  address
           and the usual information) which brings  up  information  as  to
           entry and exit visas, but is  not  yet  linked  into  the  hukou
           system.

   Overseas offences prosecutions under Articles 7 and 10 CL

        8) Articles 7 and 10 deal with prosecutions for offences  committed
           overseas ('overseas offences') and are  discretionary  in  their
           application.  Both  are  used,  but  very  rarely.    Article  7
           permits prosecution of an overseas offence  which  was  not  the
           subject of  a  foreign  prosecution.   Article  10  permits  re-
           prosecution even where the offender was  prosecuted,  convicted,
           and punished abroad.  The experts were able to identify  only  a
           handful of instances of overseas offences prosecutions over a 17
           year period,  three  involving  Article  7  and  five  involving
           Article  10.   Of  the  three  Article  7  cases,  one  involved
           factually similar offences and attracted a sentence of 14 years.
            The others attracted sentences of 2 and 5  years  respectively,
           and a fine.  Of the five Article 10 cases, four of them did  not
           indicate whether investigation  had  led  to  prosecution.   The
           other, in 1990, had a political element and involved a  man  who
           had escaped from the sentence he was serving  in  Kuwait  before
           completing it.  He was re-prosecuted and re-sentenced to  laogai
           in China but the term is not known.

        9) International agreements with  a  growing  number  of  countries
           restrict or remove overseas offences  prosecution  for  offences
           committed in those countries.  There is no such  agreement  with
           the United Kingdom.

       10) Prosecution under Article 7 or 10 is a  fresh  prosecution.  For
           both Articles, the Chinese authorities have a discretion whether
           to prosecute, which will be exercised  in  the  light  of  their
           opinion as to whether the foreign jurisdiction  dealt  properly,
           and without undue leniency, with the offence.  It can no  longer
           be said that there is no information available  on  the  use  of
           that power: the Chinacourt database of cases and the NPC website
           guidance comes directly from the Chinese Government and provides
           guidance on the use of these powers.

       11) The procuracy and police are  reluctant  to  prosecute  in  most
           cases because of evidential  difficulties  in  establishing  the
           necessary elements of the offence without access to the overseas
           proceedings and evidence. Where there is  no  agreement  between
           the two Governments, the case can be pursued only  where  either
           there are sufficient witnesses and evidence in China,  or  where
           the evidence used in a foreign jurisdiction can be  obtained  by
           diplomatic channels.

       12) Foreign judgements are  not  recognised  but,  where  available,
           evidence obtained and used to in overseas  prosecutions  may  be
           used as the basis of a fresh investigation  in  China.   Torture
           during such an investigation cannot be ruled out, though  it  is
           less likely in  the  higher  courts  than  in  People's  Courts.
           Western governments are reluctant to cooperate in furnishing the
           evidence required from their  own  records  because  of  China's
           record on the death penalty.

       13) The Foreign  and  Commonwealth  Office  cannot  monitor  Chinese
           citizens who are returned to China, save negatively; in the case
           of  re-prosecution,  they  would  be  likely  to  be  aware   of
           diplomatic requests for the United Kingdom evidence.

   Laogai and laojiao

       14) Laodong gaizao, commonly abbreviated to laogai (reform through
           labour) and laodong jiaoyan, abbreviated to laojiao (re-
           education through labour) are distinct concepts.

       15) Laogai equates to imprisonment after conviction and is  reserved
           for  more  serious  criminal  cases.   There  are  international
           concerns about China's trial system and prison conditions but it
           will be appropriate to review  those  in  another  determination
           where there is a greater likelihood of trial  and  imprisonment.
           China's reform efforts are proceeding but they are not yet at  a
           level where the West can have confidence  that  all  appropriate
           international norms (in particular Articles 5 and  6  ECHR)  are
           met.

       16) Laojiao is much more controversial.   It  is  an  administrative
           penalty, originally limitless but now restricted to  four  years
           maximum, where for lesser offences a person may be  incarcerated
           in prison-like conditions at  the  behest  of  any  official  or
           police officer (or even a child's school).  There is a  powerful
           movement against it within China.  Its use  is  declining.   All
           the experts except Dr  Sheehan  agreed  that  re-prosecution  or
           prosecution under Articles 7 or 10 for a serious  offence  would
           not be dealt with under laojiao.

       17) The Tribunal is satisfied that there is a double jeopardy risk
           under Article 10 CL, but that absent particular aggravating
           factors, the risk falls well below the level required to engage
           international protection under the Refugee Convention, the ECHR,
           or humanitarian protection.

       18) Merely to have committed a crime overseas,  been  sentenced  and
           punished for it will not be enough to entail a prosecution under
           Article 10 CL; nor under Article 7 CL is it sufficient  to  have
           escaped punishment for an overseas offence.

       19) The risk of prosecution or re-prosecution will be a question  of
           fact in individual cases but is more likely where:

           a) there has been a  substantial  amount  of  adverse  publicity
              within China about a case;
           b) the proposed  defendant  has  significantly  embarrassed  the
              Chinese authorities by their actions overseas;
           c) where the offence is unusually serious. Generally,  snakehead
              cases in China do not have the significance they have in  the
              West  and  are  regarded  as  ordinary  (but  serous)  crimes
              requiring no special treatment;
           d) political factors may increase the likelihood of  prosecution
              or re-prosecution;
           e) the Chinese Government is also particularly  concerned  about
              corruption of Chinese officialdom.

Application of the general conclusions to the appellant's case and  decision


274. We turn now to consider this appeal.

The s.72 certificate

275. We are required to consider s.  72  first,  to  determine  whether  the
   appellant has rebutted the statutory presumption that he remains a danger
   to the United Kingdom community. As set out in the Immigration Rules  (HC
   395 (as amended)) at paragraph 339D, the commission of  a  serious  crime
   also takes the appellant outside the humanitarian  protection  provisions
   of the Refugee Qualifications Directive:

      "339D. A person is excluded from a grant  of  humanitarian  protection
      under paragraph 339C (iv) where the Secretary of  State  is  satisfied
      that:


      (i) there are serious reasons for considering that he has committed  a
      crime against peace, a war crime, a crime  against  humanity,  or  any
      other serious crime or instigated or otherwise  participated  in  such
      crimes;"

276. In SB (cessation and exclusion) Haiti  [2005]  UKIAT  00036  Ouseley  J
   considered  s.72 (2) and the 'dangerousness requirement' -

      "65. Plainly the effect of section 72(2), if  applicable,  is  to  put
      beyond argument the existence of a particularly serious crime, and the
      fact that the crime for which a sentence of  three  years  was  passed
      preceded the Act does not affect the application of the Act to it. ...
      67. If the specific definition of "a particularly serious offence"  in
      section 72(2) includes offences which would not  otherwise  have  been
      within the scope of Article 33(2), section 72(2)  alters  the  law  to
      that  extent  but  in  its  effect  is  qualified  by  the  rebuttable
      presumption as to dangerousness  in  subsection  (6).  Except  to  the
      extent that  that  alters  the  burden  of  proof,  the  dangerousness
      requirement would have to be satisfied conformably with the Convention
      thresholds. This ought to lead to the same result  as  before,  except
      where the change in the burden of proof, if  it  is  a  change,  would
      affect the outcome.

      68. This provision does not have many of the objectionable features of
      retrospective changes to the law. It does not change the character  of
      past transactions  or  arrangements;  nor  does  it  criminalise  past
      conduct or  increase  the  criminal  penalties.  But  it  changes  the
      potential asylum consequences of a past criminal act and its sentence;
      it may affect a decision as to  whether  an  appeal  against  sentence
      should be launched. ..."

277.  In  the  present  case,  the  appellant  did  appeal   his   sentence,
   unsuccessfully.  The appellant's representatives accept that  as  he  has
   served half  of  a  fourteen-year  sentence  for  conspiracy  to  kidnap,
   conspiracy to extort and conspiracy falsely to imprison, all contrary  to
   s.1(1) of the Criminal Law Act 1977, that  the  Secretary  of  State  has
   shown that the appellant  committed a serious offence as defined by s.72.
    There remains the question of whether the dangerousness element has been
   satisfied.  The evidence in this respect is that of the  Ms  Ludgam,  his
   parole officer who knew the appellant for 17 months before  his  release.
   He was released in 2005 and has been on licence since  then.   We  remind
   ourselves that  the  parole  officer's  report  was  not  based  on  full
   information as to the offences in which the appellant was involved.   She
   noted that there was a low risk of reoffending but that if the  appellant
   did re-offend it  would  be  serious,  gang-related  offences.   She  was
   concerned, even on the limited facts available to her, that he should not
   be released unless the supervision of a probation officer was  available.
   That was not done.  We have no later report, and no evidence at all as to
   what the appellant has been doing since release, save  that  he  has  not
   apparently been arrested again.

278.  The  original  Tribunal  did  not  consider   s.72.    They   regarded
   credibility as determinative, which was an error of  law.   At  paragraph
   43, however, they stated that had they engaged with Article 33(2) (and by
   implication s.72) they would have upheld the certificate.  They did so on
   the basis of the sentencing judge's  remarks,  Ms  Ludgam's  report,  and
   other information about  the  appellant's  current  position  (considered
   under  paragraph  364,  on  which  there  is   no   challenge   in   this
   reconsideration).  They noted Counsel's assertion in  those  proceedings,
   as here, that there was a lack of  evidence  that  the  appellant  was  a
   danger to the community but took into account the serious nature  of  the
   offence.  That was  the  basis  on  which  they  would  have  upheld  the
   certificate.

279. We have considered s.72.  The appellant was found  to  be  one  of  the
   prime movers in a particularly nasty kidnap and  extortion  offence.   He
   has not admitted his central r�le in the offence, and neither  the  trial
   judge in  the  criminal  proceedings,  the  original  Tribunal,  or  this
   Tribunal, considered him to be a witness of truth.  The burden is on  the
   appellant to show that he is not a danger to the community.  His evidence
   to that effect consists of the usual certificates  of  various  low-level
   qualifications obtained in prison, and then  nothing  at  all  for  three
   years after that.  The appellant has been on  notice  that  the  Tribunal
   would have wished to see up-to-date evidence on risk since  the  original
   determination in August 2006.  There is still nothing.  Under  s.72,  the
   appellant cannot show that he is no longer a danger to  the  public  and,
   apart from his educational certificates in prison and a well-meaning  but
   ill-informed Parole Report, has made  no  attempt  to  do  so.   We  know
   absolutely nothing about what he has done while on licence, save that  he
   was not arrested for it.

280. We uphold the s.72 certificate.  The appellant  cannot  therefore  rely
   on  the  refoulement  provisions  of  the  Refugee   Convention   or   on
   humanitarian protection.

Credibility and findings of fact

281.  Having  heard  the  appellant  and  his  sister  give  evidence,   and
   considered the credibility of their account, we find  that  we  are  even
   more concerned about their account  of  the  1994  events.   The  country
   materials record enormous numbers of rural protests at that  time  (about
   3.5 million individuals a year) and the Secretary of State  has  accepted
   that the injuries the appellant sustained may well  have  been  sustained
   defending his home from destruction.  Their conflicting accounts  of  his
   r�le in the alleged demonstration fatally damaged the credibility of that
   part of the account, as the Tribunal  held  in  2006,  and  the  evidence
   before us did not  ameliorate  that  position.   The  appellant  has  not
   satisfied us to any standard that he was a writer of posters or a  leader
   of a demonstration, or even  that  he  threw  a  stone  at  a  Government
   official.  At best, he may have been present at a small demonstration but
   even that is doubtful.

282. The account of the family's difficulties with the local police and  the
   sister's employer simply beggars belief.  Beginning with the sister, as a
   birth control inspector she would have known the risks  quite  well;  her
   evidence to the contrary was not credible.  The account of what they  did
   with the baby "Little Sister" was inconsistent and neither of them showed
   any interest in the child after leaving China.  As  regards  the  alleged
   confession, on the appellant's account there was no  need;  he  had  been
   seen in the demonstration. Further, the threat by which the  sister  said
   that the authorities intended to extort a confession with which to arrest
   her brother was that if she did not confess they would arrest him.   This
   part of the account is nonsensical and we do not believe it.  It is  much
   more likely, as the Tribunal held, that these  two  people  are  economic
   migrants.  There was no error in the Tribunal's credibility assessment in
   relation to the 1994 events.

283. There is an additional point as far as the alleged  1994  offences  are
   concerned.  They appear  to  be  time  barred  based  on  Professor  Fu's
   evidence  as  to  limitation  periods  for  Chinese  criminal   offences.
   Although the United Kingdom offences are among those  serious  enough  to
   engage the 20-year limitation  period,  and  are  in  time,  having  been
   committed less than 15 years ago, the alleged 1994 offences, since  there
   was no evidence that they were capable of entailing life imprisonment  or
   a death sentence, appear to be outside the limitation period.  There is a
   discretion to extend it but these offences are very  low-level,  even  if
   they occurred.  It is most unlikely indeed that  they  are  the  type  of
   offence where the authorities  would  extend  the  limitation  period  to
   enable prosecution so long after the events occurred.

Paragraph 364

284. We have reviewed the paragraph 364 assessment at paragraph  56  of  the
   determination.  His Counsel's presentation of him as a young man  in  bad
   company was dramatically at odds with the trial judge's view  of  him  as
   one of the instigators of the kidnap, extortion and blackmail  for  which
   he was imprisoned.

285. At the date of hearing the appellant was a  30-year  old  man  who  had
   entered the  United  Kingdom  without  leave  and  been  given  temporary
   admission pending  determination  of  his  asylum  appeal,  and  who  had
   committed a serious offence for which he had been punished.  There was no
   record of his ever having been lawfully employed in  the  United  Kingdom
   (nor, on his account, in China), although he may have worked illegally in
   a Chinese takeaway in Cambridge for about three years  before  committing
   this offence.  His sister had a restaurant;  however,  he  did  not  work
   there.  He was reasonably fit and healthy, and there was no reason why he
   should not adapt to living in China again.

286. The Tribunal was entitled to find, as it did, that the public  interest
   in deportation was not  outweighed  by  the  appellant's  rather  limited
   engagement with the  United  Kingdom  or  any  feature  of  his  personal
   circumstances.

Double jeopardy and Article 10 re-prosecution

287.  The risk on return under Articles 3, 5, 6, and 8  ECHR  arose,  if  at
   all, from the Article 10 CL risk.  The appellant would not be subject  to
   Article 7 CL; he was prosecuted and punished.  As to the Article 10 risk,
   although the appellant was a ringleader of a snakehead group, but he took
   part in what the  Chinese  state  currently  regards  as  a  very  common
   offence.  Others who offended at that time were returned, some willingly,
   some not.  All were legally represented and none of their representatives
   subsequently indicated that they came to harm on return.  There had  been
   no request through diplomatic channels for their trial documents  by  the
   Chinese authorities.  There had been no international or local publicity,
   good or bad, identified in relation to these offences.

288. We reminded ourselves that the burden of proof of  a  real  risk  of  a
   breach of a protected ECHR right remained on the appellant:  the shifting
   burden of proof in Adam, if it existed,  related  to  a  situation  where
   there was certainty of prosecution and a  statement  in  the  Country  of
   Origin Information Report or otherwise by the respondent to that  effect,
   such that it was for the respondent to provide evidence contradicting her
   own published material.  That was not at all the same as a  general  duty
   on the Secretary of State to disprove the risk in all cases.

289. If the Chinese authorities were to take a  positive  interest  in  this
   appellant on return, there was no certainty that it would go  as  far  as
   prosecution.  Four of the  five  Article  10  examples  provided  by  the
   experts appeared to have  fizzled  out  without  prosecution.   The  only
   example which was factually similar to that of the appellant, the Article
   7 prosecution of Xiang, resulted in the same sentence.  Despite  vigorous
   attempts by the appellant's experts and his Counsel to persuade us to the
   contrary, the appellant had not satisfied the Tribunal that  the  Chinese
   authorities  would   consider   the   United   Kingdom   proceedings   so
   disproportionate that there was a  real  risk  of  a  fresh  prosecution,
   especially given that there  had  been  a  prosecution,  conviction,  and
   sentence.

290. We considered the weight to be given  to  Professor  Palmer's  evidence
   above.  We have taken it into account but we agree that it  is  based  on
   older material than that available to the experts who gave oral  evidence
   and that it takes matters little further than  his  evidence  to  the  WC
   Tribunal.

291. Overall, when examined in the light of the country situation  in  China
   and the guidance in this decision, taking into account the credible  part
   of this appellant's account after his arrival in the United Kingdom, none
   of the errors in this determination entitled the appellant  to  have  his
   appeal allowed.  Accordingly, on the facts of this appeal, we substituted
   a fresh decision dismissing the appeal.

Continuing applicability of existing country guidance cases

292.   The Foreign and Commonwealth Office 'double jeopardy' letter and  the
   evidence before us altered the position as the Tribunal understood it  in
   WC and SC.  In the light of our findings above, the decisions in  WC  (no
   risk of double punishment)  China  [2004]  UKIAT  00253  and  SC  (double
   jeopardy - WC considered) China CG  [2006]  UKAIT  00007  are  no  longer
   factually accurate  and  SC  should  no  longer  be  treated  as  country
   guidance.

Funding decision

293. The appellant applied for payment of costs  from  the  Community  Legal
   Service Fund under s.103D of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act
   2002 as amended by the Asylum and  Immigration  (Treatment  of  Claimants
   etc.) Act 2004.   Reconsideration was granted on the  basis  of  arguable
   errors of law  in  this  determination.   Nothing  in  these  proceedings
   indicates that the reconsideration application  was  not  properly  made.
   The Tribunal orders that the appellant's costs be paid from the Community
   Legal Service Fund.

DECISION

The original Tribunal made a material error of law.  The following decision
is substituted:

1. The appellant is not a refugee as defined by the Geneva Convention and
   the Refugee or Person in Need of International Protection (Qualification)
   Regulations 2006;

2. The appellant is not entitled to humanitarian protection as defined in
   those Regulations;

3. The appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds; and

4. The Tribunal orders that the appellant's costs be paid from the
   Community Legal Service Fund.





Signed
Dated:   12 May 2008
Senior Immigration Judge Gleeson
                                  SCHEDULE

                        COUNTRY BACKGROUND DOCUMENTS


|Date             |Description                                                           |
|1991             |Nanping, Liu: "Legal Precedents" With Chinese Characters: Published   |
|                 |Cases in the Gazette of the Supreme People's Court, Journal of Chinese|
|                 |Law, Volume 5 (1991) 107                                              |
|1995             |                                                                      |
|27 May           |Agreement between the People's Republic of China and the Republic of  |
|                 |Bulgaria on Mutual Legal Assistance in Criminal Matters               |
|1997             |Nanping, Liu:  Judicial Interpretation in China:  Opinions of the     |
|                 |Supreme People's Court (Excerpt, Sweet and Maxwell)                   |
|2003             |Dr Mei Y Gechlik:  "Improving Human Rights in China: Should           |
|                 |Re-Education Through Labour be Abolished?" Columbia Journal of        |
|                 |Transnational Law                                                     |
|2004             |                                                                      |
|8 April          |Report of Professor Fu in WC Case                                     |
|27 May           |Agreement between the People's Republic of China and the Republic of  |
|                 |Colombia on Mutual Legal Assistance on Criminal Matters.              |
|December         |Amnesty International: "Human Rights Defenders at Risk"               |
|2005             |                                                                      |
|17 June          |London `Times' article `Thugs kill farmers for their land'            |
|26 July          |United States Congressional-Executive Commission on China:  Written   |
|                 |evidence of Professor Jerome Cohen: "China's Legal System in          |
|                 |Transition"                                                           |
|2 September      |US Congressional-Executive Committee:  "China's Household Registration|
|                 |(hukou) System:  Discrimination and Reforms"                          |
|10 October       |BBC News: "China village democracy skin deep"                         |
|14 November      |Extradition agreement between People's Republic of China and the      |
|                 |Kingdom of Spain                                                      |
|29 November      |Home Office Operational Guidance Note on China                        |
|3 December       |Guardian newspaper article : "Torture Still Widespread in China"      |
|2006             |                                                                      |
|1 January        |International Herald Tribune:  "In rural China, a time bomb is        |
|                 |ticking"                                                              |
|8 March          |OHCHR Report of the Special Rapporteur on torture and other cruel,    |
|                 |inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, Manfred Nowak, "Mission |
|                 |to China"  (Advanced Edited Version)                                  |
|10 March         |US State Department Report on China for 2005                          |
|10 March         |UN Economic and Social Council Report on China                        |
|27 March         |Human Rights in China:  "Rural Land Activists Detained after          |
|                 |Petitioning over Corruption"                                          |
|11 May           |BBC News Online:  "China's 'reforming' work programme"                |
|14 May           |Toronto Star newspaper article: "Is child Killer here to stay?"       |
|19 June          |AsiaNews.it article: `Beijing threatens lawyers: `Don't help          |
|                 |anti-Government protestors'                                           |
|18 July          |Amnesty International report `People's Republic of China'             |
|                 |`Human rights Defenders at Risk' (with update)                        |
|20 September     |US Congressional-Executive Commission on China:  Professor Jerome     |
|                 |Cohen (written evidence):  "Human rights and the Rule of Law in China"|
|20 November      |Home Office Operational Guidance Note: China                          |
|2007             |                                                                      |
|1 March          |China Daily article:  "End Legal Black Hole"                          |
|6 March          |US State Department Report: Human Rights Practices - China            |
|15 March 2007    |UN General Assembly Report on implementation of General Assembly      |
|                 |resolution 60/251, only in so far as it relates to China (pages 1-3   |
|                 |and 21-26),                                                           |
|29 June          |ABC News Australia:  "Chinese deportee tells of torture"              |
|8 August         |Dr Michael Dillon:  Expert witness report on JC                       |
|7 September      |Dr Jackie Sheehan:  Country Expert Report in the case of JC           |
|11 September     |Dr Mei Y Gechlik (nee Veron Mei-Ying Hung):  Expert witness report re |
|                 |JC                                                                    |
|30 October       |Professor Fu Hualing, Expert Report (Double Jeopardy), with           |
|                 |Curriculum Vitae  and annexes                                         |
|12 November      |Letter from Foreign and Commonwealth Office                           |
|3 December       |Home Office Country of Origin Report:  China                          |
|6 December       |Guardian report: "Chinese police stage huge gang crackdown"           |
|2008             |                                                                      |
|14 January       |Respondent's Skeleton Argument                                        |
|17 January       |Dr Jackie Sheehan:  "Remarks in addition to the Country Expert Report |
|                 |on JC" and appendices with translations                               |
|17 January       |Comment of Professor Fu on WC report                                  |




