


                       ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL


        MH (Darfurians: relocation to Khartoum?) Sudan CG [2006] UKAIT 00033

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at: Kings Court, North Shields
On 11 January 2006
                                                   Determination Promulgated
                                                            On 03 April 2006
                                      ......................................

                                   Before:

                 Mr Andrew Jordan, Senior Immigration Judge
                      Mr D.G. Zucker, Immigration Judge

Between:

                                                                   APPELLANT

                                     and

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  RESPONDENT






For the Appellant:           Ms C. Ganning of Halliday Reeves, solicitors
For the Respondent:          Mr P. Keane, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

On reviewing the background country material both past and present, the
view of the Tribunal is that relocation to Khartoum is still in general a
viable option for those from Darfur

  1. The appellant is a citizen  of  Sudan  who  said  he  was  born  on  8
     September 1986, although the Secretary of State disputed this.  At the
     hearing before the Immigration Judge, the appellant was due to  be  18
     within a few days and the Judge  concluded  in  paragraph  27  of  the
     determination that there was  no  adequate  material  to  dispute  the
     appellant's age and accepted that he was born on the date claimed.  No
     challenge is made to that finding.  The appellant is now aged 19.

  2. The appellant stated that he entered the United  Kingdom  on  6  March
     2004, whilst still a minor,  avoiding  immigration  controls.   It  is
     accepted that he claimed asylum on that day.  The Secretary  of  State
     rejected his asylum claim in a decision made on 15 April 2004.  On  21
     April 2004, he made a further decision to  issue  directions  for  the
     appellant's removal to Sudan.  This decision gave rise to a  right  of
     appeal which the appellant exercised by serving a notice of appeal  on
     4 June 2004.

  3. When the appeal came before the Immigration Judge, Mr A.B. Caskie,  on
     3 September 2004, he allowed the appeal in a determination promulgated
     on 27 September 2004 both on asylum and human rights grounds.

  4. The Secretary of State appealed and the Tribunal determined  that  the
     Immigration Judge had made a material error of law and  directed  that
     the appeal be heard afresh. In so ordering the Tribunal  set  out  its
     reasons in these terms:

           "1.   This was an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the
                 decision of an Adjudicator (now Immigration Judge) Mr A. B.
                 Caskie, sitting at  North  Shields  on  3  September  2004,
                 allowing the appeal on asylum and human rights  grounds  of
                 the appellant, a citizen of Sudan, against the decision  of
                 the respondent to refuse asylum and give directions for his
                 removal.  Since permission to appeal  was  given,  but  the
                 appeal had not been heard by 4 April 2005, it  proceeds  as
                 if reconsideration  had  been  ordered  on  review  by  the
                 present Tribunal.
              2. We had full submissions from the parties and were satisfied
                 that the grounds were made out  by  Mrs  Pettersen  (HOPO).
                 Although  Miss  Ganning  took  us  through  the   objective
                 material that had been before the Adjudicator, she did  not
                 identify any passages in the objective material to  support
                 or justify the conclusion reached by the  Adjudicator.   We
                 were satisfied that there would have to be  a  reassessment
                 of  the  objective  evidence  and  in  the  light  of   the
                 additional evidence to be submitted and as the  proceedings
                 were being conducted by video link we were  satisfied  that
                 the case would have to be adjourned for a consideration  of
                 the objective evidence on another occasion.
              3. The error of law was that  the  Adjudicator  misinterpreted
                 the  objective  evidence  or  there  was  no   satisfactory
                 evidence to support his decision.
              4. We decided to adjourn for the reasons given  and  therefore
                 the case will be reconsidered on its  merits  at  a  future
                 date by the Tribunal."

  5. In his interview, conducted in Liverpool on 5 April  2004  in  Arabic,
     the appellant stated that he was a Muslim from the Tama tribe and came
     from outside Kobabiya in Darfur where he and his family had land which
     they farmed and on which they reared livestock.  The family  consisted
     of the appellant's parents, two brothers and two sisters.   They  were
     attacked in July 2003  by  the  Janjaweed  militia  supported  by  the
     Sudanese government.  The appellant managed to escape from the  attack
     and was told by his father that his two brothers had been abducted  by
     the militia.  On the following day, the bodies of  his  brothers  were
     found.  His father sold crops and livestock in  order  to  enable  the
     appellant to move to Taweela where he stayed with his  maternal  uncle
     for five months.  In his answer to question 37 of his  interview,  the
     appellant stated that members of the Zaghawa, Massaleit, Tama and  Fur
     tribes formed a group called Equality and Justice Party [JEM] and that
     government troops targeted young people in the area  on  suspicion  of
     involvement in what was perceived to be an anti-government party.  The
     appellant decided to flee and travelled by lorry to Port  Sudan  where
     he fled from the country.

  6. The appellant also claimed that as a  member  of  the  Tama  tribe  he
     suffered discrimination in employment and education.  He claimed that,
     should he be returned to Sudan, he would be killed by  the  government
     because he fled the country.

  7. In paragraph 32 of his determination, the Immigration  Judge  accepted
     the core of the appellant's account.  In particular, he  accepted  the
     appellant is a citizen of Sudan who had lived for much of his life  in
     western Darfur and was a member of the Tama tribe who was at  risk  of
     persecution if he were to return to his home area as a result  of  his
     ethnicity.  In paragraph 33, however, the Judge noted the Secretary of
     State's contention that the appellant could relocate to  another  part
     of Sudan.  The Judge summarised the  background  material  by  stating
     that none of the material indicated that any of the population fleeing
     from Darfur had fled to Khartoum.  Accordingly, he was  not  satisfied
     that the absence of material about such individuals facing persecution
     in Khartoum established those from Darfur were safe in  Khartoum.   He
     said, in paragraph 34:


           "Despite concluding that there is no evidence of the  population
           of Darfur facing any difficulties in Khartoum  I  consider  that
           the reason for this is not because the population of Darfur  are
           not facing difficulties in Khartoum.   It  is  absolutely  clear
           that an enormous number of individuals (in  excess  of  200,000)
           have fled from Dafur to Chad where a  further  1.2  million  are
           internally displaced.   It is clear  to  me  that  there  is  no
           evidence of any of the population in Darfur  seeking  refuge  in
           Khartoum.  I accept the evidence presented to me  that  a  great
           many of the horrendous results which have occurred within Darfur
           are caused by, encouraged  by  or  linked  to  elements  of  the
           Sudanese state.  I also consider that  the  evidence  before  me
           indicates that there are efforts by the Sudanese government  and
           their official and unofficial agents to ethnically  cleanse  the
           Darfur region.  Against that background it appears  to  me  that
           any individual emanating from Darfur  who  arrived  in  Khartoum
           would be at substantial risk."


  8. Finally, in paragraph 35 of his determination, the  Immigration  Judge
     made an alternative finding  that,  even  if  he  were  wrong  in  his
     assessment  as  to  the  reason  for  the  absence  of   evidence   of
     difficulties faced by the Darfurian population in Khartoum, there  was
     a serious possibility that if the appellant were returned to Sudan and
     were to attempt to take up residence in the area of Khartoum, he would
     be at risk of being forced by the Sudanese authorities  to  return  to
     the Darfur region.  It was for  those  reasons  that  he  allowed  the
     appeal.

  9. The Secretary of State claimed in the grounds of application that,  in
     essence, it was perverse of the Immigration Judge  to  find  that  the
     fact that there was no evidence that those from the Darfur region were
     persecuted in Khartoum might be explained by the fact that there  were
     no Darfurians in the Khartoum area.  It  was  this  finding  that  the
     Tribunal determined  was  not  supported  by  any  of  the  background
     material.

 10. In the light of our identification earlier of a material error of law,
     we were invited to make a fresh assessment of the risk on return using
     background  material  that  was  not  before  the  Immigration  Judge.
     Indeed, this fresh material (identified later  in  our  determination)
     was not before the Tribunal in  the  series  of  cases  in  which  the
     Tribunal has sought to provide guidance about the general  risk  faced
     by Darfurians who have been displaced by the  conflict  and  have  re-
     settled in and around Khartoum.  The  appeal,  therefore,  raises  the
     issue as to whether the earlier decisions  can  now  be  supported  by
     current information.

Tribunal guidance on risk to Darfurians

 11. Before proceeding further, we should  summarise  past  Tribunal  cases
     seeking to give guidance on risk to Darfurians.   In  AE  (Relocation-
     Darfur-Khartoum an option) Sudan CG [2005] UKAIT  00101,  (promulgated
     on 3 May 2005 ), the Tribunal presided over by its President, reviewed
     the decisions of the IAT on internal relocation  in  Sudan,  referring
     specifically to AA [2004] UKIAT 00167 (22 June 2004), AB [2004]  UKIAT
     00260 (17 September 2004) (both referring to persons from the conflict
     in southern Sudan) and MM [2005] UKIAT 00069, the  latter  promulgated
     on 9 March 2005.  In MM, the Tribunal relied upon the UNHCR letter  of
     18 May 2004 and reached its decision on the understanding  that  there
     was only one example of the authorities moving into a  camp  to  evict
     residents and forcibly relocating them to the outskirts  of  Khartoum.
     Based on that single  example,  the  Tribunal  satisfied  itself  that
     evictions were not being  systematically  carried  out  sufficient  to
     establish a real risk.  We now know there is evidence of more  than  a
     single example of closure.

 12. It is apparent that in MM, the Tribunal considered  evidence  from  Mr
     Verney but concluded his  evidence  did  not  establish  a  systematic
     violation of human rights of those displaced Darfurians  in  Khartoum.
     In addition, the Tribunal considered the risk faced  by  returnees  to
     Sudan after  a  long  absence,  particularly  those  originating  from
     southern Sudan.  Notwithstanding the finding that the ethnic origin of
     the appellant in MM was likely to result in his  being  questioned  at
     the airport,  the  attendant  risk  did  not  establish  the  risk  of
     persecution or Article 3 ill-treatment.

 13. The Tribunal in AE had before it the Global IDP Project  report  dated
     24 March 2005 which referred to the position of  IDPs  in  and  around
     Khartoum.  In particular,  consideration  was  given  to  whether  the
     government was genuinely committed to dealing with the problems  faced
     by displaced families,  the  vast  majority  of  whom  are  living  in
     squatter areas and four overcrowded camps.

 14. In addition, the Tribunal in AE considered the  Amnesty  International
     paper of 4 April 2005 which asserted that there was no internal flight
     alternative for Darfurians in Khartoum or central Sudan.  In paragraph
     35 of its determination, the Tribunal  concluded  that  there  was  no
     evidence in the background papers to support  a  suggestion  that  the
     Massaleit from Darfur or indeed any individual member  of  an  African
     tribe from that region would be automatically at  risk  on  return  to
     Khartoum or as an internally displaced persons in or around  Khartoum.
     The Tribunal identified members or supporters of opposition parties as
     facing a specific risk.  So, too, those suspected of  supporting  such
     groups or perceived to sympathise with the armed groups.   The  source
     for this categorisation was the Amnesty International paper of 4 April
     2005 entitled "Risks of Refoulement for Sudan's refugees" in which  it
     was said:

           "..arrests have been carried out mostly of suspected  supporters
           of opposition groups  including  Darfuris  from  African  ethnic
           groups accused of sympathising with the armed groups".

 15. Mr Peter Verney also gave evidence  to  the  effect  that  there  were
     reports of arrests and detention of students, lawyers,  merchants  and
     traders as well as those who are perceived to  sympathise  with  rebel
     groups.

 16. The Tribunal went on to consider the position adopted by UNHCR  on  18
     May 2004 to  the  effect  that  the  Sudanese  of  non-Arab  Darfurian
     background returning to Sudan faced heightened risk of scrutiny by the
     security apparatus and that internally displaced persons  from  Darfur
     often faced protection risks including forced  relocation  and  forced
     return.  The Tribunal noted that in the area around Khartoum there are
     some 1.8 million internally displaced persons of whom some hundreds of
     thousands are from the Darfur region, most of whom will  be  from  the
     "African" tribal groups.  The Tribunal rejected  the  submission  that
     all of these persons faced a real risk of persecution or ill-treatment
     contrary to Article 3.  The Tribunal distinguished those who were,  or
     were perceived to be, active sympathisers of  armed  rebel  groups  or
     persons  connected  with  opposition   political   groups   as   being
     potentially at risk.  Accordingly, the Tribunal  found  the  appellant
     would not face of violation of his rights if relocated in the Khartoum
     area or by being singled out at Khartoum airport on return.

 17. These two different divisions of the Tribunal in MM and AE  were  each
     concerned to consider  whether  Sudanese  nationals  from  the  Darfur
     region were at risk of persecution or  of  violation  of  their  human
     rights.  Whilst the wider humanitarian situation in  Sudan  inevitably
     causes disquiet, the Tribunal's assessment, variously  expressed,  was
     to the effect that those from the Darfur  region  were  not  at  risk.
     These  decisions  were  followed  in  LM  Sudan  [2005]  UKIAT   00114
     promulgated on 30 June 2005, in which the US State  Department  report
     for 2004 (not before the earlier Tribunals) was also considered.

 18. The Court of Appeal cited both MM and AE  in  Hamid  [2005]  EWCA  Civ
     1219, (decided on 25 October 2005), as justifying the decisions of the
     Adjudicators or Judges in the three cases before it.  It approved  the
     Tribunal's approach in AE  that, however badly a person may have  been
     treated in his home area, if there is not a real risk  of  persecution
     in the area to which he would be returned, (i.e.  Khartoum),  he  will
     not be able to establish a right to refugee status.  In  BA  (military
     service - no risk) Sudan CG [2006] UKAIT  00006,  decided  in  January
     2006, the Tribunal when dealing with the current political  situation,
     rationalised country guidance cases  affecting  Sudan  and  determined
     that none of the existing country guidance cases, save AE (Relocation-
     Darfur-Khartoum an  option)  Sudan  CG  [2005]  UKAIT   00101  and  TM
     (Persecution- Christians - Individual - General) Sudan CG [2002] UKIAT
     04849 were to be considered as furnishing current country guidance.

The background evidence

 19. Ms Ganning sought to persuade us that a combination of recent material
     and material not properly considered previously establishes that those
     from  Darfur  are  currently  at  risk,  notwithstanding  the  earlier
     assessments of risk.  We are able to see that the  government  re-acts
     swiftly and forcibly to events when its security is  threatened,  such
     as in the aftermath of the attempted coup or the death  of  the  Vice-
     President.  We accept that it re-acts vigorously against opponents  or
     those it deems to oppose it.  This state of affairs was clearly in the
     minds of the Tribunal when it assessed the general risk to those  from
     Darfur in MM and AE.  We do not, however, seek to compartmentalise the
     background material so as to exclude that information which  pre-dates
     those decisions.  Rather, we approach our assessment of  risk  on  the
     basis  all  of  the  background  material,  including   that   already
     considered and found insufficient in itself to establish a risk.

 20. At page 279 of our bundle, we were  referred  to  a  report  dated  31
     October 2005 prepared by Mr Peter Verney, who  it  will  be  recalled,
     prepared reports for the Tribunal in AA, MM and AE.  In paragraphs  68
     to 70 of our report, he says:

           68. Many Sudanese from marginalised areas  such  as  South  Sudan
               and Dafur live in Internally Displaced Persons (IDP)  'camps'
               on the fringes of Khartoum. Camps which  host  Darfuris  have
               been raided by the Sudanese security forces and Dafuris  have
               been arrested and detained  incommunicado.   Many  IDP  camps
               are raided by the police in attempts to relocate IDPs in  the
               camps (without  advance  warning  or  the  right  to  appeal)
               further into the deserts on the  outskirts  of  the  capital,
               often with no access to  basic  facilities,  such  as  water,
               housing and transport.  The UN has denounced  such  practices
               by the Sudanese government in recent months.
           69. The areas of the capital in which  the  displaced  people  of
               southern and western Sudan live, whether  in  camps  or  more
               permanent settlements, have frequently  been  raided  by  the
               authorities in search of suspected  rebel  sympathisers.   In
               the last few months, encampments  such  as  Soba  Aradi  have
               been the targets of  security  police  operations  to  remove
               inhabitants further into  the  desert.   In  long-established
               settlements  such  as  Hajj  Yousid  and  Souq   Sitta,   the
               authorities closed off the area and conducted  house-by-house
               searches in  August  2005,  following  the  unrest  that  was
               triggered by the death of Vice-President John Garang.   These
               actions have resulted in  a  number  of  gross  human  rights
               abuses against innocent civilians.   Darfuri  people  in  the
               capital are now being treated in the same way that  Nuba  and
               Southern Sudanese have been in the last decade.  Often  their
               treatment is worse, according to my eyewitness (see below).
           70. People fleeing from Darfur to Khartoum are  demonstrably  not
               safe.  For example, between January and February  2005,  some
               750 people who had fled to Khartoum from Dafur were  sent  to
               a school in Mayo camp, Khartoum, to  be  looked  after  by  a
               group of local voluntary associations.  They  included  young
               and old men and women,  and  young  children  from  the  Fur,
               Zighawa, Massaleit and other,  smaller  African  tribes.   At
               the end of February, the  police  raided  the  school,  using
               batons  and  tear  gas  indiscriminately.   Although  a   few
               terrified individuals managed to run away, there is  no  news
               of  what  happened  to  the  rest.   They   may   have   been
               imprisoned, killed or detained indefinitely, according to  an
               investigation by the Aegis Trust published in June 2005."


 21. In paragraph 130 of his report, Mr Verney refers to the  repeated  and
     highly disturbing accounts of forcible relocation and  other  security
     police actions against the Darfuris and Southern Sudanese in displaced
     people's camps and longer-established settlements around Khartoum.  He
     states that the political climate worsened significantly following the
     death of the Vice-President in July 2005 and areas of  the  city  with
     Darfuri and South Sudanese populations were sealed  off  and  searched
     house-by-house.

 22. On 2 December 2004, Amnesty International published a report  "No  one
     to complain to...".   This report has been in the  public  domain  for
     well over a year and has been referred to in cases before the Tribunal
     but does not appear to have been expressly considered in  the  reports
     to which we have earlier  referred.  The  Amnesty  report  draws  upon
     earlier material prepared by Amnesty  International  and  observations
     derived from the visits made by  its  representatives  to  the  Sudan,
     including what was then the most recent visit  between  September  and
     October 2004.  The report  deals  with  events  up  to  November  2004
     referring to further arbitrary arrests, detention  without  trial  and
     torture by the Sudanese authorities throughout  October  and  November
     2004 in relation to the conflict in Darfur and  to  the  alleged  coup
     d'etat.  On  page  5,  it  is  reported  that  arbitrary  arrests  and
     prolonged incommunicado detentions without charge or  trial  increased
     in the run-up to and during the conflict in Darfur.  In  section  2.2,
     entitled "Arrests based on the origin or personal affiliation -  as  a
     means of intimidation", the report states:

           "In Khartoum since 2002 people originating from Dafur have  been
           routinely subjected to arrests.  Such practices  have  continued
           throughout 2004 (13).  Many arrests carried out by the  security
           forces named above do not seem to be for any reason  other  than
           belonging to particular ethnic groups, usually those represented
           in the dark for armed opposition groups (Zaghawa,  Fur,  Masalit
           and other small groups) or  to  families  who  enjoy  a  certain
           social status in those groups."


 23. The source for part of this material, identified at  footnote  13,  is
     the Amnesty International report of June  2004:  Dafur,  incommunicado
     detentions, torture and Special Courts.  The December report then goes
     on to deal with what is described as a snapshot of  the  situation  in
     Darfur.  Specific reference is made to named individuals who have been
     arrested and detained.  These  include  the  President  of  the  Sudan
     Liberation Army (SLA)  and  one  of  his  relatives,  a  human  rights
     defender.  Reference is made at page 7 to the arrest of three students
     on 11 October.  Further, from the same  page,  we  see  that  security
     officers  arrested  three  young  men,  one  a  trainee  lawyer,   one
     unemployed and another  whose  occupation  is  not  identified,  after
     finding in their bags a demand for compensation for a house burnt down
     by the Janjaweed, a poster about a symposium upon human rights  and  a
     membership card of the Justice Party.  They were accused of  belonging
     to armed groups or the Popular Congress.  The same  report  refers  to
     the arrest of other students including the General Secretary  and  the
     Chairman of the Darfur Students Association.  The report continues:


              "Often displaced camps around the capital are raided  by  the
              security forces and persons from Dafur arrested.  There seems
              to be no other reason for their arrests than  their  area  of
              origin.  Several IDPs from Dafur living  in  Mayo  camp  were
              arrested at the beginning of October."

      The report then identifies a lawyer, an engineer, several students and
      a 15 -year-old child.


              "The risk of being kept in prolonged incommunicado  detention
              is very real.  Some Dafurians arrested  since  February  2004
              are still detained without charge and  mostly  incommunicado.
              No reason was given for their arrest.  Amnesty  International
              believes  that  they  were  arrested  on  account  of   their
              ethnicity."


      A number of named individuals are described including a leader of  the
      Fur clan, a lawyer, a merchant, a bank employee and a student.


 24.  Two  of  those  (the  unemployed  man  and  a  person  not  otherwise
     identified), were arrested in possession of material which included  a
     poster referring to a symposium on human rights and might therefore be
     construed as demonstrating sympathy for opposition to the  government.
     This leaves the 15-year old.  It is possible that he, too,   may  have
     fallen into one or other of the classes  of  those  at  risk  but  the
     reason was not identified by the informant.  Even if he did  not,  the
     evidence  is  too  scant  to  infer  that  it  establishes   a   wider
     categorisation based on ethnic lines.  Although Amnesty believes  that
     arbitrary arrests occur "on account of their ethnicity" (and we accept
     that this may well be a factor), the detailed evidence provided in the
     report re-affirms the risk categorisation  that  was  adopted  by  the
     Tribunal in AE.   So far as the inference  in  this  report  to  these
     cases as  being  only  a  'snapshot',  that  does  not  assist  us  in
     identifying  any  evidential  basis  for  the  Amnesty   International
     conclusion beyond what is set out there.  If there has been some other
     Amnesty report giving details of  other  cases  in  existence  at  the
     relevant time, we are not aware  of  them.   Far  from  expanding  the
     classes of those at risk, we consider that it supports the  conclusion
     that not all Darfurians are at risk.  Overall,  the  risk  of  routine
     detention appears to be in  respect  of  only  certain  categories  of
     Darfurians, not Darfurians generally.

 25. The Human Rights Watch report Empty Promises? of 11 August  2004  pre-
     dates the Amnesty report and was also in the public  domain  when  the
     decisions in MM and AE were decided.  The report stated that by  early
     August 2004, aside from humanitarian access,  there  had  been  little
     improvement in the humanitarian and human rights  conditions  for  the
     more than one million displaced persons in Darfur.  Incidents of  rape
     and sexual violence, looting, and other attacks on civilians continued
     to occur on a daily basis.  Government plans to relocate many  of  the
     displaced communities to resettlement camps, 'safe areas' or to  force
     them to return to their villages despite continuing insecurity  raised
     new concerns of possible forced  displacement.   The  writer  remained
     doubtful as to Sudanese government pledges.  In the  section  entitled
     'Forced return and resettlement', it was said  that  the  prospect  of
     resettlement and the notion of 'safe areas' raised  the  concern  that
     rather than being enabled to return to their homes and lands in safety
     and dignity, displaced civilians would be forced to remain in camps or
     permanently re-settled in new locations, confined  in  their  movement
     and unable to access their lands, effectively consolidating the ethnic
     cleansing that had taken place and further destroying livelihoods.  It
     was suggested that the government's  plan  to  address  the  displaced
     civilians seemed to involve two elements: the forced return  of  small
     numbers of communities to their  original  villages,  and  the  forced
     resettlement of a much larger population of displaced civilians to new
     locations.  The report went on to claim that the  government's  record
     in creating 'safe areas' or 'peace villages' was poor.   It  described
     the government as  having  routinely  forcibly  displaced  or  evicted
     thousands of  civilians  to  inhospitable  locations  with  inadequate
     conditions, non-existent or minimal access to shelter,  water,  health
     care and other objects essential to survival.  Humanitarian access had
     often been provided under unacceptable  government  conditions.   Rape
     and other forms  of  violence  were  prevalent.   Nevertheless,  under
     multilateral pressure, the Sudanese government  opened  up  access  to
     Darfur for humanitarian agencies.

 26. We do not know whether  the  above  material  was  considered  by  the
     Tribunal in the earlier cases, although there is reference  in  MM  (9
     March 2005) to a Human Rights Watch report  which  may  refer  to  the
     report of 11  August  2004  (or  at  least  a  report  that  contained
     substantially similarly material).   The  reports  to  which  we  have
     referred  speak  of  continuing  and  depressing  criticisms  of   the
     government's attitude to IDPs and, in particular, those  from  Darfur.
     There  is  clear  evidence  of  attempts  to  use  arbitrary  arrests,
     detention without trial and torture in relation  to  the  conflict  in
     Darfur and the alleged attempted coup d'etat.  IDP  camps  surrounding
     the capital were raided by the security forces and persons from Darfur
     arrested.  Some  of  those  were  held  without  charge   and   mostly
     incommunicado.  Incidents of rape and sexual  violence,  looting,  and
     other attacks on civilians continued to occur on a daily basis in  the
     Darfur region. Government  plans  to  relocate  displaced  communities
     despite continuing insecurity raised concerns of forced  displacement.
     There is evidence that the Sudanese government's promises have  little
     value.  For those not returned to their home area, IDPs were  at  risk
     of remaining in camps or permanently re-settled in a state of  partial
     confinement and without access to services.

 27. In a public statement dated  23  August  2005,  Amnesty  International
     condemned the forced mass relocation of the  entire  Shikan  IDP  camp
     which took place on 17 August 2005.  Amnesty was  concerned  that  the
     camp's residents had been arbitrarily relocated to camps without their
     consent where they were deprived of fundamental human rights including
     the right to health care and  education.   It  is  said  that  on  the
     morning of 17 August  2005,  armed  police  surrounded  the  IDP  camp
     located in Omdurman, Khartoum, having notified  some  members  of  the
     camp leadership on the previous day that they would  be  checking  the
     camp  for  stolen  property,  following  the  riots  after  the  Vice-
     President's death.  National security  forces  arrived  with  lorries,
     emptying the camp of its residents.  About 1000 families were moved to
     other camps and about one-third were  allotted  places  to  return  to
     Shikan.  The report continued  that  the  events  of  17  August  2005
     followed a trend of similar  such  actions  taken  by  the  government
     towards the IDP population.  It referred  to  involuntary  relocations
     taking place in Soda Aradi on 14 May 2005 leading to violent  clashes,
     mass arrests and the death of an IDP in police custody.  In  mid-July,
     the Khartoum State Governor entered into a verbal agreement  with  the
     Consultative Committee of international donors and  the  UN  aimed  at
     monitoring and jointly implementing IDP  relocations.   Despite  these
     verbal promises, the governor authorised the relocation of Shikan camp
     without notice to the consultative committee or the camp residents.

 28. We have also being referred to  an  interview  conducted  with  Dennis
     McNamara, head of  the  UN's  Internal  Displacement  Division  on  30
     September 2005 provided through IRIN in which he explains that the  UN
     was already making the necessary intervention to stop the pressure  in
     Khartoum on forcible relocations to unsuitable areas.  He accepted  in
     principle that it is possible that those returned might  be  relocated
     but the issue was that relocations should be carried out  with  proper
     respect  for  the  human  rights  of  the  returnees.   He   did   not
     specifically dispute a question posed to him that almost half  of  the
     IDPs are based in the Khartoum area  in  settlements  that  are  being
     destroyed on a regular basis giving the occupants little choice but to
     return to their home area.  His response  was  that  the  Consultative
     Committee chaired jointly with the EU  and  the  government  and  with
     other donors and UN agencies was supposed to ensure  that  relocations
     are properly and fairly carried out to areas that are sustainable.  He
     accepted that this had not been done in the recent past  because  "the
     most recent locations were not done properly and were not sustainable.
      But the idea is to reactivate that Consultative Committee and try and
     make sure that there is a co-ordinated,  agreed,  proper  process  and
     there  is  no  undue  pressure  on  people  to  go   to   unacceptable
     conditions..."

 29. The UN Secretary General, Kofi Annan, noted that, contrary to previous
     commitments made by the Governor of Khartoum State, there had been new
     forced  relocations  of  IDPs  and  squatters  in  settlements  around
     Khartoum.  In the report to the United Nations of 12  September  2005,
     the Secretary General provided an assessment of the overall  situation
     in Sudan, particularly  in  relation  to  the  implementation  of  the
     Comprehensive Peace Agreement.  The process was brought  to  a  severe
     test when the Vice-President, John Garang, died on 30 July 2005  in  a
     helicopter crash in southern Sudan.  The period following the death of
     the Vice-President was marked by  serious  violence  in  Khartoum  and
     several  other  locations,  particularly  in  southern  Sudan,   which
     resulted in a significant  number  of  deaths,  arson  and  damage  to
     property.  By the time the funeral of the Vice-President was held on 6
     August 2005, there had been some relaxation of the tension.   It  also
     led  to  understandable  delays   in   the   implementation   of   the
     Comprehensive Peace Agreement and the transition  from  the  caretaker
     government.

 30. On 11 October 2005, Voice of America News reported that  thousands  of
     people displaced by the civil  war  had  been  affected  by  land  re-
     planning, apparently for redevelopment purposes following the  January
     peace accord.  Under the relocations, displaced people had been  moved
     from ramshackle, but substantial, camps into flimsy shacks  in  remote
     desert areas.  The  displaced  persons,  it  said,  were  often  moved
     suddenly, without prior notice and in some cases to places where  even
     the most basic services do not exist.   Complaints  centred  upon  the
     lack of services, schooling,  transport  and  water.   There  were  no
     employment prospects.

 31. These events are reflected in the COIS report  prepared  by  the  Home
     Office Science and Research Group in October 2005 in a section dealing
     with IDPs in Khartoum:

            6.276      USSD 2004 stated that "Tens of thousands of persons,
                 largely southerners and westerners displaced by famine  and
                 civil war, continued to  live  in  squatter  slums  ringing
                 Khartoum." [3b] (Section 2d) The Global IDP Project's March
                 2005 Profile reported the UN's 2005 assessment of  the  mix
                 of IDPs in Khartoum as being "750,000 from southern  Sudan;
                 510,000  from  Transitional  Areas;  270,000  from  Darfur;
                 25,000 from Eastern Sudan." [43] (p65) Also that "The major
                 ethnic groups are the Dinka, Nuba, Missiriya and  Fur.  The
                 smaller groups include the Shilluk 4.1%,  Bari  4%,  Firtit
                 3.2%, Nuer 2.3% and Fonj 2%." [43] (p204)  Concerning  the
                 treatment  of  different  types  of  internally   displaced
                 persons,  the  Global  IDP's  Profile  also  reported   the
                 findings of a June 1997 Amnesty International (AI) report:


                 "Southerners and Nuba  are  widely  seen  as  second  class
                 citizens and as supporters of 'the enemy', exposing them to
                 discrimination and abuse. Sudanese law reinforces prejudice
                 by differentiating between 'squatters' - people who arrived
                 in Khartoum before 1984  (mainly  because  of  drought  and
                 famine in western Sudan) - and the 'displaced' - people who
                 arrived after 1984 (mainly southerners and Nuba fleeing the
                 war). Squatters have  the  right  to  settle  in  Khartoum;
                 displaced people do not. (AI 20 June  1997,  'Sudan:  abuse
                 and discrimination')" [43] (p87)


           6.277       The Global IDP Project's March 2005  Profile  stated
                 that  "A  survey  found  that  three-quarters  of  IDPs  in
                 Khartoum were unemployed, with 44 percent  having  received
                 no formal education. Over half of them were under 20  years
                 old (CARE/IOM, 28 February 2003)."  [43] (p12)  USSD  2004
                 reported that "Southern IDPs generally occupied the  lowest
                 paying   occupations   and   were   subject   to   economic
                 exploitation in rural and urban industries and activities."
                 [3b] (Section 6e)


           6.278       A  report  compiled  by  the  IRC  in  November  and
                 December 2004 on the situation of Khartoum's IDPs  recorded
                 that "Although there were some overall  similarities/issues
                 affecting internally displaced people in the four different
                 areas surveyed (OeS, WeB, Soba Arradi and Mayo camp), there
                 are also key distinctions  that  must  be  kept  in  mind."
                 [62c] (Key Findings) The report  went  on  to  list  these
                 distinctions - ethnic and social-economic, what  replanning
                 stage each camp had  reached,  the  Crude  Mortality  Rate,
                 proportion of Female Headed households and education  -  in
                 more detail, and discussed the  impact  of  the  replanning
                 process on concerns such  as  health,  education,  returns,
                 leadership structures and  the  legal  status  of  IDPs  in
                 Khartoum. [62c] (Key Findings) IRC's report stated that:


                 "In October 2003, the  Ministry  of  Planning  in  Khartoum
                 State began the re-planning process of two IDP  camps,  Wad
                 el Bashier (WeB) and Omdurman es  Salaam  (OeS)  and  three
                 squatter areas, Mayo Dar Naim, Soba Arradi and Salaama. The
                 process was accelerated during the last months of 2004  and
                 has led to some challenges  that  need  addressing.  It  is
                 believed that the current demolitions  have  affected  over
                 250,000 people in Khartoum State." [62c] (Background of the
                 Assessment)


           6.279       In 2004  and  2005,  the  UN's  Integrated  Regional
                 Information  Networks  (IRIN)  reported  on  the  worsening
                 conditions for IDP's residing  in  Khartoum.  [15bf,  15bi,
                 15ci]  The  October  2004  report  recorded  that,  in  the
                 Khartoum area, the government had demolished  thousands  of
                 homes in three official camps. The government  claimed  the
                 demolitions were  part  of  an  area-replanning  programme.
                 [15bf] (p1) The February 2005 report recorded how the vast
                 majority of those made homeless were unable to  afford  the
                 plots, or provide the necessary documentation  required  to
                 purchase a new plot and that, of those  that  could,  6,000
                 were unable to afford the construction costs of building  a
                 new home. [15bi] (p2) IRIN's  February  2005  report  also
                 outlined how the demolitions  had  adversely  affected  the
                 provision of  basic  services,  such  as  medical  clinics,
                 latrines and water points. [15bi] (p3)


           6.280       IRIN reported in March 2005 that  "At  least  11,000
                 internally displaced persons (IDPs)  were  forced  to  move
                 following the demolition of the Shikan  settlement,  18  km
                 north of the Sudanese capital, Khartoum, a UN  spokesperson
                 said on Tuesday. They were now living rough in El Fateh,  a
                 desert area north of the capital, she  added."  [15ci]  The
                 report added that "More than 13,000 IDPs, displaced by  the
                 21-year-old war that ended in southern  Sudan  in  January,
                 had found shelter in Shikan, a squatter area established in
                 the 1980s. Nuba, Majanin, Arab,  Shilluk,  Dinka,  Masalit,
                 Felata and Khofra were among the ethnic groups in  Shikan."
                 [15ci]


           6.281       In May 2005, the Sudan Organisation Against  Torture
                 (SOAT) reported on a violent confrontation between the IDPs
                 and the police when the authorities attempted  to  forcibly
                 relocate the residents; the report stated that "On  18  May
                 2005, several people were killed,  14  police  officers,  6
                 civilians including two children and  several  others  were
                 wounded when violence broke out in Soba Aradi Area, with  a
                 population of 10, 000 people in Southern Khartoum."  [23ai]
                 A follow up report published by the  same  organisation  in
                 June 2005 recorded that:


                 "As a response to the incident, the government of Sudan has
                 deployed extra police, military and security  personnel  on
                 the streets of Soba. Persons residing  in  the  Soba  Aradi
                 Area  have  been  subjected  to  a  government   controlled
                 campaign  of  mass  arbitrary  arrests  and   incommunicado
                 detentions. Over 200 people have  been  arrested  including
                 women and children. The whereabouts of many  of  those  are
                 unknown to their families. Furthermore,  on  24  May  2005,
                 police officers shut off three  out  of  four  water  pipes
                 lines and tanks as a method to force people  to  leave  the
                 Soba Aradi area. At present  the  population  in  Soba  are
                 facing water shortages." [23aq]


           6.282       An August 2005 press release  by  AI  reported  that
                 "The organization [AI] is concerned that Shikan's residents
                 have been arbitrarily  relocated  to  camps  without  their
                 consent, where  they  are  deprived  of  fundamental  human
                 rights - including the right to health care and education."
                 [11h] The report also stated that, on 17 August 2005:


                 "National security forces arrived  with  lorries,  emptying
                 the entire camp of its residents. 500 families  were  moved
                 to Thawra camp, 170 families  were  relocated  to  Al-Fatah
                 III, and 371 families will be allotted places to return  to
                 in Shikan.


                 Al Fatah III and Thawra  are  locations  lacking  the  most
                 basic means of  survival.  Thawra,  located  55  kilometres
                 north of Khartoum, was previously a garbage dump, and lacks
                 all essential services. Water, healthcare, and  educational
                 facilities are non-existent as the location is no more than
                 a patch of desert. Al Fatah III is better only in  that  it
                 possesses one water pump." [11h]


           6.283       AI noted that "Shikan is mainly populated by southern
                 Sudanese and Darfuris who have been forced  to  flee  their
                 homes due to serious human rights abuses  committed  during
                 the  long-standing  conflict,  including  severe   economic
                 deprivation." [11h]

 32.  The  material  to  which  we  have  referred  clearly  suggests  that
     Darfurians in Khartoum are just one element of a much wider  group  of
     displaced persons.  These include persons displaced by the conflict in
     southern Sudan as well as those from Darfur and persons who  are,  for
     one reason or another, squatters or have moved  from  their  homes  in
     other parts of Sudan.  Apart from squatters who  arrived  before  1984
     and have the right to settle in Khartoum  (see  paragraph  28  above),
     there is little evidence before us to suggest that those  from  Darfur
     are treated differently from those in the other groups.

Our conclusion

 33. It cannot be expected that the above is a comprehensive review of  the
     substantial amount of background material relating to  Sudan  and  its
     present  difficulties.     The  bundle  prepared  by  the  appellant's
     solicitors for the purposes of this appeal ran into some 445 pages and
     was augmented by additional material in the  course  of  the  hearing.
     The  latest  background  material  confirms  the  trends   that   were
     identified in early 2005. It demonstrates  that  there  have  been  at
     least two additional closures of IDP camps in  May  and  August  2005.
     Further, closure has taken place in violation of promises made by  the
     Sudanese government.  The breaking of these commitments was prefigured
     in the information set out as long ago as August 2004 and  the  report
     Broken promises?  Nor can it be said that the breaches are the  action
     of maverick politicians acting outside the scope  of  their  authority
     because there is evidence that the decisions have  been  made  at  the
     highest level, namely, by the Governor of the State of  Khartoum.   We
     place no weight on the promises  made  by  the  Sudanese  authorities.
     Nevertheless, Sudan is the recipient of aid and  the  donor  countries
     have formed a Consultative Committee which attempts to  exercise  some
     control on  what  are  undoubtedly  violations  of  promises  made  in
     relation to proper respect for the rights of IDPs.  It is  clear  that
     the UN are well aware of the breaches - as is  amply  demonstrated  in
     the interview with the head of the UN's Internal Displacement Division
     on 30 September 2005 and the report of the UN Secretary General of  12
     September 2005.  Although the former indicates that the August closure
     of the camp at Omdurman  was  carried  out  in  violation  of  settled
     procedures, the interview indicates the intention of the international
     community as represented by the Consultative  Committee  to  influence
     the Sudanese government in effecting the orderly relocation  of  IDPs.
     We are satisfied that the United Nations and the  wider  international
     community are aware of the conditions of IDPs and that access  to  the
     camps is available to observers.  Importantly,  with  that  degree  of
     knowledge about events on the ground, neither the United  Nations  nor
     the UNHCR have declared that  those  in  the  camps  are  at  risk  of
     persecution or that those returned  to  Sudan  face  a  similar  risk.
     Whilst the humanitarian concerns persist as to the manner in which the
     Sudanese government is handing its IDP population, the  evidence  does
     not suggest that all IDPs (or all those from Darfur) are  at  risk  or
     that those returned to the country from abroad  face  a  specific  and
     heightened  risk  of  persecution  or  ill-treatment.   Nor,  in   our
     judgment, is it unreasonable in the sense that it is unduly  harsh  to
     expect those from the Darfur region to relocate to Khartoum.  In  this
     context, we take account of the  appellant's  personal  strengths  and
     resilience.  He is a young male, apparently fit, who has shown himself
     to be resourceful.

 34. Since hearing this appeal the House of Lords has issued  its  opinions
     in Januzi [2006] UKHL 5.  We have not had the benefit  of  submissions
     from the parties as to the possible implications of this  judgment  in
     cases such as this. It is clear that the House of  Lords  envisages  a
     need for an up-dating country guidance decision dealing with  internal
     relocation in Sudan and we understand that steps are  being  taken  to
     ensure that this happens as soon as practicable.   We  have,  however,
     considered whether what is said in Januzi requires  us  to  reappraise
     anything we have said in this determination. We have concluded that it
     does not. Insofar as that judgment  sets  out  the  law  dealing  with
     internal relocation, we consider that our approach is consistent  with
     that approach. Insofar  as  their  judgment  deals  with  the  factual
     situation in Sudan and expresses concern about the  current  situation
     in Khartoum in the light of the  most  recent  country  materials,  we
     consider that  our  decision  takes  account  of  all  the  background
     evidence, past and present, having a material bearing on the issue  of
     relocation in Khartoum and can thus properly represent the position of
     the Tribunal on this issue  for  the  immediate  future  and  (in  the
     absence of a change of circumstances in Sudan now) until such time  as
     there is a new country guidance case dealing with the  cases  remitted
     by their Lordships' House.

 35. For these reasons we are not satisfied that the two divisions  of  the
     Tribunal in MM and AE came to the wrong  conclusion  as  a  result  of
     their not being shown  background  material  that  properly  reflected
     conditions in Sudan in the early part of 2005.  Whilst we  cannot  say
     that conditions have improved since that date, we do not consider that
     they have deteriorated to a significant extent and  certainly  not  to
     such a significant extent that those returned to Khartoum are  now  at
     risk, thereby effectively  reversing  the  decisions  in  all  of  the
     various cases that have sought to make an assessment of risk.

 36. Our consideration of risk demonstrates that  no  material  distinction
     arises from our treatment of the asylum and human rights claims.


DECISION


        1. The Adjudicator made a material error of law.
        2. The following decision is substituted:
                   i)  The  appellant's  appeal  on   asylum   grounds   is
                      dismissed.
                  ii) The appellant's appeal on  human  rights  grounds  is
                      dismissed.




                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                    SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE




Principal sources of background information considered by the Tribunal in
previous decisions

        a. UNHCR letters 1 July 2002 and 25 July 2003  [AA] 18 May 2004 and
           2 November 2004 [MM] and [AE]
        b. Human Rights Watch report (unidentified) [MM]
        c. Norwegian Refugee Council's profile report 19 May 2004 [AA]
        d. Global IDP Project report 24 March 2005  [AE]
        e. Amnesty International Paper 4 April 2005 [AE]
        f. US State Department report for 2004 (28 February 2005) [LM]
        g. UNHCR Handbook [AE]
        h. CIPU reports April 2004 and October 2004 [AE] April 2005 [LM]
        i. Peter Verney reports May 2004 [AA]  28 October 2004 and
           addendums [MM] and oral evidence [AE]

Principal background information relied upon in this appeal

        1. Human Rights Watch: Empty Promises? 11 August 2004
        2. Amnesty International: No one to  complain to 2 December 2004
        3. Dennis McNamara, head of the UN's Internal Displacement
           Division, interview, 30 September 2005
        4. The UN Secretary General report 12 September 2005
        5. Peter Verney report, 31 October 2005
        6. COIS report October 2005
        7. Voice of America News; Displaced Sudanese suffer in New Camp 11
           October 2005
