
ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL

                JL (A8 worker - lawful employment) Poland [2009] UKAIT 00030


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at: Columbus House, Newport             Date of Hearing:  15 May 2009

                                   Before

      Mr C M G Ockelton, Deputy President of the Asylum and Immigration
                                  Tribunal
                       Senior Immigration Judge Grubb

                                   Between

                                     JL
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:  Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer

For the purpose of  determining  an  A8  state  worker's  period  of  lawful
employment in the UK, a Worker Registration  Certificate  issued  under  the
Accession   (Immigration   and   Worker   Registration)   Regulations   2004
authorising employment with a particular  employer  takes  effect  from  its
date of issue by virtue of reg 7(2)(c) of the 2004 Regulations.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Poland who was born 17 March 1970.  On 15
    February 2008, he applied for a registration certificate under  reg  16
    of the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006  (SI
    2006/1003) on the basis that he was a "qualified person"  being  an  EU
    national working in the UK.  On 2 May 2008, the Respondent refused  the
    application on the ground that the Appellant was  an  "accession  State
    worker" required to comply with the Worker  Registration  Scheme  under
    the Accession (Immigration and Worker  Registration)  Regulations  2004
    (SI 2004/1219).  On appeal, Immigration Judge D  J  Archer  agreed  and
    dismissed the appeal. On  21  August  2008,  Senior  Immigration  Judge
    Latter ordered reconsideration.  Thus, the matter came before us.

 2. The Appellant  was  not  represented  before  us  and  did  not  appear
    personally.   Mr Richards, who represented the Respondent,  invited  us
    to determine the appeal in the Appellant's absence under rule 19(1)  of
    the 2005 Procedure Rules.  We were satisfied  that  the  Appellant  had
    been served with notice of the hearing and  had  not  provided  a  good
    reason for his absence.  Taking account of all  the  circumstances,  we
    considered it proper to exercise our discretion to hear the  appeal  in
    his absence.

 3. The background to this  appeal  may  be  summarised  as  follows.   The
    Appellant began working in  the  UK  on  30  November  2005  for  Omega
    Workforce Ltd.  As  required  by  the  2004  Accession  Regulations  he
    registered that employment with the Home Office and was issued  with  a
    Registration Card and Worker  Registration  Certificate  ('WRC')  under
    those Regulations.  It seems that at some point he gave  up  that  work
    and on 3 April 2006 began working for Delphi Diesel Systems.   However,
    he did not, as he was required, register that work under the  Accession
    Regulations - at least not for some time.  He  continued  to  work  for
    Delphi  Diesel  Systems.   On  15  February  2008,  he  applied  for  a
    registration certificate under the 2006 EEA Regulations  on  the  basis
    that he was a 'qualified person', namely an EEA national working in the
    UK.  The Respondent refused his  application  on  the  ground  that  he
    remained subject to the Accession Regulations and was not  entitled  to
    be treated as an EU worker (and therefore  a  registration  certificate
    under reg 16 of the EEA Regulations) unless he had worked in the UK for
    an uninterrupted period of 12  months  under  the  Scheme.   That,  the
    Respondent concluded,  he  had  failed  to  establish  as  he  had  not
    registered his employment with Delphi  Diesel  Systems  until  3  April
    2006.  The Respondent advised the Appellant to register his  employment
    with Delphi Diesel Systems under the Worker Registration Scheme of  the
    Accession Regulations.  The Appellant duly did so and on 9 April 2008 a
    WRC was issued by the Home Office under that Scheme  stating  that  the
    Appellant had worked for Delphi Diesel Systems since 3 April 2006.

 4. The issue in this appeal is as  follows.   In  order  to  succeed,  the
    Appellant  must  establish  that  he  has   legally   worked   for   an
    uninterrupted period of 12 months since 30 November 2005.  He can  only
    do so if the WRC issued on 9 April 2008 under the Accession Regulations
    operates so as to make Delphi Diesel Systems his "authorised employer",
    not from its date of issue or when he received it, but from the earlier
    date when it states he began the employment  with  them,  namely  on  3
    April 2006.

 5. It will be helpful briefly to describe the Worker  Registration  Scheme
    under the 2004 Accession Regulations and the impact  those  Regulations
    have upon the EEA Regulations.

 6. The 2004 Accession Regulations apply to EU nationals from the so-called
    A8 states, including Poland, who work (or wish to work) in the UK on or
    after 1 May 2004 when the A8 states joined  the  EU.   The  Regulations
    apply to A8 state nationals already working here on that date  as  well
    as those who come to the UK on or  after  1  May  2004.   We  are  only
    concerned in this appeal with the latter.

 7. The Accession Regulations give effect to the  UK's  right  to  derogate
    from the free movement provisions for EU workers in Regulation (EEC) No
    1612/68 during the accession period of 1 May  2004  to  30  April  2009
    which is set out in the Treaty of Accession (signed in Athens 16  April
    2003) in respect of the A8 states.   (The application of the  Accession
    Regulations was recently extended to 30 April 2011: see  SI  2009/892.)
    Whilst allowing access to the UK labour market for  A8  state  workers,
    the Regulations create a registration scheme - the Worker  Registration
    Scheme ('the Scheme').  The principal  purpose  of  the  Scheme  is  to
    enable the UK Government to monitor and  review  the  arrangements  for
    access by A8 state  nationals  to  the  UK  labour  market  during  the
    accession period.  It is not  intended  to  limit  or  restrict  access
    although it is intended to encourage those working  here  illegally  to
    regularise  their  status  (see  Zalewska  v  Department   for   Social
    Development [2008] UKHL 67 at [34] per Lord Hope of  Craighead  and  at
    [53]-[54] per Baroness Hale of Richmond).


 8. As a consequence, an accession  State  worker  may  only  work  for  an
    "authorised employer" with whom he is registered under the Scheme  (reg
    7(1)).   Likewise, an employer  may  only  employ  an  accession  State
    worker if he is an "authorised employer" otherwise, subject to  certain
    defences, the employer commits a criminal offence (reg 9) (described as
    a "not very serious" one by Baroness Hale in Zalewska  at  [50]).   The
    worker must apply for (initially) a  registration  card  and  for  each
    employment a WRC in accordance with  regulation  8  which,  so  far  as
    relevant, provides as follows:

           "8.   (1)  An  application  for   a   registration   certificate
           authorising an accession State worker requiring registration  to
           work for an employer may only be made by  an  applicant  who  is
           working for that employer at the date of the application.


               (2) The application shall be in writing and shall be made to
           the Secretary of State.


               (3) The application shall state  -
                 (a) the name, address, and date of birth of the applicant;
                 (b) the name and address of the head or main office of  the
                 employer;
                 (c) the date on which the applicant began working for  that
                 employer;
                 (d) where the applicant has been issued with a registration
                 card, the reference number of that card.


               (4) Unless the applicant has been issued with a registration
           card under paragraph (5), the application shall  be  accompanied
           by  -
                 (a) a registration fee of �50;
                 (b) two passport size photographs of the applicant;
                 (c) the applicant's  national  identity  card  or  passport
                 issued by the applicant's State;
                 (d) a letter from the employer  concerned  confirming  that
                 the applicant began working for the employer  on  the  date
                 specified in the application.


               (5) In the case of an application by an applicant  who  has
           not been issued with a registration card under  this  paragraph,
           the Secretary of State shall, where he  is  satisfied  that  the
           application is made in accordance with this regulation and  that
           the applicant  -
                 (a) is an accession State  worker  requiring  registration;
                 and
                 (b) began working for the employer on the date specified in
                 the application,
           send the  applicant  a  registration  card  and  a  registration
           certificate authorising the worker  to  work  for  the  employer
           specified in the application, and shall return  the  applicant's
           national identity card or passport.


               (6) In the case of any other application, the Secretary  of
           State shall, if he is satisfied as mentioned in  paragraph  (5),
           send the applicant a registration  certificate  authorising  the
           worker to work for the employer specified in the application.


               (7) A registration card issued under  paragraph  (5)  shall
           contain  -
                 (a)  the  name,  nationality  and  date  of  birth  of  the
                 applicant;
                 (b) a photograph of the applicant;
                 (c) a reference number.


               (8) A registration certificate issued under paragraph (5) or
           (6) shall contain  -
                 (a) the name of the applicant;
                 (b) the reference number of  the  applicant's  registration
                 card;
                 (c) the name and address of the head or main office of  the
                 employer, as specified in the application;
                 (d) the date on which the applicant began working  for  the
                 employer, as specified in the application; and
                 (e) the date on which the certificate is issued. ...."

 9. As reg 8 makes clear, the application by the A8 state worker must be in
    writing (reg 8(2)) and can only be made once the individual is  working
    for the employer (reg 8(1)).  Provided the formalities set out in reg 8
    are complied with, and the Secretary of State  is  satisfied  that  the
    applicant is an accession State worker and has started working for  the
    employer on the date stated in the application, she must issue the  WRC
    (and registration card if applicable) (reg 8(5) and (6)).  There is  no
    discretion to refuse.  The WRC will contain the  date  upon  which  the
    individual  started  working  for  the  employer  as  stated   in   the
    application (reg 8(8)(d)) and the date of issue (reg 8(8)(e)).

10. Although the issue of a WRC is a "purely administrative  act",  and  it
    appears that no checks are made on whether the  employer  is  complying
    with such  matters  as  employee  protection  legislation,  paying  the
    minimum wage, paying employee national insurance contributions  and  so
    on (Zalewska per  Baroness  Hale  at  [52]),  non-compliance  with  the
    requirements of the Scheme has a significant effect upon the individual
    A8 state worker's immigration status in the UK.  This is because,  when
    an individual is an "accession  State  worker  requiring  registration"
    within the Accession Regulations, the 2006 EEA Regulations, which apply
    to other EEA nationals who are working (or seeking work) in the UK, are
    disapplied.  However, during the time an A8 state worker is employed by
    an  "authorised  employer",  the  A8  state  worker  is  treated  as  a
    "qualified person" for the purpose of the 2006 EEA Regulations but  not
    otherwise, for example when seeking work or when that work  has  ceased
    (reg 5(2) and (3)).  Even so, the  A8  state  worker  cannot  obtain  a
    registration certificate under reg 16 of the 2006 EEA  Regulations  and
    his family members are not entitled to a residence card under reg 17 of
    the 2006 EEA Regulations (reg 5(5)).  The consequence is that if an  A8
    state worker fails to comply with the Scheme set out in  the  Accession
    Regulations, he will not have any lawful basis  for  being  in  the  UK
    under EU law as a worker (or job-seeker).  He may, of course,  exercise
    a right of free movement on another basis, for example as a student  or
    self-employed person.

11. Those differences under EU law, however, disappear once  the  A8  state
    worker ceases to be an "accession State worker requiring registration",
    as defined in reg 2 of the Accession Regulations because,  for  example
    he has legally worked in the UK  for  an  uninterrupted  period  of  12
    months.  Regulation 2(4) provides that:

           "a national of a relevant accession State who legally  works  in
           the United Kingdom without  interruption  for  a  period  of  12
           months falling partly or wholly after 30 April 2004 shall  cease
           to be an accession State worker requiring  registration  at  the
           end of that period of 12 months."

12. A particular period of 12 months may qualify despite containing periods
    when the individual was not working  lawfully  providing  those  latter
    periods do not exceed 30 days in total.  Regulation 2(8) provides:

           "... a person shall be treated as having worked  in  the  United
           Kingdom without interruption for a period of 12 months if he was
           legally working in the United Kingdom at the beginning  and  end
           of that period and any intervening periods in which he  was  not
           legally working in the United Kingdom do not, in  total,  exceed
           30 days".

13. For our purposes reg 2(7)(b) includes an important definition  of  when
    an A8 state worker is "legally working":

           "a person working in the United Kingdom on or after 1  May  2004
           is legally working during any period in which he is  working  in
           the United Kingdom for an authorised employer".

14. It will be immediately apparent that this is the provision relied  upon
    by the Appellant in this appeal which, it is said, takes him out of the
    Accession Regulations and back into the 2006 EEA Regulations  entitling
    him to a registration certificate under reg 16 of the  EEA  Regulations
    as a n EU worker in the UK.  In this appeal, the Appellant  relies,  at
    least in part, upon his employment with Delphi Diesel  Systems  from  3
    April 2006 whom he must show was an  "authorised  employer"  from  that
    date.


15. Who then is an "authorised employer"?  Regulation 7  of  the  Accession
    Regulations, so far as relevant to this appeal, provides as follows:

           "7(2) An employer is an authorised employer  in  relation  to  a
           worker if  -
                 (a) ....
                 (b) the worker  -
                       (i) during the one month period beginning on the date
                       on which he begins working for the employer,  applies
                       for a registration  certificate  authorising  him  to
                       work for that employer in accordance with  regulation
                       8; and
                       (ii)  has   not   received   a   valid   registration
                       certificate or notice of refusal under  regulation  8
                       in relation to that application or ceased working for
                       that employer since the application was made;
                 (c)  the  worker  has   received   a   valid   registration
                 certificate authorising him to work for that  employer  and
                 that certificate has not expired under paragraph (5); or
                 (d) the employer is an authorised employer in  relation  to
                 that worker under paragraph (3) or (4).


               (3) Where a worker begins working for  an  employer  on  or
           after 1st May 2004 that employer is an  authorised  employer  in
           relation to that worker during the one month period beginning on
           the date on which the work begins.


               (4) ....


               (5) A registration certificate -
                 (a) is invalid if the worker is no longer working  for  the
                 employer specified in the certificate on the date on  which
                 it is issued;

                 (b) expires on the date on which the worker ceases  working
                 for that employer....."

16. In our judgment, the outcome of this  appeal  turns  upon  the  correct
    interpretation of reg 7(2) which defines when an accession State worker
    is working for an "authorised employer" and thus  working  legally  for
    the purposes of reg 2.

17. The structure of reg 7 is as follows.  First, it contemplates a  period
    of 1 month when an A8 state worker begins to work for an  employer  and
    deems that employer to be an "authorised employer"  for  that  1  month
    period (reg 7(3)).   Secondly, it is during that 1  month  period  that
    the Accession Regulations contemplate that the A8 state  worker  should
    make an application for a WRC: such an application  can  only  be  made
    once the individual has started working for that employer  (reg  8(1)).
    The centrality to the working of the Scheme  of  the  initial  1  month
    period of employment is also emphasised by reg 9.   Regulation  9  sets
    out two situations where an employer will have a defence to  the  crime
    he commits by employing  an  A8  state  worker  whilst  he  is  not  an
    'authorised employer'.  Both require that  the  employer  was  provided
    within the initial 1 month period with documentation  appearing  either
    to establish the worker does not fall within  the  registration  Scheme
    (reg 9(2)) or  that the worker has made an application for a WRC  under
    reg 8 (reg 9(3)).  Thirdly, if the  application  is  made  within  this
    initial 1 month period but remains  undetermined  at  the  end  of  the
    period,  the  employer  remains  an  "authorised  employer"  until  the
    application is refused or a WRC is  received  (reg  7(2)(b).   Finally,
    once received the employer remains an "authorised employer" during  the
    period of the WRC's validity (reg  7(2)(c))  or  until  the  employment
    ceases (reg 7(5)(b)) whichever is sooner.  That  provision  would  also
    apply if the WRC  was  received  before  the  1  month  initial  period
    expired.

18. The point in this appeal, however, concerns the effect of  reg  7(2)(c)
    in  a case where the WRC is applied for, and issued, after the  initial
    1 month period.  Should reg 7(2)(c) be interpreted such  that  the  WRC
    has retrospective  effect,  presumably  to  the  date  upon  which  the
    particular work began?  We were not referred to any relevant  case  law
    that might assist us in reaching our conclusion  on  this  issue.   One
    case is, however, relevant namely  the  House  of  Lords'  decision  in
    Zalewska (cited above).

19. Zalewska  concerned  the  claimant's  entitlement  to  social  security
    payments which, in turn, depended upon her establishing  that  she  was
    not an accession State worker because she had been legally  working  in
    the UK for an uninterrupted  period  of  12  months  under  the  Scheme
    created by the Accession Regulations.  She could not do this as she had
    failed to seek, and obtain, a registration certificate  in  respect  of
    her most recent employment.  Thus, on the facts, she fell short of  the
    necessary 12 months lawful employment.  By a  bare  majority  (Baroness
    Hale of Richmond and Lord  Neuberger  of  Abbotsbury  dissenting),  the
    House  held  that  the  requirement  to  comply  with  the  Scheme  (in
    particular to re-register when changing employer within  the  first  12
    months) was not disproportionate in EU law as a means of giving  effect
    to the derogation from EU free movement law permitted by the  Accession
    Treaty applicable to A8 state national workers.   That  aspect  of  the
    case is not relevant  to  this  appeal.   However,  in  describing  the
    application of the Accession Regulations to the claimant, Baroness Hale
    appears to have given reg 7(2)(c) an interpretation consistent with the
    Appellant's case in this appeal.  At [49], Baroness Hale said:

           "The appellant is Polish. She came to this  country  on  1  July
           2004, two months after the accession of Poland to  the  European
           Union. She started work on 9 July  2004  picking  mushrooms  for
           Monaghan Mushrooms Ltd of Dungannon. She  applied  to  the  Home
           Office for a registration certificate. We are not told when  she
           applied but the certificate was issued on 5 November 2004.  This
           meant that her employers were and had always been an "authorised
           employer": see the 2004 Regulations, reg 7(2)(c). They would  in
           any event have been an authorised employer for the  first  month
           after she started work: see reg 7(2)(d) and (3). And even if  no
           certificate had been issued, they would have been an  authorised
           employer provided that she had applied for a certificate  within
           the first month after she started work and not been refused one:
           see reg 7(2)(b)." (emphasis added)

20. Likewise in relation to work the claimant then took on in January  2005
    first with Smirnoff Vodka and then  with  a  company  called  Linwoods,
    Baroness Hale said (at [50]):

           "... either Smirnoff or the agency were an  authorised  employer
           for the first month after she started work  for  them:  see  reg
           7(2)(d) and (3). She stayed with Smirnoff for  three  weeks  and
           then moved, at the end of  January,  to  work  for  Linwoods  in
           Armagh, baking and packing bread. If Linwoods were her employers
           they were an authorised employer for the first month  after  she
           started work with them: see reg 7(2)(d) and (3). This  takes  us
           up to the end of February 2005, almost eight  months  after  she
           started work. Once again, she did not apply for  a  registration
           certificate for her job with Linwoods. But had she  done  so  at
           any time and had the certificate been issued  before  she  left,
           Linwoods  would  have  been  an  authorised  employer:  see  reg
           7(2)(c)." (emphasis added)

21. In both these passages (but particularly in the former), Baroness  Hale
    appears to consider that reg 7(2)(c)  has  the  effect  of  making  the
    relevant employer an "authorised employer" even for a period before the
    WRC was issued.

22. Lord Hope (who delivered the leading speech for the  majority)  clearly
    did not take the same view.  In relation to the  claimant's  employment
    beginning in July 2004 with Monaghan Mushrooms, he said this (at [17]):

           "Monaghan Mushrooms was an authorised employer  in  relation  to
           her for the first month of her employment starting  on  9  July:
           reg 7(3). There was a gap until 5 November 2004. This appears to
           have been due to a delay in  the  issuing  of  her  registration
           certificate by the Home Office.  Thereafter  Monaghan  Mushrooms
           was an authorised employer in relation to her  because  she  had
           received a valid registration certificate which had not  expired
           as she was still working for that employer: reg 7(2)(c)."

23. Lord Hope's analysis shows that he perceived a "gap".  But  it  appears
    that the reason he gives for the delay would be  sufficient  to  enable
    the claimant in that case to have the benefit of reg 7(2)(b).

24. It is not clear from the report of the case what, if any argument,  was
    addressed to the Law Lords on the effect  of  reg  7(2)(c).   There  is
    certainly no reasoned analysis leading to a considered decision  as  to
    what is the proper interpretation of reg 7(2)(c).   The  crucial  issue
    for the House of Lords was the proportionality of the Scheme.   On  the
    facts, the claimant could not satisfy the requirement that she had been
    legally employed for 12 months under the Scheme even  if  the  WRC  had
    retrospective effect.  No doubt the point which we must decide was  not
    at the forefront of the argument or of the minds of the  Law  Lords  in
    reaching their decision.  Also, Baroness Hale's view should be seen  in
    the light of what she says at [52] of her speech:

           "We do not know exactly  when  the  appellant  applied  for  her
           certificate, but it is likely to have been before 9 August 2004,
           within the first  month  of  her  starting  work  with  Monaghan
           Mushrooms, yet the certificate was not issued until 4 November.

25. Lord Hope specifically says the delay appears  not  to  have  been  the
    Claimant's.  Consequently, the House of Lords may, in fact,  have  been
    dealing with a case where the A8 worker's employer was  an  "authorised
    employer" due to the combined effects of regs 7(3) and 7(2)(b) and  (c)
    because the application for the WRC had been  made  in  the  initial  1
    month of employment.

26. We readily acknowledge that the view of Baroness Hale  is,  of  course,
    entitled to the greatest  respect.    However,  for  the  reasons  that
    follow, we have  reached  a  contrary  conclusion  to  that  apparently
    suggested in Zalewska.  It seems to us  that  when  reg  7(2)(c)  takes
    effect on 'receipt' of a valid  WRC  it  contemplates  authorising  the
    work,  and  making  the  employer  an   "authorised   employer",   only
    prospectively from its date of issue.

27. First, in our judgment, that is the more natural sense in which it  can
    be said that the employment is 'authorised'.  The WRC takes effect from
    its date of issue once received by the worker.  We note  that  the  two
    WRCs issued to the Appellant, which we have no reason  to  believe  are
    atypical, do not purport to authorise retrospectively  the  employment.
    Although, as required by the Regulations, they record the  start  dates
    of the jobs as set out in the applications, they also set out the dates
    they were issued.

28. Secondly, to give a WRC retrospective effect is inconsistent  with  how
    reg 7 operates in a case where the  A8  state  worker  behaved  as  the
    Accession Regulations contemplate he should.  Where the application  is
    made within the initial 1 month, but the  WRC  is  not  received  until
    later, to interpret reg  7(2)(c)  as  having  retrospective  effect  is
    redundant.  The employer is in any event at all  times  an  "authorised
    employer" during the first month (reg 7(3)) and  thereafter  until  the
    WRC is received (reg 7(2)(b)).  The WRC needs only to have  declaratory
    effect for the future.  That is all that reg 7(2)(c) need do to provide
    a legislative continuum within the structure of reg 7(2)  that  ensures
    that the relevant employer is at all times  an  "authorised  employer".
    Thus,  in  the  paradigm  case  to  interpret  reg  7(2)(c)  as  having
    retrospective effect would be to force a meaning upon it  which  cannot
    have been intended by Parliament for if it has that effect reg  7(2)(b)
    is never needed where a WRC is issued.  If it cannot have been intended
    to have such an effect in the paradigm case, in our view, that  weights
    heavily (perhaps conclusively) against  an  interpretation  that  would
    give it retrospective effect (as a matter of  Parliamentary  intention)
    when the A8 state worker does not seek a WRC in  the  initial  1  month
    period of his employment.

29. Finally, a contrary interpretation of reg 7(2)(c) would have surprising
    (and in our view undesirable) effects which we do not accept could have
    been intended.  The situation contemplated, as in this appeal, is where
    the A8 state worker does not make an  application  for  a  WRC  in  the
    initial 1 month period but does so at some later point.  The  Secretary
    of State has no discretion to refuse the WRC if the application  is  in
    order and she is satisfied that the applicant is an A8 state worker who
    started work on the date claimed.  Consequently, in every case the  WRC
    would legitimate any  prior  period  of  unlawful  employment  (however
    long).  Also, if the start date of the  job  was  at  least  12  months
    earlier, the effect of the WRC would be immediately to  remove  the  A8
    state worker from the requirements of the Accession Regulations  as  he
    would have worked legally for an  uninterrupted  period  of  12  months
    despite the fact that he had patently worked outside the Scheme for the
    entirety of that period.

30. Further, it would also mean that the worker's immigration status  would
    be retrospectively changed.  In the  period  prior  to  the  WRC  being
    issued, the individual would have no lawful EU basis  for  residing  in
    the UK.  However, once issued, if  retrospective  in  effect,  the  WRC
    would somehow result in the individual - in fact but retrospectively  -
    having a  lawful  basis  for  being  in  the  UK  under  the  Accession
    Regulations.  Also, it would ensure that the criminal offence in reg  9
    committed by an employer who employs an A8  state  worker  outside  the
    Scheme could simply be avoided by the worker applying for a WRC at  any
    time and, satisfying the rudimentary requirements of reg 8(5), would be
    entitled to such a  certificate.   We  see  no  basis  upon  which  the
    employer could be guilty of a criminal  offence  after  the  initial  1
    month period  (for  which  he  could  already  have  been  successfully
    prosecuted) only for that to be, somehow, retrospectively expunged when
    the WRC is received.

31. The Accession Regulations impose a  registration  requirement  upon  A8
    state workers as a  condition  of  access  to  the  UK  labour  market.
    Compliance with the Scheme is a pre-requisite to such workers having  a
    lawful entitlement to reside  in  the  UK  at  least  until  they  have
    completed 12 months work  in  accordance  with  that  Scheme.   As  the
    majority's decision in Zalewska illustrates, failure to comply with the
    Scheme's requirements may (consistently with EU law) have adverse legal
    consequences  for  an  individual  A8  state  worker:  in   that   case
    entitlement to social security benefits.  The interpretation of  reg  7
    of the Accession Regulations  which  would  entitle  the  Appellant  to
    succeed in this appeal would, in effect, remove any incentive  upon  an
    A8 state worker to register at the beginning of his employment  with  a
    particular employer.  Any consequences for him,  and  perhaps  for  the
    employer also, of prior non-compliance could be removed at a stroke  by
    any subsequent successful application  for  a  WRC:  its  retrospective
    effect making good anything that had previously been  wrong.     We  do
    not accept that this was intended to be the effect of a  WRC.   In  our
    judgment, the correct interpretation of reg 7(2)(c) is that a WRC takes
    effect, once received, only from the date of its issue.

32. In this appeal, the judge overlooked the WRC issued  on  9  April  2008
    which was in the appeal file.  The judge thereby failed  to  take  into
    account a relevant piece of evidence when he decided that the Appellant
    had not proved that he had worked lawfully in  the  UK  (in  accordance
    with the Scheme) for an uninterrupted period of  12  months.   In  that
    respect, the judge clearly erred in law.  However, that error  was  not
    material to his decision.  The Appellant had worked for  Delphi  Diesel
    Systems  since  3  April  2006.   However,  he  did  not  register  his
    employment under the Scheme until the WRC  took  effect  from  9  April
    2008.  As a result, even taking into account  the  WRC,  the  Appellant
    still could not prove at the date of the hearing that he had worked  in
    accordance with the Scheme for 12 months.   The Appellant  remained  an
    "accession State worker requiring registration" and was not entitled to
    a registration certificate under reg 16 of the 2006 EEA Regulations.

33. It is perhaps worth noting that it is now more than 12 months since the
    Appellant was issued with a WRC on 9 April 2008.  If the Appellant  has
    continued to work for Delphi Diesel Systems since then, he will by  now
    have worked for an 'authorised employer' for over 12 months.   Even  if
    that were the case, and we have  no  evidence  before  us  one  way  or
    another, it cannot affect the outcome of this appeal.  For the  reasons
    we have given, we are satisfied that the judge did not  materially  err
    in law and his decision to dismiss the appeal stands.


SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE GRUBB

