
AP and FP (Citizens Directive Article 3(2); discretion; dependence) India
[2007] UKAIT 00048

                       ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

                                                        Heard at: Nottingham
                                               Dates of Hearing: 1 September
                                                      2006 and 24 April 2007

                                   Before:


 Mr C M G Ockelton, Deputy President of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
                       Senior Immigration Judge Martin
                           Immigration Judge Peart

                                   Between

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the Appellant:           Mr Jafferji, instructed by Jasvir Jutla & Co.
For the Respondent:          Miss O'Connor, Home Office Presenting Officer

1. Article 3(2) of Directive  2004/38/EC  gives  no  substantive  rights  of
entry or residence.  Such rights  are  a  matter  for  national  legislation
only.  2.  The procedural  rights  given  in  Article  3(2)  add  little  or
nothing to the process already applicable  in  the  UK.   3.  References  to
dependence in Directive 2004/38/EC  are  references  to  dependence  arising
from need.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellants are citizens of India and are sisters.  They are married
    to brothers, who are also citizens of India, but who  live  with  their
    father in the United Kingdom.  The father,  whom  we  shall  call  "the
    sponsor", was born in Goa, exercised his right  to  acquire  Portuguese
    nationality, and further exercised his right of  free  movement  within
    the European Union to come to the United Kingdom and  work  here.   His
    sons, the appellants' husbands,  joined  him  in  the  United  Kingdom,
    apparently in 2002.  They have lived here  with  him  ever  since.   In
    March 2005 there was a family visit to India, during which each of  the
    appellants married one of the sponsor's sons.  On 8 November  2005  the
    appellants applied for entry clearance as  family  members  of  an  EEA
    national.  They were interviewed on 8 December  2005  and  subsequently
    refused.  They appealed to the Tribunal against the refusals.

 2. Put shortly, the appellants' claim is that they are entitled  to  entry
    to the United Kingdom as family members of the sponsor, their father-in-
    law, on whom it is claimed they are dependent.  They claim that at  the
    date of the decisions against which they appeal they were  entitled  to
    permission under Article 10 of Regulation (EEC) No. 1612/68, and  that,
    although that Article has since been repealed,  they  are  entitled  to
    succeed in this appeal on the basis of it.  Alternatively,  they  claim
    that they are entitled to admission under Directive 2004/38/EC  of  the
    European Parliament  and  the  Council,  which  replaced  the  previous
    legislation, including Article 10 of Regulation (EEC) 1612/68, and came
    into effect on 30 April 2006.  In connection with that  part  of  their
    argument, they claim that  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2006 (SI 1003/2006) (the EEA Regulations) fail properly  to
    implement the 2004 Directive so as to  give  effect  to  their  rights.
    Alternatively, they claim that the decisions against which they  appeal
    breach their Convention rights.  The  respondent  relies  on  the  2006
    Regulations and, in particular, contests the claim that the  appellants
    are dependent on the sponsor.  These and similar issues are raised in a
    considerable number of appeals presently  before  the  Tribunal.    For
    this reason the hearing of  this  appeal  took  place  before  a  panel
    consisting of three legally-qualified members with  a  view  to  giving
    guidance on issues including the interpretation of Article 3(2) of  the
    2004 Directive; the claim that the EEA  Regulations  do  not  correctly
    implement it, and the meaning of dependence for the  purposes  of  both
    the Directive and the Regulations.

 3. We heard submissions from Mr Jafferji and Miss O'Connor on 1  September
    2006.  We adjourned the appeal part-heard, for two  reasons.   One  was
    that it was unclear whether we would need to hear evidence.  The  other
    was that the decision of  the  European  Court  of  Justice  in  Jia  v
    Migrationsverket, Case C-1/05, to the opinion of  the  Advocate-General
    in which we had been referred, was thought  to  be  both  imminent  and
    relevant.  In the result, the Court's judgment was given on  9  January
    2007.  There was some difficulty in arranging for the resumed  hearing,
    but this eventually took place on 24 April 2007.  It was  not  possible
    at the resumed hearing to replicate exactly the panel which  sat  on  1
    September 2006.  Both parties nevertheless  indicated  that  they  were
    content to treat the submissions  made  in  writing  and  orally  on  1
    September 2006 as having been made to us (as in fact they had been made
    to two of us); and we make our determination  on  the  basis  of  those
    submissions and the further submissions made and evidence heard  on  24
    April 2007.



The EEA Regulations and the 2004 Directive

 4. We must begin  by  setting  out  the  relevant  legislation.   The  EEA
    Regulations are applied by paragraph 5 of Schedule 4 to appeals pending
    on 30 April 2006, the date those Regulations came into effect.  In  reg
    6, there is a definition of "qualified person".  We do not need to  set
    it out.  In this appeal there  is  no  doubt  that  the  sponsor  is  a
    qualified person and that his sons (the appellants' husbands)  are  not
    qualified persons.  We need to set out parts of regs 7, 8, 11 and 12.

      "Family member

      7. -  (1)  Subject to paragraph (2) [which is not  material  for  the
             purposes of this appeal], for the purposes of these Regulations
             the following persons shall be treated as the family members of
             another person-
            (a)  his spouse or his civil partner;
            (b)  direct descendants of his, his spouse or his civil  partner
             who are -
                 (i)   under 21; or
                 (ii)  dependants of his, his spouse or his civil partner;
      (c)   dependent direct relatives in his ascending line or that of  his
                 spouse or his civil partner;
      (d)   a person who is to be treated as a family member of  that  other
                 person under paragraph (3)
      ... .




      'Extended family member'


      8. -  (1)  In these Regulations  'extended  family  member'  means  a
             person who is not a family member  of  an  EEA  national  under
             Regulation 7(1)(a), (b) or (c) and who satisfies the conditions
             in paragraph (2), (3), (4) or (5).
      (2)   A person satisfies the  condition  in  this  paragraph  if  the
             person is a relative of an EEA  national,  his  spouse  or  his
             civil partner and -
            (a)  the person is residing in an EEA State in  which  the  EEA
                 national  also  resides  and  is  dependent  upon  the  EEA
                 national or is a member of his household;
            (b)  the person satisfied the condition in paragraph (a) and is
                 accompanying the EEA national  to  the  United  Kingdom  or
                 wishes to join him there; or
            (c)  the person satisfied the condition in paragraph  (a),  has
                 joined the EEA national in the United Kingdom and continues
                 to be  dependent  upon  him  or  to  be  a  member  of  his
                 household.
      (3)   A person satisfies the  condition  in  this  paragraph  if  the
             person is a relative of an EEA national or his  spouse  or  his
             civil partner and, on serious health grounds, strictly requires
             the personal care of the EEA national his spouse or  his  civil
             partner.
      (4)   A person satisfies the  condition  in  this  paragraph  if  the
             person is a relative of an EEA  national  and  would  meet  the
             requirements  in  the  Immigration  Rules  (other  than   those
             relating to entry clearance) for indefinite leave to  enter  or
             remain in the United Kingdom as a dependent relative of the EEA
             national were the EEA national a person present and settled  in
             the United Kingdom.
      (5)   A person satisfies the  condition  in  this  paragraph  if  the
             person is the partner of an EEA national (other  than  a  civil
             partner) and can prove to the decision maker that he  is  in  a
             durable relationship with the EEA national.
      (6)   In these Regulations 'relevant EEA national' means, in relation
             to an extended family member, the EEA national who is or  whose
             spouse or civil partner is the relative of the extended  family
             member for the purpose of paragraph (2), (3) or (4) or the  EEA
             national who is the partner of the extended family  member  for
             the purpose of paragraph (5).
        ... .




        Right of admission to the United Kingdom


      11. -      (1)   An EEA national  must  be  admitted  to  the  United
             Kingdom if he produces on arrival  a  valid  national  identity
             card or passport issued by an EEA State.
      (2)   A person who is not an EEA national must  be  admitted  to  the
             United Kingdom if he is a family member of an EEA national  ...
             and produces on arrival -
           (a)   a valid passport; and
           (b)   an EEA family permit, a  residence  card  or  a  permanent
             residence card.
        ... .




        Issue of EEA family permit
        12. -    (1)   An entry clearance office must issue an  EEA  family
             permit to a person who applies for  one  if  the  person  is  a
             family member of an EEA national and -
             (a)  the EEA national is -
                 (i)   is residing  in  the  UK  in  accordance  with  these
                     Regulations; or
                 (ii)  will be travelling to the United Kingdom  within  six
                     months of the date of the application and will  be  an
                     EEA  national  residing  in  the  United  Kingdom   in
                     accordance with these Regulations on  arrival  in  the
                     United Kingdom; and
              b) the family member will be accompanying the EEA national  to
                 the United Kingdom or joining him there and -
                  i) is lawfully resident in an EEA State; or
                 ii) would meet the requirements in the  Immigration  Rules
                     (other than those relating  to  entry  clearance)  for
                     leave to enter the United Kingdom as the family member
                     of  the  EEA  national  or,  in  the  case  of  direct
                     descendants  or  dependent  direct  relatives  in  the
                     ascending line of his spouse or his civil partner,  as
                     the family member of his spouse or his civil  partner,
                     were the EEA national or the spouse or civil partner a
                     person present and settled in the United Kingdom.
          2) An entry clearance officer may issue an EEA family permit to an
             extended family member of an EEA national who applies  for  one
             if -
              a) the  relevant  EEA  national  satisfies  the  condition  in
                 paragraph (1)(a);
              b) the extended family member wishes to accompany the relevant
                 EEA national to the United Kingdom or to  join  him  there;
                 and
              c) in all the circumstances, it appears to the entry clearance
                 officer appropriate to issue the EEA family permit.
          3) Where an entry clearance officer receives an application  under
             paragraph (2) he shall undertake an  extensive  examination  of
             the personal circumstances of the applicant and if  he  refuses
             the application  shall  give  reasons  justifying  the  refusal
             unless this is contrary to the interests of national security.
        ... ."






 5. In Directive 2004/38/EC ("the 2004 Directive"):

      "Article 2

      Definitions

      For the purposes of this Directive:
          1) 'Union citizen' means any person having the  nationality  of  a
             Member State;
          2) 'Family member' means:
             (a)  the spouse;
             (b)  the partner with whom the Union citizen has  contracted  a
                 registered partnership, on the basis of the legislation  of
                 a Member State, if the legislation of the host Member State
                 treats registered partnerships as  equivalent  to  marriage
                 and in accordance with the  conditions  laid  down  in  the
                 relevant legislation of the host Member State;
             (c)  the direct descendants who are under the age of 21 or  are
                 the dependants and  those  of  the  spouse  or  partner  as
                 defined in point (b);
             (d)  the dependent direct relatives in the ascending  line  and
                 those of the spouse or partner as defined in point (b);
          3) 'Host Member State' means the Member State  to  which  a  Union
             citizen moves in  order  to  exercise  his/her  right  of  free
             movement and residence.


        Article 3


        Beneficiaries


          1. This Directive shall apply to all Union citizens who move to or
             reside in a Member State other than that of which  they  are  a
             national, and to their family members as defined in point 2  of
             Article 2 who accompany or join them.
          2. Without prejudice to any right to free movement  and  residence
             the persons concerned may have in their  own  right,  the  host
             Member  State  shall,   in   accordance   with   its   national
             legislation, facilitate entry and residence for  the  following
             persons:
              a)  any  other   family   members,   irrespective   of   their
                 nationality, not falling under the definition in point 2 of
                 Article 2 who, in the country from which  they  have  come,
                 are dependants or members of the  household  of  the  Union
                 citizen having the primary right  of  residence,  or  where
                 serious health grounds strictly require the  personal  care
                 of the family member by the Union citizen;
              b) the partner with whom  the  Union  citizen  has  a  durable
                 relationship, duly attested.
             The host Member State shall undertake an extensive  examination
             of the personal circumstances and shall justify any  denial  of
             entry or residence to these people."




 6. In  reg  1612/68,  Article  10  was  in  Title  III,  headed  "Workers'
    families", and was as follows:


      "Article 10


      1.    The following shall, irrespective of  their  nationality,  have
             the right to install themselves with a worker who is a national
             of one Member State and who is employed  in  the  territory  of
             another Member State:
            (a)  his spouse and their descendants who are under the age  of
                 21 years or are dependants;
            (b)  dependent relatives in the ascending line  of  the  worker
                 and his spouse.
      2.    Member States shall facilitate the admission of any  member  of
             the family not coming within the provisions of paragraph  1  if
             dependent on the worker referred to above or living  under  his
             roof in the country whence he comes.
            3.    For the purposes of paragraphs 1 and 2,  the  worker  must
             have available for his family housing considered as normal  for
             national workers in the region  where   he  is  employed;  this
             provision, however must not give rise to discrimination between
             national workers and workers from other Member States."

The meaning of "facilitate"

 7. It is a crucial  part  of  Mr  Jafferji's  submissions  that  the  2004
    Directive gives substantive rights to all family members as defined  in
    the Directive, and that  the  appellants  therefore  have  a  right  of
    residence in the United Kingdom.  If he is right about that it  follows
    that the EEA Regulations would be incomplete if they did not  implement
    that right.

 8. Mr Jafferji derives the right in  the  appellants'  case  from  Article
    3(2).  He submits that the Member  State's  duty  to  "facilitate"  the
    admission of family members not covered by Article 2(2) is  a  duty  to
    admit  them.   He  suggests  that  if  it  were  otherwise,  the  right
    apparently given by Article 3(2) would be illusory.

 9. In our judgment, the starting-point must  be  the  distinction  in  the
    Directive between the close family members defined as "family  members"
    in Article 2(2), who clearly  are  given  substantive  rights  of  free
    movement and residence by the Directive, and those other members of the
    family who are comprised within the provisions of Article 3(2).   It is
    clear that the Directive treats these two groups differently;  and  any
    proposed interpretation which does not do so must be doomed.  What then
    are the differences?  There appear to be three at least.

10. First, by Article 3(1), the Directive is  made  simply  to  "apply"  to
    "family members" as defined by Article 2(2); but Article 3(2) does  not
    apply the Directive in any  general  sense  to  other  members  of  the
    family.   Secondly,  whereas  other   provisions   of   the   Directive
    (principally in Chapters II-IV) give rights of entry and  residence  to
    EU citizens and their "family members", no such rights are given by the
    Directive to other members of the family, because the Directive  (other
    than Article 3(2)) does not apply to them, and because the  rights  are
    given to EU citizens and their "family members" as defined and  not  to
    others.  A similar distinction, and similar wording, was to be found in
    Article 10 of Council Regulation 1612/68, which  gave  close  relatives
    (as defined) a right to install themselves with a national of a  Member
    State, but required Member States  to  "facilitate  the  admission"  of
    other dependent  family  members.   Thirdly,  the  treatment  of  other
    members of the family in Article 3(2) is characterised  by  the  phrase
    "in  accordance  with  its  [sc  the  host  Member  State's]   national
    legislation".  This is the clearest possible indication  that  national
    legislation has a role in the attribution of rights to other members of
    the family: the position is not therefore  entirely  regulated  by  the
    substantive provisions of the  Directive  that  have  force,  from  the
    Directive, over the whole of the Union.  The  distinction  between  the
    two categories of family member is thus made even clearer than  it  was
    in Article 10 of reg 1612/68, which did not contain these words.

11. Those differences do not mean that Article 3(2) gives nothing to  those
    covered by it.  On the contrary, it  clearly  gives  two  rights.   The
    first is that, subject to national law, their entry and residence shall
    be "facilitated".   The  second  is  that  there  shall  be  "extensive
    examination" of their circumstances and  a  justification  of  refusal.
    The second of these rights is new.  The first is the  right  previously
    embodied in Article 10 of  reg  1612/68,  extended  in  its  scope  and
    clarified in its relation to national law.

12. What, then, does "facilitate" mean?  The apparent  sense  would  be  to
    make entry and residence easy, or easier: but it would  evidently  have
    to be entry and residence in accordance with national legislation  that
    was made easy or easier.  That sounds very  much  like  a  prescription
    about procedure, the substantive rights being  given  by  the  national
    legislation.  We think that that is exactly what is meant.  If national
    legislation  permits  a  person's  admission,  admission   is   to   be
    facilitated.  If not, there is no entry or residence to be  facilitated
    in accordance with national legislation.

13. We bear in mind the important provisions about the  procedural  aspects
    of free movement rights in particular, which have been in the  relevant
    legislation  since  the  beginning.     Council  Directive   68/360/EEC
    provides in Article 3 that persons  who  have  the  substantive  rights
    secured by that Directive shall be allowed by other Member  States  "to
    enter their territory simply on production of a valid identity card  or
    passport"; and Article 6 of Council  Directive  73/148/EEC  prevents  a
    State from requiring anything (from an applicant entitled because of  a
    relationship to someone else) other than the identity card or  passport
    with which  the  individual  entered  the  country  and  proof  of  the
    relationship.  Further, Article 5(1) of  Council  Directive  64/221/EEC
    limits the time allowed for making a  decision  on  a  first  residence
    permit to six months, and requires that the  applicant  be  allowed  to
    remain temporarily in the country while the decision  is  made.   These
    provisions are an essential  part  of  provisions  for  free  movement.
    Movement would not be free if, whatever a person's substantive  rights,
    he could in practice be kept at the border by national requirements for
    particular documentation or kept out  of  the  country  during  a  long
    bureaucratic process.  Similarly, the  movements  of  the  EU  national
    would not be free if his family members might suffer such  difficulties
    at the border: he might be hindered or dissuaded  from  travel  if  his
    family were not easily able to travel the whole journey with him.   The
    considerations for obtaining a residence permit, by  a  person  already
    within the borders of the state, are not  identical,  as  explained  in
    Chang v SSHD [2001] UKIAT 00012 at [24]-[26]: but,  nevertheless,  they
    exist, and a developing law of free movement  and  residence  could  be
    expected to have provisions such as these relating to  the  recognition
    of the substantive rights under it.

14. There is equally reason for procedural regulations  relating  to  those
    whose rights will depend on the national law of the country  where  the
    principal proposes to exercise a right of free movement  or  residence.
    For in the same way as his rights may be hindered if,  at  the  border,
    there may be delay or difficulty in admitting a family  member  who  is
    entitled under EU law to accompany him, so  they  may  be  hindered  if
    there may be delay or difficulty in  admitting  a  family  member  who,
    although without substantive  rights  under  EU  law,  is  entitled  to
    admission under the law of the country he is seeking to enter.  We  may
    use an example.  Suppose a person seeking to exercise an  EU  right  of
    free movement has a niece, whom he would like to accompany him.  If  he
    goes to a country where nieces are (under national law) not entitled to
    admission, he knows in advance that there is no purpose  in  his  niece
    travelling with him, and so far as EU law is  concerned  his  right  of
    access to the country in question is not hindered because EU law  gives
    no right of admission to nieces.  If, however,  he  chooses  a  country
    whose national  law  allows  the  admission  of  nieces,  delaying  the
    admission of his niece has the same clogging  affect  as  delaying  the
    admission of any member of his closer family.   Similar  considerations
    again apply to a person already in the country who  seeks  a  residence
    permit: undue delay, or expulsion of the family member while the matter
    is considered, might well reduce the attractiveness of the  country  in
    question for the principal: and that would be a clog  or  hindrance  on
    his right of free movement and residence.

15. It can thus readily be seen that procedural  requirements  relating  to
    persons who have no substantive rights under EU law are both explicable
    and indeed necessary to give full effect to free movement and residence
    provisions.  The  new  right  -  of   extensive   examination   and   a
    justification for any refusal - will no doubt serve to ensure that  the
    procedural requirements are observed.  We can, we think, be  reasonably
    confident that the procedure  for  application,  reasoned  refusal  and
    right  of  appeal  provided  under  our  own  legislation   meets   the
    requirements  of  the  last  sentence  of  Article  3(2)  of  the  2004
    Directive.

16. We are aware that it has been suggested that the scope of the  national
    legislation to which reference  is  made  in  Article  3(2)  is  itself
    limited to matters of procedure: in other words, that Article  3(2)  is
    to be read as giving some sort of substantive right to the wider family
    members to whom it refers, and that the  procedural  aspects  of  those
    rights (only) are subject to national legislation.   We  do  not  think
    that that  can  be  right.   First,  it  would  be  remarkable  if  the
    substantive residence and free movement  rights  of  the  wider  family
    members were to be found in Article 3(2) and in such general and  vague
    terms, whereas the rights of Union citizens  and  their  closer  family
    members are so  closely  defined  and  circumscribed  by  the  detailed
    provisions  of  Chapters  II-VI  (Articles  4-33)  of  the   Directive.
    Secondly, we note that the procedural requirements for those  relatives
    that are admitted or allowed to remain in the Member State are in  fact
    prescribed by  the  Directive.   Article  8(5)(e)  and  (f)  cover  the
    formalities for registration certificates, and permit certain documents
    to be demanded of  those  within  Article  3(2),  over  and  above  the
    requirements to be met by others.  Article 10(2)(e) and (f)  cover  the
    formalities for residence cards, and require certain  documents  to  be
    demanded of those within Article 3(2), over and above the  requirements
    to be met by others.  In this context  the  apparent  liberty  to  make
    national legislation on procedural matters would be  largely  illusory,
    and it is in any event inconceivable that there would not be in Article
    3(2) a reference to the prescriptions of Articles 8 and 10, if it  were
    really the case that the "national legislation" to which  reference  is
    there made were confined to the matters in fact dealt with later in the
    Directive.  It seems to us that the terms of Articles 8 and  10  are  a
    further reason for supposing that the "national legislation"  to  which
    reference is made in Article 3(2) is national  legislation  which  may,
    but is not obliged to, confer substantive rights of free  movement  and
    residence on those family members covered by that paragraph.

17. Article 7(4) of the Directive is a clear pointer to the conclusion that
    no rights of residence are conferred by Article 3(2).  Article 7  as  a
    whole is concerned with rights of  residence  for  over  three  months.
    Paragraph (1) gives the right to certain Union citizens,  including  in
    subparagraph (c) students, and in subparagraph (d) Union  citizens  who
    are family members accompanying Union citizens.   Paragraph  (2)  gives
    the right also to family members who are not themselves Union citizens,
    who accompany or join Union citizens.  "Family member" has, of  course,
    the meaning given by Article 2(2): that is to  say,  we  are  concerned
    here with close family members.  Paragraph (4) is as follows:

        "By way of derogation from paragraphs 1(d) and 2  above,  only  the
        spouse, the registered partner provided for in Article 2(2)(b)  and
        dependent children shall have the  right  of  residence  as  family
        members of a Union citizen meeting the conditions under (c)  above.
        Article 3(2) shall apply to his/her dependent direct  relatives  in
        the ascending lines and those  of  this/her  spouse  or  registered
        partner."

    This is very revealing.  The right of residence does not accrue to  all
    the "family members" of students.  It accrues only to a narrower group.
     The other "family members" of a student  do  not  have  the  right  of
    residence but Article 3(2) applies to them.  It appears to us to follow
    that Article 3(2) does not give a right of residence  to  those  within
    it.

18. So far as this appeal is concerned the  position  is  that  we  do  not
    accept that Article 3(2) gives, or is intended to give, or  has  to  be
    read as giving, any right of free movement or residence  to  those  who
    have no such right apart from it.  Any such rights will be dependent on
    national law, which, however, has to be administered in accordance with
    the   requirements   of   facilitation,   extensive   examination   and
    justification of refusal.

19. We note that this conclusion is entirely in line with that  reached  by
    Turner J in R (McCollum) v SSHD [2001] EWHC (Admin) 584.  We  were  not
    referred to that decision, although it may be the only decision of  any
    of the superior courts on the meaning of  "facilitate".   We  have  not
    relied on  it  as  it  was  an  interpretation  of  different  European
    legislation and in  a  rather  different  context.   We  take  comfort,
    however, from the fact that we have not found it  necessary  to  differ
    from it.  The decision of this Tribunal in SY and others  [2006]  UKAIT
    00024 is to the  same  effect.   Our  conclusion  appears  also  to  be
    supported by the official Table  of  Correspondence  between  Directive
    2004/38/EC and Current EC Legislation on Free Movement and Residence of
    Union Citizens within the EU, where the comment on the  final  sentence
    of Article 3(2) of the Directive is:

        "New:   The  obligations  on  Member   States   entailed   by   the
        'facilitation' are defined, which is new."

20. There is no suggestion here that the  "facilitation"  entails  anything
    other than the right to be examined and to have full  reasons  for  any
    refusal.  In particular, it is impossible to read  this  entry  in  the
    Table of Correspondence as meaning that the  "facilitation"  entails  a
    substantive right of entry or residence.

The requirements of the law and the scope of an appeal

21. Both the Directive and the EEA Regulations make dependence one  of  the
    relevant factors in considering whether his wider family members should
    be allowed to enter or reside with a Union citizen.  For the Directive,
    the "facilitation" and the right to extensive examination and  properly
    motivated refusal apply to "any other family members ...  who,  in  the
    country from  which  they  come,  are  dependants  or  members  of  the
    household of the Union citizen having the primary right of  residence".
    As we have explained above, however, these rights under  the  Directive
    are procedural only and the Directive does not  itself  give  any  such
    family member a right of movement to or residence in  a  Member  State.
    The latter rights depend on national legislation.  The  legislation  is
    question is reg 12(2)  of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2006, which we have set out above.  This gives a discretion
    to issue an EEA family permit in certain circumstances to an  "extended
    family member" as defined by reg  8,  which  is  also  set  out  above.
    Taking  these  two  regulations  together,  the  national   legislation
    therefore requires first that a person claiming as an  extended  family
    member be in one of the categories set out in reg 8.  Secondly, he must
    fulfil the requirements in reg 12(2)(a) and (b).  If (but only  if)  he
    does so, he has an expectation that the relevant officer will  consider
    whether to exercise in his favour the discretion conferred variously by
    the terms of reg 12(2)(c) and the word  "may"  which  governs  all  the
    provisions of reg 12(2).  The process of examination and the giving  of
    reasons for any refusal are in reg 12(3) and are exactly in  accordance
    with the requirements of the Directive.


22. In order to succeed in an appeal against such a refusal,  an  appellant
    must undertake a similar process.  He must first show  that  he  is  an
    "extended family member" within the meaning of reg 8.  If he  fails  to
    do so, nothing else matters for the purposes of the Directive  and  the
    EEA Regulations.  If he is an extended family member, the next question
    is whether he meets the requirements of reg 12(2)(a) and  (b).   If  he
    does not, he has no right to consideration  for  the  exercise  of  the
    discretion.  If he does, and the discretion has been exercised  against
    him, he can challenge it on the ground that it breaches a right of  his
    under the Treaties or other EU legislation (this is s 84(1)(d)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as applied  by  s  109  of
    that Act and Schedule 1 to the EEA Regulations).  Although  his  rights
    are (merely) procedural rights, this challenge is not on  that  account
    nugatory.  In the first place, we remind ourselves that  the  Directive
    applies equally to all Member  States.   The  practice  in  the  United
    Kingdom is to conduct an examination and justify  any  refusal  in  the
    vast majority of requests, so Article 3(2) may add little.  In  another
    Member  State,  without  such  practices   already   established,   the
    requirement of detailed examination and reasoned  refusal  might  be  a
    substantial change.  Even in the  United  Kingdom  it  is  possible  to
    envisage that a person who met the requirements of regs 8 and  12(2)(a)
    and (b) might be able to have a  decision  set  aside  for  failure  to
    comply with the requirements of full  examination  and  the  giving  of
    reasons for refusal.  One possibility might be  that  the  officer  had
    wrongly thought that the appellant did not meet the requirements of the
    Regulations, so had failed to conduct  an  examination  of  the  nature
    required by them.

23. Alternatively, an appellant might argue that the decision to refuse him
    was "otherwise not in accordance with the law".  This is s 84(1)(e)  of
    the 2002 Act, applied as before.  If he showed  that  the  officer  had
    failed to exercise his discretion at all, or had failed to exercise  it
    lawfully, that would no doubt suffice to have the decision set aside.

24. Further, as we have held elsewhere [1], the  combination  of  s84(1)(d)
    and s86(3)(b) of the 2002 Act gives the Tribunal jurisdiction to review
    the exercise of a discretion in a case where the appellant comes within
    both the terms of Article 3(2) and the definition of  "extended  family
    member" in reg 8.

25. For completeness we should add that in cases of exclusion or  expulsion
    the  process  under  Chapter  VI  of  the  Directive   depends   on   a
    discretionary exercise of individual  judgment:  in  other  words,  the
    discretion is itself part of EU law.   Here  again,  and  perhaps  more
    obviously, the discretion is reviewable as a result of the  combination
    of s84(1)(d) and s86(3)(b).




Dependence and dependants

26. There are  three  possibly  relevant  notions  of  dependence  for  the
    purposes of cases such as this.  First as we  have  seen,  there  is  a
    reference to dependants in Article 3(2) of the  Directive,  as  persons
    who have, subject to national law, the procedural advantages  given  by
    that Article.  Secondly,  the  EEA  Regulations,  at  reg  8(2)  define
    "extended family member" partly in terms of dependence.   Thirdly,  reg
    8(4) defines "extended family member"  alternatively  by  reference  to
    qualification under the Immigration Rules, which themselves may contain
    a requirement of dependence on the sponsor.

27. There are at least two possibly relevant definitions of dependence  for
    these purposes.  The Immigration Rules require that  a  person  seeking
    admission as a dependent relative be "wholly or  mainly  dependent"  on
    the family member he seeks to join (Statement of Changes in Immigration
    Rules, HC 395, paras 317(iii)), and the authorities establish that, for
    these purposes, the dependence must be  of  necessity,  not  of  choice
    (Zaman v ECO Lahore [1973] Imm AR 71; Musa v ECO Bombay [1976]  Imm  AR
    28).  Where the requirement of dependency is outside the Rules  but  is
    instead imposed by regulations introduced with  reference  to  EU  free
    movement legislation, the Tribunal, interpreting regs 6(4) and 10(4) of
    the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)   Regulations   2000   (SI
    2000/2326), implementing reg (EEC) No 1612/98  of  the  Council  of  15
    October 1968,  in PB and others [2005] UKIAT 00082 said at [8]:

        "In deciding whether an applicant is  a  family  member  for  these
        purposes, it may  be  necessary  to  make  a  finding  of  fact  on
        dependency.  For these purposes, it is clear that dependency  is  a
        question of fact.  There is no requirement that  dependency  be  of
        necessity."

28. What is meant by dependence within the  EU  free  movement  legislation
    itself was discussed in Jia.  In that case the Court  had  to  consider
    whether the claimant had established that she was dependent on her  son
    and daughter-in-law within the meaning of Article 1(1)(d) of  Directive
    73/148/EEC, which set out equivalent rules for the admission of  family
    members  of  nationals  of  Member  States  who  sought  to   establish
    themselves in another Member State.   The Court noted at [35] that "the
    status of  'dependent'  family  member  is  the  result  of  a  factual
    situation characterised by the fact that the material support for  that
    family member is provided by the Community national who  has  exercised
    his right of free movement".  After further reminding itself  that  the
    question is about the circumstances that  exist,  not  the  reason  for
    those circumstances, the Court continued:

        "37.     In  order  to  determine  whether  the  relatives  in  the
             ascending line of  the  spouse  of  a  Community  national  are
             dependent on the latter, the  host  Member  State  must  assess
             whether,  having  regard  to   their   financial   and   social
             conditions, they are not in a position to  support  themselves.
             The need for material support must exist in the State of origin
             of those relatives or the State whence they came  at  the  time
             when they apply to join the Community national.


        38.      That is the conclusion that must be drawn having regard to
             Article 4(3) of Council Directive 68/360/EEC of 15 October 1968
             on the abolition of  restrictions  on  movement  and  residence
             within the Community for workers of  Member  States  and  their
             families (OJ,  English  Special  Edition,  1968(II),  p.  485),
             according to which proof of the status of dependent relative in
             the ascending line of a worker or his spouse within the meaning
             of Article 10 of Regulation No 1612/68 is to be provided  by  a
             document issued by the competent authority  of  the  'State  of
             origin or the State whence  they  came',  testifying  that  the
             relative concerned is dependent on the worker  or  his  spouse.
             Despite the lack of precision as to  the  means  of  acceptable
             proof by which the individual concerned can establish  that  he
             falls within one of the  classes  of  persons  referred  to  in
             Articles 1 and 4 of  Directive  73/148,  there  is  nothing  to
             justify the status of dependent relative in the ascending  line
             being assessed differently according to whether the relative is
             a member of the family  of  a  worker  or  of  a  self-employed
             worker."

    So much is clear.  Leaving aside for a moment the requirement for proof
    by a particular document, dependency  for  the  purposes  of  Directive
    73/148/EEC is a matter of need, not of choice.   The  question  is  not
    whether a person does not support himself, but whether he is not  in  a
    position to support  himself.   This  position  is  emphasised  in  the
    Court's formal Ruling at the end of the judgment,  that  "dependent  on
    them" means that the members of the  family  of  a  Community  national
    established in another Member State within the meaning of Article 43 EC
    need the material support of that Community  national  or  his  or  her
    spouse in order to meet their essential needs in the State of origin of
    those family members or the State from which they have come at the time
    when they apply to join that Community national.

29. A potential difficulty arises, however, from the words of para [36]  of
    the judgment.  This is as follows:

        "36.     The Court has also  held  that  the  status  of  dependent
             family member does not presuppose the existence of a  right  to
             maintenance, otherwise that status  would  depend  on  national
             legislation, which varies from one  State  to  another  (316/85
             Lebon [1987] ECR 2811, paragraph 21). According to  the  Court,
             there is no need to determine the reasons for recourse to  that
             support or to raise the question whether the  person  concerned
             is able to support himself by taking up paid  employment.  That
             interpretation is  dictated  in  particular  by  the  principle
             according  to  which  the  provisions  establishing  the   free
             movement of workers, which constitute one of the foundations of
             the Community, must be construed broadly (Lebon, paragraphs  22
             and 23)."

30. This appears to be - in fact is - a reference to a different notion  of
    dependence, in which the question is to be settled  without  regard  to
    need, so that a person can be dependent on another even if he is  in  a
    position to support himself.  It is certainly rather odd  that  in  the
    judgment this paragraph is followed immediately, in the next paragraph,
    by the first of the formulations of a rule of dependence based on  need
    and on a requirement of inability to support oneself.  The Court has no
    formal procedure for reviewing or overruling its previous judgments  or
    revising a view previously expressed and we can only suppose  that  the
    reference to the  rule  in  Lebon  here,  followed  by  discussion  and
    assertion of a different test and  a  formal  ruling  are  intended  to
    dictate a new understanding of dependence based on need,  whatever  may
    have been said in Lebon.  That understanding must, it is clear from the
    reasoning in Jia (in particular that at the conclusion of para [38]  to
    which we are about to refer) pervade the notion  of  dependence  as  an
    adjunct of or qualification of the  rights  of  free  movement  of  and
    residence in the free movement legislation as a  whole;  and  the  same
    must be true of the 2004 Directive which replaces it.  It follows  that
    the formulation in para [8] of PB may also need revision.  In so far as
    dependence in the EEA Regulations is intended as an  implementation  of
    such a requirement in the Directive, it must mean dependence in the Jia
    sense: that is to say, dependence arising from a need for  the  support
    of the national of a Member State.

31. So far as concerns  the  mode  of  proof  of  dependence,  it  will  be
    apparent, from the extract from the judgment in Jia that we have cited,
    that the requirement of a document issued by the competent authority of
    the State of origin or the State from which the applicant  came  was  a
    feature of Article 4(3) of Directive  68/360/EEC  and  was  under  that
    Directive a requirement for the proof of status and  hence  entitlement
    under reg 1612/68.  This requirement  was  not  included  in  Directive
    73/148, but according to the Court's judgement in Jia that  requirement
    must be read into that Directive.  The Court went on  to  consider  the
    requirements for the issue of a residence permit  under  Article  6  of
    Directive 73/148 and, noting that there  was  no  specific  requirement
    there for any form of proof, held  that  for  these  purposes  evidence
    might be adduced by any acceptable means, but that a  mere  undertaking
    from the Community national or his or her spouse to support the  family
    members concerned need not be regarded as establishing the existence of
    the family members' real dependence.

32. The position is now governed by Article 8(5)  of  the  2004  Directive,
    which provides that Member States  may  require  such  evidence  before
    issuing  a  registration  card  to  wider  family  members  who   claim
    entitlement as dependants, and Article 10(2)(e),  which  provides  that
    Member States shall require presentation of such a document by  such  a
    person for a residence card to be issued.   It  is  to  be  noted  that
    although in Article 5(5) the Directive  envisages  the  possibility  of
    Union citizens or family members establishing a right  of  entry  to  a
    Union country without "the necessary travel documents or, if  required,
    the necessary visas", there is no suggestion that a person claiming  to
    be a dependant within Article 3(2)(a) can do so  without  the  document
    proving  dependence.   On  the  other  hand,   the   Article   10(2)(a)
    requirement does not appear at all in the  EEA  Regulations.   That  is
    permissible, for Article 37 of the Directive allows  Member  States  to
    grant rights more  extensive  than  those  required  by  the  Directive
    itself; and the removal of  a  restrictive  requirement  has  the  same
    effect.  (We should however  observe  that  a  Member  State  does  not
    necessarily confer an EU right by  granting  more  than  the  Directive
    requires.  The starting-point in such a case must be that the right  in
    question is good only in the Member State granting it.)

33. In summary, the effect of the decision of the Court in Jia is to import
    into European law a requirement for dependence to be of necessity,  and
    to reinforce the requirement of proof by the document described in  the
    Directive.  In the result, the notion of dependence under the Directive
    and hence the EEA Regulations is probably little  different  from  that
    developed under the Immigration Rules, although the  Regulations  allow
    dependence to be proved for  UK  purposes  without  production  of  the
    document normally required by European law.

34. Before leaving the subject of dependence there are two further  matters
    to which we must allude.  The first is that both the Directive and  the
    EEA Regulations, are concerned with dependence on a Union  citizen  (or
    on the spouse or partner of a Union citizen).  The reason for  that  is
    that the purpose of the Directive which the EEA  Regulations  implement
    is to ensure that Union citizens' rights of free movement and residence
    can be enjoyed properly.  It cannot be sufficient for these purposes to
    show dependence on a person who is not a Union citizen or the spouse or
    partner of a Union citizen.  This is not to say that dependence  cannot
    be shown when household finances are  pooled,  as  they  often  are  in
    certain cultures and traditions: but, in such a case, where the  source
    of the household finances is not solely the assets of the Union citizen
    and his or her spouse or partner, it may be  more  difficult  to  prove
    that any dependence is genuinely dependence on such person rather  than
    on some other member of the family.  It will be necessary  to  look  at
    all the circumstances.

35. The second matter relates to state benefits.  Where  a  person  in  the
    United Kingdom receives state benefits for the needs of himself or  his
    family here, we  think  it  likely  that  it  will  generally  be  more
    difficult to establish that someone abroad is dependent on  him  within
    the meaning of the Directive and the EEA  Regulations.   In  the  first
    place, the dependence may well be seen to be on the State  rather  than
    on the citizen; but, in particular, where a Union citizen receives both
    benefits from the state and contributions from another  member  of  his
    family, and it is as a result of those contributions that he is able to
    send funds abroad for the support of somebody else, we think that he is
    generally to be seen rather  as  a  conduit  for  support  provided  by
    another than as himself the source of the third person's income.

The present appeals

36. The appellants are not the direct descendants of the sponsor or of  his
    spouse.  They are not related to a Union citizen in any of the ways set
    out in Article 2(2) of the 2004 Directive.  They are not within Article
    3(1) of the Directive and, for the reasons we have given, neither  they
    nor  anybody  else  can  derive  substantive  rights  of  admission  or
    residence from Article 3(2).  They are members  of  the  wider  family,
    whose admission and residence is subject to national  legislation.   In
    the United Kingdom the relevant legislation is the EEA Regulations.  It
    is conceded on their part that they cannot  meet  the  requirements  of
    those regulations: they are neither "family members" within reg 7,  nor
    "extended family members" within reg 8.  They are entitled  neither  to
    admission to the  United  Kingdom  nor  to  consideration  whether  the
    discretion under reg 12(2) should be exercised in their  favour.   This
    determination (if not the original refusal) constitutes a justification
    of the refusal of entry following an  extensive  examination  of  their
    personal circumstances.  There is nothing that the 2004 Directive gives
    them that the EEA Regulations fail to recognise as theirs.

37. Because the question was fully argued before us and in  order  to  give
    guidance on the approach to the issue of dependence we consider whether
    the appellants would have succeeded in this appeal if, as  Mr  Jafferji
    argued, their entitlement had turned on whether they were dependants of
    the sponsor or members of his household.

38. We heard oral  evidence  from  the  sponsor  and  from  his  sons,  the
    appellants' husbands.  On the basis of it and  of  the  other  evidence
    before us we find the following facts. The house in India in which  the
    appellants live belongs to the sponsor's mother, who still lives in it.
     The appellants earn money teaching: they  have  from  this  source  at
    least Rs 1,000 per month: that was the amount stated by the sponsor but
    the second appellant's husband gave her income  as  Rs  1,000-2000  per
    month.  Their husbands and the sponsor believe that the appellants need
    Rs 5,000 - 6000 per month between them (about 30  each)  in  order  to
    meet their expenses.  The appellants' husbands both have  (and  had  at
    the date of the decision) jobs in the United Kingdom, each earning 800-
    900 per month at the date of the decision and more now.   Both give the
    bulk of their wages to their father for the family's general  expenses:
    the first appellant's husband said he gives  his  father  400-500  per
    month or more if needed, and the second said he gives what he has, 500-
    1000 per  month.   Money  is  sent  from  the  United  Kingdom  to  the
    appellants in India.  The first appellant's husband said that he  sends
    his wife some money "or sometimes Dad" does.  The second appellant said
    that he gives money to his father, who sends  it;  but  he  also  gives
    money to his wife if someone is travelling  to  India.   He  remembered
    giving her 50 this way a couple of months ago.

39. Much of the oral evidence related to the date of the hearing, but it is
    not said that the position at the date of the decision was in any  real
    sense different.  The documentary  evidence  supported  what  was  said
    about the income of the household  in  the  United  Kingdom;  there  is
    evidence of the remittances in the form of photocopies of Postal Orders
    said to have been sent to India and more recent Western Union  transfer
    orders.

40. Looking at  the  facts  in  the  round,  as  we  do,  we  are  entirely
    unpersuaded that the appellants are or were at any  time  dependent  on
    the sponsor.  The house in which they live is not his; they  have  some
    income of their own; the remittances from the United Kingdom come  from
    a common fund; major contributors to that fund are their husbands,  who
    would properly be expected to provide for their  support.   Of  course,
    neither a  legal  obligation  to  support  nor  an  expectation  proves
    dependence; but the fact is  that  one  would  expect  the  appellants'
    husbands to maintain them if they  could,  and  that  is  exactly  what
    appears to be happening, although the money is sent often (not  always)
    through the sponsor.  It is not  enough  to  say  that  the  custom  or
    culture in this family is to have a common fund:  that may well be  so,
    but for the purposes of the  Directive  and  the  EEA  Regulations  the
    appellants need to show that their dependence (if any) is on the  Union
    citizen (or his wife, although that possibility is  not  live  in  this
    appeal), not on somebody else.  That they have signally failed to do.

41. For completeness we should add that it is quite  unarguable  that  they
    have at any time been members of the sponsor's  household.   The  house
    they live in is not his; and they have not lived in it at the same time
    as he has, although he has stayed there  during  his  short  visits  to
    India since their marriages.

42. The appellants are not (and at the  date  of  the  decision  were  not)
    dependants or members of the household of a Union  citizen  within  the
    meaning of the 2004 Directive and so would not in any event be entitled
    to claim the benefits of Article 3(2)  that  Mr  Jafferji  argued  they
    could claim.

Article 24 of the 2004 Directive

43. Mr Jafferji also mounted an argument based on Article 24  of  the  2004
    Directive, which reads as follows:

      "Article 24

      Equal treatment

      1.    Subject to such specific provisions as  are  expressly  provided
             for in  the  Treaty  and  secondary  law,  all  Union  citizens
             residing on the basis of this Directive in the territory of the
             host  Member  State  shall  enjoy  equal  treatment  with   the
             nationals of that Member State within the scope of the  Treaty.
             The benefit of this right shall be extended to  family  members
             who are not nationals of a Member State and who have the  right
             of residence or permanent residence.

      2.    By way or derogation from paragraph 1,  the  host  Member  State
             shall not be obliged to confer entitlement to social assistance
             during  the  first  three  months  of   residence   or,   where
             appropriate,  the  longer  period  provided  for   in   Article
             14(4)(b), nor shall it be obliged, prior to acquisition of  the
             right of permanent residence,  to  grant  maintenance  aid  for
             studies, including vocational training, consisting  in  student
             grants or student loans to persons other  than  workers,  self-
             employed persons, persons who retain such status and members of
             their families."

44. He submitted that the appellants' husbands  ought  by  reason  of  this
    provision to have the same rights to bring their wives  to  the  United
    Kingdom for settlement as they  would  have  if  they  were  themselves
    citizens  of  the  United  Kingdom.   We  are  unable  to  accept  that
    submission.

45. In the first place, it does  not  appear  to  us  that  Article  24  is
    intended to give such rights to those who, not  being  Union  citizens,
    have a right of residence under the directive.   The  rights  to  which
    paragraph (2) of the Article makes reference are an indication  of  the
    scope of the Article in general; and in any event  the  possibility  of
    family reunion (by migration of family members into the European Union)
    for persons who are not themselves Union citizens is  not  "within  the
    scope of the Treaty".  It is, after all, "Citizens of the  Union",  and
    not others, who enjoy "the rights conferred by this Treaty" (Article 17
    of the Treaty).  Although, in order to secure true freedom of  movement
    and residence, rights of free movement and residence  are  extended  to
    certain family members who wish to accompany or join the Union citizen,
    and although those rights necessarily give rise to  further  rights  to
    such things as access to the labour market and social assistance, there
    is no reason to believe that it is intended that the  Treaty  envisages
    those persons (whose  rights  are  secondary  to  those  of  the  Union
    citizen) themselves having rights to have their families with them.

46. Further, in the present case, even if the principle were as  stated  by
    Mr Jafferji, the right would not accrue.  For it is  difficult  to  see
    that the present residence of the appellants'  spouses  in  the  United
    Kingdom is "on the basis of this Directive".  It  is  true  that  their
    admission here was as family members of their  father,  but  they  were
    over 21 when they came and we have not heard that they  were  dependent
    on him - they both obtained good jobs immediately on their arrival  and
    have retained them.  Their admission appears to have been as  a  result
    of  provisions  more  generous  than  those  of  the  Directive   being
    implemented  by  the  United  Kingdom  authorities.   Admission   under
    provisions more generous than those of the Directive is  not  admission
    under the Directive unless the latter's requirements would in any event
    have been fulfilled; and the resulting residence in such a case is  not
    residence "on the basis of" the Directive.

47. The argument based on Article 24 therefore fails.

Human Rights and discrimination

48. Mr Jafferji also submitted that if the appellants were unable  to  join
    their husbands in the UK, that would  be  discrimination  against  them
    contrary to Article 14 taken with Article 8 of the European  Convention
    on Human Rights.  The argument is as follows.  The appellants' husbands
    are lawfully in the United Kingdom.  If their father had not been an EU
    national and they had accompanied him to the United Kingdom, they would
    have been granted indefinite leave to remain as his sons, and would  be
    settled here within  the  meaning  of  the  Immigration  Acts.   As  UK
    residents who are earning enough  to  support  their  dependants,  they
    would, if they were settled in the United Kingdom, be able  to  sponsor
    their wives for admission to the United Kingdom under paragraph 281  of
    HC 395.  The fact that they are not settled means they  cannot  do  so.
    That, it is said, shows that there is discrimination for these purposes
    against the families of EU nationals.  The discrimination is on  ground
    of national origin, and (because it prevents husband  and  wife  living
    together) falls within the ambit of Article 8.

49. The problem with this argument in our view is that  the  starting-point
    is wrong.  The sponsor's sons could have been admitted to  the  UK  and
    given indefinite leave to remain under the Rules as his  dependants  if
    and only if the sponsor had himself been entitled under  the  Rules  to
    admission for settlement.  But the sponsor has no claim  at  all  under
    the Rules.  He is here because and only because he has an EU  right  of
    free movement.  If it were not for that, he would require a work permit
    and there is no reason to suppose that he would have obtained one.  The
    residence here of the sons is not something less than they  would  have
    if their father had been subject to the Immigration Rules: it  is  much
    more.  There is no  discrimination  against  the  appellants  or  their
    husbands.

50. The final matter that we need to deal with is Article 8.   Mr  Jafferji
    submitted that refusing to allow the appellants entry to and  residence
    in the United Kingdom breached  their  rights  under  Article  8.   The
    position  is,  however,  that  the  marriages  were  entered  into   as
    transnational marriages and have continued as  such.   The  parties  to
    such a marriage are not, in general, entitled to choose their place  of
    residence without being subject to national law: Abdulaziz &  others  v
    UK [1985] EHRR 471.  There is no material before us to  show  that  the
    appellants have any right to admission to the United Kingdom beyond the
    Immigration Rules. We reject the claim that  applying  the  Immigration
    Rules to them breaches their Convention rights.

Conclusion

51. For the foregoing reasons the appellants' appeals are dismissed.









                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT
                                                               Date:

                           -----------------------
[1] FD (EEA discretion: basis of appeal) Algeria [2007] UKAIT 00049

