
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Mirza (ACCA Fundamental level qualification - not a recognised degree)
[2013] UKUT 00041(IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 7 December 2012                            |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR

                                   Between

                             ADEEM RASOOL MIRZA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     No representation
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


The ACCA does not have degree awarding powers and the qualifications which
it awards are not UK recognised degrees.





                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of Pakistan, who was  born  on  19  January
    1986.  He arrived in this country on 21 August 2010 with leave to enter
    as a Tier 4 (General) Student. This leave expired on 22 December  2011.
    While in this country, he successfully completed the Fundamental  Level
    of the ACCA qualification.  He completed his exams in December 2010 and
    received the certificate confirming his successful  completion  of  the
    course in March 2011.

 2. On 21 December 2011 the appellant applied for further leave  to  remain
    in the United Kingdom as a Tier  1  (Post-Study  Work)  Migrant,  under
    paragraph 245FD of the Immigration Rules.  It is common ground that  in
    order to qualify under this rule, the appellant was  required  to  show
    that he would be  entitled to  be  awarded  75  points  or  more  under
    paragraphs 66 to 72 of Appendix A.  The appellant  also  needed  to  be
    awarded 10 points under paragraphs 1 to 3 of Appendix  B  (the  English
    language requirement).

 3. Under the  qualification  section  of  his  application  the  appellant
    claimed 20 points for his ACCA qualification, claiming that this was  a
    "United Kingdom recognised degree at Bachelor's level".  He  claimed  a
    further 55 points under Appendix A, which would have been  awarded  had
    his ACCA qualification been accepted as a recognised degree at Bachelor
    level.

 4. The respondent refused this  application  on  13  February  2012.   The
    respondent did not accept  the  ACCA  as  a  recognised  body  for  the
    purposes of granting degrees, and the appellant was accordingly awarded
    no points under Appendix A. As a  consequence  of  being  awarded  zero
    points under Appendix  A,  he  was  not  entitled  to  be  awarded  the
    requisite 10 points under Appendix B either.   It should be noted  with
    regard to this  latter  requirement,  that  this  failure  is  entirely
    technical.  It was quite clear to us during the hearing, in  which  the
    appellant represented himself, that his English language  skills,  both
    written and spoken, were of the highest order.

 5.  The  appellant  appealed  against  this  decision  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. His appeal was heard before First-tier Tribunal Judge Norton-
    Taylor, sitting at Hatton Cross on 23 April 2012, but was dismissed  in
    a determination dated 28 April 2012 and promulgated shortly thereafter.
     First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Norton-Taylor  also  concluded  that  the
    appellant had not been awarded a United Kingdom  recognised  degree  at
    Bachelor's level.

 6. The appellant now appeals to the Upper Tribunal against this  decision,
    permission having been granted by Designated First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Macdonald.

 7. The issue before us is a narrow one, which is whether or not  the  ACCA
    qualification can properly be said to be of a type required by Table 10
    to Appendix A of the Rules.  If the ACCA is a  relevant  qualification,
    then it  is  not  suggested  on  behalf  of  the  respondent  that  his
    application would fail under the Rules for any other reason.

 8. We are aware that this is an issue that has  been  argued  before  this
    Tribunal on a number of previous occasions, but  there  is  as  yet  no
    reported decision on the point.  We are also aware that there have been
    conflicting decisions of the First-tier Tribunal on this issue, one  of
    which, supportive of the appellant's position, was relied upon  by  the
    appellant in this case.

Submissions

 9. In  the  course  of  his  succinct  and  well-argued  submissions,  the
    appellant drew our attention to paragraph 53 of the respondent's Policy
    Guidance, wherein it was stated that an applicant could claim 20 points
    if he or she had been awarded a  "UK  recognised  degree  at  Bachelor,
    Master or PhD level". He asserted that the word "level"  meant  "equal,
    equitable, same" and that, in the context of these meanings,  the  ACCA
    qualification should entitle him to be awarded the points.

10. The appellant noted that at paragraph 55 of the Guidance, referring  to
    the requirement that the degree had to have been awarded  by  a  United
    Kingdom recognised body, such a body was  defined  as  "an  institution
    which has been granted degree awarding powers by Royal Charter"; whilst
    the appellant accepted that he had never seen, and could not produce to
    the Tribunal, a Royal Charter which  in  itself  gave  degree  awarding
    powers to ACCA  he,  nevertheless,  placed  reliance  upon  a  document
    contained within his bundle relating to chartered bodies generally.  It
    was common ground that the ACCA was governed by a Royal Charter.

11. The appellant then drew the attention of the  Tribunal  to  the  recent
    Supreme Court decision in Alvi [2012] UKSC 33, and submitted that  this
    decision was of application to  his  appeal  because  the  respondent's
    policy was contained within this Guidance.

12.  The  appellant  then  referred  us  to  a  letter  from  the  National
    Recognition Information Centre for the United Kingdom ("UK  NARIC")  in
    which UK NARIC  had  stated  that  the  award  from  the  ACCA  of  its
    "fundamental level" qualification "is considered comparable to  British
    Bachelor (honours) degree standard".

13. With regard to the definition of "degree level study" within  paragraph
    6 of the Immigration Rules, the appellant asked the  Tribunal  to  note
    that it was stated that this was a course which leads to  a  recognised
    United  Kingdom  degree  at  Bachelor's  level  or  above".    As   his
    qualification was at Bachelor's  degree  level,  it  should  have  been
    treated as qualifying under the Immigration Rules.

14. Mr Tufan submitted that the ACCA professional level qualification  does
    not purport to be, and is not, either a Bachelor's  or  a  postgraduate
    degree.  It is a professional accountancy qualification. It neither is,
    nor should be, considered as being a Bachelor's degree.

15. He reminded the Tribunal that the  definition  of  degree  level  study
    within the immigration rules mirrored that contained within Section 214
    of the Education Reform Act 1988 and that to fit within the  definition
    in paragraph 6(a) of the rules there must be an award on  behalf  of  a
    particular type of body of a qualification designated by  the  awarding
    institution to be a "Bachelor's degree".  That institution  must  be  a
    body authorised by Royal Charter or Act of Parliament to grant degrees.
    The ACCA is not such an institution. Whilst it has a Royal Charter,  it
    is not authorised by that Charter to grant degrees.

16. To fit within paragraph 6(b) of the rules, the qualification awarded by
    the institution must be designated by  that  institution  as  being  of
    Bachelor's degree level, which this professional qualification is  not,
    and must also be a recognised award  under  Section  214(2)(c)  of  the
    Education Reform Act 1988, and the ACCA qualification is not designated
    in that way. The Tribunal was also asked to note that  the  website  of
    the Department for Business Innovation and Skills  confirmed  that  the
    ACCA was not a body included within the definition  as  being  able  to
    grant degrees.

17. The respondent further relied on paragraph 59 of the  guidance,  which,
    it  was   noted,   confirmed   that   professional   and   occupational
    qualifications were not acceptable  unless  of  a  type  recognised  at
    paragraph 53.  It was submitted that the ACCA did not fall within  this
    definition, so could not purport to be a degree.

18. Mr Tufan continued by asserting that whilst the ACCA may be treated  by
    others as being of equivalent level to a Bachelor's degree, in order to
    be so considered under the Rules there were three requirements.  First,
    the qualification itself must be a degree; secondly, this degree has to
    have been issued by a  particular  type  of  institution  (that  is  an
    institution authorised either by Royal  Charter  or  under  an  Act  of
    Parliament to grant degrees, or designated by the Secretary of State as
    so  authorised);  and  thirdly,  the  award  itself  must   have   been
    designated by that institution as being of a  particular  level,  which
    the ACCA has not been.  This last point was  underpinned  by  the  fact
    that the ACCA had arranged for students to  obtain  degrees  at  Oxford
    Brookes University whilst studying for their  qualifications.   On  its
    own website, with reference  to  also  obtaining  a  degree  at  Oxford
    Brookes University, it is said that  there  are  numerous  benefits  to
    completing such a degree because it was  a  "powerful  combination"  of
    qualifications to have. Accordingly, it was clear that the ACCA  itself
    did not consider its professional qualifications to be "degrees".

19. Finally, on behalf of the respondent, Mr Tufan submitted that  had  the
    Secretary of State (whose Rules  have  been  approved  by  Parliament),
    wished to allow qualifications other than degrees to be accepted, table
    10 within Appendix A could and would have been drafted differently, and
    would not have been limited to a  "UK recognised degree".

Discussion

20. Paragraph 245F of the Immigration Rules sets out "the purpose  of  this
    route" as being "to encourage international graduates who have  studied
    in the UK to stay on and do skilled or highly skilled work".  Paragraph
    245FD then materially states as follows:





         "245FD requirements for leave to remain

         To qualify for leave to remain as Tier 1 (Post-Study Work)  Migrant
         an applicant must meet the requirements listed below.   Subject  to
         paragraph 245FE(a)(i) if the applicant  meets  these  requirements,
         leave to remain will be granted. If the  applicant  does  not  meet
         these requirements, the application will be refused.

         Requirements:

         (a)  The applicant must not fall  for  refusal  under  the  general
             grounds for refusal, and must not be an illegal entrant.

         (b)   The  applicant  must  previously  have  been  granted   entry
             clearance or leave to remain under Tier  1  (Post-Study  Work)
             Migrant.

         (c)   The  applicant  must  have  a  minimum  of  75  points  under
             paragraphs 66 to 72 of Appendix A."

21. The applicant is also required to have a minimum  of  10  points  under
    paragraphs 1 to 3 of Appendix B (the English language requirement)  and
    must further be awarded a minimum of 10 points under paragraphs 1 to  2
    of Appendix C (the financial requirements).

22. Paragraphs 66 to 68 of Appendix A to the Rules stated at  the  material
    time as follows:

         "66.     An applicant applying for entry  clearance  for  leave  to
             remain as Tier 1  (Post-Study  Work)  Migrant  must  score  75
             points for attributes.

         67.  Available points are shown in Table 10.

         68.  Notes to accompany the table appear below the table."

23. The material part of table  10  requires  an  applicant  to  have  been
    awarded either (a) a UK recognised Bachelor or postgraduate degree,  or
    (b) a UK postgraduate certificate in education or professional graduate
    diploma of education, or (c) a Higher National Diploma ("HND")  from  a
    Scottish institution.

24. Paragraphs 69 to 72 of Appendix A to the Rules stated as follows:

         "69.     Specified documents must be  provided  as  evidence  of  a
             qualification and, where relevant, completion  of  the  United
             Kingdom  foundation  programme  office  affiliated  foundation
             programme as a postgraduate doctor or dentist  (06.04.2010  HC
             439).

         70.  A qualification will have been deemed to have been  'obtained'
             on the day on  which  the  applicant  was  first  notified  in
             writing, by the awarding institution, that  the  qualification
             had been awarded.

         71.  If the institution studied at  is  removed  from  one  of  the
             relevant lists referred to in table 10, or  from  the  Tier  4
             Sponsor  Register,  no  points   will   be   awarded   for   a
             qualification obtained on or after the  date  the  institution
             was removed from the relevant list or from the Tier 4  Sponsor
             Register.

         72.   To  qualify  as  an  HND  from  a  Scottish  institution,   a
             qualification must be at level 8 on the  Scottish  Credit  and
             Qualifications Framework."

25.  A  "UK  Bachelor's  degree"  is  defined  within  paragraph  6  of  the
   Immigration Rules as meaning either

         "(a)     a programme of study or research which leads to the award,
             by or on behalf of a university, college or other  body  which
             is authorised by Royal Charter  or  by  or  under  an  Act  of
             Parliament to grant degrees, of a qualification designated  by
             the awarding institution to be of Bachelor's degree level; or

         (b)  a programme of study or research, which leads to a  recognised
             award for the purposes of Section 214(2)(c) of  the  Education
             Reform Act 1988, of a qualification designated by the awarding
             institution to be at Bachelor's degree level".

26.  It  is  accepted  that  the  appellant  has  been  awarded   the   ACCA
   Fundamentals  Level  qualification.  The  question  arises  before   the
   Tribunal, not for the first  time,  as  to  whether  that  qualification
   counts for the purposes of the Rules as  a  UK  recognised  Bachelor  or
   postgraduate degree.

27. In Mahad v  ECO  [2009]  UKSC  16,  Lord  Brown,  when  considering  the
   question of construction of  the immigration rules, said as follows:

             "[10] The rules are not to be construed with all the strictness
             applicable to the construction of  a  statute  or  a  statutory
             instrument but, instead, sensibly  according  the  natural  and
             ordinary meaning of the words used, recognising that  they  are
             statements of the Secretary of State's  administrative  policy.
             The respondent's counsel readily accepted that what  she  meant
             in her  written  case  by  the  proposition  "the  question  of
             interpretation is...what the Secretary of  State  intended  his
             policy to be" was that the court's task  is  to  discover  from
             words used in the Rules what the Secretary  of  State  must  be
             taken to have intended...that  intention  is  to  be  discerned
             objectively from the language used, not divined by reference to
             supposed policy considerations. Still less is the Secretary  of
             State's  intention  to  be  discovered  from  the   Immigration
             Directorates Instructions."

28. It is accordingly clear that the Secretary  of  State's  Guidance  Note
    cannot be used as a tool to interpret the meaning  of  the  Immigration
    Rules. If, however, the terms of the relevant Tier 1 (Post-Study  Work)
    Guidance  Note  were  more  beneficial  to  the  appellant   than   the
    Immigration Rules  and  the  Secretary  of  State  failed  lawfully  to
    consider the terms of the Guidance Note when coming to her  conclusions
    on the appellant's application, the Secretary of State's decision would
    not be in accordance with  the  law.  This  was  a  point  specifically
    pursued by the appellant during the hearing before the Upper Tribunal.

29.  To that end  the  relevant  paragraphs  of  the  Secretary  of  State's
    Guidance Note stated as follows:

         "Attributes

         Qualification

         53.  An applicant can claim 20 points if he/she  has  been  awarded
             one of the following qualifications:

             .    a United Kingdom recognised degree at Bachelor, Master or
                  PhD level; or

             .       a    Postgraduate     Certificate     in     Education
                  (PGCE)/Professional Graduate Diploma of Education  (PGDE);
                  or

             .     a  Higher  National  Diploma  (HND)  from   a   Scottish
                  institution; or

             .    United Kingdom recognised degree  at  Bachelor  level  or
                  postgraduate level.

         54.   For  a  qualification  to  be  considered  a  United  Kingdom
             recognised degree at Bachelors, Masters or PhD level, it  must
             have been awarded by a United Kingdom recognised body.

         55.  A United Kingdom recognised body is an institution  which  has
             been  granted degree awarding powers by a  royal  charter,  an
             Act of Parliament or the Privy  Council.  All  United  Kingdom
             universities and some higher educational colleges  are  United
             Kingdom recognised bodies.

         56.  Further information on the United  Kingdom  recognised  bodies
             can be found on the website of the Department for  Innovation,
             Universities        and        Skills        (DIUS)         at
             HTTP://www.DCSF.gov.uk/recognisedukdegrees.

         Postgraduate certificate in education

         57.  A  United  Kingdom  postgraduate  certificate   in   education
             (PGCD)/Professional Graduate Diploma of  Education  (PGDE)  is
             acceptable for this requirement. It is not necessary  for  the
             awarding body to be a United Kingdom recognised body. ....

         Qualifications that are not acceptable

         59.      Qualifications that cannot be used for the award of points
             include:

             .    Foundation degrees;

             .    Honorary degrees;

             .    Qualifications awarded in the United Kingdom by  overseas
                  awarding bodies;

             .    Qualifications undertaken solely at an overseas campus of
                  United Kingdom institution;

             .    Professional and vocational qualifications  (unless  they
                  are of a type listed in paragraph 53); and

             .    Postgraduate certificates and diploma (except PGCE/PGDE).

         60.  An eligible qualification is one which has  been   awarded  20
             points under this scoring section. Therefore, if the applicant
             fails to score points in  this  section,  he  will  not  score
             points for any of the other attributes."

30. The letter from  UK  NARIC  dated  12  October  2011  states  that  the
    fundamental level of ACCA's qualification "is considered comparable  to
    British Bachelor (honours) degree standard".

31. The supporting letter dated 18 October 2011 from Kaplan Financial  (the
    institution at which the appellant studied for his ACCA  qualification)
    includes the following:

         "The Association of Chartered Certified Accountants  (ACCA)  is  an
         internationally recognised Professional Accountancy  Qualification.
         Students who have completed  the  fundamentals  level  (first  nine
         papers)  receive  substantial  exemptions  from  the  UK  Bachelors
         Degree, typically entering as a third year student."

32. The appellant also relied on a letter from the ACCA dated 3 March 2011,
    which he was sent upon successfully completing the fundamental level of
    the ACCA qualification. In this letter, it is stated on behalf  of  the
    ACCA as follows:

         "ACCA is currently governed by the regulations of the UK  Companies
         Act which state that the final level of the examinations must be at
         least  equivalent  to  a  3  year  UK  degree.   In  1993,   ACCA's
         recognition as a recognised Qualifying Body under the Companies Act
         1989 meant that it had to set  examinations  which  were  at  least
         equivalent in standard to those required to obtain a degree from  a
         university in the UK.

         At that time, the standard of the foundation stage was  similar  to
         that of  the  first  year  examinations  of  a  three  year  degree
         programme, the certificate stage is  similar  to  the  second  year
         examinations, and the professional stage is similar  to  the  final
         examinations of a Masters degree.

         The 2001 syllabus equivalents are: Part 2 is the same standard as a
         three year UK degree programme, and part 3 is the same standard  as
         a UK Masters degree.

         Completion of the fundamentals level of the 2007 syllabus has  been
         equated to the standard of a UK Bachelors degree.  ACCA  literature
         states that the  professional  level  examinations  are  set  to  a
         standard comparable to that required in the  final  examination  of
         the UK Masters degree ..."

33. The core of the appellant's case is that he is entitled to rely upon  a
    qualification of equivalent or comparable level to a degree, given  the
    terms of paragraph 53 of the Secretary of  State's  guidance,  and  the
    letters from UK NARIC.

34. We reject this  submission.  Neither  the  Immigration  Rules  nor  the
    Secretary of State's guidance state that the required qualification can
    be either equivalent, or comparable, to a  UK  recognised  degree.  The
    relevant requirement under the Rules  is  clear  and  unambiguous.  The
    requisite points can only be given if an applicant has been  awarded  a
    "UK recognised degree" at Bachelors level or above. The guidance itself
    provides,  at  paragraph   59,   that   professional   and   vocational
    qualifications cannot be used to obtain the award of points unless they
    fall  within  those  qualifications  listed  in   paragraph   53.   The
    qualifications listed in paragraph 53 of the  guidance  merely  reflect
    those set out in Table 10 to the Immigration Rules.  The  Secretary  of
    State's guidance does not  set  out  a  more  beneficial  position  for
    applicants.

35. We conclude that the ACCA fundamentals level  qualification  is  not  a
    relevant qualification for the purposes of Table 10 to Appendix A,  nor
    is it of a type referred to in the Secretary of State's guidance. It is
    not a United Kingdom recognised degree or a postgraduate certificate or
    professional graduate diploma in education.

36. In order to come within the  definition  of  "a  UK  Bachelors  degree"
    contained within paragraph 6 of the Immigration Rules, a  qualification
    designated as being at Bachelor's degree level must have  been  awarded
    by a body authorised (a) by Royal Charter or (b) by, or under,  an  Act
    of  Parliament,  to  grant  degrees;  alternatively,  it  must   be   a
    qualification designated as being at Bachelor's degree level and be  "a
    recognised award for the purposes of Section 214(2)(c) of the Education
    Reform Act 1988."

37. There is no evidence before us that the ACCA is a  body  authorised  by
    Royal Charter or by an Act of Parliament (in  this  case  the  relevant
    Companies Act) to grant degrees.

38. Under Section 214(2)(c) of the Education Reform Act 1988, the Secretary
    of State is given  power  to  designate  as  a  'recognised  award',  a
    specified award granted by a person named in the order. On the evidence
    before  us,  neither  the  appellant's  qualification,  nor  any  other
    qualification awarded by ACCA, has been  designated  pursuant  to  this
    section.

39. Even if we were wrong in our  conclusions  above,  it  cannot  even  be
    argued, in our judgment, that the qualification has been   "designated"
    by the ACCA as being of Bachelor's degree level. Indeed, the fact  that
    the ACCA encourages students  to  obtain  a  separate  and  independent
    degree from Oxford Brookes University, because this would enhance their
    qualifications, suggests that ACCA recognise that their  qualifications
    are not categorised as a degree.

40. In short, therefore, because the definition of a UK  Bachelor's  degree
    in paragraph 6 of the Immigration Rules requires either that that award
    has been made by a body which has  the  power  or  authority  to  award
    degrees, which the ACCA does not  have  (or,  certainly,  there  is  no
    evidence  before  us  that  it  has  this  authority),  or   that   the
    qualification awarded has otherwise been  designated  as  a  recognised
    award for the purposes of Section 214  of  the  Education  Reform  Act,
    which this qualification has not,  this  appeal  must  fail  under  the
    rules. The appellant is not entitled to 75 points under Appendix  A  of
    the Immigration Rules and neither is he entitled  to  10  points  under
    Appendix B.

41. Article 8 of the ECHR was not argued before us, was not in the original
    grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal and was not raised in  the
    grounds of application for permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal;
    we therefore do not consider such ground.

42. We conclude that the First-tier Tribunal's decision  does  not  contain
    the making of an error on a point of law.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error of law, and accordingly its decision to  dismiss  the  appeal  stands.
This is a decision of the panel.




Signed                                  Date: 28 December 2012


Upper Tribunal Judge Craig



