
BP (DP3/96 - Unmarried Partners) Macedonia [2008] UKAIT 00045

Asylum and Immigration Tribunal



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |
|On 7 June 2007, 11 January 2008               |
|                                              |


                                   Before

                       SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE STOREY
                       Senior Immigration Judge Latter

                                   Between


                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Macdonald QC instructed by Procol & Cantor
Solicitors
For the Respondent:     Mr J Wright, Home Office Presenting Officer, Ms Z
Kiss, Home
                                      Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. DP3/96 which along with DP2/93 was revoked on 24 April  2008  applies  to
married persons only. It is a policy in the form  of  casework  instructions
that  identify  factors  covering  marriage  and  children  which  must   be
considered before removal action is initiated or enforced and it is  not  as
such a leave-conferring policy.

2.it may be that by virtue of a ministerial statement made to Parliament  on
16 June 1999, the Home Office policy on enforcement action in  the  case  of
married persons (as expressed in DP3/96)  was  complemented  by  a  parallel
concession relating to persons in a relationship akin to marriage.  Applying
as it does to unmarried, cohabiting  persons  prior  to  the  initiation  of
enforcement action, it is not to be confused  with  the  Unmarried  partners
concession or with the Immigration Rules paras 259A-0 (both  of  which  only
apply to persons with valid leave).

3. Applying a common sense approach  to  chapter  36.4  of  the  Operational
Enforcement Manual dealing with common-law  relationships  (as  Home  Office
caseworkers are expected to do) a person can show he  or  she  has  met  the
requirement of 2 years in a relationship akin to marriage even if  for  part
of that period the couple were married.

1. The appellant is a national of Macedonia. In a determination notified  on
15 July 2005 Immigration  Judge  Walters  dismissed  her  appeal  against  a
decision dated 20 April 2005 refusing her application for  leave  to  remain
on human rights grounds and a decision to give directions under  section  10
of the Immigration Act  1999  for  removal  from  the  United  Kingdom.  She
successfully obtained an order  for  reconsideration  and  the  matter  came
before us at a hearing on 7 June 2007. Following that hearing  the  Tribunal
sent a Memorandum to the parties dated 17  September  2007  seeking  further
submissions, asking the respondent in particular to  clarify  whether  there
were any policy considerations applied to persons who  were  able  to  show,
prior to commencement of enforcement action, that they  had  lived  together
for 2 years albeit for some of that time in a relationship akin to  marriage
and for some of it as a married  couple.  When  that  Memorandum  failed  to
produce a response from the respondent, the Tribunal listed the case  for  a
further hearing on 11 January 2008. As a result  of  an  undertaking  by  Ms
Kiss given at that hearing, we agreed to await  a  further  submission  from
the respondent. In correspondence to the Tribunal dated 8 February  2007  Ms
Kiss stated that on 25 January 2008 the appellant's case had  been  reviewed
and  an  undertaking  to  grant  the  standard   period   of   three   years
Discretionary Leave was made. A letter of the same  date  addressed  to  the
appellant's solicitors stated that as  a  result  of  this  undertaking  the
appellant's appeal "is considered abandoned".

2. We are unable to agree  with  that  assertion.  Section  104(4A)  of  the
Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  Act  states  that  an  appeal
under s.82 (1) brought by a person while he is in the United Kingdom  "shall
be treated as abandoned if the  appellant  is  granted  leave  to  enter  or
remain in the  United  Kingdom,  subject  to  subsections  4(B)  and  4(C)."
(neither of the latter apply to this appellant).  This  provision  does  not
state that an appeal is to  be  abandoned  simply  on  the  strength  of  an
undertaking to grant leave to remain. Nor have  we  had  anything  from  the
appellant's representatives withdrawing this appeal. We would add that  even
if we had decided the appeal was abandoned  or  withdrawn,  we  would  still
have set out  our  reasoning  and  conclusions  as  given  below,  since  we
consider it is of some importance for the position relating to persons in  a
relationship akin to marriage who face enforcement action  to  be  clarified
and made more widely known. It has taken us some time to get to  the  bottom
of it.

3. The appellant came to the UK on a visitor's  visa  which  expired  on  20
April 2000.  Upon expiration  of  this  visa  she  remained  in  the  United
Kingdom working as a part-time  waitress  on  a  casual  basis  for  various
hotels and restaurants  until  2003.   She  also  undertook  studies.   Over
Christmas 2001 she met her future husband.  Subsequently, on 11 March  2003,
she became engaged to him and moved into his home.  They married on  24  May
2003.  Later that year the couple sought advice from solicitors with a  view
to regularising her immigration status.  On 3 June 2003 they applied on  her
behalf for leave to remain on the basis of  marriage.   She  said  that  the
firm concerned assured her she would gain permission to remain but  after  a
year of waiting, she changed to her present solicitors.   Their  efforts  on
her behalf also met with delay.

4. The refusal decision letter of 20 April 2005  first  explained  that  the
appellant could not qualify under the Immigration Rules (paragraph  284)  as
she was an overstayer.  It then  made  reference  to  the  "guidelines"  for
dealing with marriage applications from  overstayers  (a  document  commonly
referred to as DP3/96).  "These guidelines", it said:

     "state that it will normally be appropriate to consider granting  leave
        to remain, exceptionally, on the basis of  a  marriage  if  we  are
        satisfied that:

           i. the marriage is genuine and subsisting; and


           ii.    that it pre-dates the services of an  enforcement  notice
               by at least two years; and


           iii.   that it is unreasonable to expect the settled  spouse  to
               accompany his/her spouse on removal."


5. The refusal decision letter pointed out that  the  appellant's  case  did
not fall within this general rule since her marriage on 24 May 2003 did  not
pre-date by two years the service of notice of liability to removal.

6. The letter continued:

     "Notwithstanding the general  policy  we  have  considered  whether  it
        would be right to allow your client to remain but having considered
        all the circumstances of her particular case it is  concluded  that
        there are insufficient compassionate  circumstances  to  justify  a
        concession on the grounds of marriage.  It is  considered  that  it
        would be reasonable to expect both parties to have been aware  that
        [the appellant's] precarious immigration status was such  that  the
        persistence of their marriage within the United Kingdom would, from
        the outset, be uncertain.  Moreover, although  [her]  spouse  is  a
        British citizen we believe that [he] could reasonably  be  expected
        to live in Macedonia."

7. The letter  then  turned  to  consider  the  appellant's  position  under
Article 8 of the ECHR.  Given that it was considered  that  the  appellant's
spouse was free to accompany her to Macedonia,  it  was  not  accepted  that
there had been an interference with their right to respect for family  life.
 As regards the right to respect for private life, it was stated that  since
her private life had  been  established  whilst  she  had  been  in  the  UK
unlawfully, in the knowledge that she had no right to be  here  and  may  be
removed at any time, "any interference with [her] private life is  necessary
and proportionate to the wider interest of the maintenance of  an  effective
immigration policy."

8. The grounds for reconsideration contended that the Immigration Judge  had
erred in his approach to DP3/96 and in his  approach  to  Article  8.   They
highlighted the fact that the Immigration Judge had been satisfied that  the
appellant's marriage  was  genuine  and  subsisting,  that  the  couple  had
cohabited for more than two years at the date of decision and that it  would
not be reasonable to expect her husband to accompany  her  upon  removal  to
Macedonia.  Given those findings he should have found that  the  appellant's
circumstances fell within  the  DP3/96  guidelines  and  that  the  decision
appealed against amounted to a disproportionate interference with her  right
to respect for private and family life.  The  grounds  also  pointed  to  an
apparent inconsistency on the  part  of  the  Immigration  Judge  in  having
decided on the one hand that it was not reasonable to expect her husband  to
accompany her (essentially for medical reasons) yet on  the  other  hand  to
have considered it appropriate for him to visit her.

9. The application for reconsideration was refused by a  Senior  Immigration
Judge but succeeded on statutory review, Collins J stating:

     "I  am  not  impressed  by  the  reasons  for  delay  in  lodging  this
          application.  The decision of the  Immigration  Judge  was  harsh,
          but, if he correctly construed DP3/96, was not erroneous  in  law.
          The appellant had lived with her husband since  early  March  2003
          and so if cohabitation rather than the date of  marriage  was  the
          relevant test, she would have qualified.   There  had  been  undue
          delay by the respondent and the appellant was not well  served  by
          her solicitors.  Equally there is no doubt that her husband  would
          not go to live  with  her  in  Macedonia  contrary  to  the  views
          expressed in the refusal letter.  Whether  it  was  reasonable  to
          believe he would visit her there is open  to  question.   She  has
          undoubtedly  abused  the  immigration  laws,  but  that   is   not
          necessarily fatal.  Mr Macdonald QC suggests the  policy  was  not
          fully explained and properly applied..."

10. It is clear from the above that an issue  which  Collins  J  saw  as  of
central importance was whether the DP3/96 policy  was  correctly  understood
and/or applied.  His reasons made  reference  to  the  point  raised  by  Mr
Macdonald in the grounds for statutory  review.   It  is  a  point  of  some
interest, because, if Mr Macdonald is right, then the Immigration Judge  did
materially err in law.   What  Mr  Macdonald  asserts  is  that  the  DP3/96
guidelines were effectively  amended  or  modified  by  dint  of  a  written
statement to Parliament on 16 June 1999  made  by  Minister  of  State  Mike
O'Brien that the then unmarried partners  concession  would  be  taken  into
account in the same way as  the  marriage  policy  in  deciding  whether  to
remove overstayers.  The Minister stated to Parliament:-

     "It has been decided that, in order to demonstrate  a  commitment  akin
        to  marriage,  it  is  not  necessary  to   demonstrate   a   prior
        cohabitation period of  four  years,  and  the  prior  cohabitation
        period has, therefore, been changed to two years.  The probationary
        period before settlement may be granted has been increased  to  two
        years, which means that there will  be  a  four  year  cohabitation
        period before the grant of settlement.  Where applicable, these new
        arrangements will be taken into account when  deciding  whether  or
        not to initiate enforcement action.  The other  provisions  of  the
        concession remain unchanged".

11. The way Mr Macdonald put matters in his grounds (which we  treat  as  an
extension of the original grounds for reconsideration) was as follows:

     "In reaching his decision to refuse leave to remain, the  Secretary  of
        State referred to DP3/96 but failed to refer to  or  to  take  into
        account the policy changes indicated by the Minister's  said  reply
        as a result of the concessions and later rule changes  putting  co-
        habitation by couples on a par with marriage, and has thereby acted
        unreasonably and not  in  accordance  with  the  law  (see  Khan  v
        Immigration Appeal Tribunal [1984] 1 WLR 1337; [1984]  Imm  AR  68,
        CA)."

12. In his submissions both for the original  and  the  resumed  hearing  Mr
Macdonald clarified that he did not seek to pursue any suggestion  that  the
appellant could rely on a legitimate expectation.   His  primary  submission
was that we should treat DP3/96 as having effectively been modified as  from
16 June 1999.  In this context he asked us  to  bear  in  mind  the  purpose
behind the DP3/96 policy (and its predecessor DP2/93), which was,  he  said,
to  ensure  compliance  with  the  UK's  obligations  under   the   European
Convention on Human Rights; indeed DP2/93 had stated this  expressly.   That
it was legitimate to view DP3/96 as having been modified  on  16  June  1999
was supported by the fact that the latest statement of  the  policy  in  the
Home Office Enforcement Manual (ch.36.4.1) did not require the existence  of
a relationship for the requisite two years prior to  enforcement  action  as
being one of marriage.  This subsection states:

     "Where  a  person  makes  representations  after  the  commencement  of
        enforcement action on the basis of a common law or  some  same  sex
        relationship the normal course will be to  proceed  to  enforcement
        action unless it is clear that the couple have lived together for 2
        years or more before enforcement  action  commenced  and  that  the
        parties are not involved in a consanguineous relationship with  one
        another."

13. It was important, added Mr Macdonald, that  it  be  understood  properly
that, unlike Article 8 case law, the Home Office policy on  enforcement  did
not contain a requirement that the reasonableness of a  person's  return  be
assessed in part on the basis of whether an appellant would  have  a  viable
option or going abroad and applying for  entry  clearance.   Neither  DP3/96
itself nor its restatement in the current Home  Office  policy  instructions
stipulated such a requirement.

14. Mr Wright for the respondent submitted at the  first  hearing  that  the
DP3/96 policy had to be read as it stood.  It had not been  amended  by  the
Ministerial statement of 16 June 1999, as can be seen  from  the  fact  that
its text had not been altered.  Minister O'Brien's 16 June  1999  concession
was only in respect of unmarried partners who had lawful  leave  to  remain.
The Home Office Manual at chapter 36.4 confirmed  the  unchanged  nature  of
DP3/96.

Relevant materials

15. Before proceeding to give our decision with reasons, it is important  to
clarify that there are several different documents  which  have  a  possible
bearing on this case.

DP3/96
16. There is DP3/96 which, as we have seen was introduced on 13  March  1996
as a revision of the Home Office enforcement  policy  which  had  previously
been contained principally in DP2/93 (introduced in 1993) and  DP2/96.   Two
points about this policy are of particular  importance.  First  it  is  only
concerned with persons who are married. That is how it describes itself  and
this point is reinforced in the current Home Office  Enforcement  Manual  at
36.3 which states that: "Unlike the previous  policy,  DP2/93,  it  [DP3/96]
does not provide for the consideration of common-law relationships  akin  to
marriage."). Second (as Ms Kiss emphasises  in  her  letter  of  8  February
2008), DP3/96 is not as such a leave-conferring policy but  rather  casework
instructions which contain factors  concerning  marriage  and  children  and
which must be considered before removal is enforced. The policy states:

        "Introduction
        1.   This  notice  provides  guidance,  in  general  terms  on  the
             consideration of cases of those persons liable to be removed as
             illegal entrants or deported who  have  married  a  person  and
             settled in the United Kingdom. This  notice  supersedes  DP2/93
             which  is  hereby  cancelled,  subject  to   the   transitional
             provisions  set  out  in  paragraph  10  of  this  instruction.
             Deportation cases fall to be considered within the framework of
             the Immigration Rules and the attached guidance should be  read
             in conjunction in with those  rules.   Although  illegal  entry
             cases  are  considered  outside   the   Rules,   any   relevant
             compassionate circumstances, including those referred to below,
             should be considered before a decision to remove is taken.


        Policy
        2.    Paragraph  364  of  the  Immigration  Rules   explains   that
             deportation will normally be the proper course where  a  person
             has failed to comply with or has contravened a condition or has
             remained here without authority but that all the known relevant
             factors must  be  taken  into  account  before  a  decision  is
             reached.  These include:


             (i)   age;
             (ii)  length of residence in the United Kingdom;
             (iii)     strength of connection with the United Kingdom;
             (iv)    personal  history,  including  character,  conduct  and
                  employment record;
             (v)   domestic circumstances;
             (vi)  previous criminal record and the nature of any offence;
             (vii)     compassionate circumstances;
             (viii)    any representations.


        3.   Where persons do not qualify for leave  to  remain  under  the
             Immigration Rules and are to be considered for  deportation  or
             whether they are illegal entrants liable to removal,  but  seek
             nevertheless to remain on the basis of marriage in  the  United
             Kingdom, the following paragraphs of this guidance apply.


        4.   Where  enforcement  action  is  under  consideration  and  the
             offender is married to someone settled  here  a  judgment  will
             need to be reached on the weight to be attached the marriage as
             a compassionate factor. Caseworkers should bear  in  mind  that
             paragraph 284 of the  Immigration  Rules  which  sets  out  the
             requirements to be met for an extension of stay as  the  spouse
             of  a  person  present  and  settled  in  the  United  Kingdom.
             specifically requires, amongst other things, a person  to  have
             limited leave to remain here and to have not remained  here  in
             breach of the immigration on laws, in order to obtain leave  to
             remain on that basis. Therefore, the fact that an  offender  is
             married to a person setlted here  does  not  give  him/her  any
             right to remain under the Rules.


        Marriages that predate enforcement action
        5.   As a general rule, deportation action under 3(5)(a) or 3(5)(b)
             in (non-criminal cases) or illegal  entry  actions  should  not
             normally be initiated in the  following circumstances (but  see
             notes below):


             (a)   where the subject has a genuine and  subsisting  marriage
                  with someone settled  here  and  the  couple  have  lived
                  together  in  this  country  continuously   since   their
                  marriage for at least 2 years before the commencement  of
                  enforcement action;
             and
             (b)   it is  unreasonable  to  expect  the  settled  spouse  to
                  accompany his/her spouse on removal.


             Notes
             (i)   in this instruction, "settled" refers to British citizens
                  who live in the United Kingdom or to other nationals  who
                  have ILE or ILR here.
              (ii)     in considering whether or not, under paragraph   5(b)
                  above, it would be unreasonable for a settled  spouse  to
                  remain the subject of enforcement action on  removal  the
                  onus remains with the settled spouse to make out  a  case
                  with supporting evidence as to why it is unreasonable for
                  him/her to live outside the United Kingdom. Factors which
                  caseworkers should take into account  if  they  are  made
                  known to them, will include whether  the  United  Kingdom
                  settled spouse:


             (a)     has very strong and close family  ties  in  the  United
                 Kingdom such as older children from a previous relationship
                 that form part of the family unit;  or
             (b)   has been settled and living in the United Kingdom for  at
                 least the preceding 10 years;  or
             (c)   suffers from ill health and medical evidence conclusively
                 shows that his/her life would be significantly impaired  or
                 endangered if he/she were to accompany  his/her  spouse  on
                 removal.


             (iii)      In  this  instruction  commencement  of  enforcement
                 action is to be taken as either:


             (a)   a  specific  instruction  to  leave  with  a  warning  of
                 liability to deportation if the subject fails to do so;  or
             (b)   service of a notice of intention to deport or service  or
                 illegal entry  papers  (including  the  service  of  papers
                 during a previous stay  in  the  United  Kingdom  were  the
                 subject has returned illegally); or
             (c)   a recommendation by a  court  that  a  person  should  be
                 deported following a conviction.


             (iv) The commencement of  the  enforcement  action  "stops  the
                 clock" in terms of the  2 year qualifying  period  referred
                 to in paragraph  5(a) above in which a marriage  must  have
                 subsisted. No further time can then be accrued to meet this
                 criterion, e.g. whilst  making  representations,  appealing
                 against the decision or applying for judicial review.


             (v) This notice contains guidance as  to  the  approach  to  be
                 adopted  in  the  generality  of  cases  but  it  must   be
                 remembered  that  each  case  is  to  be  decided  on   its
                 individual merits and, for instance, a  particularly   poor
                 immigration history may  warrant  the  offender's  enforced
                 departure from the UK notwithstanding the factors  referred
                  to above.


        Criminal convictions
        6.   In cases where someone is liable to  immigration  control  has
             family ties here which would  normally  benefit  him/her  under
             paragraph 4 above but has criminal convictions, the severity of
             the offence should be  balanced against the stength  of  family
             ties. Serious crimes which are punishable with imprisonment  or
             a series of lesser crimes which show a propensity to re-offend,
             would  normally  outweigh  the  family  ties.   A   very   poor
             immigration  history  may   also   be   taken   into   account.
             Caseworkers  must  use  their  judgment  to  decide   what   is
             reasonable in any individual case.


        Children
        7.   The presence of children with the right of  abode  in  the  UK
             (see note below) is a factor to be  taken  into  account.    In
             cases involving children who  have  the  right  to  abode,  the
             crucial question is whether it is reasonable for the  child  to
             accompany his/her parents abroad.   Factors  to  be  considered
             include:


               a) the age of the child (in most cases  a  child  of  10  or
                  younger could reasonably be expected  to  adapt  to  life
                  abroad);
               b) serious ill-health for which treatment is  not  available
                  in the country to which the family is going.
             Note
              i) Children will have the right to abode must  commonly  as  a
                 result of  having been born in  the  United  Kingdom  to  a
                 parent settled here. It should  be  noted  that  under  the
                 British Nationality Act 1981 an illegitimate child born  in
                 the United Kingdom obtains British citizenship only if  the
                 mother is a British citizen or is  settled  in  the  United
                 Kingdom. Under the 1981 Act the status of the father  of  a
                 child born illegitimate has no bearing on  the  nationality
                 of the child unless she subsequently marries the mother and
                 thus legitimises the child.


        Marriages that postdate enforcement action
        8.   Where the person marries after the commencement of enforcement
             action removal should normally be enforced.  The  criteria  set
             out in paragraph 5 do not apply in such cases. Paragraph 284 of
             the  Immigration  Rules  makes  it  clear  that  one   of   the
             requirements for an extension of stay as the spouse of a person
             present and settled in the United Kingdom is that "the marriage
             has not taken place after a decision has been  made  to  deport
             the applicant or he has been recommended for deportation or has
             been given notice under Section 6(2P  of  the  Immigration  Act
             1971". Marriage cannot therefore  in  itself  be  considered  a
             sufficiently compassionate factor to militate against  removal.
             Detailed enquiries in order to ascertain whether  the  marriage
             is genuine and subsisting should not  normally  be  undertaken.
             The onus is on  the  subject  to  put  forward  any  compelling
             compassionate factors that he/she wishes to be considered which
             must be supported by documentary evidence.  Only  in  the  most
             exceptional circumstances  should removal action be stopped and
             the person allowed to stay.


        Marriage to European Economic Area (EEA nationals)
        9.   Any foreign national  who  contracts  a  marriage  to  an  EEA
             national should have  his/her  case  considered  in  the  first
             instance by EC group, B6 ... to whom the case must be referred,
             irrespective of whether the marriage took place before or after
             the initiation of enforcement action.


        Transitional arrangements
        10.  This  instruction  will  not  apply  retrospectively.  It  has
             immediate effect in cases where the marriage came to the notice
             of the Immigration and Nationality Department  after  13  March
             1996 irrespective of the date on which the marriage took place.
             case where the marriage came to notice on or prior to 13  March
             1996 should be considered under the terms of  DP2/93.


        Enquiries
        11. Any enquiries about this instruction should be addressed to the
              Enforcement Policy Group  in  Room  301,  Apollo  House  (Ext.
             8408/8409).


        Enforcement Policy Group
        13 March 1996"

17. The policy is also accompanied by a Flow Chart which begins: "This  flow
chart should be used as a guide  only.  There  will  occasionally  be  cases
which fall outside the guidelines".

Unmarried partners concession

18. Then there is the unmarried partners' concession, which gave effect  (as
from 13 October 1997) to Immigration Minister O'Brien's announcement  on  10
October 1997.  Its full title is "Concession Outside the  Immigration  Rules
for unmarried  partners  of  persons  present  and  settled  in  the  United
Kingdom, or being admitted on the same occasion for settlement, or  who  are
in the United Kingdom in a category leading to settlement, or who have  been
granted asylum".  The wording of the title highlights  the  fact  that  this
concession, so far as it relates to after-entry,  only  covers  persons  who
have  valid  leave  to  be  in  the  United  Kingdom:   it  does  not  cover
overstayers or illegal entrants and is not concerned with enforcement.

Immigration Rules paras 259A-0

19. There are also the Immigration Rules  dealing  with  unmarried  couples.
Provision in the Immigration Rules for people who are not  married  but  are
now in a permanent relationship were first made in  October  2000  (HC  395,
paras 295A-O).  Mr Macdonald stated  that  these  Rules  "replaced  hard-won
concessions concerning the admission of heterosexual  cohabitees  and  same-
sex partners, and were added to give  effect  to  the  right  to  family  or
private life under Article 8 of the  ECHR".   A  similar  feature  of  these
provisions is that (so far as they related to after-entry cases)  they  only
apply to persons who have valid leave to be in the United Kingdom.

The 16 June 1999 concession on relationships akin to marriage

20. As already noted, on 16 June 1999 Minister of State Mike O'Brien  stated
to Parliament:-

     "It has been decided that, in order to demonstrate  a  commitment  akin
        to  marriage,  it  is  not  necessary  to   demonstrate   a   prior
        cohabitation period of  four  years,  and  the  prior  cohabitation
        period has, therefore, been changed to two years.  The probationary
        period before settlement may be granted has been increased  to  two
        years, which means that there will  be  a  four  year  cohabitation
        period before the grant of settlement.  Where applicable, these new
        arrangements will be taken into account when  deciding  whether  or
        not to initiate enforcement action.  The other  provisions  of  the
        concession remain unchanged".

Home Office policy instructions

21. And then there are the Home Office  policy  instructions  which  amplify
DP3/96 and also deal with persons in  "common  law  relationships".  On  the
basis of the documentation shown to us (and as the parties  agreed  was  the
case) such instructions have accompanied DP3/96 ever since 1996.  They  were
produced before us in the form they now have in the Borders and  Immigration
Agency (BIA) web pages under  the  heading  Law  and  policy  -  Operational
Enforcement Manual -  Section  D  ("Other  Factors").  Chapter  36  of  this
Manual, headed "Extenuating Circumstances" deals with a number of  different
sets of circumstances affecting enforcement policy, including,  inter  alia:
long residence, marriage and common law relationships,  EU  and  Association
Agreement cases, children, medical cases.


(a) Instructions concerning DP3/96 in marriage cases

22. At ch.36.3.3, headed "Procedures when dealing  with  an  offender  whose
marriage falls to be considered under DP3/96" the Manual sets  out  guidance
which (the parties agreed) essentially replicates the text of DP3/96.

23. As already noted it  then  makes  clear  at  ch.36.3  that  DP3/96  only
applies to married persons. It does this in the following terms:

    "Marriage to a British citizen or a person settled here
    The policy guidelines DP3/96 for such marriages came into force  on  13
    March 1996 (see 36.3.2). Unlike the previous policy,  DP2/93,  it  does
    not provide for the consideration of common-law relationships  akin  to
    marriage".


(b) Instructions on unmarried partners

24. However, the chapter then goes on to deal under a  separate  sub-heading
with unmarried partners in 36.4. This  begins  by  reiterating  that  DP3/96
does not cover unmarried partners:

        "36.4 Common-law relationships
        Marriage  policy  in   DP2/93   applied   equally   to   common-law
        relationships akin to marriage.  Any common-law  relationship  that
        was brought to the notice of the Department on or before  13  March
        1996 should  be  considered  under  policy  DP2/93  (see  36.3  and
        36.3.1).   Its successor, DP3/96, did not extend  consideration  to
        common-law relationships akin to marriage and  such  relationships,
        if they came to notice after  13  March  1996,  no  longer  availed
        offenders."

25. It then proceeds to explain what procedures should be used  in  relation
to unmarried partners:


        "36.4.1 Procedures  when  dealing  with  an  offender  who  is  the
        unmarried partner of a person present and settled in the UK


        Enforcement  action  should  not  normally  be  initiated  in   the
        following circumstances:


        Where the subject has a genuine and subsisting relationship akin to
        marriage with a person present and settled in  the  United  Kingdom
        and the couple have lived together in this country for at least two
        years before the commencement of enforcement action


        and


        any previous marriage (or similar relationship) by either  partners
        has permanently broken down


        and


        it is unreasonable to expect the settled partner to  accompany  the
        subject on removal


        and


        the couple are not involved in a consanguineous  relationship  with
        one another.


        Where a person makes  representations  after  the  commencement  of
        enforcement action, on the  basis  of  a  common-law  or  same  sex
        relationship, the normal course will be to proceed  to  enforcement
        action unless it is clear that the couple had lived together for  2
        years or more before the enforcement action commenced and that  the
        parties are not involved in a consanguineous relationship with  one
        another.


        As with cases involving marriage any  compelling  or  compassionate
        circumstances  advanced  by  the   couple   must   be   considered.
        Similarly,  the  commencement  of  enforcement  action  "stops  the
        clock" in terms of the two-year qualifying period (see 36.3.2)."

26. The terms of 36.4.1 make clear that for  unmarried  couples  the  normal
course will be to proceed  to  enforcement  action  unless  the  couple  can
establish that they lived together for 2 years prior to the commencement  of
enforcement action. Although  its  substantive  provisions  are  not  wholly
identical with those of DP3/96, it can be seen that in  common  with  DP3/96
it lays down three main  requirements  (the  brackets  deal  with  unmarried
partners): a genuine and subsisting  marriage  (relationship);  cohabitation
for 2 years prior to commencement of enforcement  action;  and  that  it  be
"unreasonable to expect the settled spouse (partner)  to  accompany  his/her
spouse (partner) on removal.


Case-law

27. It is also salient to observe that, so far as we can tell,  and  perhaps
surprisingly, the point raised by Mr Macdonald about the  modifying   effect
on enforcement policy of  16 June 1999 statement to Parliament has not  been
the subject of any previous higher court or reported Tribunal decision.   We
highlight this because of course,  DP3/96  has  been  the  subject  of  much
litigation, with leading cases of the higher courts having included  Mahmood
[2000] EWCA Civ 315 and Ahmed and  Anor [1997]  EWHC  Admin  453  and,  most
recently, AB (Jamaica) [2007] EWCA Civ  1302;  and  reported  cases  of  the
Tribunal having included MA (DP3/96 - interpretation) [2005]  Algeria  UKIAT
00129, IA ('applying policies') Mauritius [2007] UKAIT 00082 and AA  (DP3/96
- Commencement of enforcement action)  Pakistan  [2007]  UKAIT  00016.    We
observe that in Mahmood Laws LJ stated:

            "DP3/96 is badly drafted ... I hope that the Home  Office  will
        look again at the terms of DP3/96, if only for clarity's sake".

and that in AB (Jamaica) Sedley LJ noted  that  its  having  been  drawn  up
prior to the Human Rights Act has caused difficulties since October 2000  in
operating it in tandem with a human rights jurisdiction.

28. Against this background we find that both the respondent in his  Reasons
for Refusal letter and  the  Immigration  Judge  misconstrued  the  relevant
policy guidelines.   DP3/96  was  a  policy  created  in  1996  setting  out
guidelines for dealing with marriage applications  for  overstayers  in  the
context of deciding whether or not to take enforcement action.  It  did  not
apply to  unmarried  partners.  However,  the  statement  to  Parliament  by
Minister  O'Brien  on  16  June  1999  did  have  application  to  unmarried
partners: its plain effect was that henceforth the change in the  period  of
prior cohabitation necessary to demonstrate a commitment  akin  to  marriage
from  four  years  to  two  years  had  to  be  taken  into  account,  where
applicable, when deciding whether not to initiate enforcement action.   From
that date  onwards,  therefore,  any  consideration  of  enforcement  action
against  an  unmarried  partner  had  to  be  made  on  the  basis  of  that
concession.

29. We do not have enough information to say with any certainty  how  or  to
what extent Home Office policy instructions to case workers  since  16  June
1999 until recently made clear  that  this  concession  applied.  Given  the
brevity of the 16 June 1999 statement to Parliament we think it very  likely
that when considering as from that date whether to proceed with  enforcement
action against unmarried partners caseworkers were  expected  to  apply  the
same or very similar  basic  requirements  as  those  set  out  for  married
persons in DP3/96. Further we remind ourselves that at the original  hearing
Mr Wright on behalf of the respondent had  accepted  that  the  Home  Office
policy instructions in force at  the  date  of  decision  and  the  date  of
hearing were in all relevant respects the same as are now  to  be  found  in
the Operational Enforcement Manual.

30.That caseworkers have been applying the 16 June 1999 concession as  later
codified in the Operational Enforcement  Manual  instructions  on  unmarried
partners at ch.36 is rather confirmed by the further  letter  from  Ms  Kiss
dated 8 February 2008 which enclosed an undated note from a Policy  Advisor,
Operational Enforcement Policy, Border and Immigration Agency stating:

    "Most of these enforcement cases fall to be considered under either the
    unmarried partner's  provision  or  DP3/96.  However,  there  are  rare
    occasions where the individual may fall into  both  policies.  This  is
    where they have cohabited before entering into marriage for part of the
    two year  relationship  requirement.  This  combination  of  two  years
    cohabitation must have occurred prior to  the  service  of  enforcement
    papers.


    Although there are no  instructions  for  caseworkers  to  follow  when
    dealing with these rare cases, we would expect a common sense  approach
    to be applied by caseworkers where a  subsisting  relationship  of  two
    years or more through a  combined  cohabitation  has  been  identified.
    However, each case must be considered on its individual merits. "

31. From the above it follows that whilst we have  accepted  Mr  Macdonald's
principal argument, we do not think he is right  to  describe  the  16  June
1999 change as an amendment or modification of  DP3/96.  DP3/96  has  always
been expressly confined to married persons. It has not been  modified.  What
has been modified is the wider enforcement policy of which DP3/96 is only  a
part (just as DP5/96, which sets out the seven years policy in  relation  to
children and is dealt with at chapter 36.7.1 of the Operational  Enforcement
Manual, is only one other part).

32. The 16 June 1999 change was  clearly  not  taken  into  account  by  the
respondent  in  his  reasons  for  refusal  letter  appertaining   to   this
appellant.  In that letter he confined the relevant policy to  that  dealing
with married couples, and in particular to its requirement  at  DP3/96  (ii)
that the marriage pre-date the service of an enforcement notice by at  least
two years.  That amounted to a failure  to  take  into  account  a  relevant
consideration,  namely  that  there  was  a  separate  concession  modifying
enforcement policy from 16 June 1999, such that enforcement action  was  not
to be normally initiated against an  unmarried  partner  who  could  show  a
period of cohabitation pre-dating the service of an  enforcement  notice  by
at least two years. Heeding what the Policy Advisor  letter  of  8  February
2008 said was a "common sense approach", that concession  should  have  been
applied notwithstanding that the appellant's was a  case  of  someone  whose
two year period of cohabitation  consisted  partly  in  a  period  when  the
couple lived in a relationship akin to marriage and party in a  period  when
they were living as a married couple.

33. Equally clearly, this concession was  not  taken  into  account  by  the
Immigration Judge.  That failure on his part amounted to  a  material  error
of  law  because,  on  his  finding,  the  appellant  had  met   all   other
requirements of the policy - (i) and (iii)  -  dealing,  respectively,  with
the marriage being genuine and  subsisting  and  it  being  unreasonable  to
expect the settled spouse to accompany his/her  spouse/partner  on  removal.
At the original hearing Mr Wright confirmed  that  the  respondent  had  not
raised any other reason  for  refusing  to  apply  his  own  policy  in  the
appellant's favour save for the three respects just identified and  Ms  Kiss
did not resile from that at the resumed hearing.


34. Mr Wright sought to argue at the original hearing that the  Home  Office
had deliberately maintained, as it was quite entitled to  do,  a  difference
in the treatment of married and unmarried partners.  Since February 1996  it
had been decided to restrict the ambit of policy  concessions  for  families
to married persons.  That was the effect of  DP3/96.   On  the  other  hand,
whilst since 1996 concessions and  eventually  Immigration  Rules  had  been
introduced to cover unmarried parties, these covered  only  those  who  were
lawfully present in the UK.  They did not extend to overstayers.  Mr  Wright
submitted that both the unmarried partners concession  and  the  Immigration
Rules at paragraph 295A-O (insofar as they  relate  to  persons  in  the  UK
seeking to remain here) contain a requirement that an applicant has  limited
leave to remain in the UK.  However, whilst that contention is  correct,  it
leaves unaffected the fact that the concession made by Minister  O'Brien  in
June 1999 plainly did extend to cover overstayers, since  it  dealt  in  its
final sentence with persons who were the potential  subject  of  enforcement
action.

35. Having concluded that the Immigration Judge materially erred in  law  we
must decide what decision to substitute for his.  Neither representative  at
either the original or resumed hearings suggested that  we  were  not  in  a
position to decide this matter for ourselves on the basis  of  the  evidence
before us.  Time  has  moved  on  since  the  Immigration  Judge  heard  the
appellant's appeal, but there is no  suggestion  that  there  has  been  any
significant change to the appellant's circumstances,  except  for  the  fact
that she is now pregnant and is  expecting  a  child  of  the  marriage.  In
considering the policy dimension we must bear in mind the guidance given  by
the Tribunal in AG and others (Policies; executive  discretions;  Tribunal's
powers) Kosovo [2007] UKIAT 0082, para 50 in particular.

36. The respondent has not sought to  suggest  that  there  were  any  other
reasons why he decided that  the  appellant  should  not  benefit  from  the
unmarried partners concession in the context  of  enforcement  policy  apart
from those three specified in the reasons for refusal letter.

37. Nor has there been  any  challenge  raised  by  the  respondent  to  the
Immigration Judge's finding  in  relation  to  the  genuine  and  subsisting
nature of the couple's relationship since their engagement on 11 March  2003
and in relation to it being unreasonable to expect her husband, for  medical
reasons, to accompany her to live in Macedonia.

38. Accordingly the only reason for the appellant not being able to  benefit
from government policy is one which rested on a mistaken  application  of  a
requirement of two years since marriage (which  has  to  be  a  genuine  and
subsisting marriage).  The correct requirement, as  introduced  by  Minister
O'Brien with effect from 16 June 1999, was two years since the  commencement
of a genuine and subsisting relationship akin to marriage.  Bearing in  mind
that we are entitled  to  expect  that  caseworkers  would  have  applied  a
"common sense" approach, we consider that the  appellant  should  have  been
found to meet the two year requirement, notwithstanding that some of it  was
comprised of cohabitation as a common law  couple  and  some  as  a  married
couple.  Given Mr Wright's concession  that  there  was  no  other  relevant
consideration, the  only  outcome  of  the  policy,  had  it  been  properly
applied, would have been to grant the appellant leave to remain   Hence  the
decision refusing leave to remain was not in accordance  with  the  law  and
accordingly the appellant's appeal against that refusal must be allowed.

39. In light of our finding that the decision was  not  in  accordance  with
the law, we can deal much more  briefly  with  the  Article  8  grounds  for
reconsideration. Since the decision it  is  evident  that  the  couple  have
continued  to  live  together  as  a  married  couple  and  the  appellant's
connections with the UK have strengthened.  It has been our finding that  at
the date of decision there was  an  applicable  governmental  concession  or
policy which should have been  applied  in  the  appellant's  favour.   That
being the case, the respondent has no continuing interest in  this  case  in
applying immigration control measures against the appellant in the  form  of
enforcement action.  In other words, the  interests  of  the  state  in  the
maintenance of effective immigration control, which are  normally  of  heavy
weight when conducting the Article 8 balancing exercise, carry no weight  in
this case: see PO (Interests of the state - Article 80 Nigeria [2006]  UKAIT
 00087 and  AG  and  others  (Policies;  executive  discretions;  Tribunal's
powers) Kosovo [2007]UKIAT 0082.

40. For the above reasons the Immigration Judge  materially  erred  in  law.
The decision we substitute is to allow the appellant's appeal  both  on  the
ground that the decision was not in accordance  with  the  law  and  on  the
ground that it was contrary to the appellant's Article 8 rights.

Direction

41. At the original hearing we heard submissions from the parties as to  the
remedy we should afford (if any) in  the  event  we  decided  to  allow  the
appeal on Article 8 grounds - as we have.   Mr  Wright  submitted  that  the
matter of the period of any grant of leave to remain should be left for  the
Secretary of State to determine.  Mr Macdonald initially submitted that,  to
the contrary, we had jurisdiction to make a grant  of  indefinite  leave  to
remain and should exercise that jurisdiction by directing a  grant  of  ILR.
However, his eventual position was that this was a matter he was content  to
leave  for  the  Tribunal  to  decide.   We  have  no  doubt  that  we  have
jurisdiction to direct a specific period of leave  - see  MS  (Ivory  Coast)
[2007] EWCA Civ 133. We must also bear in mind the  conclusions  reached  in
AG and others that in  a  case  where  there  is  nothing  to  displace  the
presumption created by a policy in favour  of  granting  leave  "the  appeal
should be allowed, with a direction as  indicated".  However,  the  relevant
remedy, had the Secretary of State decided at the date of decision to  grant
a period of leave, would have been a grant  of  Discretionary  Leave  for  3
years, not ILR: that has been confirmed by the letter from Ms Kiss  dated  8
February 2008, which states that  in  cases  falling  within  the  ambit  of
DP3/96 and related polices dealing with common law relationships, it is  the
Discretionary Leave policy which is applied and that policy provides  for  a
standard period of three years Discretionary  Leave.  Hence  whilst  we  are
satisfied it would be appropriate to make a direction, it is for a grant  of
Discretionary Leave for 3 years, not ILR.

42. We add one other comment. It seems to us that the Home Office  would  do
well to consolidate its policies on enforcement action, so as to  avoid  the
difficulties - highlighted by this case  -  posed  by  the  co-existence  of
DP3/96 and a parallel concession relating to enforcement action  in  respect
of unmarried partners (a concession quite separate from  what  is  known  as
the "unmarried partners' concession). The facts of this case also  highlight
a failure of the  texts  of  any  policy  or  casework  instructions  to  be
precise about what approach  should  be  taken  to  persons  in  a  "hybrid"
situation of having two years  of  living  together  comprised  in  part  of
simple cohabitation as a couple and in part of  cohabitation  as  a  married
couple.

43. We remind ourselves of what Laws LJ said in Mahmood:  "DP3/96  is  badly
drafted ... I hope that the Home Office will look  again  at  the  terms  of
[this policy], if only for clarity's sake". It seems to  us,  some  7  years
on, not  only  has  DP3/96  remained  unredrafted  but  the  current  policy
instructions on enforcement action continue to lack  overall  coherence  and
clarity.  We  also  remind  ourselves  of  Sedley  LJ's  observation  in  AB
(Jamaica) that the continuing co-existence  of  DP3/96  since  October  2000
causes a degree of mismatch.

44. For the above reasons, the Immigration Judge materially  erred  in  law.
The decision we substitute  is  to  allow  the  appellant's  appeal  on  the
grounds that the decision was not in accordance with the law  and  on  human
rights  grounds  (that  the  decision  amounted  to  a  violation   of   the
appellant's right to respect for family life  under  Article  8  ECHR).  The
direction we make is for a grant of Discretionary Leave for 3 years.




Signed                                  Date


Senior Immigration Judge Storey
