
VW ("Extension"; curtailment of leave) Jamaica [2007] UKAIT 00042

                       ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

                                                        Heard at: Birmingham
                                              Date of Hearing: 30 March 2007
                                         Date of Promulgation: 25 April 2007
                                   Before:


 Mr C M G Ockelton, Deputy President of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
                     Designated Immigration Judge French
                         Immigration Judge Grimmett

                                   Between

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the Appellant:           Mr Ahmed, instructed by Immigration Assist
Limited
For the Respondent:          Mr Khan, Home Office Presenting Officer

(1) An "extension" of leave  requires  existing  leave:  a  grant  of  leave
following a period without leave is not an "extension".  (2)  Leave  granted
outside the Immigration Rules cannot lawfully be curtailed  under  paragraph
323(ii) of HC 395.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Jamaica.  She appealed to an  Immigration
    Judge against the decision of the respondent  on  11  October  2006  to
    curtail her leave.  The Immigration  Judge  allowed  the  appeal.   The
    respondent sought and obtained an order for reconsideration.  Thus  the
    matter comes before us.

 2. The appellant entered the United Kingdom on 12 May 2000 and was granted
    six months leave to enter as a visitor.  Within a short period of  time
    she had met a man whom we will call "the sponsor", with whom she  began
    a relationship.  When her leave expired  she  remained  in  the  United
    Kingdom without leave.  Her daughter by the sponsor was born in  August
    2001.  She married the sponsor in February 2002.  In March  2003,  when
    she had been an overstayer for well over two  years,  she  applied  for
    leave to remain on the basis of her marriage.  On 27 July 2004 a second
    child was born.  On June 2005, in response to her application of  March
    2003,  the  appellant  was  granted  three  years  to   remain   on   a
    discretionary  basis  outside  the  Immigration  Rules.    Difficulties
    developed in the marriage in the winter of 2005, and the sponsor became
    violent towards the appellant.  The appellant left the matrimonial home
    with the children in  2006.   The  parties  to  the  marriage  are  now
    divorced and the sponsor does not  see  either  the  appellant  or  the
    children.  On 5 July 2006 an application was made  on  the  appellant's
    behalf for indefinite leave to remain in the United Kingdom as a victim
    of domestic violence.  That application was refused on the ground  that
    the appellant could not meet the requirements  of  the  Rules,  and  in
    addition the appellant's existing leave was curtailed because,  as  the
    relationship  had  broken   down,   the   circumstances   under   which
    discretionary leave was granted  no  longer  existed.   The  Notice  of
    Decision is headed as follows:

                "REFUSAL TO VARY LEAVE or VARIATION OF LEAVE


    Paragraph 289C with reference to 289A(i), 289A(iv) and 323(ii) of HC
                             395 (as amended)."

 3. Paragraph 289A(i) of the Statement of Changes in Immigration Rules,  HC
    395 requires an applicant to have been "admitted to the United  Kingdom
    or given an extension of stay for a period of two years as  the  spouse
    or civil partner of a person present and settled here".  Paragraph  323
    is as follows:

      "323. A person's leave to enter or remain may be curtailed:
             (i)  on any of the grounds  set  out  in  paragraph  322(2)-(5)
                 above; or
             (ii)      if he ceases to meet the requirements  of  the  Rules
                 under which his leave to enter or remain was granted; or
             (iii)     if he is the dependant, or is seeking leave to remain
                 as the dependant, of an asylum applicant  whose  claim  has
                 been refused and  whose  leave  has  been  curtailed  under
                 section 7 of the1993 Act, and he does not qualify for leave
                 to remain in his own right.
             (iv)      on any of the grounds set out in paragraph 339A  (i)-
                 (vi) and paragraph 339G (i)-(vi)."

 4. The Immigration Judge thought that the appellant met  the  requirements
    of paragraph 289A(i).  She reasoned that as there is in the Immigration
    Rules  no  definition  of  "extension",  and  as  the  application  for
    indefinite leave to remain had been dealt with as  though  it  were  an
    application under paragraph 289A, the grant of  three  years  leave  to
    remain must be regarded as having been  an  extension  of  leave  as  a
    spouse.  We are confident that the Immigration Judge was wrong.  First,
    it is not quite right to say that there is no definition of "extension"
    in the Immigration Rules.  So far as extension of leave to remain as  a
    spouse is concerned, the provisions are in paragraph 284, and we cannot
    see that there is in the Immigration Rules  any  provision  for  having
    extension of leave to remain as a  spouse  save  under  paragraph  284.
    That paragraph requires existing leave: so a  person  without  existing
    leave cannot have an extension of leave to remain  as  a  spouse  under
    paragraph 284 or, therefore, at all.  Secondly, it is inherent  in  the
    meaning of the word "extension" that the entity  so  described  touches
    and continues the entity of which it is said to be  an  extension.   An
    extension of leave therefore necessarily means the adding of  a  period
    of leave to a period already in existence, so  that  the  period  as  a
    whole is longer.  A grant of a period of leave to a person who  had  no
    leave cannot be an "extension", even if the  person  had  had,  in  the
    past, some other period of leave.  It is a grant of new leave,  not  an
    extension of previous leave.

 5.  For  these  reasons  the  appellant  did  not,  at  the  time  of  her
    application, meet the requirements of paragraph 289A.  She did not meet
    the requirements of any other paragraph and was thus not entitled under
    the Rules to indefinite leave to remain.

 6. The decision against which  she  appeals  did  not  merely  refuse  her
    indefinite leave: it purported to cancel the leave that she had.   That
    leave was not leave granted under the Rules.  We were shown the  Asylum
    Policy Instructions (APIs) under which  it  was,  apparently,  granted.
    (That is because grants of  discretionary  leave  to  remain  are  most
    frequently  (though  not  exclusively)   made   to   those   who   have
    unsuccessfully claimed asylum.)  The APIs we were shown indicate that a
    grant of leave to remain on the basis of a relationship with  a  person
    in the United Kingdom must not be made unless the officer dealing  with
    the case is satisfied that there  is  a  right  under  Article  8.   It
    follows that such questions as  whether  family  life  can  be  enjoyed
    abroad, and whether the applicant can be expected to go  abroad  for  a
    short time in order to obtain entry clearance, must already  have  been
    resolved  in  the  applicant's  favour.   The  precise  nature  of  the
    necessary relationship, and  whether  it  was  a  relationship  between
    adults or whether it might be  a  relationship  between  a  parent  and
    child, is not set out in  any  detail  in  the  APIs.   These  are  all
    considerations quite different from those arising under paragraph 289A.



 7. As we have indicated, the curtailment  of  the  appellant's  leave  was
    purportedly under paragraph 323(ii).  That paragraph provides only  for
    the curtailment of leave granted  under  the  Immigration  Rules.   The
    appellant's leave was not granted under Immigration  Rules  and  it  is
    difficult to see that it was appropriately curtailed  by  reference  to
    paragraph 323 at all.  Because the circumstances  under  which  it  was
    granted depend not on the Rules but on the APIs, and because there  was
    no indication at the time of  its  grant  precisely  why  it  had  been
    granted, this is a point of some substance.  What the  officer  dealing
    with the application for indefinite leave to remain seems to have  done
    is indeed to treat the application as though  it  were  an  application
    under paragraph 289A, when it could not be because of the nature of the
    leave which had been granted.  The officer's mistake about  that  could
    neither change the nature of the leave  nor  make  it  subject  to  the
    provisions of paragraph 323(ii).

 8. We have no doubt that the Secretary of State is entitled,  under  s3(3)
    of the Immigration Act 1971, to curtail existing  leave.   But  in  the
    present case  that  decision  would  need  to  be  made  after  a  full
    consideration of the circumstances under which the  leave  was  granted
    and the reasons why it was granted, rather than by  a  misunderstanding
    of  the  position,  misapplication  of  the   Immigration   Rules   and
    (apparently) a failure to consider all relevant factors.

 9. The appellant's original grounds of appeal assert at paragraph  9  that
    the decision to curtail under paragraph 323(ii) is wrong in  law.   The
    issue we have been considering  is  not  removed  from  the  Tribunal's
    jurisdiction by s86(6) of the 2002 Act, because nobody  is  asking  the
    Secretary of State to depart from the Immigration Rules.  The  argument
    is simply that he should not purport to  apply  paragraph  323  of  the
    Immigration Rules to circumstances in which it  does  not  apply.   The
    Immigration Judge ought to have found that  the  purported  curtailment
    under paragraph 323 was a decision which was not in accordance with the
    law and should have allowed  the  appeal  on  that  ground  only.   She
    materially erred in law in allowing the appeal  under  the  Immigration
    Rules.  We substitute a determination allowing the  appellant's  appeal
    on the curtailment point only on the ground that that decision was  not
    in accordance with the law.

10. The effect of this is as  follows.   The  appellant  has  discretionary
    leave to remain until 21 June 2008.  It is open  to  the  Secretary  of
    State to curtail that leave on any grounds that may be  appropriate  or
    to allow it to run its course.  The appellant can have  no  expectation
    that it will be renewed.  So far  as  concerns  the  appellant's  claim
    under paragraph 289A, the position is, as we have indicated,  that  she
    cannot meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules.  The decision to
    refuse her application for indefinite leave to remain did not, however,
    leave her without any extant leave,  because  her  discretionary  leave
    continued.  For that reason she had and has  no  exercisable  right  of
    appeal against the refusal of indefinite leave to remain.

11. The appellant's appeal is allowed for the reasons and to the extent set
    out above.










                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT
                                                             Date:
