
ar

Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
                             ZQ (serving soldier) Iraq CG [2009] UKAIT 00048

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham, 10 June 2008 and Field     |                           |
|House,                                          |                           |
| 23 January 2009                                |                           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before


                       SENIOR Immigration Judge STOREY
                       SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE MATHER
                            IMMIGRATION JUDGE COX



                                   Between


                                     ZQ
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the appellant: Ms  S  Akinbolu  of  Counsel  instructed  by  Rai  Braich
    Solicitors
For the respondent: Mr L Petryszyn, Home Office Presenting Officer (10 June
2008), Mr J Eadie QC and Mr S Wordsworth instructed by the Treasury
Solicitor (thereafter)

i) There is no reason to seek to develop special principles of  refugee  law
to deal with cases of soldiers. The approach to the meaning  of  persecution
and protection (and of the need for protection to be practical) as  set  out
in Horvath [2000] UKHL 37 and  in  the  Persons  In  Need  of  International
Protection Regulations SI 2006/2525 is well able to accommodate such  cases.
The case of Fadli [2000] EWCA Civ 297 has to be  read  and  applied  in  the
light of in the subsequent decisions of the higher courts,  including  Sepet
and Bulbul [2003] UKHL 15 and Krotov [2004] EWCA Civ 69 as well  as  in  the
light of the Protection Regulations.

ii) Whether an asylum claimant is a soldier rather than  a  civilian  has  a
significant impact on risk assessment. Assessment of any harm a  soldier  if
returned might face must  take  account  of  his  particular  circumstances,
including when he is  not  in  barracks  or  on  active  duty.  However,  in
general, serving soldiers cannot expect to  be  protected  against  military
violence.

iii) As a general rule fears a soldier may  have  about  having  to  perform
military service cannot give rise to a refugee claim.  That  rule,  however,
is subject to exception. One exception already identified  by  the  Tribunal
and higher courts concerns those who would face punishment for being  forced
to participate in acts contrary to international humanitarian law  (IHL).  A
further exception may arise when serving  soldiers  face  being  exposed  by
their country's commanders to a  consistent  pattern  of  military  violence
contrary to the laws of war. However, where fighting of this kind is  taking
place the state's duty to protect its soldiery will be  heavily  attenuated,
by virtue of its primary responsibility to defend itself and  its  citizenry
and will in any event vary depending on a wide range of circumstances.

iv) Enemy targeting of a soldier off duty or of members  of  his  family  is
not necessarily contrary to IHL but may very often be contrary to IHL  norms
of military necessity, distinction and proportionality.

v) Insofar as the risk  categories  of  NS  (Iraq;  perceived  collaborator;
relocation) Iraq CG [2007] UKAIT 00046 may cover persons who  by  virtue  of
their work have become members of the Multinational Forces or the  Coalition
Provisional Authority, application of its guidance  will  need  to  bear  in
mind that the state's duty to protect them will be very limited.

vi) NH (Iraq-Yazidis) Iraq CG [2004] UKIAT 00306 is no longer to be
followed.  Whilst being a Yazidi does not as such place a person at risk on
return to central and southern Iraq, it is a significant risk factor and
special reasons would need to exist for not finding that such a person
faces a real risk of persecution or treatment contrary to Article 3 ECHR.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1. At the heart of this case is the question of whether a soldier who  faces
return to serve in his country's armed forces can ever succeed  in  a  claim
for international protection based solely on his fear  that  his  commanders
will fail to protect him against being the victim of war crimes.  Throughout
this determination we use the term "soldier" to describe  a  member  of  the
armed forces, the term "laws of war" or  "rules  of  war"  as  shorthand  to
describe the rules of international humanitarian law  (IHL),  and  the  term
"war crimes" (unless the context specifies otherwise) as a  rough  shorthand
for serious violations of the laws of war. At different points we  cite  the
main treaties comprising IHL, namely:

      the 1949 Geneva Convention I for the Amelioration of the Condition  of
      the Wounded and Sick in Armed Forces in the Field (GCI);
      the 1949 Geneva Convention II for the Amelioration of the Condition of
      Wounded, Sick and Shipwrecked Members of Armed Forces at Sea (GCII);
      the 1949 Geneva Convention III Relative to the Treatment of  Prisoners
      of War (GCIII);
       Geneva Convention IV Relative to the Protection of  Civilian  Persons
      in Time of War (GCIV);
      1977 Protocol I Additional to the  Geneva  Conventions  of  12  August
      1949, and relating to the Protection of Victims of International Armed
      Conflicts (API); and
      The 1977 Protocol II Additional to the Geneva Conventions of 12 August
      1949, and Relating to the Protection of Victims  of  Non-International
      Armed Conflicts (APII)

2. However, we should emphasise that our essential focus when  doing  so  is
on the above as a  source  for  IHL  norms   accepted  as  forming  part  of
customary international law and we are  concerned  primarily  with  the  IHL
norms  applicable  to  internal  [i.e.  non-international]  rather  than  to
international armed conflict. For the most part our focus is on persons  who
are ordinary soldiers, i.e. members of their country's armed forces  and  we
do not as such address the sometimes more  complex  situation  of  irregular
fighters. Nor do we seek to deal with persons who are members of the  police
or intelligence services except to the extent that IHL would treat  them  as
forming part of a country's armed forces. We should add that  although  this
case is concerned with return to a country, Iraq, which (at  least  for  IHL
purposes) remains  in  a  state  of  internal  armed  conflict,  it  is  not
concerned  with  the  issue  of  whether  an  appellant  can   qualify   for
subsidiary/humanitarian  protection  under  Article  15(c)  of  the  Refugee
Qualification Directive (para 339(iv)  of  Statement  of  Immigration  Rules
HC395 as amended), since the material scope of that  provision  is  confined
to civilians. This case is about a soldier. Hence we do not need to  examine
the relevance of the recent judgment of the European Court of Justice  which
dealt with Article 15(c), Case  C-465/07  Elgafaji  v  Staatssecretaris  van
Justitie, 17 February 2009 or the Court of  Appeal  judgment  in  QD  (Iraq)
[2009] EWCA Civ 620.

3. The appellant is a national of Iraq. On 17  August  2005  the  respondent
decided to remove him as an illegal entrant  having  refused  to  grant  him
asylum. On 10 May 2006 Immigration Judge (IJ) Hobbs  dismissed  his  appeal.
His  subsequent  application  for  an  order  for  reconsideration  of  this
dismissal  resulted  in  a  decision  dated  8  November  2006   by   Senior
Immigration  Judge  (SIJ)  Nichols  who  found  a  material  error  of  law.
Following a  second-stage  reconsideration  hearing  Designated  Immigration
Judge (DIJ) O'Malley decided on 31  January  2007  to  (again)  dismiss  his
appeal. However, onward appeal by the  appellant  resulted  in  a  Court  of
Appeal  consent order  dated 28 January  2008  remitting  his  case  on  the
basis of an agreed Statement of  Reasons,  which  highlighted  two  concerns
about DIJ O'Malley's decision: first his treatment of  the  appellant  as  a
member of the New Iraq Army (or Iraqi Security Forces or ISF)  returning  to
military duties without placing that in the context of his previous  history
of attacks on him and his family by insurgents in  Mosul;   and  second  the
fact that the assessment of risk to the appellant  should  have  encompassed
not just his life when serving as a soldier  but  also  his  life  when  not
actually performing military service. The Statement concluded thus:

      "Accordingly, on the basis of a grant of [permission to appeal to  the
      Court of Appeal] by Senior Immigration Judge Storey on  23  May  2007,
      the Respondent accepts that there is   potential  arguability  in  the
      Appellant's case and that it would be pragmatic for the matter  to  be
      remitted back to the Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal.  The  parties
      request that the sole matter under consideration upon remittal is  the
      risk to the Appellant as a member of the New Iraqi Army  returning  to
      military duties in conjunction with the previous history of attack  by
      insurgents and the targeting of his family in Mosul."

4. The appellant's appeal was the subject of a hearing in Birmingham  on  10
June 2008 before SIJ Storey and IJ Cox. The  Tribunal  subsequently  decided
that it needed further submissions on a number of  questions  which  it  set
out in a memorandum to the parties dated 22  August  2008.  This  memorandum
also put the parties on notice that there would  be  a  further  hearing  in
which the Tribunal would be joined by a third member, SIJ  Mather.  At  this
further hearing held at Field House on 23 January 2009 Miss  Akinbolu  again
represented the appellant. Representation of the  respondent,  however,  now
passed to Mr Eadie QC and Mr Wordsworth, the former dealing mainly with  the
law and the latter with the  application  of  the  law  to  the  appellant's
particular circumstances. The parties confirmed their consent to  the  panel
now being three. Subsequent to the hearing  we  learnt  that  the  Court  of
Appeal had given judgment in Secretary of State for Defence v Smith (on  the
application of) [2009] EWCA Civ 441 and gave until 12  June  2009   for  the
parties to comment on its implications for this case; we  have  taken  their
responses into account.  Before  we  proceed  further  we  must  record  our
indebtedness to the parties for the painstaking efforts they made to  ensure
that we had before us detailed submissions on the relevant legal  issues  as
well as further background country information.

The Birmingham hearing

5. At the hearing  in  Birmingham  the  Tribunal  heard  evidence  from  the
appellant who briefly amplified his supplementary statement dated 9  January
2007. In summary his evidence was that his own tribe, the Qaidi, were to  be
found throughout the Kurdistan region, but  he  had  no  friends  or  family
outside his own home area of Mosul. He had left his barracks in  Baghdad  in
May 2005 after having been informed that members  of  his  family  had  been
killed at his family home in Mosul and he returned there for their  funeral.
At the time of the funeral, the Army had sent soldiers to see  how  he  was;
they were aware of his situation. He had not gone absent without  leave.  To
his understanding they were hoping he would  return  to  his  post  although
they were aware he was fearful of his own safety and planned to leave  Iraq.
 They said to him, "Come back". In cross examination Mr  Petryszyn  did  not
seek to challenge this further evidence, but  simply  to  clarify  that  the
appellant spoke Izdiati and Arabic.

6. At the end of the  appellant's  oral  evidence,  both  parties  confirmed
there was no dispute about the essential facts relating to  the  appellant's
history.

The hearing at Field House

7. At the further hearing on 23 January 2009 the parties sought  principally
to address a number of questions the Tribunal had posed  in  its  memorandum
to the parties. In essence these questions were: whether  in a country in  a
state of internal armed conflict  a  soldier  who  is  off  duty  remains  a
soldier; what was the status of Fadli [2000] EWCA Civ 297 in  the  light  of
Sepet and Bulbul [2003] UKHL 15 and Krotov [2004] EWCA Civ 69 ; whether  the
protection a state affords its armed forces is  to  be  regarded  as  always
less than that it is expected to afford  to  its  civilian  population;  and
whether in relation to soldiers the case  law  of  the   European  Court  of
Human Rights (ECtHR) suggests that the position when   assessing  whether  a
person faces a real risk of treatment contrary to Articles 2 and  3  of  the
ECHR is any different from the position when  assessing  whether  he  is  at
real risk of persecution.   There were  also  questions  about  whether  the
country guidance case of NS (Iraq: perceived collaborator: relocation)  Iraq
CG [2007] UKAIT  00046  required  revision  and  about  the  latest  country
information.

8. Both parties agreed that for  IHL  purposes  there  continued  to  be  an
internal armed  conflict  in  Iraq  and  that,  as  a  consequence,  it  was
important when assessing risk on return to differentiate between  "soldiers"
and "civilians".  Rather  than  summarise  the  parties'  written  and  oral
submissions en bloc, we shall seek to deal with the  arguments  they  raised
when examining the main questions before us.

The accepted facts

9. As already noted, this case was remitted to the Tribunal by the Court  of
Appeal on a limited basis. We were not asked to revisit the facts  as  found
by DIJ O'Malley.  Further, at the hearing in  Birmingham,  the  respondent's
representative took no issue with the additional oral evidence given by  the
appellant intended to clarify certain matters not dealt with by the DIJ.  In
its subsequent memorandum to the parties the Tribunal had stated  that  this
was not a case where there was any dispute as  to  the  facts  and  that  Mr
Petryszyn (the respondent's representative at the  Birmingham  hearing)  had
not sought  to challenge what little further  oral  evidence  the  appellant
gave at the last hearing. The respondent's response to concomitant  Tribunal
 directions  requiring  the  parties  to  submit  any  further  evidence  or
submissions prior to the next hearing before the  expanded  panel  at  Field
House on 23 January 2009 took no issue with this statement or  indeed   with
any matters of fact relating to the appellant's personal history.

10. It was therefore a matter of some surprise to us that at the 23  January
hearing Mr Wordsworth sought  at  several  points  during  the  respondent's
submissions to  ask  us  to  revisit  certain  aspects  of  the  appellant's
account.  In particular, he asked us to revisit the matter  of  whether  the
appellant was still a  soldier when he left Iraq. As we pointed out to  him,
the proper time for any revisiting of the facts relating to the  appellant's
past history had long passed.

11. In any event it seems to us  that  even  if  we  had  been  prepared  to
revisit the facts relating to the appellant's past  history,  we  would  not
have been persuaded to take a different view from that set  out  immediately
below.  We accept that Mr Wordsworth was able to identify some  things  said
by the appellant which suggested a different picture.  At the same  time  we
note that in relation to each of the  issues  of  fact  he  identified,  the
DIJ's findings were based on what the  appellant  had  written  or  said  in
other places and in our view it was entirely open to him to reach a view  as
to which parts of the appellant's evidence he  considered  to  be  credible.
The respondent had not sought to argue in the context  of  the  second-stage
reconsideration that  the  existence  of  possible  inconsistencies  in  the
appellant's evidence regarding such matters  was  a  reason  to  reject  his
credibility.

12. In summary, therefore,  the  following  are  the  accepted  facts.   The
appellant is a Yazidi whose home area is Mosul. In  August  2003  he  joined
the  ISF. He was based in Kerkush in Dalia city. He held the rank  of  Squad
Leader. He was engaged in  patrols  and  was  involved  in  actions  against
insurgents.  On 1 May 2005 he was in the military camp in  Baghdad  when  he
was told his family home in Mosul had been attacked, his wife,  one  of  his
sons and his brother being murdered, in his brother's case by beheading.  He
had learnt that a photograph was found  after  the  attack,  placed  on  the
garden wall. It showed the appellant with some  American  soldiers  and  had
been taken from a family photograph album. It had been splashed  with  blood
and written above it (in Arabic) were the words "do you think your  American
brothers will be useful for you now?" In a  state  of  shock  the  appellant
stayed in Mosul with other members of his family. On 7 May  2005  a  car  he
was driving was  attacked  by  gunmen  and  a  passenger  (his  cousin)  was
murdered. He drove straight to the police  station.  They  told  him  to  be
careful and to protect himself. Leaving his car  with  them   he  then  went
into hiding, changing houses frequently, always staying with  relatives.  It
was eventually decided he should leave  Iraq  and  his  father  and  brother
found an agent. He arrived in the UK on 8 June 2005.

13. In relation to the above it is as well  that  we  clarify  why  we  have
described the appellant's home area as Mosul. We  do  so  not  only  because
that was the basis on which his case was remitted to us  but  also  because,
having studied his evidence, it is  clear  that  even  though  he  has  made
mention    of    more    than    one     place     as     his     home     -
        his own family home in Mosul (which was attacked) and  his  parent's
home in Til Kaif, Dakhan Alsaker, just  outside  Mosul  -  both  places  are
within the Ninewah Province (not  within  the  Kurdish  Regional  Government
(KRG) and his parent's home is also within the vicinity of  the  area  known
as Mosul.

Our assessment

The relevance of whether an asylum applicant is a soldier or a civilian

14. An initial question raised by this case was what  relevance  it  had  to
assessing a person's asylum claim that  he  was  a  soldier  rather  than  a
civilian. Of the three types of protection we are obliged to consider  under
the statutory  framework  -  refugee  protection,  subsidiary  (humanitarian
protection) and Article 3 ECHR  protection  -  only  Article  15(c)  of  the
Refugee Qualification Directive (see 339C of the  Statement  of  Immigration
Rules HC 395 as amended) depends upon a  distinction  between  civilian  and
non-civilian  status  (it  refers  to  the  need  to  show  a  threat  to  a
"civilian's life or person"). However,  Article  9  of  the  same  Directive
(replicated in reg 5 of the  Person  In  Need  of  International  Protection
Regulations (hereafter "the Protection Regulations") SI 2006/2525)  provides
as follows:

    "Acts of persecution
    1.     Acts of persecution within the meaning of Article  1(a)  of  the
         Geneva Convention  must:
         (a)      be sufficiently serious by their nature or  repetition  as
             to constitute a severe violation  of  basic  human  rights  in
             particular  the rights from which  the  derogation  cannot  be
             made under Article 15(2) of the European  Convention  for  the
             Protection of Human Rights and Fundament Freedoms; or
         (b)       be  an  accumulation  of  various   measures,   including
             violations of human rights which is sufficiently severe as  to
             affect an individual  in a  similar  manner  as  mentioned  in
             (a).
    2.     Acts of persecution as qualified in paragraph 1 can, inter alia,
         take the form of:
         (a)      acts of physical or mental  violence,  including  acts  of
             sexual violence;
         (b)      legal, administrative,  police  and/or  judicial  measures
             which  are  in  themselves   discriminatory   or   which   are
             implemented in a discriminatory manner;
         (c)      prosecution or punishment  which  is  disproportionate  or
             discriminatory;
         (d) denials of judicial redress resulting  in  disproportionate  or
             discriminatory punishment;
         (e)      prosecution or punishment for refusal to perform  military
             service in a conflict, where performing military service would
             include crimes or acts falling under the exclusion clauses  as
             set out in Article 12(2);
         (f)      acts of a gender-specific or child-specific nature.
    3.     In accordance with Article  2(c)  there  must  be  a  connection
         between the reasons  mentioned  in  Article  10  and  the  acts  of
         persecution as qualified in paragraph 1."

15. It can be seen  from  Article  9(2)(e)  that  acts  of  persecution  can
include acts directed  against  soldiers  who  refuse  to  perform  military
service entailing "crimes or acts falling under  the  exclusion  clauses  as
set out in Article 12(2)".  (The  latter  defines  such  crimes  as  "crimes
against peace, a war crime, or a crime against humanity, as defined  in  the
international instruments drawn up to make  provision  in  respect  of  such
crimes"(Article 12(2)(a)). In what follows - and as already indicated -   we
shall use as convenient, if  not  entirely  accurate,  shorthand  for  these
crimes the expression "war crimes".) Having said that, however,  we  do  not
consider that either the provisions of the Qualification  Directive  or  any
principles of case law necessitate or warrant  the  development  of  special
principles of refugee law to deal with cases of soldiers;  it  is  rather  a
question of having regard to their  particular  circumstances  as  and  when
relevant. We shall return to this point below.

The issue of whether a soldier remains a soldier when off-duty or on leave

16. As regards  the  first  question  on  which  we  sought  submissions   -
whether  for  the  purposes  of  assessing  risk  under  both  the   Refugee
Convention, the Qualification Directive (Article 15) and  the  Human  Rights
Convention, a soldier remains a soldier even when off duty or  on  leave   -
both parties were agreed that the answer enjoined by international law  must
be that he remains a soldier from the time that he enlists  until  the  time
he resigns or is discharged.  Since they agreed on this we do  not  need  to
set out their submissions, but since the  latter  were  confined  to  simple
recital of some  relevant  materials,  it  is  appropriate  that  we  should
briefly set out our own conclusions on this question.

17. Under international law there do not appear to  be  any  hard  and  fast
definitions, although it is assumed that in  most cases it will be  easy  to
tell if someone is a soldier or a civilian.  Article 43(1) of API is  widely
seen by leading commentators as furnishing key elements of a  customary  law
definition of "armed forces", although its final sentence is more  hortatory
than definitional.  It provides:

      "1.    The armed forces of a  party  to  a  conflict  consist  of  all
          organised armed forces,  groups  and  units  which  are  under  a
          command  responsible  to  that  party  for  the  conduct  of  its
          subordinates, even if that party is represented by  a  government
          or an authority not recognised by an adverse  party.  Such  armed
          forces shall be subject to an internal disciplinary system which,
          inter  alia,  shall  enforce  compliance  with   the   rules   of
          international law applicable in armed conflict."

18. Although API only  deals  with  international  armed  conflict,  leading
commentators see the characteristics identified in  the  first  sentence  of
Article 43(1) as holding good for internal armed conflict as well.

19. The IHL treaties do not refer to  soldiers.  The  term  "combatant"   is
used in the context of international armed conflict, but not in relation  to
internal armed conflict. Art 43(2) of API states:

      "Members of the armed forces of a Party  to  a  conflict  (other  than
      medical personnel and chaplains covered by Article 33 of  [GCIII]  are
      combatants, that is to say, they have a right to participate  directly
      in hostilities".

Nonetheless the position at customary international law appears to  be  that
the  term  "combatant"  can  be  used  to  describe  protagonists  in   both
international and internal armed conflicts: see J Heinckaerts and L  Doswald
Beck,  Customary International Law, Vol I, 2005, Rules 11-13.

20. Even though we lack precise definitions there are  several  reasons  for
thinking that under international law a soldier  does  not  cease  to  be  a
soldier just because he goes off duty or  on  home  leave.  As  the  Appeals
Chamber observed in Prosecutor v Blaskic (Judgement) Appeals  Chamber,  Case
No.IT-95-14-A, 29 July 2004 at para 114,  "the  specific  situation  of  the
victim at the time the crimes [war crimes or crimes  against  humanity]  are
committed may not be determinative of his civilian or  non-civilian  status.
If he is indeed a member of an armed organisation, the fact that he  is  not
armed or in combat at the time of the commission of crimes, does not  accord
him  civilian  status."  Immediately  preceding  this  passage  the  Appeals
Chamber had cited the ICRC Commentary to Article 43 of API (at 1676) in  the
following terms:

      "All members of armed forces are combatants, and only members  of  the
      armed forces are combatants.  This should therefore dispense with  the
      concept of quasi-combatants, which has  sometimes  been  used  on  the
      basis of activities related more or less directly with the war effort.
      Similarly, any concept of a part-time status, a  semi-civilian,  semi-
      military status soldier by night and peaceful  citizen  by  day,  also
      disappears. A civilian who is incorporated in  an  armed  organisation
      such as that mentioned in paragraph 1, becomes a member  of  both  the
      military and a combatant throughout the duration  of  the  hostilities
      (or  in  any  case,  until  he  is  permanently  demobilized  by   the
      responsible command referred to in paragraph 1) whether or not  he  is
      in combat, or for the time being armed..."

21. The view is further supported by academic  authority.  As  stated  by  D
Fleck, The Handbook of International  Humanitarian  Law,  2nd  ed  at  p.614
"...persons assuming a permanent combatant  function  for  a  party  to  the
conflict lose civilian protection for the duration of  such  conflict..."  Y
Dinstein, Conduct of  Hostilities  under  the  Law  of  International  Armed
Conflict, at p.30 states  that  combatants  who  can  be  lawfully  targeted
include all members of the armed forces, whether they are  actually  engaged
in combat.

22.  The idea that a soldier might cease to be a soldier when  off  duty  or
on home leave has a superficial attraction in that  it  might  be  said  for
example that an out-of-uniform soldier who has returned to his home  village
and is simply enjoying social time with his fellow-villagers in  a  caf�  or
bar should not be regarded as  a  legitimate  military  target  during  that
time, as he might be  under the  laws  of  war  if  he  remains  a  soldier.
However, it is military law and command that determines whether and  when  a
soldier can go off-duty or on  leave.  Further,  to  make  the  question  of
military or civilian status contingent on such  circumstances  would  defeat
the underlying purpose  of  international  rules  regulating  warfare  which
depend on there being a  regular,  occupation-based  way  of  distinguishing
between those who are combatants and those who are members of  the  civilian
population.

23. That does not mean however that when  assessing  risk  on  return  to  a
soldier one ignores those aspects of his life when he is not on active  duty
or in barracks. Soldiers have private lives; many also  have  families  and,
when on leave, may occupy a family home. Proper risk assessment  depends  on
taking a holistic approach to all aspects of a  soldier's  life.   But  when
doing so it must be understood that one is assessing such aspects  as  being
aspects of  a  soldier's  life,  not  someone  who  is  part-soldier,  part-
civilian.

Fadli and Gedara

24. The Tribunal's memorandum asked the parties to make submissions  on  the
Fadli case and whether the  authority  it  provides  has  been  modified  by
subsequent higher court authority. Before outlining those, it  is  in  order
that we quote this case at length as well  as  the  subsequent  judgment  by
Newman J in Gedara [2006] EWHC 1690  (Admin)  which  seeks  to  clarify  its
underlying principles.

25.  Fadli concerned a national of Algeria who claimed  that  on  return  he
would be under a legal obligation to perform  military  service  and  if  he
refused to do so he would be subjected to a term of imprisonment of about  9
months. He submitted that if he did military service his life  and  that  of
his family would be at risk. In paras 10-18   Schiemann  LJ,  who  gave  the
judgment of the Court, stated:


      "10.  The present case is concerned with the danger  to  life  arising
          out of military  service.  There  are  international  conventions
          which are concerned with protecting soldiers but none of them are
          relevant to the present case. It has long been accepted that  the
          mere fact that a citizen is expected by his home  state  to  risk
          his life whilst doing military service against an external  enemy
          of the state does not entitle him to  refugee  status  under  the
          Geneva  Convention  and  the   consequent   protection   of   the
          international community. Although he may have a well founded fear
          of being killed for reasons of nationality or  religion  he  will
          not have a well founded fear of persecution as that term is  used
          in the Geneva Convention. That is so however great  the  risk  to
          life which is inherent in participating in the relevant  military
          operations. This is not disputed by Mr Blake Q.C. counsel for the
          appellant.
      11.   The position in our judgment is no different if the enemy is  an
          internal one. If the state is  to  fulfil  its  duty  to  provide
          protection for its citizens up to a practical standard  it  will,
          in a civil war situation, use its police and  soldiers  for  that
          purpose. It will not be in breach of  its  duty  to  its  citizen
          policemen and citizen  soldiers  not  to  persecute  them  if  it
          requires them to run a high risk of losing their life fighting in
          a civil war. This proposition also is not challenged directly  by
          Mr Blake.
      12.   He seeks however to  do  so  indirectly.  The  argument  ran  on
          broadly similar lines  in  relation  to  two  possible  groups  -
          serving soldiers and ex-soldiers.
      Ex-soldiers
      13.   Mr  Blake  concentrated  primarily  on  ex-soldiers  -  probably
          because he recognised that, in relation to serving  soldiers  the
          received law presents him with something of a hurdle.  He  relies
          on a number of cases in which ex-soldiers and  ex-policemen  have
          been regarded as refugees Montecino v I.N.S.  915  F.2nd  518,  a
          1990 decision of the U.S. 9th Circuit Court  of  Appeals;  Lakhar
          Abdelouahad v SSHD  a decision of the  IAT  this  year  reference
          HX/88716/97. However, in relation to any claim based on being  an
          ex-soldier, the appellant faces  the  problems  that  he  is  not
          presently an ex-soldier. The time when the appellant will  be  an
          ex-soldier, if it ever comes, is at least  18  months  away.  The
          degree of risk of harm to him from the GIA is  manifestly  higher
          in relation to the immediate future.  He  may  never  be  an  ex-
          soldier in Algeria exposed to the GIA. This can be for  a  number
          of reasons. He may refuse to serve and be imprisoned instead;  he
          may die or be killed; he may leave Algeria at the  conclusion  of
          his military service and be welcomed by some other  country;  the
          GIA may have been subdued or have changed its policy by then;  he
          may himself join the GIA and so on. In our judgment there are far
          too many uncertainties as to the future to entitle the  appellant
          to rely on a situation which may appertain in 18 months time as a
          basis for his claim to be a refugee at present. This is enough to
          dispose of the refugee claim in so far as  it  is  based  on  the
          appellant's possible future position as an ex-soldier. It is  not
          necessary for us to decide now whether he might then be  entitled
          to refugee status.
      Serving soldiers
      14.    Turning to the more immediate future, we hope we do justice  to
          the appellant's case by summarising it as follows: a) one of  the
          duties of the home  state  is  to  provide  practical  protection
          against persecution by third parties  such  as  the  GIA;  b)  in
          threatening to  kill  soldiers  who  are  off  duty  the  GIA  is
          persecuting them; c) soldiers can be regarded as a group and they
          are threatened because of their membership of that group and that
          therefore the persecution is for a Convention reason; d) soldiers
          are entitled to practical  protection  by  the  home  state  from
          persecution by third parties for  a  Convention  reason;  e)  the
          Special Adjudicator did not investigate whether  the  home  state
          gave soldiers that practical protection; f)  if  the  home  state
          does not do so then the international community must provide that
          protection by granting asylum; g) therefore the case ought to  be
          remitted to the Adjudicator to consider whether  the  home  state
          gives off-duty soldiers practical protection.
      15.   Mr Blake relies on Article 4(1) of the  1977  Geneva  Convention
          relating to Non International Armed Conflicts which provides:-
              'All persons who do not take direct part or who  have  ceased
              to take part in hostilities ... are entitled to  respect  for
              their  persons,  honour   and   convictions   and   religious
              practices.  They  shall  in  all  circumstances  be   treated
              humanely without adverse distinctions.'
      16.   He submits that those  who  commit  war  crimes  or  cruel  acts
          inconsistent with the laws of war  in  their  treatment  of  non-
          combatants are guilty of persecution. He submits that, whereas  a
          soldier can be expected to put up with the normal hazards of  the
          job, he should not be expected to put up with the GIA  which,  he
          submits and we are  prepared  for  present  purposes  to  accept,
          indulges in kidnap and torture. He submits that if a  soldier  is
          exposed to such risk it is properly described as persecution  and
          it is the duty of the home state to protect him from it.
      17.   There will no doubt be a spectrum  of  situations  in  which  an
          Algerian soldier may find himself. At one end he will, under  the
          command of his superior be pointing  a  gun  at  someone  who  is
          pointing a gun at him. At the other end a soldier might  well  be
          given periods of leave when he would return to his village to see
          his family and be exposed to terrorist attacks by the GIA because
          he was a member of the army.  Mr  Blake  submitted  that  if  the
          evidence showed, as it might on examination,  that  the  Algerian
          state was unable  to  give  the  appellant  practical  protection
          against that risk on leave  then  he  could  claim  that  he  was
          exposed to persecution as a member of a particular social  group,
          namely, serving soldiers. The argument, if  right,  must  embrace
          times when a soldier is going out to a  cinema  in  the  evening.
          This will be in the middle of  the  spectrum.  Perhaps  precisely
          where it is will depend on whether the soldier is on call or not.
          In substance his submission was that the soldier could  not  seek
          the surrogate protection of the international  community  if  the
          hostile forces remained on the battlefield but could do so if the
          hostile forces moved off the battlefield and engaged in terrorist
          attacks against  the private houses of the soldiery.
      18.   In our judgment the Special Adjudicator was  right  to  conclude
          that the Geneva Convention does not confer the status of  refugee
          on someone who has a well founded fear of such  things  happening
          to him whilst he is a  soldier.  The  life  of  a  soldier  is  a
          hazardous one. We are not persuaded that the Convention  draws  a
          distinction between, on the one hand, the  position  of  soldiers
          engaged  on  a  battlefield  in  combat  against  other  soldiers
          observing the rules of war  and,  on  the  other  hand,  soldiers
          engaged on internal security duties against terrorists.  Breaches
          of the rules of war are regrettably common.  To  allow  soldiers'
          claims for asylum based on the failure  by  a  State  to  provide
          practical protection to its soldiers against such an  eventuality
          would we consider hinder the home state  in  providing  the  very
          protection  for  the  generality  of  its  citizens   which   the
          definition of refugee in the Convention  assumes  that  the  home
          state should provide. It would give the GIA and those  like  them
          the power, by adopting terrorist tactics, to weaken the power  of
          the home state to provide protection for its citizens.
      19.   We do not accept Mr Blake's submission, for which  he  cited  no
          authority, that serving soldiers in the circumstances of  Algeria
          either do or could constitute a "particular social group" who  is
          at risk of being "persecuted" for the purposes of the  definition
          of refugee in the Convention. We note that the 1997 guidelines in
          relation  to  Algeria  from  the  UNHCR,  while  suggesting  some
          categories of persons who would benefit from a  presumption  that
          they should be granted asylum status, do not suggest  that  those
          in the army fall into that category."

26. In Gedara the claimant  was a national of Sri Lanka who had  joined  the
police force in Sri Lanka and had in time become a police  sergeant  in  the
Intelligence Unit, his duties including gathering intelligence  in  the  war
against the LTTE. He had left at a time when he had been told  by  informers
that his life was in danger as the LTTE wanted  to  kill  him  and  his  own
employers had told him they could not protect him outside the high  security
zone of the police station. Newman J stated:


      "20. It is true that the facts in connection with the risk  to  which,
      by reason of his service with the police,  the  claimant  is  exposed,
      have been specifically laid out whereas the risk was generally  stated
      in Fadli. However, the heightened awareness this creates does not lead
      me to conclude that there is any material difference between the facts
      of this case and the facts in Fadli. It is not the degree or imminence
      of the risk which is critical, but its source  and  the  circumstances
      which have given rise to the existence of the risk. The LTTE cannot be
      distinguished from the GIA, and  its  desire  for  revenge  against  a
      member of the security forces who has opposed it constitutes, for  all
      material purposes, an identical set of circumstances.
      21. As to the ECHR claim, Mr Khubber  submitted,  correctly,  that  no
      mention was made of the ECHR in Fadli. Next he submitted that a  claim
      for protection can succeed under the ECHR where  the  same  claim  for
      protection under the Refugee Convention could not. He  submitted  that
      the  ECHR  widens  the  reach  of  protection,  making  it  available,
      regardless of the motive  giving  rise  to  the  persecution  and  the
      occupation of the applicant. For example, he submitted that the  ECtHR
      has resisted any attempt to restrict  the  application  of  Article  3
      because of the conduct or motivations of an applicant. It is submitted
      that if the Secretary of State is correct, a member of the LTTE, being
      a person who would probably not be able to claim protection under  the
      Refugee  Convention,  because  of  the  exclusion   clauses   in   the
      Convention, would be able to claim protection under  the  ECHR  if  he
      could show that there was a real risk of agents of the State acting in
      a way contrary to Articles 2 or 3 of the ECHR. In contrast,  a  person
      in the position of the claimant who could show a real risk of unlawful
      attack by non-State agents could be expected to risk his life.
      22. Ms Giovannetti submitted that the claimant's arguments  ignore  an
      important feature in connection with Convention  rights,  namely  that
      the content of various rights can vary according to the  context  (see
      Sen and Others v Turkey, Application 45824/99 and Rekv�nyi v  Hungary,
      Application 25390/94). In short,  she  submits  that  the  content  of
      reasonable protection will depend on the circumstances. It will not be
      the same for a police officer as it is for a member of the  public  at
      large. Thus the explanation for the  hypothetical  advantage  for  the
      member of the LTTE being entitled to protection under Article 3 of the
      ECHR and a police officer  not  being  entitled,  flows,  not  because
      members of the armed forces  or  the  police  are  excluded  from  the
      protection of Articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR,  but  because  States  are
      entitled to impose certain obligations upon individuals. In  the  case
      of Sen, the following observations were made:


          'The  Court  observes  that  it  is  well  established  that  the
          Convention applies in principle to members of  the  armed  forces
          and  not  only  to  civilians.  However,  when  interpreting  and
          applying the rules of the Convention in cases such as the present
          one, the Court must bear in mind the  particular  characteristics
          of military life and its effects on the situation  of  individual
          members of the armed forces ...
          In order to determine whether this provision was infringed in the
          instant case, it must first be ascertained whether the measure in
          issue amounted to an interference with the  applicants'  exercise
          of their right  to  "freedom  to  manifest  [their]  religion  or
          beliefs".
          The Court considers that in choosing to pursue a military  career
          the applicants were accepting of their own  accord  a  system  of
          military  discipline  that  by  its  very  nature   implied   the
          possibility of placing on certain of the rights  and  freedom  of
          members of the  armed  forces  limitations  which  would  not  be
          imposed on civilians.'
      23. Thus the Secretary of State does not dispute that Article 3 of the
      ECHR can have a broader reach than  the  Refugee  Convention,  but  Ms
      Giovannetti submits that the distinctions which have  been  drawn  are
      simply not material for the purposes of the present case. She  submits
      that Fadli recognises that a State is entitled to require soldiers and
      policemen, as representatives of the organs of the State,  to  face  a
      heightened risk of harm from internal or  external  enemies  in  order
      that it can provide due and practical protection to its citizens. As a
      result, the exposure of soldiers or police officers to such dangers is
      not, without more, a breach of the State's  obligation  to  provide  a
      reasonable level of protection to them.
      Conclusion on Fadli
      24. In my judgment the submissions based upon the case  of  Fadli  and
      its application, both to the  Refugee  Convention  and  the  ECHR  and
      advanced on behalf of the Secretary of State, are correct. Articles  2
      and 3 of the ECHR enshrine fundamental values in absolute  terms,  but
      they are not free standing. They stand to be interpreted by  reference
      to the full terms of the ECHR and  in  a  manner  which  promotes  the
      protection of the rights conferred and not  so  as  to  frustrate  due
      protection being accorded to all those entitled to protection.  In  so
      far as it might be argued that the ECtHR decision in Chahal  v  United
      Kingdom (1996) 1 BHRC 405 does not conform  to  these  principles,  it
      should be regarded as an exception. The ECHR establishes a  principled
      framework  for  protection  to  which  States  must  adhere  for   the
      protection of citizens and those within its territory, but  the  reach
      and character of the protection is (a) personal to the individual  and
      (b) has to be interpreted  having  regard  to  all  the  human  rights
      obligations imposed upon a State. A State cannot fulfil its obligation
      to provide practical protection for its citizens against, for example,
      insurgents, without service from security forces, comprising policemen
      and soldiers. Where, by reason of their service, they  become  exposed
      to the risk of harm, the ambit of the State's  duty  to  protect  them
      does not extend to the risk of harm arising from protection they  have
      provided to fellow citizens. Further, the reach  and  content  of  the
      protection afforded to individuals will depend upon the  circumstances
      touching the existence and character of the risk to  which  they  have
      become exposed. For this reason, it has consistently been held that  a
      State's  obligation  is  to  provide  practical  protection   in   the
      particular circumstances of an individual's case...."



27.  Miss Akinbolu's submissions on the Tribunal's question  concerning  the
relevance to the appellant's  case  of  Fadli  and  Gedara  were  threefold.
First, she considered that in order to achieve consistency with more  recent
House of Lords and Court of Appeal authority, the Fadli  principles  had  to
be understood as applying only in situations where the  armed  conflict  did
not pose a real risk that a  soldier  would  be  a  victim  of  war  crimes.
Building on the decision of the House of Lords  in  Sepet  and  Bulbul,  the
Court of Appeal in Krotov had recognised that a soldier could qualify  as  a
refugee if able to show he would be forced by his commanders  on  return  to
participate in war crimes.  It would be illogical, she said,  if  a  soldier
could qualify for refugee protection if  he  faced  a  real  risk  of  being
compelled to be a perpetrator of war crimes but not if he faced a real  risk
of being a victim of war crimes.  The protection  afforded  by  the  Refugee
Convention and the ECHR was designed  principally  to  protect  people  from
being victims of serious harm.

28. Secondly, she submitted, Fadli was in and of itself a conscription  case
and did  not  address  that  of  a  soldier  who  voluntarily  enlists.  The
judgments in Fadli and Gedara themselves, at least if one followed what  was
said in Gedara, acknowledged that there could be a  spectrum  of  situations
which soldiers might face and whether they  faced  persecution  or  lack  of
protection would depend on the type of military harm they  would  face.  The
notion of a spectrum of situations  was  also  consistent  with  IHL  norms,
which recognise that soldiers who are  "hors  de  combat"  are  entitled  to
protection akin to that of a civilian.

29. Thirdly, she submitted,  Fadli and Gedara  were  of  limited  assistance
when dealing with a case in which the soldier had  a  family.   Even  if  it
could be said that a soldier "signed up" to  face  whatever  type  of  armed
conflict that arose, it could not be said that his family did  so.  Yet  if,
as in this case, the appellant being  a  target  would  make  his  family  a
target, that must surely  make  the  harm  he  faced  persecutory  since  on
Frantisek Katrinak [2001]  EWCA  Civ  832  principles,  a  person  could  be
regarded as being at real risk of serious  harm  by  virtue  of  his  family
being at such risk.

30. So far as  concerned  the  appellant's  particular  circumstances,  Miss
Akinbolu made the following main  points:  (i)  that  it  was  manifest  the
appellant had suffered past persecution (and past serious harm);  (ii)  that
if returned to his  home area he would still  face  persecution  from  those
who had targeted him and his family  before;  (iii)  wherever  in  Iraq   he
sought to relocate he would be known to be both  a  serving  soldier  and  a
Yazidi and the combination of these factors would put him at risk;  (iv)  it
was not reasonable to expect him to relocate   without  reuniting  with  his
close family members; but (v) wherever he chose to live  with  close  family
members, their living together as a family would increase the risk  of  harm
both to  them and him.

31. Mr Eadie,  on  the  other  hand,  maintained  that  Fadli  remained  the
governing higher court authority for cases involving returning soldiers  and
police (as well as ex-soldiers and ex-police).  The principles  subsequently
established in cases such as Sepet and  Bulbul  and  Krotov  and  BE  (Iran)
[2008] EWCA Civ 540 were concerned, he submitted, with  the  very  different
situation  of  persons   being  forced  to  perpetrate  (by  commission   or
participation) war crimes. They said nothing to suggest, he submitted,  that
the exception to the general rule (that performing military service did  not
give rise to a risk of persecution) extended or should extend to  those  who
faced being victims of war crimes.

32. Further, Mr Eadie submitted, it would undermine  a  basic  principle  of
refugee law if soldiers could qualify as refugees by demonstrating  that  on
return they would face being  unprotected  against  a  real  risk  of  being
victims of war crimes.  It was a critical function of any state army  to  be
able to respond to terrorist threats; and, if Miss Akinbolu's  argument  was
accepted, it could lead to soldiers from conflict areas all over  the  world
fleeing abroad and thereby undermining the ability of their home  states  to
protect its own citizens, thereby creating unnecessary refugee flows.

33. He submitted that it was clear from the facts considered in  both  Fadli
and Gedara that it made no difference whether a soldier would face  military
violence compatible with or contrary to IHL norms.  In  Fadli  Schiemann  LJ
specifically addressed the case of an  individual  claiming  a  threat  from
terrorist organisations such as the GIA.

34. It was also clear from what was said by Schiemann LJ at paragraph 17  of
Fadli that in his Lordship's view the general position did  not  alter  just
because the risks the soldier faced might include risks to his family.

35. As a result, submitted Mr Eadie, it was unnecessary to engage  with  any
issues about a "spectrum of situations" or the type of military  violence  a
soldier might face. Nor was it necessary to go  on  to  consider  separately
issues relating to the  sufficiency  of  protection  against  any  (claimed)
serious harm.

36. However, if the Tribunal was not with him on this basic point  then,  he
submitted, it was important to bear  in  mind  that  a  soldier  could  only
succeed in a claim to international protection  if  able  to  show  that  he
faced a real risk of serious harm personal to him.

37. On this point both  Mr  Eadie  and  Mr  Wordsworth  sought  to  identify
relevant evidence appertaining to the appellant's  case.   In  essence  they
submitted, it was clear both from the background country  evidence  and  the
approach  taken  by  the  Tribunal  in  KH  (Article   15(c)   Qualification
Directive) (Iraq) [2008] UKAIT 00023  and  more  recently  by  the  European
Court of Human Rights (ECHR) in FK v Sweden (App. No.  3261/06  judgment  of
20 January 2009) that the  general  situation  in  Iraq,  albeit  still  one
characterised by significant levels of violence, was  not  such  that  there
was  a  real  risk  of  serious  harm  to  returnees,  including   soldiers,
generally. (We interpolate here that although the  Court  of  Appeal  in  QD
(Iraq) has now overturned KH, the Tribunal's findings of fact on the  levels
of violence was  not  criticised).   And  on  the  accepted  facts  in  this
appellant's case: (i) he would spend 80% of his time in barracks in or  near
 Baghdad; (ii) if he returned to his home area, Mosul, either he  would  not
face  being  targeted  or  even  if  he  would,  he  could  obtain  adequate
protection from the authorities locally; (iii) in  any  event  he  would  be
able to achieve safety by relocating  either  in  Baghdad  or  elsewhere  in
central or southern Iraq, possibly also in the KRG.

38. As regards the time the appellant spent in barracks, it could not  said,
he submitted, that he would be exposed to   a  real  risk  of  serious  harm
since there was little or no evidence to show soldiers in this situation  in
Iraq routinely faced military violence contrary to  IHL norms.


Fadli principles

39. In the light of these submissions we turn then  to  our  evaluation.  So
far as propositions of law are concerned,  we  consider  that  Fadli  states
three things. First, that it is in the nature of  soldiery  that  a  soldier
can be expected to face a heightened risk to  his  life.  Second,  that  the
Refugee Convention does not confer the status of refugee  on a  soldier  who
faces heightened risk to his life in the form of breaches  of  the  laws  of
war whilst he is a soldier. Third,  (and  contrary  to  what  Miss  Akinbolu
submitted was its ratio), whilst there was a  "spectrum  of  situations"  in
which an Algerian  soldier  might  find  himself,  none  of  them  justifies
identifying any exception to the rule that soldiers must expect  to  face  a
heightened risk to their life, irrespective of whether the risk  constitutes
violations of the rule of war.

40. So far as  concerns  whether  Fadli  could  be  distinguished  from  the
current case  on  the  facts,  we  see  considerable  force  in  Mr  Eadie's
submission that it cannot.  The risk the appellant  in  Fadli  was  said  to
face was risk from the Groupe Islamlique Arme (GIA) and for the  purpose  of
his appeal the  Court  accepted  that  it  was  a  "terrorist"  organisation
indulging in acts of kidnap and torture. The Court also  accepted  that  one
situation (along the spectrum) which Fadli might  face  would  be  terrorist
attacks on him in his private house, when he was on leave in his village  to
see his family (para 17). In historical  terms  at  least,  our  appellant's
situation, both in relation to risk from insurgents using terrorist  tactics
and their directing them at  him  and  his  family  in  his  home  area,  is
remarkably similar.

41. Fadli principles, as we have seen, were analysed in 2006 by Newman J  in
Gedara.   We  have  already  noted  Miss  Akinbolu's  submissions  regarding
Gedara, which argued that this case had modified  somewhat  the  application
of Fadli principles. For Mr  Eadie,  Gedara  [2006]  EWHC  1690  represented
clear evidence that Fadli continued to be  the  applicable  law  even  post-
Krotov.

42. We do not think it entirely clear that  that  Newman  J  in  Gedara  saw
Fadli principles considered in isolation as continuing to apply to  refugee-
related cases concerning members  of  police  intelligence  as  much  as  to
soldiers. We would not dissent from Mr Eadie's  submission  that  in  Gedara
Newman J seeks to show that principles similar to those which  Schiemann  LJ
saw as applying to refugee claims by soldiers  also  applied  to  Article  3
ECHR claims by soldiers. In that way Gedara  broadens  the  scope  of  Fadli
principles so they apply to both protection regimes. However, by seeking  to
synthesise the principles applying to both legal  frameworks  he  underlines
that both depend on a concept of protection that is practical. In  this  way
he reaffirms, in our view, the primacy of the approach taken  by  the  House
of Lords in Horvath to the concept of protection against serious harm  under
the Refugee Convention, which in turn drew on the ECtHR judgement  in  Osman
v U.K.(1998) 29 EHRR 245. Further, and to this  extent  agreeing  with  Miss
Akinbolu, we think that in para 24 Newman J sought to refine  the  scope  of
application of Fadli principles  to  a  certain  extent,  since  he  clearly
accepts that whilst the "ambit" of the state's duty to protect  soldiers  is
restricted, it is not without any scope whatsoever. The only purpose of  the
last two sentences in the above paragraph can have  been  to  refer  to  the
need in the context of soldier cases for  the  state  to  provide  practical
protection. What difference that makes, if any, to the  issues  we  have  to
decide is another matter, to which we shall return later.

43. Whilst not seeking to argue that soldiers  off-duty  or  on  home  leave
cease to be soldiers, Miss Akinbolu sought to  argue  that  the  IHL  treaty
provisions treat them as being effectively "hors de  combat"  and  therefore
entitled to the same protection as civilians. IHL drew  a  distinction,  she
said, between the situation of soldiers actively  or  directly  involved  in
hostilities and those who found themselves "hors de combat":  those  in  the
latter category could not legitimately be targeted by another party  to  the
conflict in the same way as those in the former category.  Further,  it  was
necessary  to  consider  where  along  the   "spectrum  of  situations"  any
particular soldier's situation fell, and in this context  it  was  relevant,
she submitted, to consider  to  what  extent  he  faces  attacks  that  were
contrary to IHL.  If he faces a real risk of  being  a  victim  of  military
action contrary to IHL he faces a real risk of being  persecuted  and  being
exposed to ill-treatment contrary to  Article  15(b)  of  the  Qualification
Directive and Article 3 of the ECHR.

44. Mr Eadie differed strongly. He did not  accept  that  "hors  de  combat"
provisions had application in this type of context. Nor did  he  agree  that
it was legitimate to look at a  spectrum  of  situations.  Although  in  his
written submissions he had stated that he would not exclude the  possibility
that in extreme circumstances there might be a need for a  different  answer
at least in relation to the position under  (Article  2  of)  the  ECHR,  he
expressly disavowed that caveat in his oral  submissions.  The  respondent's
considered view was, he said, that it was an integral part of  the  military
duties a solder was expected to perform that  he  could  face  a  heightened
risk to him of death or injury caused by the  fighting.   That  remained  so
irrespective of whether his adversaries used methods  and  means  consistent
with or contrary to IHL  norms.  To  hold  otherwise,  he  contended,  would
undermine the underlying principle of state sovereignty,  namely  the  right
of a state to protect its own citizens against armed attacks. In the  nature
of modern armed conflicts, insurgents would often use illegitimate  methods.
Indeed in some cases, the more heinous the means and  methods  used  by  the
enemy, the more incumbent it would be on the state to combat  it,  otherwise
international terrorism would prevail.

45. We do not agree with Miss Akinbolu that soldiers who are off-duty or  on
home leave can be considered as "hors de combat" and therefore  entitled  to
protection in the same way as civilians.  Article 3 of GCIV reads:

      "In the case of armed conflicts, not of an international character ...
      each Party shall be  bound  to  apply  as  a  minimum,  the  following
      provisions: (1) Persons taking no  active  part  in  the  hostilities,
      including members of armed forces who have laid down  their  arms  and
      those placed hors de combat by sickness,  wounds,  detention,  or  any
      other cause, shall in all circumstances be treated humanely..."

46. In summarising similar provisions under Article 44 of API,  Y  Dinstein,
The Conduct of Hostilities under the Law of  International  Armed  Conflict,
states:

      "Combatants can withdraw from the hostilities not only by retiring and
      turning into civilians, but also by becoming hors de combat. This  can
      happen either by choice (through laying down of arms or  surrendering)
      or by force of circumstances (as a result of getting wounded, sick  or
      shipwrecked)..."

 47. In our view the language of such relevant provisions says  nothings  to
suggest that being off duty per se could be a type of  choice  or  force  of
circumstance necessitating protection appropriate to civilians.

48. However, we do think Miss Akinbolu is right to  assert  that  IHL  rules
can apply differently depending on the particular circumstances  surrounding
the violence that a soldier may find himself  subject  to.   The  rights  of
combatants to take part directly in combat are subject to  restrictions  and
correlative duties. Treacherous or perfidious attacks  on  individual  enemy
soldiers, for example, are prohibited (Dinstein, p.31).  Dinstein  gives  as
one example of unlawful combatancy the ambush  of  the  car  of  SS  General
Heydrich in 1942 by members of the  Free  Czechoslovak  army  who  were  not
wearing uniforms.  In this connection we have already  noted  Article  44(3)
of API. At p.48 Dinstein clarifies that whilst uniforms are not a  necessary
condition, it is incumbent on combatants, including  irregular  forces   "to
distinguish themselves from civilians in some way that  makes  them  visibly
different from civilians". Nor does it seem to us  that  such  examples  are
confined to situations where combatants fail to identify themselves  to  the
soldier being targeted. Any targeting must be  conducted  according  to  the
principles of distinction  and  proportionality.  Thus  a  soldier  who  may
otherwise be a legitimate target might not be  so  if  he  is  known  to  be
guarding a school and the weapon aimed at him is a  mortar.  Similarly,   it
would be contrary to the laws of war for would-be attackers to fire  rockets
at him in his private home if it is  known  (or  could  be  expected  to  be
known) that he is residing there with civilians. To proceed with  an  attack
on a soldier in such situations would violate  the  rule  (as  expressed  in
Article 48 AP1) that parties to a conflict "shall  direct  their  operations
only against military objectives". The ICRC Commentary on API states that:

      "...in wartime conditions it is inevitable that individuals  belonging
      to the category of combatants become intermingled  with  the  civilian
      population, for example, soldiers on leave  visiting  their  families.
      However, provided that these are not regular units with  fairly  large
      numbers, this does not in any way change the civilian character of the
      population".

49. Obviously the Commentary does not mean here to suggest that soldiers  on
leave become civilians, but rather to indicate that the civilian  population
does not lose its civilian character just  because  there  are  soldiers  on
leave who intermingle with them -unless the  soldiers'  numbers  are  large.
From this it can be inferred that so far as the  targeting  of  soldiers  on
leave is concerned, and subject to the number of such soldiers  being  small
(see further on this, the Appeal Chamber in Blaskic, para 115),  to  proceed
to target them in such a  situation  would  be  tantamount  to  targeting  a
civilian population. We shall have cause to return to  the  significance  of
this observation when considering the appellant's personal history.

The refusal to perform military service cases

50. However, even if we are right in regarding  Gedara as taking a  somewhat
different view of protection than seems to be taken by  Fadli,  it  is  only
the latter precedent which is binding. In the absence of other higher  court
authority modifying the effect of Fadli, the latter judgment is  binding  on
the Tribunal.  The question here,  however,  is  whether  subsequent  higher
court authority has modified the true legal  position.  The  cases  most  in
point, which can conveniently be termed "the  refusal  to  perform  military
service cases", are, of course, Sepet and Bulbul, Krotov (which  inter  alia
discusses Foughali (OOTH01653, 2 June 2000 and BE (Iran)).


51. It was Miss Akinbolu's submission that the cases involving a refusal  to
perform  military  service  have  established   that   when   assessing   an
individual's claim to  asylum,  the  Tribunal  and  courts  may  and  do  on
occasions have regard to  the  broader  principles  of  IHL.   It  had  been
accepted in Krotov that it was relevant to  the  issue  of  whether  someone
could make out a real risk of persecution to  have  regard  to  whether  the
harm they would face would be contrary to IHL norms, or, to use the  precise
language of Krotov, "the basic rules or norms of human  conduct".  Utilising
the notion in Fadli of the  "spectrum of situations" that  a  soldier  could
face, she submitted that where he faced being the victim of acts  so  severe
as to constitute war crimes or systemic degradation or abuse, an  individual
soldier cannot be considered to have consented to violence or loss  of  life
relating from those breaches.  Thus, when, as in  the  appellant's  case  he
was off duty with members of his family, the character of the risk he  would
face in that situation, being risk far removed from that he  would  normally
face as a member of the armed forces, was such as to amount  to  persecution
and ill-treatment.

52. Mr Eadie, by contrast, contended that this line of cases had  no  impact
on the application of Fadli principles. He gave several reasons:  that  they
all concerned conscripts, i.e.  people facing involuntary military  service;
that  in all of them the potential persecutor was not an  opposing  army  or
armed or terrorist group but  the  State  itself;  that  all  concerned  the
question of whether the punishment afforded to the national who  refuses  to
perform military service would amount to persecution ("[a] prerequisite  for
the application of the principle is the prospect of punishment by the  State
of the failure to appear for  military  service").  Further,  the  exception
carved  out  in  these  cases  for  persons  at  risk  of  being  forced  to
participate in acts contrary to the basic rules of human conduct  (i.e.  the
most fundamental rules of war) was solely intended  to  prevent  them  being
forced to act as agents of serious harm or  perpetrators.  That  is  because
of the IHL principle which prohibits soldiers from carrying  out  (or  being
complicit in) war crimes. His written submission stated on this point:

      "The systemic inhumane conduct is of importance to a case like  Krotov
      not because of the potential for physical risk to  the  conscript  but
      rather because it is the necessary background to a  political  opinion
      and well-founded fear of persecution as a result thereof."

53.  Hence  there  was  nothing  in  any  of  these  cases,  he   submitted,
establishing a principle permitting a claim  by  a  soldier  of  persecution
based on being faced on return with exposure to  a  real  risk  of  being  a
victim of acts contrary to basic IHL norms.

54. So that we can better analyse the issues, we need  to  remind  ourselves
what was said by the higher courts in the  three  main  cases  dealing  with
refusal to perform military service  cases  in  the  context  of  an  asylum
claim.  In Sepet and Bulbul Lord Bingham stated at para 8 that:

   "There is compelling support for the view that refugee status  should  be
   accorded to one who has refused to undertake compulsory military  service
   on the grounds that such service would or might  require  him  to  commit
   atrocities or gross human rights abuses  or  participate  in  a  conflict
   condemned by the international community, or where refusal to serve would
   earn grossly excessive or disproportionate punishment".

55. At para 52 Lord Hoffman noted the guidance given  in  point  10  the  EU
Joint Position paper of 1996 [in terms very similar to those now set out  in
Article 9(2)(e) of the Qualification Directive] stated that  punishment  for
conscientious objection might amount to  persecution  if,  inter  alia,  the
conditions under which service  had  to  be  performed  "would  require  the
applicant to commit war crimes or the like."

56.  In  Krotov,  Potter  LJ,  having  set  out  the  core   provisions   of
international humanitarian law, which prohibit, inter alia, actions such  as
genocide, deliberate killing  and  targeting  of  the  civilian  population,
rape, torture, the execution and ill treatment of prisoners and  the  taking
of civilian hostages,  stated:


    "37. In my view, the crimes listed above, if committed  on  a  systemic
    basis as an aspect of deliberate policy, or as  a  result  of  official
    indifference to the widespread actions of a brutal military, qualify as
    acts contrary to the basic rules of human conduct in respect  of  which
    punishment for a refusal to  participate  will  constitute  persecution
    within the ambit of the 1951 Convention.
    38. It is in my view preferable to refer  in  this  context  to  'basic
    rules of human conduct' or 'humanitarian norms' rather than  to  'abuse
    of human rights', at least unless accompanied by the  epithet  'gross':
    cf. the observations of Lord Bingham  quoted  above.  That  is  because
    human rights really concern rights enjoyed by all at all times, whereas
    humanitarian rules concern rights which protect  individuals  in  armed
    conflicts. Most Conventions and other documents which provide  for  the
    protection of human rights (a) include a far wider  variety  of  rights
    than the rights to protection  from  murder,  torture  and  degradation
    internationally recognised as set out above; (b) in any event,  contain
    safeguards which exclude or modify the application of  such  rights  in
    time of war and armed conflict: see generally the approach set  out  in
    Detter: The Law of War (2nd ed) at pp.160-163.
    39. As pointed out in paragraph 35 of  the  judgment  in  Foughali,  to
    propound the test in terms of actions contrary to international law  or
    humanitarian law norms applicable in time of war or armed conflict,  is
    consistent with the overall framework of the Convention which  contains
    at Article 1F an exclusion clause to the Convention  framed  upon  that
    basis:
       "The provisions of this Convention shall not  apply  to  any  person
       with respect to whom there are serious reasons for considering that:
       (a) he has committed a crime against peace, a war crime, or a  crime
       against humanity, as defined in the international instruments  drawn
       up to make provision in respect of such crimes;"
    It can well be argued that just as an applicant for asylum will not  be
    accorded refugee status if he has  committed  international  crimes  as
    defined in (a), so he should not be denied refugee status if return  to
    his home country would give him no choice other than to participate  in
    the commission of such international crimes, contrary  to  his  genuine
    convictions and true conscience...
       ...
      51. If a court or tribunal is satisfied (a) that the level and  nature
    of  the  conflict,  and  the  attitude  of  the  relevant  governmental
    authority towards it, has reached a position where combatants   are  or
    may be required on a sufficiently widespread basis to act in breach  of
    the  basic  rules  of  human  conduct  generally  recognised   by   the
    international community; (b) that they will be punished for refusing to
    do so and (c) that  disapproval  of  such  methods  and  fear  of  such
    punishment is the genuine reason motivating the refusal  of  an  asylum
    seeker to serve in the relevant conflict, then it should  find  that  a
    Convention ground has been established."

57. Rix LJ added at para 56 that he wished to:

    "underline the importance in this context of  some  form  of  state  or
    organisational responsibility for the conduct in question.  It  is  not
    the mere occurrence of random acts of brutality, or of rape or  murder,
    which in my opinion would qualify the conscientious  objector  for  the
    surrogate  protection  of  the  asylum  state  under  the   Convention.
    Unfortunately, such random acts are too often an incident  of  warfare.
    There must be that systematic basis for the acts, either as a matter of
    deliberate policy or as a result of official indifference...to  qualify
    the situation as  one  in  which  the  objector  is  able  to  rely  on
    international law norms to make good his claim for protection."

 58. BE (Iran) concerned the  claim to international protection of a  sapper
from the Iranian army who in 1999 deserted rather than continue to lay anti-
personnel mines in a populated part of Iranian  Kurdistan.   The  key  issue
was whether, given the accepted fact that no state of war  existed  in  that
region at the time,  the appellant's right of refusal to commit war  crimes,
and the entitlement to international protection which it attracts,  extended
to orders to commit any human rights violation  of  sufficient  seriousness.
Sedley LJ analysed the cases of Sepet  and  Bulbul  and  Krotov,  noting  as
regards the former at para 25 that:
   "Sepet concerned draft evasion, but in the leading speech Lord Bingham,
   at �8, made this wider observation:
      "There is compelling support for the view that refugee status should
      be accorded to one who has refused to undertake compulsory military
      service on the grounds that such service would or might require him to
      commit atrocities or gross human rights abuses, or participate in a
      conflict condemned by the international community, or where refusal to
      serve would earn grossly excessive or disproportionate punishment."
59. Sedley LJ  went on to note that it was on the first limb of this
formulation - a requirement to participate in atrocities or gross human
rights abuses - that BE founded his case.
 60. At para 41 Sedley LJ concluded  that:
   "For the reasons we have given, we hold that what this appellant was
   seeking to avoid by deserting was the commission of what this country and
   civilised opinion worldwide recognise as an atrocity and a gross
   violation of human rights - the unmarked planting of anti-personnel mines
   in roads used by innocent civilians. He is consequently entitled to
   asylum, and his appeal accordingly succeeds."
61. Dealing with the submissions regarding these  cases,  it  is  convenient
first of all to eliminate points made by Miss Akinbolu and Mr Eadie that  we
consider devoid of merit. Her submission that Fadli was in and of  itself  a
conscription case and did not address that  of  a  soldier  who  voluntarily
enlists was correct as far as it went, but if the appellant's  situation  on
return would be that he was a voluntary enlistee who could leave the ISF  of
his own accord, then  his  claimed  fear  of  being  a  victim  of  military
violence whilst serving as a soldier would be avoidable (we shall return  to
this matter below), in which case the appellant's case would fall  away.  As
regards Mr Eadie's submission that Sepet and  Bulbul  and  Krotov  concerned
conscripts (not volunteers), that was correct but so did  Fadli,  so  it  is
not a distinguishing feature. In any event (leaving  aside  for  the  moment
the significance of a  compulsory  element  to  the  return  to  life  as  a
soldier) we do not see that their character as conscription cases is of  any
importance to deciding on the nature  of  the  harm  the  persons  concerned
might face. Whether a soldier faces return as  a  conscript  or  (as  in  BE
(Iran)) as a career  soldier  he  is,  for  international  law  purposes,  a
soldier.

62. Mr Eadie made much of the fact that in the refusal to  perform  military
service cases the potential persecutor was not, as  in  Fadli,  an  opposing
army or insurgents but the state itself. However, even  though  it  is  true
that  in  Fadli  the  appellant  feared  harm  from  non-state  actor  (GIA)
terrorists, the appellant's  claim  placed  focus  on  whether  or  not  the
Algerian state could be expected to protect  him  against  such  harm.   The
question of state responsibility arises in  both  types  of  case.  Further,
inasmuch as the appellant in this case feared being  a  victim  of  military
violence  at  the  hands  of  non-state  actors,  it  is  settled  law  that
persecution  (and  serious  harm  under  Article  15  of  the  Qualification
Directive) can emanate from non-state as well as state actors  and  since  9
October 2006, indeed, that law is now codified in reg 3  of  the  Protection
Regulations (implementing Article 6 of the Qualification Directive).  We  do
accept, however, that in the  present  type  of  case,  a  state's  duty  of
protection may be of a different kind than arises in the refusal to  perform
military service cases, since whilst in the latter  it  is  necessarily  the
case that the state  concerned  is  complicit  in  war  crimes  (by  forcing
soldiers to commit them or to participate in their  commission),  that  will
not necessarily be the case where the issue is whether the  state  concerned
is responsible for failing to protect its soldiers against being victims  of
war crimes. We shall return to this point below.

63. As regards Mr Eadie's  attachment  of  significance  to  the  fact  that
unlike Fadli or Gedara  or  this  case,  the  refusal  to  perform  military
service cases concerned persons facing a risk of punishment, he  is  correct
up to a point, but plainly the only reason why the punishment  was  seen  in
the latter as capable of being persecutory was because the  alternative  was
being required to perform military service  contrary  to  the  laws  of  war
(punishment which is  excessive or disproportionate is a  separate  type  of
persecutory act: see Article 9(2)(c)).  One  must  not  confuse  cause  with
effect. Lord  Bingham  in  Sepet  and  Bulbul,  para  8  saw  "refus[al]  to
undertake compulsory military service  on  the  grounds  that  such  service
would or might require a soldier to commit atrocities or gross human  rights
abuses  or  participate  in  a  conflict  condemned  by  the   international
community" as a separate basis for being accorded refugee  status  that  was
distinct from "refusal to serve  [that  would]  earn  grossly  excessive  or
disproportionate punishment".  In addition, it seems to us that whether  the
case concerns a soldier refusing to perform military service (because to  do
so would entail being a perpetrator of or being complicit in war crimes)  or
a soldier refusing to perform military  service  (because  to  do  so  would
entail being a victim of war crimes),  an  element  of  punishment  will  be
involved in both situations. In both types of situation, if the  home  state
decides to disregard the soldier's wishes and  forces  him  to  fight,  that
action has at least a punitive element. If, however, if allows  him  not  to
fight, and instead imposes a  formal punishment, then it is  the  punishment
which forms the basis of the fear of persecution.

64. We turn then to Mr Eadie's strongest submission  which  was  that  Fadli
has established, without modification by subsequent law or  case  law,  that
acts of state persecution could not include failure by the state to  protect
its soldiers effectively against exposure to a heightened risk to  his  life
irrespective of the nature of the  military  violence  they  might  have  to
face.

65. When addressing this submission, we reiterate that we  find  Newman  J's
treatment of the issues in  Gedara  a  helpful  reminder  of  the  value  of
seeking to resolve  the  difficulties  we  face  in  this  case  within  the
existing framework of basic refugee law principles, rather than  seeking  to
strike out on some new path. In our judgment, there is no reason to seek  to
develop special principles of refugee law to deal  with  cases  of  soldiers
and any reference  to  "Fadli  principles"  should  be  understood  in  this
context. The approach to the meaning of persecution and protection  (and  of
the need for  protection  to  be  practical)  as  set  out  in  Horvath  and
reflected in Articles 9 and 7 of Qualification Directive ( regs 5 and  4  of
the Protection Regulations is intended to  have  universal  application  and
should be well able to accommodate such cases.

66. It is next necessary to remind ourselves that since  Fadli  (and  indeed
since  Sepet  and  Bulbul  and  Krotov  and  Gedara)  the  matter  of   what
constitutes persecution and protection  has  come  to  be  governed  by  the
provisions of the Refugee Qualification Directive,  as  implemented  in  the
Protection Regulations (which mirror the wording of Article 9).  As  already
noted, Article  9  (2)(e)  identifies  as  one  type  of  persecutory  harm,
prosecution or punishment of a person refusing to perform  military  service
entailing the commission of crimes or acts contrary to the laws of war.   So
despite Schiemann LJ  relying  in  para  18  of  Fadli  on  there  being  no
distinction under the Refugee Convention  turning  on  the  effect  of  acts
contrary to the laws of war, the Qualification Directive definition of  such
acts expressly relies upon   such  a  distinction.  So  do  the  refusal  to
perform military service cases. Of course, in the  Article  9(2)(e)  context
and in the refusal to perform military service cases the contemplated  actor
and victim of the harm are the other way  round:  (assuming  a  state's  own
soldiers to be "friends" and the other party to the conflict's  soldiers  to
be "foes") they are not  friend-to-foe but foe-to-friend.   But  both  types
of harm involve the  use  of  illegitimate  military  violence  and  depend,
therefore, on a distinction between legitimate  and  illegitimate  types  of
military violence. As regards protection, it is perhaps wise,  given  slight
differences from the wording of Article 7 of the Directive to state what  is
provided by reg 4 of the Protection Regulations. It states in  its  relevant
parts:

     "1) In deciding whether a person is a refugee or a person eligible for
    humanitarian protection,    protection from persecution or serious harm
    can be provided by:
             (a) the State; or
             (b) any party or  organisation,  including  any  international
             organisation, controlling the State or a substantial  part  of
             the territory of the State.
    (2) Protection shall be regarded as generally provided when the  actors
    mentioned in paragraph 1(a) and (b) take reasonable  steps  to  prevent
    the persecution or suffering of serious harm by operating an  effective
    legal system for the detection,  prosecution  and  punishment  of  acts
    constituting persecution or serious harm, and the person  mentioned  in
    paragraph (1) has access to such protection.
    ...".


67.  A  further  important  point  is  that  under  Article  9(1)   of   the
Qualification Directive (see above, para 14) persecution has to  be  defined
by reference to  human  rights  criteria  and  the  latter  do  not  exclude
recourse in interpreting the term to IHL norms when the situation  concerned
is one of armed conflict. We derive this proposition from the fact that  the
ECtHR in Strasbourg has made  clear  that  in  interpreting  its  own  human
rights guarantees regard must be had to the broader  body  of  international
law: see Bankovic v Belgium and Others [2001] 11 BHRC 435, para 57  and  the
related fact that the broader body of international law  includes  IHL  and,
as stated in the respondent's written submissions, Articles 2, and 3 of  the
ECHR "are to be interpreted having regard to the principles of IHL".   There
can be no question, therefore, of the Fadli principles continuing  to  apply
except insofar as they are consistent with  the  definition  of  persecution
and protection contained in the Protection Regulations.

68. Fourth, as was made clear by  Sen (which was cited in Gedara:  see  para
26 above), although the ECtHR has held that soldiers must be  understood  as
accepting that military life modifies  the  extent  to  which  they  can  be
expected to face the risk of loss of life or injury in the service of  their
country, it is important  to  note  that  the  Court  expressed  this  as  a
modification of, not a negation or exclusion  of,  human  rights  guarantees
applicable to soldiers. In  Sen the Court stated,  it  is  to  be  recalled,
that:


          " The Court  observes  that  it  is  well  established  that  the
          Convention applies in principle to members of  the  armed  forces
          and  not  only  to  civilians.  However,  when  interpreting  and
          applying the rules of the Convention in cases such as the present
          one, the Court must bear in mind the  particular  characteristics
          of military life and its effects on the situation  of  individual
          members of the armed forces ..."


 69. Whilst the  Court  here  emphasised  the  need  to  bear  in  mind  the
particular  characteristics  of  military  life  and  its  effects  on   the
situation of individual members of the armed  forces,  it  said  nothing  to
suggest  that  by  enlisting  (or  being  conscripted)  soldiers   must   be
understood to have consented to any type of treatment  whatsoever  to  which
they might be subjected in the armed forces or to have waived  any  specific
human right. In particular there is nothing to  suggest  that  they  can  be
expected in all circumstances to put up with  any  kind  of  military  harm,
even a consistent pattern of harm contrary  to  the  basic  rules  of  human
conduct. Nor is there anything said in any other  Strasbourg  cases  dealing
with soldiers (e.g. Kalac v Turkey (1997)  27  EHRR  552)  to  suggest  that
taking into  account  "the  particular  characteristics  of  military  life"
entails  that  soldiers  cannot  invoke  human  rights  protection   against
military acts that are routinely  contrary  to  the  basic  rules  of  human
conduct.  Indeed what it stated further on in the same para of Sen, namely:

    "The Court considers that in choosing to pursue a military  career  the
    applicants were accepting of their own  accord  a  system  of  military
    discipline that by its very nature implied the possibility  of  placing
    on certain of the rights and freedoms of members of  the  armed  forces
    limitations which could not be imposed on civilians".

re-emphasises that members of the armed forces have "limitations"  on  their
rights and freedoms, not that they are denuded of  them.   And  in  deciding
whether "limitations" are permissible, much is seen to hinge on  the  extent
and degree of the interference in the right. In certain cases the Court  has
accepted, for example that military courts can try soldiers and,  sometimes,
deprive them of their liberty: see Engel v Netherlands (1976)  1  EHRR  647,
para 54, but not in others. In several cases, the Court has  held  that  the
mere fact of joining the armed forces in the knowledge it  did  not  approve
homosexuality, does not lead to a waiver of the right  to  a  private  life:
see para 54, Smith and Grady v UK (2000) 29 EHRR 493, Brown  v  UK,  8  July
2003 see further Ezeh and Connors v UK, App.Nos  39665/98,  40086/98,  Grand
Chamber, 9 October 2003; Findlay v UK (1997) 24 EHRR 221.

70. We do not take Mr Eadie to have adopted the position that soldiers  have
no human rights, but for the sake of clarity we should state that  it  would
be odd indeed if the ECHR were read as having no  application  to  soldiers.
The rights enshrined in the ECHR are guaranteed to   "everyone..."  (Article
1).  Article 15 of the ECHR allows state parties to  derogate  from  certain
human rights in terms of "war or  other  public  emergency  threatening  the
life of the nation",  but  not  from  non-derogable  human  rights  such  as
Articles 2 and 3.

71. We take Mr Eadie's underlying position to be that whilst  soldiers  have
human rights, their position changes when it comes to the context  of  being
required by their  commanders  to  serve  in  an  armed  conflict  and  face
military violence from their enemies. In that situation, he considers,  they
cannot  benefit  from  human  rights  guarantees,  even   those   that   are
nonderogable, such as Articles 2 and 3. We find that position  difficult  to
square with Strasbourg case law for three reasons. The  first  concerns  the
point we have already noted that the ECHR guarantees the right to life as  a
right  applying  to  everyone.  The  second  is  that  leading   cases  have
highlighted the fact that Article 2 enjoins that everyone's  right  to  life
shall be protected by law entails not just  a  negative  obligation  on  the
part of the state to refrain from taking life intentionally, but a  positive
obligation to take appropriate steps  to  safeguard  life.  In  Osman  v  UK
(2000) 29 EHRR 245 the Court stated that the State may be responsible for  a
breach of human rights to  a  person  within  its  jurisdiction  where  "the
authorities knew or ought to have known at the time of the  existence  of  a
real and  immediate  risk  to  the  life  of  an  identified  individual  or
individuals from the criminal acts of a third party and that they failed  to
take measures within the scope of their  powers  which,  judged  reasonably,
might have been expected to avoid that risk".  Third,  the  Court  has  seen
Article 2 as in principle applicable to soldiers. Thus in  Yavus  v  Turkey,
25 May 2000 CD353 the Court held that although Turkey was not in  breach  of
its obligation to the deceased soldier who had been shot and  killed  by  an
army firearm in his barracks by another soldier who had  been  convicted  of
wilful homicide prior to his being conscripted into the army, that was  only
because the applicants had failed to show the Osman test had been  met.  (We
note that in a recent case, Omer Aydin v Turkey App.no.  34813/02,  judgment
of 25 November 2008 the Court at para 47  confirmed  what  it  had  said  in
Yavuz and also cited earlier cases to similar effect, Alvarez Ramon v  Spain
App.no. 51192/99, 3 July 2001 and Kilinc & ors v Turkey App.no. 40145/98,  7
June 2005.)

72. Further, the Court has clearly held that non-derogable human rights  are
applicable in situations of international or internal  armed  conflict:  see
Muslim v Turkey [2006] 42 EHRR 16 and  Isayev v Russia [2005]  41  EHRR  38.


73. Turning from European case law to domestic case law, we  must  first  of
all examine to what extent the cases on refusal to perform military  service
have modified the application of Fadli  principles.  We  accept  that  these
cases are only concerned with soldiers who refuse  to  be  involved  in  the
commission  of  war  crimes  (or,  as  in  BE  (Iran)  atrocities  or  gross
violations of human rights). We agree that none of these cases say  anything
to  suggest  that  the  principles  they  enunciate   concerning   reluctant
perpetrators of war crimes can be  automatically  read  across  as  applying
conversely to reluctant victims of war crimes. However,  we  do  think  that
they establish that when assessing what acts can be persecutory  (or  amount
to treatment contrary to Article  3  ECHR)  in  a  military  context  it  is
important to distinguish between acts which accord with the laws of war  and
those that do not.  They lend support for the view  (seemingly  rejected  in
Fadli) that the Refugee  Convention  can  be  understood  as  recognising  a
distinction between legitimate  and  illegitimate  military  violence.  They
also show that in relation to its soldiery a state cannot be  understood  as
having no duties of protection of any kind: these cases identify that  there
is at least a duty on a state to protect its soldiery from being  forced  to
commit war crimes. These cases also  indicate  that  it  is  only  when  the
military violence involved  is  marked  by  a  consistent  pattern  of  acts
contrary to the laws of war that any question can arise of a  soldier  being
at real risk as a result of having to engage in it.

74. Nor do we think, focusing still on UK cases, that it is the  changes  in
our domestic law made as a result of the  Qualification  Directive  and  the
further development of the law in the refusal to  perform  military  service
cases which alone operate to modify  the  application  of  Fadli.  There  is
clear authority outside the context of  refugee  law,  for  the  proposition
that soldiers are entitled in certain situations  to  be  protected  from  a
real and immediate threat to their right to life, e.g.  if  called  upon  to
give evidence without anonymity before an  inquiry  where  they  fear  being
targeted by insurgents: see  e.g.  R  (A  and  others)  v  Lord  Saville  of
Newdigate [2002] 1 WLR, 1249 and Re: Officer  L  [2007]  UKHL  36  (31  July
2007). Even more apposite is the  case  concerning   Private  Smith  in  the
Administrative  Court  (R  (Catherine  Smith)  v   Assistant   Coroner   for
Oxfordshire & Secretary of State for Defence [2008] EWHC  694  (Admin))  and
in the Court of Appeal ([2009] EWCA Civ  441).  This  concerned  a  deceased
soldier who had served in Basra, Iraq. His next  of  kin  alleged  that  his
death had occurred as a result of a failure by the state or  its  agents  to
protect life. In the Administrative Court, Collins J,  having  decided  that
in this context the deceased remained within the jurisdiction of  the  U.K.,
turned to the question of whether soldiers could invoke the right to life:
   "18. Ms Moore submitted that it was impossible to afford to soldiers  who
   were on active service outside their bases  the  benefits  of  the  Human
   Rights Act. If the Act was to apply, it had to apply in all aspects.  The
   circumstances of any particular case will determine whether an Article is
   breached. I am concerned with Article 2. This reads, so far as material:-


      "1. Everyone's right to life shall be protected by law.
      2.  Deprivation  of  life  shall  not  be  regarded  as  inflicted  in
      contravention of this Article when it results from the  use  of  force
      which is no more than absolutely necessary:
      (a) in defence of any person from unlawful violence;
      (b) in order to effect a lawful arrest or to prevent the escape  of  a
      person lawfully detained;
      (c) in action lawfully taken for the purpose of  quelling  a  riot  or
      insurrection."
   19. Article 2 covers the taking of life by  state  agents.  But  it  also
   imposes a positive obligation to protect life.  Thus  where  there  is  a
   known risk to life which  the  State  can  take  steps  to  avoid  or  to
   minimise, such steps should be taken. What can reasonably  be  done  will
   depend on the circumstances of a particular  case.  It  is  obvious  that
   sending members of the armed forces to fight or to keep order will expose
   them to the risk of death. Article 2(2)(c) as drafted seems to  be  aimed
   at internal strife within a State and the possibility of deaths occurring
   as a result of the use of force by police or army to maintain order. But,
   having regard to the extension of the protection of the Article  both  in
   its application outside the territory of a State and  its  obligation  to
   protect life, it does no violence to the language of Article  2(2)(c)  to
   recognise that the lives of members of the  armed  forces  when  sent  to
   fight or to keep order abroad cannot receive  absolute  protection.  This
   accords with the approach of the Court of Appeal in Mulcahy v Ministry of
   Defence [1996] 2 All ER 758, where a soldier serving in the Gulf War  who
   suffered hearing loss due to the negligent firing of a gun when he was in
   front of it failed in his claim because  no  duty  of  care  was  in  the
   circumstances owed to him. The court decided that in battle conditions it
   would be impossible to impose a duty  of  care.  As  Sir  Iain  Glidewell
   observed at p.772h:-
      "It would be highly detrimental to the conduct of military  operations
      if each soldier had to be conscious that, even in the heat of  battle,
      he owed such a duty to his comrade."
      This applied too to an allegation that there was a failure to maintain
      a safe system.
   20. But the soldier does not lose all protection simply because he is  in
   hostile territory carrying out dangerous operations. Thus,  for  example,
   to send a soldier out on patrol or, indeed, into  battle  with  defective
   equipment could constitute a breach  of  Article  2.  If  I  may  take  a
   historical  illustration,  the  failures  of  the  commissariat  and  the
   failures to provide any adequate medical attention  in  the  Crimean  War
   would whereas the Charge of the Light Brigade would not be regarded as  a
   possible breach of Article 2. So the protection of Article 2  is  capable
   of extending to a member of the armed forces wherever he or she  may  be;
   whether it does will depend on the circumstances of the particular  case.
   "
75. In the Court of Appeal  Sir Anthony Clarke MR  giving  the  judgment  of
the Court, addressed two questions,  the  "jurisdiction  question"  and  the
Article 2 question. The Court's answer to both did  not  differ  essentially
from that given by Collins J.  In relation to the Article  2  question,  the
Court formulated it in terms of whether the  inquest  into  Private  Smith's
death had to conform with Strasbourg principles applied in custody cases  so
that the state was under a positive obligation  to  protect  persons   in  a
vulnerable position ( the  Osman  principle:  see  Osman  v  United  Kingdom
(2000) 29 EHRR 245) and  thereby  to  set  up  a  system  which  involves  a
practical  and  effective  investigation  of   the   facts   and   for   the
determination of civil liability : see para 90. Having noted that the  ECtHR
had applied custody principles  to  conscripts,  the  Master  of  the  Rolls
stated:

      "104. The question remains whether the same is true of a case in which
      a solider dies of heat stroke as a member of the armed forces in Iraq.
      Our answer to that question is yes. On the  basis  of  the  Strasbourg
      jurisprudence, there is not doubt that it would apply to Private Smith
      if he were a conscript. We do not think that it could be right to draw
      a distinction between a regular soldier who is not a conscript  and  a
      member of the TA when in active service. When in active  service  both
      regular soldiers and members of the TA are  subject  to  army  orders,
      instructions and discipline in the same way.  So  there  could  be  no
      principled distinction between them.


      105. The  question  is  therefore  whether  the  principles  apply  to
      soldiers on active service in Iraq. We conclude that they do. They are
      under the control of and subject to army discipline. They must do what
      the army requires them to do. If the army  sends  them  out  into  the
      desert they must go. In this respect they are in the same position  as
      a conscript. Once they have signed up for a particular period they can
      no more disobey an order than a conscript can. The army owes them  the
      same duty of care at common law. We recognise that  they  may  not  be
      quite as vulnerable as conscripts but they may well be  vulnerable  in
      much the same way, both in stressful situations caused by conflict and
      in stressful situations caused, as in Private Smith's case, by extreme
      het. We see no reason why they should not have the same protection  as
      is afforded by article 2 to a conscript."


76. In an 11 June 2009 submission to us the two counsel for  the  respondent
contended that the Article 2 issue in Smith  related  to  the  investigative
obligation  under Article 2, which  was  a  different  issue  than  the  one
before us and the Court's  consideration  "does  not  assist  on  the  quite
different facts  and  issues  before  the  Tribunal,  i.e.  in  the  Soering
context, and with respect to an Iraqi national returning to military  duties
in Iraq as a member of the Iraqi Army, with particular  respect  to  alleged
threats to an off duty Iraqi soldier." We fully accept that the  issues  are
different, but what is relied on here is simply the basic  proposition  that
ECHR principles are considered to have protective implications  for  persons
who are soldiers. The Court of Appeal in Smith was in  no  doubt  that  this
was indeed a basic ECHR principle.

77. As regards derogable human rights, in R.(on the application of Purja  et
al.) v. Ministry of Defence [2004]  1  WLR  289  the  Court  of  Appeal  has
accepted that restrictions on the opportunity to live in  married  soldiers'
quarters might infringe the right to a private life.

78. Thus, applying human rights criteria to the  definition  of  persecution
(as Article 9 of the Qualification Directive stipulates that  we  must)  and
giving effect to the principle of protection enunciated in   Horvath  [2000]
UKHL 37) in Article 7 of  the  same  Directive  (reg  4  of  the  Protection
Regulations), we see no reason in principle why a soldier  who  is  able  on
the particular facts of his case to show that on return his  home  country's
commanders could not protect him to the extent that would be  practical  (we
shall come back to the importance  of  the  practicality  criterion   later)
against a real risk of becoming a  victim  of  systemic  violations  of  IHL
(e.g. of capture and then, as a matter of routine, torture at the  hands  of
the enemy) would not be entitled to invoke refugee  protection  (assuming  a
Refugee Convention ground was also made out) or subsidiary protection  under
Article 15(b) of  the  Qualification  Directive  or  Article  3  protection,
notwithstanding that he could be expected to face heightened  risks  to  his
life in the course of ordinary warfare.

79. However, nothing we  have  said  so  far  amounts  to  support  for  the
proposition that soldiers generally can succeed in refugee claims merely  by
pointing to the fact that the armed conflict to which they  face  having  to
return to as soldiers is one in which incidents of war crimes are  occurring
and are likely to continue to occur. It is of  the  highest  importance   to
reiterate our earlier point that in order to show real risk in  relation  to
such a broad category, it would be necessary to demonstrate  not  only  that
there would be an absence of an appropriate level of  protection,  but  that
there was a consistent pattern of such war crimes occurring.  In  the  words
of Potter LJ in Krotov:

      "37. In my view, the crimes listed above, if committed on  a  systemic
      basis as an aspect of deliberate policy, or as a  result  of  official
      indifference to the widespread actions of a brutal  military,  qualify
      as acts contrary to the basic rules of human  conduct  in  respect  of
      which  punishment  for  a  refusal  to  participate  will   constitute
      persecution within the ambit of the 1951 Convention."

80. In our view identical considerations apply in  relation  to  persecution
arising from the failure (if there  is  one)  of  a  state  to  protect  its
soldiers against a real risk of war crimes.

The element of compulsion

81. However, the exception we have  identified  to  the  general  rule  that
refusal to perform military service is not a basis for  a  refugee  claim  -
that relating to serving soldiers facing a real risk of  being  the  victims
of war crimes - there is an added  restriction.  It  relates  back  to   our
earlier discussion of the importance of  the  element  of  compulsion  in  a
person being required to perform military service. Plainly  in  the  refusal
to perform military service cases, the issue of risk on  return  only  arose
because the appellants concerned  feared  return  to  countries  where  they
faced compulsory military service, either in the  form  of  conscription  or
fixed service contracts. Without the element of compulsion it  would  always
have been open to them to avoid the feared harm (of  having  to  participate
in war crimes) by choosing not to serve.  It  seems  to  us  that  the  same
restriction must apply in relation to a soldier basing his claim on fear  of
being unprotected by his commanders against a real risk of being the  victim
of war crimes. If he is not facing compulsory military service, then it  may
be open to him to avoid the feared harm by quitting the army. We shall  come
back to how this criterion impacts on the general  situation  of  the  Iraqi
armed forces and the appellant's particular case later on.

IHL norms

82. Up to this point we have concentrated in the main on the application  of
human rights guarantees to soldiers. But since we depend  for  our  analysis
(in part) on ECHR guarantees encompassing IHL norms (see above para 60),  it
is also necessary for us to demonstrate that IHL norms themselves  recognise
that soldiers are entitled to some degree of protection.  Having  regard  to
IHL norms also helps cast light on how  we  should  approach  the  issue  of
practical protection by the state in the  context  of  refugee  claims.  One
obvious premise here is  that,  although  recognised  as  complementary  and
overlapping bodies of  law,  human  rights  law  and  IHL  have  significant
differences. And so far as protection of soldiers  is  concerned,   we  must
straightaway acknowledge that  for the most part the main body  of  IHL,  in
particular that contained in the four 1949 Geneva Conventions  and  the  two
1977 protocols, is chiefly  concerned  with  protection  of  civilians,  not
soldiers. Further, as Fleck,op.cit. notes at p.99 within the  IHL  framework
being a soldier does put one outwith the general  protection  guaranteed  to
civilians and specified others:

      "From the negative legal definition of civilians it also follows  that
      members of the armed forces  do  not  enjoy  the  'general  protection
      against dangers arising from military operations',  which  Article  51
      para 1, 1st sentence [of API]  affords to the civilian population  and
      to individual civilians".

83. On the other hand, this  family  of  treaties  exists  to  regulate  all
aspects of armed conflict and API, Article  1(1),  for  example,  states  in
unqualified terms: "The High Contracting Parties undertake  to  respect  and
to ensure respect for this Protocol  in  all  circumstances".   And  Article
3((2) states that:

      "In cases not covered by  this  Protocol  or  by  other  international
      agreements, civilians and combatants remain under the  protection  and
      authority  of  the  principles  of  international  law  derived   from
      established custom, from the principles of humanity and from  dictates
      of public conscience".  (Emphasis added)


84. The Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court, although  for  the
most part  specifying  crimes  directed  against  the  civilian  population,
includes  descriptions  of  certain  crimes,  e.g.  genocide,  that  are  in
unqualified terms and include, as acts amounting to war crimes,  "Committing
outrages upon personal dignity,  in  particular  humiliating  and  degrading
treatment"  (Article  8(b)(xx11).  There  are  a   significant   number   of
provisions also which impose duties on  parties  to  a  conflict  compliance
with which clearly operates to protect each party's own combatants. We  have
already noted provisions designed to protect those who are  hors  de  combat
or who qualify as  "protected  persons".  Complementing  these  API  Article
10(1)  prescribes  that  "[a]ll  the  wounded,  sick  and  shipwrecked,   to
whichever Party  they  belong,  shall  be  respected  and  protected."  API,
Article 16.3 stipulates that no person engaged in medical  activities  shall
be compelled to give to anyone belonging either to an adverse Party,  or  to
his own Party, except as required by  the  law  of  the  latter  party,  any
information concerning the wounded and the sick who are, or who  have  been,
under his care. IHL imposes duties  of  protection,  that  is  to  say,  not
solely on civilians but also, to some  degree  at  least,  on  the  soldiers
belonging to each party.  In the Legality of the Threat or  Use  of  Nuclear
Weapons - Advisory Opinion   [1996] ICJ 2 (8 July 1996)  case  at  para  78,
the  ICJ  noted  that,  whilst  the  "cardinal  principle"  of  IHL  is  the
protection of the  civilian  population  and  civilian  objects,  a  "second
principle" is that "it is  prohibited  to  cause  unnecessary  suffering  to
combatants: it is accordingly prohibited to use weapons  causing  them  such
harm or uselessly  aggravating  their  suffering.  In  application  of  that
second principle, States do not have unlimited freedom of  choice  of  means
in the weapons they  use".  IHL  rules  are  rules  indicating  "the  normal
conduct and behaviour expected of States" (para 82). We think that  although
the Court was specifically concerned  only  with  the  rule   that  a  state
cannot unnecessarily harm the other side's soldiers, its formulation of  the
rule in universal terms strongly implies that it applies also to  a  state's
own combatants.

85. We have no doubt that both human  rights  law  and  IHL  recognise  that
being a soldier obliges one to face a heightened  risk  to  one's  life  and
limb. A state's maintenance of its  sovereignty  and  territorial  integrity
may depend upon its soldiers facing a heightened  risk  to  their  life  and
limb. The broader framework of international law within which both the  ECHR
and IHL operate includes the UN Charter, which enshrines the sovereignty  of
the state and its right not to  be  attacked  and  to  defend  itself  as  a
fundamental  principle:  see  Article  51.   IHL  treaties  contain  similar
provisions, e.g. APII Article 3(1) states that  "Nothing  in  this  Protocol
shall be invoked for the purpose of affecting the sovereignty of a State  or
the responsibility of the government, by all legitimate means,  to  maintain
or re-establish law and order in the State or to defend the  national  unity
and territorial integrity of the State".

86. It must also be accepted that under both human rights  law  and  IHL  it
would be untenable to hold that  soldiers  can  only  be  expected  to  face
military violence kept entirely within  the  rules  of  war.   Significantly
international law only attaches criminal liability to those responsible  for
serious violations of the laws of  war.  Significantly  as  well,  both  the
definition of "war crimes" and "crimes against humanity"  employed  for  the
purposes of establishing criminal liability under the Rome  Statute  of  the
International Criminal Court focus on war crimes "in  particular"  that  are
"large-scale" (see Article 8(1) dealing with war crimes") or "widespread  or
systematic" (see Article 7 dealing with crimes against  humanity).  Further,
whilst IHL  exists  to  regulate  the  conduct  of  armed  conflict,  it  is
predicated on the expectation  that  breaches  will  occur.   IHL  seeks  to
regulate armed conflict, not to erect tests that must be met before  parties
can commence fighting.

87. Summarising the combined effect of the provisions of  human  rights  and
IHL on this question, we consider that a soldier cannot be  expected  to  be
protected (if at all) against the risk of meeting with isolated  or  even  a
significant level of violations of the laws of war, but only against a  real
risk of being exposed to a consistent pattern of such violations. And  under
the Refugee Convention (and under the Qualification Directive and Article  3
of the ECHR) what has to be shown is both a real risk of  such  harm  and  a
failure of state protection confined to  that  which  is  practical  in  the
circumstances: see Horvath . Although (because it would  require  a  factual
situation of an exceptional kind) it may  not  be  easy  for  a  soldier  to
establish that on return he would face being unprotected (to  the  requisite
level) against having to face a consistent pattern of  military violence  of
an unlawful kind, if he can, then, in our view, his situation may give  rise
to a further exception (beyond the exception for those who face  a  systemic
risk of having to participate in  war  crimes)  to  the  general  rule  that
soldiers cannot succeed in showing the harm they face is serious harm.

88. We note Mr Eadie's contention  that  to  admit  of  the  exception  just
identified would undermine the edifice  of  international  protection  which
the Refugee Convention and the Human Rights Convention  exist  to  maintain.
He invoked the spectre of soldiers fleeing their armies  in  order  to  seek
international protection, thereby weakening their  own  state's  ability  to
protect its own citizens.  We would observe in the first place that  neither
the House of Lords in Sepet and Bulbul nor the Court of Appeal in Krotov  or
BE (Iran) appeared to  see  the  exception  for  returning  soldiers  facing
punishment for refusing to be forced to participate in war crimes (or as  in
BE (Iran) atrocities or gross violations of  human  rights)  as  undermining
the edifice of refugee protection. But in any event, we were  certainly  not
presented with any evidence to suggest any real prospect of such  a  spectre
materialising. What a soldier would have to prove, in order to  be  able  to
succeed in a refugee claim, would be an objective risk, not simply  his  own
subjective beliefs about such risks: see Sepet and  Bulbul,  para   23  (per
Lord Bingham).  It may also be (although we cannot  determine  this  in  the
absence of evidence) that the situations in which soldiers will be  able  to
show  a  well-founded  fear  of  being  exposed  by  their  superiors  to  a
consistent pattern of military violence contrary to the rules of  war  would
be very rare.  Certainly we see nothing in the evidence that was before  the
Court of Appeal in  Fadli (or Gedara), for example, to  suggest  that  there
was a consistent pattern of use of military violence by the GIA  in  Algeria
(or by the LTTE in Sri Lanka) that was contrary to the laws of  war  and  so
of sufficient severity at the  relevant  time  (in  Algeria  and  Sri  Lanka
respectively) to give rise to such a  systemic  risk.  The  Tribunal  in  KH
(Iraq) and the ECtHR in FK v Sweden clearly did not find as a fact that  the
background evidence relating to Iraq demonstrated that  the  armed  conflict
there possessed such a pattern.

89. We see great force in Mr Eadie's contention  that  it  cannot  be  right
that the more heinous the enemy the more possible it  becomes  for  soldiers
to succeed in a refugee claim  based  on  fear  of  being  exposed  to  that
enemy's war crimes. It cannot be right to maintain that a  state  is  unable
to deploy its soldiers  to  defend  itself  and  its  citizenry  against  an
internal or external enemy just because its use of force violates IHL  norms
 -  a fortiori when that enemy violence exhibits  a  consistent  pattern  of
violations of IHL norms.  But  in  our  view  the  concern  underlying  this
contention can be met by applying basic principles of refugee  law  relating
to protection.

90. That brings us to what we see as a real paradox  to  our  own  analysis,
one demonstrating the clear need to have  regard  to  the  implications  for
cases concerned with situations of armed conflict, of the Horvath  principle
that a state can only be expected to provide practical protection. If it  is
only when there is a widespread and/or systemic risk of being the victim  of
war crimes that gives  rise  to  an  exception  to  the  general  rule  that
soldiers cannot expect  state  protection  against  military  violence  from
insurgents, then it is only going to be in the  most  exceptional  situation
that such failure of protection can arise. But  if  the  situation  is  most
exceptional, then it is equally clear that the state's duty  to  protect  is
heavily attenuated, by virtue of its primary responsibility to  protect  its
own citizenry.

 91. It may be helpful to try and clarify why we think  in  such  situations
there is a protection paradox  by  considering  in  slightly  more  concrete
fashion a hypothetical example.   Let us suppose that a  state  has  ordered
its soldiers to go and fight in a part of its  territory  where  they  would
face systemic and widespread targeting  from  lethal  chemical,  biological,
nuclear weapons or other prohibited weapons.  On  our  analysis  two  things
follow. On the one hand we cannot see that soldiers are  necessarily  placed
outwith the protection of the basic  rules  of  human  conduct  or  of  non-
derogable human rights.  We remind ourselves that the basic rules  of  human
conduct are based on peremptory norms comprising  "elemental  considerations
of humanity", that are "erga omnes": see Legality of the Threat or use by  a
State of Nuclear Weapons in Armed Conflict,  ICJ Advisory Opinion   (8  July
1996.

92. On the other hand it is  apparent  from  this  very  same  international
authority that in extreme situations the responsibility of the state to  its
citizenry at large cannot be such as to divest  it  of  the  right  to  self
defence. We accept that the strict context of the Nuclear Weapons  case  was
not  a  state  sending  soldiers  to  face  nuclear  weapons  but  a   state
contemplating using nuclear weapons; and the rule it lays  down  is  applied
only to a state's use of nuclear weapons against an enemy, but  nevertheless
it seems to us that the general principles  the  Court  enunciated  must  be
understood to have universal application. In holding that it could not  rule
out that a state might in  an  extreme  case  be  entitled  to  use  nuclear
weapons, the Court stated at para 96 that:

        "...the Court cannot lose sight of the fundamental  right  of  every
      State to survival, and thus its right to resort  to  self-defence,  in
      accordance with Article 51 of the Charter, when  its  survival  is  at
      stake".

93. It is true that the Court made clear at  paras  95-6  that  recourse  to
nuclear weapons would generally be contrary to IHL  and  that  it  noted  at
para  22  that  "the  nuclear-weapon  States  appearing  before  it   either
accepted, or did not dispute, that their  independence  to  act  was  indeed
restricted  by  the  principles  and  rules  of  international   law,   more
particularly humanitarian law...".  (Indeed  at  para  86  it  noted,  inter
alia, that among statements made  to  the  Court  was  that  by  the  United
Kingdom declaring that: "[s]o far as the customary law of war is  concerned,
the United Kingdom has always accepted that the use of  nuclear  weapons  is
subject to the general principles of the jus in bello" (United  Kingdom,  CR
95/34, p.45))


94. It is also true that the Court  further  clarified  that  under  the  UN
Charter the use of force will be unlawful except  in  limited  circumstances
and  that  even  self-defence  "would  warrant  only  measures   which   are
proportional to the armed attack and necessary to respond  to  it..."  (para
41,  citing  Military  and   Paramilitary   Activities   against   Nicaragua
(Nicaragua v USA) Merits, Judgment of 27 June 1986 [1986]  ICJ  Reports  14,
para 176) and at para 42 added:

      "...a use of force that  is  proportionate  under  the  law  of  self-
      defence, must, in order to be lawful, also meet  the  requirements  of
      the law applicable in armed conflict which comprise in particular  the
      principles and rules of humanitarian law".

95. But of course, if the situation is an exceptional one in which the  very
survival of the state is at stake,  then protective  measures  a  state  can
take in relation to its  own  soldiers  are  very  likely  to  be  extremely
minimal. If self-defence is at stake then  a  state  has  competing  duties,
including its primary duty to ensure protection of its  civilian  population
and compliance with that duty may mean putting soldiers in harm's  way  with
very little notice. If a state were to fail to put its  soldiers  in  harm's
way,  that  might  well,  depending  on  the  circumstances,  amount  to  an
abandonment of the duty  to  defend  the  civilian  population.  (see  APII,
Article 3(1)) In such a context the principles  of  military  necessity  and
proportionality  may  mean  no  more  than  taking  ameliorative  steps  (if
practicable) to minimise casualties,  e.g.  providing  protective  radiation
clothing, etc.

96. We would observe that the position we adopt  here  is  not  inconsistent
with  Fadli or Gedara if one  considers  that  what  both  judgments  sought
principally to reject was the notion that soldiers could  expect  protection
(to use Newman J's words in Gedara at para 24) "  so  as  to  frustrate  due
protection being accorded to all  those  entitled  to  protection".  Such  a
formulation of the position would appear to  leave  undecided  the  position
where a state protecting its soldiers did not  conflict  with  its  role  in
protecting the citizenry. We should perhaps recall also  that  the  position
we take here, albeit different from that urged by  Mr  Eadie  in  the  later
part of his oral submissions,  is  very  similar  to  that  adopted  in  the
respondent's  written  submissions  and  in  the  first  part  of  his  oral
submissions, at least as regards the position in relation to  Article  2  of
the ECHR.  At paragraph 33 of  those  written  submissions  it  was  stated:
"Whilst it might not be impossible to envisage a case  in  which  Article  2
might be engaged on protective grounds ... such a  course  would  be  wholly
exceptional".

97. One of Mr Eadie's reasons for urging us to take an  absolutist  approach
was that he feared that to allow any exception might, in logic,  lead  to  a
position where it could be argued that the UK  government  risked  violation
of IHL if it were to send soldiers into conflicts that might expose them  to
being victims of war crimes. We hope it is first of all clear from  what  we
have said that at most the exception we have identified in  the  context  of
refugee claims arises only when there is not simply a risk  of  exposure  to
war crimes but  to  war  crimes  being  committed  on  a  widespread  and/or
systematic basis (such that there is a consistent pattern).

98. A statutory tribunal charged with assessing risk  on  return  under  the
Refugee  Convention,  the  Qualification  Directive  and  the  Human  Rights
Convention is not concerned to make  judgments other than legal ones on  the
way foreign states conduct their affairs, whether  the  conduct  relates  to
military or non-military matters. And as it happens we have no role  at  all
in pronouncing on the conduct of military  affairs  by  the  United  Kingdom
government. Further, we have to consider not just events that  have  already
happened; our principal task is to look at the much less  certain  dimension
of future risk and to assess what we consider will be done by another  state
in relation to its soldiers, their deployment, the  equipment  they  possess
etc, bearing in mind all the time that armed conflicts are heavily  affected
by contingent circumstances and the ebb and flow of warfare. But,  where  we
are faced  with  claims  for  refugee  status  brought  by  soldiers  facing
compulsory involvement in an armed conflict, we are concerned  to  determine
such matters as whether or not the armed  conflict  is  characterised  by  a
consistent pattern of violations of the laws of war. As is  clear  from  the
refusal to perform military service cases, we must seek to  reach  objective
conclusions based on international  law  norms.  And  in  terms  of  general
principles of international law, it has long been the case that  all  states
are under obligations relating to the use of force, both outside as well  as
inside their own territory.

99. We also think our approach accords with the IHL   principle  of  command
responsibility.  This  principle  or   doctrine   primarily   concerns   the
responsibility of a commander to ensure that his soldiers do not commit  war
crimes. That is clear from the classic formulation given this  principle  in
United States v Tomoyui Yamashita , US Military Tribunal, Manilla,  1945)  4
Law Reports of Trials of War Criminals 14, where it was held that:

       "Where murder and rape and vicious, revengeful actions are widespread
      offences, and there is no effective attempt by a commander to dissolve
      and control the criminal acts such a commander may be held responsible
      even criminally  liable,  for  the  lawless  actions  of  his  troops,
      depending upon their nature and the circumstances surrounding them".

100.  However, obligations relating to the use of force do  sometimes  apply
to those exposed to the use of force as much as those who are using  it.  It
is well settled law that commanders have a duty to  protect  the  safety  of
troops under their command (specifically  affirmed  by  the  UK  in  the  UK
Statement on Ratification of API  28 Hab 199, paragraph (h) reprinted  in  A
Roberts and R Guelf (eds) Documents on the Laws of War 3rd edition 2000,  pp
510-412). It is difficult to see how, in principle, it could not  give  rise
to a violation of Article 2 of the ECHR   if,  e.g.  a  commander  proceeded
with a plan to attack a non-vital enemy military installation using a  large
number of soldiers knowing that many will be killed in the attack. The  loss
of life would  clearly  be  excessive  compared  with  the  direct  military
advantage. As such it  might  contravene  the  IHL  principles  of  military
necessity and proportionality. Another example,  which  might  similarly  be
contrary to IHL rules, might be gross failure  by  a  commander  to  provide
soldiers with gas masks knowing they would be exposed  to  unlawful  methods
of combat in the form of lethal gas attacks  on  the  battlefield.  In  such
circumstances, a failure on the part of a commander  to  provide  protective
equipment might make him  culpable  for  failing  to  protect  his  soldiers
against war crimes.

101.  Furthermore,  the  words  "in  principle"  used   here   carry   major
limitations. As is clear from both the observations of both  Collins  J  and
Sir Anthony Clarke MR in the Smith case, whether the protection  of  Article
2 is capable of extending to a member of the armed forces will  depend  very
much on the circumstances of the particular case. Even  as  regards  matters
relating to faulty equipment, much may depend on what  resources  the  state
concerned has and what are the practical exigencies of the  armed  conflict.
The means of war employed by  the  parties  and  the  theatre  of  operation
(urban, jungle,  desert  etc)  may  have  considerable  impact  on  what  is
practicable. As already noted, a situation of armed conflict  is  likely  to
be characterised by flux and uncertainty, making it all the  more  important
for judges assessing risks to returning  soldiers  to  be  cautious  not  to
overlook the many contingencies that may obtain.

102. Whilst therefore we do not rule out that  in  very  extreme  cases  the
principle of military necessity might  justify  governments  exposing  their
soldiers to fight in "dirty wars" in which  they  might  become  victims  of
violations of the laws of war on a  widespread  and  /or  systematic  basis,
this must still be subject to the principle  of  proportionality.  Otherwise
it would be effectively open to a dictator, for example,  to  send  all  his
soldiers on a whim needlessly to die.   Genocide would be no  less  genocide
if it arose from the act of a dictator, not in sending his army to wipe  out
a race or tribe, but in selecting from amongst his own soldiers  only  those
from a particular tribe or race (because, e.g. he regarded them as  inferior
and more dispensable) to fight in a war zone in which  he  knew  nuclear  or
chemical weapons were being used  on  a  widespread  and  systematic  basis,
without  even  seeking  to  provide  them  with  any  protective  armour  or
equipment.

The position of members of a soldier's family

103. We doubt that the appellant is directly assisted much by  the  case  of
Frantisek Katrinak [2001] EWCA Civ 832 (or recital 27 of  the  Qualification
Directive) since that concerned whether someone  could    base  his  or  her
claim to persecution on being the  family  member  of  someone  at  risk  of
persecution when both are in the United Kingdom, whereas in  this  case  the
appellant's surviving family members are in Iraq  and  are  not  appellants.
More importantly, that case was  concerned  with  two  appellants  who  were
civilians and had no armed conflict dimension.

104. We see force in Mr Eadie's and Mr Wordsworth's arguments that  that  it
might be said that the wife of a soldier has consented  to  some  extent  to
the exigencies of military life insofar as  they  affect  her  family  life,
which may sometimes mean, for example, joining her husband for a  period  of
service abroad or living apart from him for a period of years.  However,  it
is equally clear that for the purposes of assessing  whether  the  targeting
of a soldier's family would be compatible with IHL, it  will  often  be  the
case that their position  will  be  assimilated  to  that  of  the  civilian
population in which they live, as long as the number of soldiers present  is
not large. We recall here the excerpt from the ICRC Commentary on API  which
we cited earlier at para 48, stating that:

      "...in wartime conditions it is inevitable that individuals  belonging
      to the category of combatants become intermingled  with  the  civilian
      population, for example, soldiers on leave  visiting  their  families.
      However, provided that these are not regular units with  fairly  large
      numbers, this does not in any way change the civilian character of the
      population".

105. If the presence of soldiers themselves does  not  change  the  civilian
character of the population, then we cannot see that the presence  of  their
families would.

The implication for soldiers off duty or on leave

106. The relevance of human rights and IHL principles to  the  situation  of
soldiers claiming asylum has important implications for how  decision-makers
should approach assessment of risk to  soldiers  who  are  off  duty  or  on
leave.  Outside very exceptional situations, Fadli  principles  apply,  with
the consequence that such persons  cannot  succeed  merely  by  establishing
that by virtue of being a soldier they  would  face  a  heightened  risk  to
their life or limb. Nor can they succeed merely by establishing  that  they,
in common with  other  soldiers,  would  sometimes  face  military  violence
contrary to the laws of war: they would have  to  show  that  such  military
violence formed a  consistent  pattern.  However,  all  that  we  have  been
discussing so far has been at the level  of  principle  as  it  affects  the
soldiers of a country generally. None of it prevents a person  from  showing
that their own history and particular circumstances might place  them  at  a
greater risk than the generality of soldiers. In the language of  the  ECtHR
in cases such as Vilvirajah v UK (1991) 14 EHRR 248, they may still be  able
to succeed if they can show a real risk that is personal  to  them.  In  the
case of an individual at real risk of being the victim of a war crime  aimed
at him personally, he would not need to show in addition that  there  was  a
consistent pattern of such war crimes happening in the country concerned.

Returning soldiers and the issue of protection

107. We noted earlier Miss Akinbolu's submission that in Gedara,  Newman  J,
whilst following Fadli, had clearly envisaged that soldiers fell within  the
ambit of the state's duty to protect its citizens at least to  some  extent.
Her own submission was that whilst the state did not in general have a  duty
to protect soldiers against the  risks  of  military  violence,  that  could
alter if the military violence concerned was contrary to the laws of war.

108.  Mr  Eadie's  position,  by  contrast,  was  that  under  his  proposed
absolutist approach the issue of whether soldiers  were  entitled  to  state
protection would never arise. His submission appeared to  be  (at  least  at
certain points) that those who provide protection cannot expect at  one  and
the same time to avail themselves of it.

109. We have considerable difficulty with Mr Eadie's approach. Even were  we
to accept that soldiers can be expected to face any type of harm, we do  not
see that such an acceptance entails denial of  the  duty  of  the  state  to
afford them any protection whatsoever. As already intimated,  there  may  be
both military and civilian aspects to  state  protection  of  its  soldiery.
Just because they are soldiers who can be expected when commanded to go  and
fight cannot mean, for example, that their superiors might not  be  under  a
duty (subject to what is practical in  the  circumstances)  to  ensure  they
have adequate kit  and  weaponry  for  the  fighting  they  are  sent  into.
Despite their special role arising  from  their  ability  to  bear  arms  in
service of the state, soldiers are also part of a state's  citizenry.   Just
because they are soldiers cannot mean, for example (at least in the  context
of an internal armed conflict), that when they  are  off  duty  they  cannot
look to local police to watch out for  their  safety  as  much  as  (if  not
sometimes more than) that of ordinary citizens.

110. To be fair to Mr Eadie,  we  do  not  think  his  overall  position  on
protection was so  absolutist  or  indeed  could  be.  At  para  20  of  the
respondent's written submissions it was stated:

      "It does not follow that off duty soldiers in Iraq have no  protection
      they are protected by the application  of  Iraqi  law  and  those  who
      sought to harm an  off  duty  soldier  may  be   subject  to  criminal
      sanctions applicable as a matter of Iraqi domestic law."


111. This statement very much reflects what is said in the UK MoD Manual  of
the Law of Armed Conflict at 15.6.1: "... in internal  armed  conflict,  the
law of the  place,  where  the  armed  conflict  takes  place  continues  to
apply...".

112. We note further that in reply to  the specific question we posed  prior
to the second hearing, whether protection afforded to  soldiers  was  always
less than that a state  affords  to  its  civilians,  the  position  of  the
respondent appeared to be that "... the protection afforded to a  member  of
the state's armed forces may be the same as a  matter  of  domestic  law  to
that afforded to the civilian".

113. Whilst we agree that protection  "may"  (sometimes)  be  the  same,  we
think in general terms that the  protection  soldiery  can  expect  must  in
general be more limited by virtue of the nature of  their  military  duties.
That, it seems to us, is the essence  of  the  principle  expressed  by  the
ECtHR in Sen (and echoed by the House of Lords in Gentle and Another  [2008]
UKHL 20 per Lord Hope at paras 18-19 and the Court of  Appeal  in  Smith  at
para 31).  A civilian can expect  to  be  protected  against  all  types  of
military harm;  (see  API,  Article  51(1),  Y.  Dinstein,  The  Conduct  of
Hostilities under the Law of International Armed Conflict paragraph  27);  a
soldier cannot. Under the rules of war a soldier can be a legitimate  target
of military harm from his enemy. But much still depends on the  context  and
it may be, for  example,  that  sometimes  soldiers  will   be  entitled  to
greater protection (e.g. by reasonably expecting to have sentries posted  at
live-in barracks when there is a danger of enemy attacks).

114.  However,  as  will  be  clear  from  our  earlier  analysis,  we  have
difficulties with Miss Akinbolu's position as well. Whereas  we  accept  her
argument that the general lack of any state duty  to  protect  its  soldiers
against being required to fight  does  not  necessarily  extend  to  extreme
situations where commanders know their soldiers will  be  subjected  to  war
crimes, it seems to us that, at least for the generality  of  its  soldiery,
the protective responsibilities in such extreme situations will  be  heavily
limited. Of course, the state concerned  may  be  a  state  that  is  acting
illegitimately in its use of force and so acting contrary to the UN  Charter
and to peremptory norms of international law. If that is so,  then  its  own
conduct may itself evince a failure of its duties to protect its  citizenry.
But equally it may be that the state concerned is acting in legitimate self-
defence. There may be states whose  actions  place  them  somewhere  on  the
spectrum between these two types of situation. But since our reasoning  must
work so as to cover all cases, let us focus on  the  cases  posing  greatest
difficulty for our analysis, those concerned with legitimate self-defence.

115.  If a state under international law is acting legitimately in  relation
to the  measures taken to defend itself, then it can be assumed that  it  is
conducting its military affairs according  to  the  principles  of  military
necessity and proportionality. At the same  time,  where,  it  finds  itself
engaged with insurgents who  are  committing  or  intending  to  commit  war
crimes on a wide  scale  against  the  civilian  population,  then  it  will
necessarily be concerned to defend itself  and  protect  its  citizenry.  It
seems to us that for the same reasons that the ICJ in  the  Nuclear  Weapons
case considered that even use of nuclear weapons could be consistent with  a
state's right to self-defence (if  legitimately  exercised),  so  a  state's
duties to protect its soldiers against war crimes being committed on a  wide
scale (internally or externally) would be extremely minimal and may  amount,
for example, to doing no more than trying to ensure they are  provided  with
uniforms designed to protect against radiation. Put another  way,  practical
protection in situations of such extremity  may  necessarily  (in  order  to
ensure self-defence) be extremely minimal.

The ECHR and the Refugee Convention

116. As regards the appellant's grounds under Articles 2 and 3 of the  ECHR,
Miss Akinbolu submitted that the position as regards risk to soldiers  would
be the same as under the Refugee Convention and  under  Article  15  of  the
Refugee Qualification Directive.  Mr Eadie broadly agreed albeit wishing  to
leave open that the reach of  Article  3  protection  might  be  wider  than
Refugee Convention protection. We see no  reason  to  pursue  this  question
further, save to mention that the authority of Bagdanavicus [2005]  UKHL  38
must be applied. What obtains in  regard to Article 3 protection  will  also
obtain in regard  to  subsidiary  (humanitarian)  protection  under  Article
15(b) (para 339C(iii) of HC395) of the Qualification Directive.

The safety of soldiers in Iraq

117. As well as answers to questions of law, the Tribunal in its  memorandum
also sought  help from the parties with answering questions  concerning  the
number of members of the ISF killed or wounded in Iraq since 2003 until  the
present and arrangements made by  the  Government  of  Iraq  (GOI)  for  the
housing of its soldiers. Not all of this information was available  and,  of
course, answers to these questions could at best only furnish  part  of  the
picture.  We have also had regard to the  following  passage  in  the  lCOIS
report for January 2009 including the following:

      "ISF as targets for insurgents


           11.55 Attacks by armed insurgents on the ISF  occurred.  (UNHCR,
           Aug  2007)  [40j] (p9,10,25,35,39,50,102)  (UNHCR,  Dec  2007)
           [40l] (p10,31,36,37,45) The frequent attacks  largely  targeted
           checkpoints, police stations and  recruitment  centres.  (UNHCR,
           Dec 2007) [40l] (p31)


           11.56 The UNHCR report, August 2007, commented that "Many Iraqis
           who previously worked or presently work for, or have any type of
           association with the MNF, foreign (mainly Western) embassies  or
           foreign companies are generally perceived by the  insurgency  as
           condoning and supporting the 'occupation' of Iraq and have  been
           targeted since the fall of the former regime." [40j] (p102)


           11.57 The Brooking Institute Iraq Index  report,  updated  on  6
           November 2008, provides figures of the numbers of Iraqi military
           and police killed monthly (although not the source  of  attack).
           [88d] (p6)"


118. The respondent also produced the report referred to in 11.57:  that  of
the Brookings Institute Iraq Index: Tracking  Variables  for  Reconstruction
and Security in  post-Saddam  Iraq,  6  November  2008.  It  indicates  that
between June 2003 and 6 November 2008, 8,583 police and  military  personnel
were killed in Iraq. Whilst accepting  that  neither  this  report  nor  any
other source furnishes reliably precise figures, we think it safe  to  find,
and it is not contested by Miss Akinbolu, that the latest  figures  for  the
second half of 2008 show significantly lower levels of such casualties  than
for the period 2004 - 2006.  We  also have regard to the assessment  by  the
Tribunal in KH (Iraq) and more recently by the ECtHR in FH  v  Sweden,  that
in 2008 the levels of violence  generally  in  Iraq  were  not  sufficiently
severe to establish a real risk of serious harm  or  treatment  contrary  to
Article 3. It is not in dispute that they  have  fallen  considerably  since
then.

119. We lack evidence as to what proportion of these deaths was a result  of
illegitimate  (as  opposed  to  legitimate)  military  violence.  But   even
assuming that most of them were as a result of illegitimate violence,  their
number  over the relevant period does not  suffice in our view to show  that
the ISF soldiery is routinely exposed to a consistent  pattern  of  military
violence contrary to the laws of war.

120. For reasons set  out  earlier,  that  does  not  prevent,  however,  an
individual ISF soldier from being able, in the particular  circumstances  of
his case, to demonstrate that on return he would be exposed to a  real  risk
of such violence.   But it does mean he cannot succeed  by  pointing  solely
to the general experience of ISF soldiery.

121. We noted earlier that in general a person facing return  as  a  soldier
cannot pray  in aid fear of exposure to illicit military violence unless  he
is in fact compelled to serve as a soldier.   That  may  be  because  he  is
subject to compulsory  conscription  or  because  he  has  signed  up  to  a
contract of service requiring him to remain in the  army.  This  observation
has some  importance  in  the  Iraq  context  because  of  the  considerable
evidence indicating  that  for  the  most  part  enrolment  in  the  ISF  is
voluntary.

122. According to the COIS report, January 2008, at paragraphs  11.01,  with
the fall of Saddam military service in Iraq ceased  to  be  compulsory.  The
same report at para 11.03 records a 30 November 2006 report stating that:

      "While over 300,000 men  have  been  trained  and  equipped,  a  large
      percentage has since left and deserted, substantial numbers have  been
      killed and wounded, and some 10-20% of those who remain are absent  at
      any given time because they leave to take care of their  families  and
      transfer their pay in a country where there is no  meaningful  banking
      system."

123. The same report at paragraph  10.22  cites  a  UNAMI  Report,  dated  1
September - 31 October 2006 as stating that "... absenteeism  is  widespread
and there are reports that in Kirkuk alone, half of the  5000  police  force
and 13,000 Army soldiers are not reporting to duty at any  given  time,  and
many fail to return to duty".

124. This report goes on at paragraph 11.04 to give the absenteeism  figures
as averaging 15% and notes that "there is currently no  judicial  punishment
system within the Iraqi Army. Therefore Iraqi Army  commanders  have  little
leverage to compel their soldiers to combat, and  soldiers  and  police  can
quit with impunity".

125. Paragraph 10.43 of  this  report  cites  a  Centre  for  Strategic  and
International Studies (CSIS) report of 19 June 2006, which states that  "...
the Iraqi army does not require soldiers  to  sign  contracts,  so  soldiers
treat  enlistments  as  temporary  jobs".   Under  the   heading   "Military
Service", the most  recent  report,  the  2009  COIS  report,  January  2009
states:

      "12.01      The Child Soldiers report for 2007, published on 21 May
      2008, commented that:


            "In May 2003 the Coalition Provisional Authority (CPA) had
      ordered the complete dismantling of the Iraqi army, the demobilization
      of all enlisted soldiers and the indefinite suspension of universal
      conscription. The August 2003 CPA order creating the new armed forces
      specified that the minimum age of recruitment was 18 and that
      recruitment was voluntary. Former military officers of the rank of
      lieutenant-colonel and below were being accepted into the new army;
      all other males between the ages of 18 and 40 who were not listed on
      excluded lists were allowed to sign up at recruiting centres."
      [42a] (p1)


      12.02 The CSIS report, published 23 July 2008, commented on  the  high
      desertion rate from the  ISF  [63k] (p4);  there  were  reports  that
      hundreds, possibly thousands, of soldiers defected from the Iraqi Army
      and Iraqi Police during fighting in Basra in  March  2008,  with  some
      soldiers even changing sides to the Mahdi army. [63k] (p13) The  CSIS
      report further stated:


            "Reports emerged in the week following the cease fire that more
            than 1,000 ISF soldiers and policemen either refused  to  fight
            or abandoned their posts. Some ISF personnel  even  shed  their
            uniforms, kept their weapons, and joined the JAM. While most of
            the deserters were low-level soldiers or police, officers  also
            deserted, including at least 2 senior officers. Iraqi estimates
            of the number of officers  who  deserted  varied  from  several
            dozen to more than 100." [63k] (p13)"


 126. We are cautious about seeking to infer from this information  that  it
would be open to returnee ISF soldiers in every case  to  simply  decide  to
leave the army. Whilst the evidence shows that a significant number  of  ISF
soldiers desert and go AWOL, without punishment, there clearly is  a  system
of  discipline  and  regulations  (see  "Creation  of  a  Code  of  Military
Discipline for the New Iraqi Army" CPA/ORD/7, 7 August 2003/23) and  it  may
be that opportunities to leave are dependent  on  the  particular  situation
(e.g. a person not being returned to a front-line unit where there would  be
no practical possibility of desertion for some period  at  least;  see  also
the observations of Sir Anthony Clarke MR in Smith,  paras  104-5;  although
made in relation to British soldiers, they seem apt to describe  the  likely
position for Iraqi soldiery as well).

127. (What we say here will not necessarily apply  to  Iraqi  nationals  who
are members of the  MNF  or  CPA.  Although  from  the  limited  information
available their contracts with these bodies do not bind them  to  compulsory
service we cannot rule  out  that  there  may  be  circumstances  where,  on
return, they might be handed over to  these  bodies  and  find  they  cannot
easily leave immediately. )

The country guidance case of NS

128. One of the questions the Tribunal asked  the  parties  to  address  was
whether NS requires revision in the  light  of  Fadli  and  the  refusal  to
perform military service cases.  Concerning the question  of  whether  there
were legal or factual reasons for the Tribunal to depart  from  the  country
guidance case of NS, Mr Eadie and Mr Wordsworth submitted  there  were  not.
It was doubtful that the risk categories identified in NS were  intended  to
cover soldiers; in any event, someone working in an auxiliary  capacity,  as
a translator for example  (and  as  was  the  case  in  NS),  could  not  be
considered as a member of  a  country's  armed  forces  or  otherwise  as  a
combatant.

129. Albeit stating at the outset that she saw no reason  for  the  Tribunal
to  depart  from  the  guidance  in  NS,  Miss  Akinbolu  did  indicate,  by
implication at least, that she saw the risk  categories  identified  therein
as an illustration of her  general  point  that  the  further  removed  from
active participation in armed hostilities, the greater the protective  scope
afforded by IHL norms.

130. In the light of these submissions we think it possible  to  dispose  of
this question, relatively briefly. The relevancy of the principles  we  have
identified in this case would only arise  in  respect  of  country  guidance
covering members of a county's armed forces or  persons  who  are  otherwise
combatants. In this regard we must acknowledge that the  italicised  summary
in NS poses a  problem  because  it  does  not  make  clear  whether  it  is
referring solely to persons in a civilian capacity. It states (we  give  the
summary in full  because  we  shall  have  cause  to  consider  one  of  the
paragraphs other than "1" later on):


      "1.   An Iraqi who is perceived as a collaborator as a consequence  of
          his work for the  UN,  an  NGO,  the  Multi-National  Force,  the
          Coalition Provisional Authority or a foreign contractor, and  who
          has attracted the hostility of an armed group, faces a real  risk
          of persecution on return to his home area.


      2.    Ability to relocate in Iraq to an area other than  the  KRG  for
          such a person would depend on  the  circumstances  of  the  case,
          including such matters as  the  reach  of  the  group  which  has
          targeted him.


      3.    Relocation to the KRG for any Iraqi is in general only  feasible
          if the person concerned would be allowed  to  enter  and  legally
          reside in the area  of  relocation,  and  has  family,  community
          and/or political links there enabling them to survive.


       4. LM [2006] UKAIT  Iraq  CG  00060  (guidance  on  Christian  women
          perceived as collaborators and internal  relocation  to  KRG)  is
          here considered and extended.  The guidance  in  RA  (Christians)
          Iraq CG [2005] UKIAT 00091 remains for the time  being  valid  in
          cases concerning Christians with no other distinguishing profile.
          "

131. Before we can inquire any further into this question,  we  must  return
to a matter which we touched on earlier. The distinction between members  of
the armed forces and civilians is not entirely clear cut.  On the one  hand,
there are several  sources  which  appear  to  suggest  that  the  essential
criterion is the ability to carry arms.  Thus  persons  who   accompany  the
armed forces without being members  thereof,  such  as  war  correspondents,
supply contractors, members of labour units, or of services responsible  for
the  welfare of soldiers are to  be  categorised  as  civilians:  see  APIII
Article 4A(4) and D Fleck, Handbook of International Humanitarian Law,  319-
320, 501.  Private contractors and civilian employees of  the  armed  forces
who may not  assume  combatant  functions  are  also  to  be  classified  as
civilians unless they directly  participate  in  hostilities  (Fleck,  320).
Medical personnel and pastors are also entitled to be treated as  civilians,
once again, it seems, because they are not entitled to bear arms.

132. On the other hand, there are some categories  of  person  who  are  not
entitled to carry arms who may  nevertheless  count  (at  least  in  certain
circumstances) as members of the armed forces  (and  so  can  be  legitimate
targets) such as  judges,  government  officials  and  blue  collar  workers
(Fleck, p.314).

133. In the light of these observations we consider that there is a need  to
modify the personal scope of the guidance in NS.  To the extent  that  those
specified are, by virtue of the nature of their work, to  be  considered  as
civilians, the guidance in NS is unaffected.  In our view the  appellant  in
NS, who was a translator, was clearly a civilian.  However,  if  a  person's
work for the MNF or the CPA is such that they are to be regarded as part  of
their armed forces, then there may be a need for them  to be classified  for
IHL purposes -and for the purpose of assessing the risk they face on  return
of persecution or ill-treatment - as soldiers (however, that  need  may  not
arise if the evidence is that on return they can simply choose to  terminate
their employment or services).  In consequence of our earlier  clarification
of relevant legal principles, such person will not be able to demonstrate  a
real risk of persecution unless they can show they face  being  inadequately
protected by their home state (so far as is practical in the  circumstances)
against exposure to a consistent pattern of military  violence  contrary  to
the laws of war.  In respect of the current situation in Iraq we  find  that
the background  evidence  falls  well  short  of  demonstrating  that  Iraqi
members of the MNF or the CPA per se  face  such  a  consistent  pattern  of
military violence contrary to the laws of war.

134. We reiterate  here  the  evidence  cited  earlier  from  the  Brookings
Institute report, 6 November 2008, which shows that  the  number  of  police
and military personnel killed in Iraq  is  well  down  on  previous  levels.
Additionally, the Iraq Body  Count  (IBC)  report  dated  28  December  2008
notes that  even  the  figures  for  deaths  of  Iraqi  police  who  "remain
preferred targets" (because  they  are  less  well  protected  than  foreign
troops) were significantly lower than in 2006/2007 and were 928 in 2008  (by
end of November).   We know from other sources that there continues  to  be,
albeit nowhere near on the scale reached in earlier  periods  of  the  armed
conflict, a significant number of  attacks  directed  against  soldiers  and
police by insurgents that are contrary to the rule of war e.g. beheading  of
hostages. But their scale and extent is  quite  insufficient  to  amount  to
such a pattern.

135. That is not to say, of course that a national of Iraq who is  a  member
of the MNF cannot establish a risk of persecution on the  basis  of  his  or
her personal circumstances although he would have  to  show  that  he  faced
targeting in a way the MNF and the CPA in general do not.

The country guidance case of  RQ (Afghan  national  army-Hizb-i-islami-risk)
Afghanistan CG [2008] UKAIT 00013

136. Among the reasons Mr Eadie gave in  support  of  his  view  that  Fadli
principles still apply  in  unqualified  fashion  was  that  they  had  been
followed by the Tribunal in  RQ  (Afghan  national  army-Hizb-i-Islami-risk)
Afghanistan CG [2008] UKAIT 00013. Whilst it is true that  the  Tribunal  in
this case did cite Fadli (and Gedara), it is  not  clear  to  us  that  they
adhered  strictly  to  Fadli  principles  when  enunciating  their   country
guidance, since, for example, they considered  that  serving  soldiers  were
entitled, at  least  during  home  leave,  to  protection  "to  the  Horvath
standard". In any event, insofar as  the  Tribunal  in  RQ  dealt  with  the
relevant law, they did not have the benefit of  the  fuller  submissions  we
had. Given that our case is  not  concerned  with  Afghanistan,  we  do  not
presume to go any further than saying that in applying the country  guidance
in RQ, it will henceforth be necessary to consider it in the  light  of  our
decision on points of law here.

137. (The Tribunal has recently published another country guidance  case  on
Iraq, SR (Iraqi Arab Christian: relocation to  KRG)  Iraq  CG  [2009]  UKAIT
00038. We did not seek any submissions from the parties on this case, as  we
are satisfied that although it updates the evidence on the  general  country
situation in the KRG and the rest of  Iraq,  it  does  not  affect  anything
decided in this case).

The Yazidis

138. It is one of the accepted facts in this case that the  appellant  is  a
Yazidi. We need briefly to summarise the  background  evidence  relating  to
this group.


139. The Yazidis or Yazadi (Kurdish "Ezidi"), whose own name for  themselves
is Dasin, are adherents of a small  Middle  Eastern  religion  with  ancient
origins. They are primarily ethnic Kurds and most Yazidis live  near  Mosul,
Iraq with smaller communities in Syria, Turkey, Iran, Georgia  and  Armenia.
Estimates of their number vary from 100,000 to 500,000-600,000 (the  January
2009 COIS report estimate at para 22.70) to 800,000. Although  they  believe
in God/Allah as the creator, they worship Malak  Ta'us,  apparently  a  pre-
Islamic peacock angel. Malak Ta'us is said to have been a fallen  angel  who
repented and recreated the world that had been broken. He filled seven  jars
with his tears and used them to quench the fire in Hell. Malak  Ta'us  links
to Mithraism and, through it, to Zoroastrianism. In Iraq  particularly  they
have been  oppressed  and  labelled  as  devil  worshippers  for  centuries.
Yazidis are said to be an exclusive grouping  who  do  not  intermarry  even
with other Kurds and accept no converts. Their twice-daily  prayer  services
must not be performed in the  presence  of  outsiders.  The  most  important
ritual is the annual six-day pilgrimage  to  the  tomb  of  Sheikh  Adii  in
Lalish. Their dead are buried in conical tombs.

140. The COIS  report  for  January  2009,  at  para  22.74  cites  a  UNHCR
Background Paper 2005 which states:


      "So  far,  the   situation   of   the   Yazidis   has   not   improved
      substantially...After the dissolution of  the  previous  Ministry  for
      Religious Affairs and the creation of three separate  departments  for
      the affairs of  the  Shiite,  Sunni  and  Christian  communities,  the
      Yazidis  are  no  longer  represented.  As  illustrated  earlier,  the
      embracing of stricter Islamic  values,  the  generally  dire  security
      situation, the presence of radical Islamic groups and militias as well
      as the ongoing political  power-wrangling  of  the  various  sectarian
      groups about Iraq's future, leaves Yazidis exposed to violent assaults
      and threats and curtails their traditional ways of living as  observed
      for Christian, Jewish and Mandaean minorities."

141. We also need to consider what is said about  the  Yazidis  in  Tribunal
country guidance cases. Of background relevance here is LM (Educated  women-
Chaldo-Assyrians-risk) Iraq CG [2006] UKAIT 00060.  But  the  only   country
guidance case dealing in any detail  with  the  Yazidi  specifically  is  NH
(Iraq - Yazidis) Iraq CG [2004] UKIAT 00306, which involved an appeal  heard
in November 2004, which is now over four years ago.  Its  relevant  passages
state:


      "10...There is a specific section on the Yazidis at paragraphs 6.59 to
      6.64 of the Iraq Country Report of October 2004. They are described as
      a syncretistic religious group or a set of  several  groups,  many  of
      whom consider themselves to be ethnically Kurdish, although some would
      define themselves as both religiously  and  ethnically  distinct  from
      Muslim Kurds. The Yazidis predominantly reside in the north  of  Iraq.
      There is a reference to an  article  in  The  Times  of  5  June  2003
      referring to the Yazidis' religion being one of the more secretive and
      persecuted religions. We  have  considered  the  article  in  the  St.
      Petersburg Times headed  "In  Iraq,  ancient  sect  quietly  lives  on
      faith", which provides some useful information on  the  Yazidis.  They
      are described as one of the world's oldest and most unusual religions.
      Estimated numbers of the Yazidis  range  from  less  than  100,000  to
      600,000. We see from this report that the Yazidis have won a  seat  on
      the town council in Mosul though, as Mr French pointed out, it is  not
      known how many seats there are and therefore how  representative  that
      in fact is. It is said to be the case that even in the north they  are
      so worried about extremist attacks that they cancelled most  of  their
      traditional  springtime  celebrations  this  year.  They  are  clearly
      concerned  about  Islamic  parties  and  the  fact  that   they   have
      experienced a good deal  of  religious  persecution  throughout  their
      history. Though they have been referred to as "devil worshippers",  it
      seems that they have no devil in their religion and it is unclear  why
      they have been so described.  It  is  claimed  that  as  part  of  his
      Arabisation programme, Saddam Hussein drove Yazidis  and  other  Kurds
      from their  villages  and  replaced  them  with  Arabs.  Most  Yazidis
      remained in Iraq, where they were  forced  from  their  villages  into
      crowded, squalid compounds, denied national identity cards,  forbidden
      to write about their religion and barred from holding government jobs.
      Many Yazidi men were conscripted into the army and sent to  the  front
      line during the Iran-Iraq war. It  seems,  however,  that  after  1991
      hundreds of Yazidis got jobs in the Kurdistan government.
      14. The article at page 31 of the bundle headed "Yazidi Hell's Angels"
      contains further information on the Yazidis. It is said that after the
      downfall of Saddam Hussein, Kurdish guerrillas poured into their  area
      from further north and tried to take over the town. It  is  said  that
      they have been the victims of an ugly ethnic  tug-of-war  between  the
      Kurds and Saddam Hussein's regime for years. It appears that they have
      managed to keep their religion  and  culture  alive  in  the  face  of
      oppression. They are said to be at risk in the precarious situation in
      Iraq and, given their lack of  any  stake  in  power,  their  problems
      remain. It seems that the Kurds announced that the Yazidis were  Kurds
      and should  be  represented  by  them  and  hence  they  do  not  have
      representation on the governing council.
      15. It is the case however, as Mr French accepted, that  there  is  no
      evidence of specific problems for Yazidis in recent times, but  rather
      a generalised fear, relating  in  part  to  the  problems  that  other
      religious minorities in Iraq, such  as  the  Christians  (examples  at
      paragraph 6.54 of the Country Report) and  Mandaeans/Sabians  (example
      at paragraph 6.58 of the Country Report) face. It is the case however,
      as Mr Avery pointed out, that the majority of the Yazidis live in  the
      Kurdish controlled areas where law and order is generally better  than
      elsewhere in Iraq. In essence, we have concluded  that  the  inference
      that Mr French invited us to draw from the historical problems of  the
      Yazidis and the more recent problems of other  minorities  is  not  an
      inference that can properly be drawn from the evidence. No doubt, as a
      relatively small minority in  Iraq  and  one  which  has  historically
      experienced problems from others, the Yazidis are vulnerable,  but  in
      our view that does not equate to a real risk of persecution or  breach
      of the human rights of the  Appellant  before  us  as  of  today.  The
      evidence does not in our view show that there is a  risk  of  anything
      more than the generalised risks that exist at present to almost anyone
      in Iraq, and that in our view is not such as to give rise  to  a  real
      risk of  persecution  or  breach  of  the  Appellant's  human  rights.
      Accordingly, even if we are wrong in our view that there is  no  error
      of law in  the  Adjudicator's  determination,  we  consider  that  the
      evidence does not show a real risk for this Appellant.
      16. This appeal is dismissed."
142. We must not forget, either, that the country guidance case  of  NS,  to
which we have already made reference  - in fact  concerned  -  an  appellant
who was accepted as a Yazidi. At paras  25-26  the  Tribunal  in  that  case
recorded submissions made by the appellant's representative  which  in  turn
referred to various background source references and an expert report  which
had described being a Yazidi as a "risk-increasing factor". At para  33  the
Tribunal stated:


      "Risk to Yazidis in Iraq was considered by the [IAT] in NH...where  it
      was concluded that a Yazidi did not face a real risk of persecution or
      breach of his human rights purely on account of his religion. A  UNHCR
      report of October  2005  commented  that:  "the  presence  of  radical
      Islamic groups and militias as well as the  ongoing  political  power-
      wrangling of the various sectarian groups about Iraq's  future,  leave
      Yazidis exposed to violent  assault  and  threats  and  curtail  their
      traditional ways of living as  observed  for  Christians,  Jewish  and
      Mandaen minorities". Attacks on, and killings of Yazidis are mentioned
      in that paper, and also in a Reuters Report of 18 August 2005."

143. In going on to find that the appellant in that case would  be  at  risk
on return, the Tribunal noted at para 40 that in addition to the  fact  that
it had been accepted that he was of significant  interest  to  an  important
insurgent organisation, "[t]here is the additional risk factor of him  being
a Yazidi and as we accept, being identifiable as such since he does  not  go
to the mosque and does not pray five times a day and is  understandably  not
prepared to change  his religion. .."

144. With the benefit  of  hindsight  it  is  easy  to  cast  doubt  on  the
viability of some of the NH findings. It appears from para  12  of  NH  that
the  Tribunal  attached  particular  importance  to  an  acceptance  by  the
appellant's representative that  "there is no evidence of specific  problems
for Yazidis in recent times". Whether or not that is reconcilable with  what
was noted in para 10 (the reference in The Times of 5  June  2003  to  their
being one of the most secretive and persecuted religions and  the  reference
to "extremist attacks"), it is clear that it is  no  longer  the  case  that
evidence of specific problems is lacking. The later case of NS, as  we  have
seen, identifies evidence of specific problems. It is also not clear  to  us
that the Tribunal in NH fully appreciated, when it wrote that "the  majority
of the Yazidis live in the Kurdish controlled areas where law and  order  is
generally better than elsewhere  in  Iraq",  that  the  area  where  Yazidis
numbers are largest, Mosul, is outside the KRG.  In our view,  the  case  of
NH no longer provides a proper basis for assessing risk to Yazidis in  Iraq.
 So far as NS is concerned, we need to bear in mind that since it was  heard
there have been further  reported attacks on Yazidis.

145.  Before  turning  to  consider  more  recent  materials  regarding  the
Yazidis, it is also salient that we note what is said about the position  of
minorities and  religious  minorities  in  Iraq  generally.  In  the  United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) Human Rights Report for  1  Nov-
31 December 2006 it is stated at para 54  that  minorities  in  Iraq  remain
severely affected by the overall security  situation,  economic  and  social
degradation and the existence of organised groups, militias and  insurgents,
all  operating  with  near   complete   impunity.   Minority   groups   feel
marginalised from political participation and decision-making at  the  local
and national levels. The European Council on Refugees and Exiles  (ECRE)  in
their Guidelines on the Treatment of Iraqi Asylum Seekers  and  Refugees  in
Europe, 18 April 2007 states that:

      "Religious and ethnic  minorities  are  persecuted  but  this  is  not
      necessarily directly linked to individual's own religious  beliefs  or
      practice. More often, there are strong perceptions  vis-�-vis  members
      of these groups, e.g. that  they  all  support  the  US-led  Coalition
      Forces or act in disrespect of Islamic values, which  put  individuals
      at  risk  of  persecution  irrespective  of  their  actual  belief  or
      behaviour..."


146. Turning to the more recent evidence, the UNAMI Human Rights Report  for
1 April-30 June 2007 reports that in  Ninevah  Governorate,  in  retaliation
for the murder by Yazidis of a  17  year  old  girl  reportedly  accused  of
having a relationship with a Muslim man,  vigilante  groups  carried  out  a
number of retaliatory attacks, on 23 April  executing  several  Yazidis  who
were on a bus. Several days later in Erbil,  gangs  threatened  to  harm  or
kill Yazidis found in the city. On or about 2 May, gunmen were said to  have
killed two Yazidi men in Mosul.


147. The 2007 MRG report (cited in the January 2009 COIS  report  at  22.72)
records that:


      "Since 2003,  Islamist  groups  have  declared  Yazidis  "impure"  and
      leaflets have been distributed in Mosul by Islamic extremists  calling
      for the death of all members of the Yazidi community".

148.  The  November  2007  UNHCR  Eligibility   Guidelines   for   assessing
International Protection Needs for Iraqi  Asylum  Seekers  report  that  the
Yazidis have  been  targeted  for  their  religious  beliefs,  as  they  are
considered to be Infidels and have also been accused of  collaborating  with
the Americans and for their "unislamic" behaviour.  The report  states  that
the situation of Yazidis in the Ninevah Governorate has  deteriorated  since
the fall of the former regime, due to high levels  of  insurgent  activities
and ethnic/religious tensions.  Targeted  attacks  against  Yazidis  include
threats,  assassinations  and  public  defamation  campaigns.  As  they  are
considered Infidels (or even  apostates),  Yazidis  have  been  targeted  by
Sunni extremists present in Baghdad and towns like  Sinjar,  Mosul  and  Tel
Afar (COIS, January 2009, 22.72).  Most  attacks  against  Yazidis  are  not
reported in the  international  and  national  media  or  are  portrayed  as
incidents involving Kurds. The report goes on to give examples during  2004-
2005 of Yazidis who had been targeted for their (perceived) support for  the
US-led  invasion  and  the   presence   of   the   MNF,   considering   them
collaborators. Yazidis have also been  targeted  for  "unislamic"  behaviour
such as smoking in public during Ramadan  or  selling  alcohol.  The  report
notes that over 200 Yazidi families  had  emigrated  away  from  Mosul.   It
mentions that on 22 April 2007 a group of 23  Yazidi  workers  heading  home
from a  Mosul  textile  factory  were  shot  dead,  Christians  and  Muslims
travelling  on  the  same  bus  were  not  harmed.  This  incident  is  also
highlighted in the UNAMI report and  in  the  USSD  International  Religious
Freedom report 2007 as follows:


      "There were reports that on April 22, 2007, gunmen dragged  more  than
      20 members of the Yazidi community off a bus in Mosul and shot them in
      retaliation for the stoning of a Yazidi woman, slain by fellow Yazidis
      for having a relationship with a Muslim Kurdish man. These deaths were
      in addition to the 11 Yazidis killed in  the  last  reporting  period,
      including Ninevah Provincial member Hasan Nermo, who was  assassinated
      on April 20, 2006..."


 149. An HJT report describes an  attack  on  14  August  2007  on  villages
populated by Yazidis near Mosul in  which  over  250  were  killed.  It  was
described by US Major General  Benjamin  Mixon  as  "ethnic  cleansing"  and
verging on attempted genocide.  The  same  military  man  commented  on  the
inability of the MNF to protect Yazidis.  In  September  2007  the  Minority
Rights Group in a February 2007 report noted various  incidents  of  attacks
against Yazidis since 2003, commenting that:  "For  ethnic  reasons  Yazidis
are caught between Arabs and Kurds in Iraq. Many  Yazidis  suffered  in  the
Anfal campaign alongside the Kurds ...and were forced to  define  themselves
as Arabs". This report also noted that "there had been  more  major  attacks
against the Yazidis and that more than  400  people  have  been  killed  and
injured..."(COIS January 2009, 22.75). The COIS report also cites  at  22.78
the Finnish Fact-Finding Mission for the period 23 October-3  November  2007
stating that: "Unemployment  is  a  big  problem  for  Yazidis  particularly
outside the KRG-administered region". In 2008/2009 to date,  so  far  as  we
can tell, there have not been any major incidents  similar  to  those  which
took place in April and August 2007.

150. Whilst the background evidence thus summarised  is  not  comprehensive,
it leads us to the following view. Whilst  in general merely being a  Yazidi
whose home area is outside the KRG does not suffice  currently  to  place  a
person at real risk of  serious  harm  upon  return  to  Iraq,  it  must  be
regarded as a very significant factor adding to risk and not simply  as  "an
additional risk factor" (as it was viewed in the case of NS).  Certainly  in
our judgement an appellant who is a Yazidi whose home area  is  outside  the
KRG (and on the evidence most such persons will be from Mosul  or  environs)
is currently likely to be able to demonstrate a real risk of persecution  in
that area unless there are special features of his or  her  situation  which
serve to reduce or modify that risk.

151. As regards, internal relocation for Yazidis, we are conscious  that  in
relation to the KRG, the general situation appears significantly  different.
The sizeable  Yazidi  community  there  does  not,  in  general,  meet  with
persecution or ill treatment, although there have been incidents there  too.
However, we also bear in mind the UNHCR position  that  access  to  the  KRG
depends in general on having a  family  sponsor  and  the  Tribunal  country
guidance case of NS and its statement that:

      " 3.  Relocation to the KRG for any Iraqi is in general only  feasible
      if the person concerned would be allowed to enter and  legally  reside
      in the area of relocation, and has family, community and/or  political
      links there enabling them to survive".

152. We have not had any submissions from either party asking us  to  depart
from that guidance and on the evidence before us there  is  insufficient  to
modify it. Hence it will only be in  the  case  of  Yazidis  found  to  have
"...family, community and/or political links there".

153.  In  reaching  the  above  conclusions,  two  particularly  significant
features of the background evidence before us  are  that  it  is  considered
likely there is an underreporting of incidents of  attacks  on  Yazidis  and
that  the mainstream Sunni and Shiia religious  communities  are  continuing
to scapegoat Yazidis as (either or both)  infidels  and  collaborators  with
the Americans. They are being targeted very much because of their  religion.
We consider it too early to tell whether the lack of any major incidents  in
2008  /2009  to  date  demonstrates  that  their  position   has   improved,
particularly bearing in mind the fact that  the  area  (excluding  the  KRG)
where they are  found  in  largest  numbers  is  currently  the  subject  of
considerable tension between the Arab and Kurdish communities in the  run-up
to a planned referendum.

154. It is also unlikely for very much the same  reasons  that  Yazidis  who
can establish a real risk of persecution in their home area,  will  be  able
to relocate safely in central and southern Iraq. The  only  exception  would
be if it was reasonable to expect them to relocate to the KRG,  where  there
are a very significant number of the Yazidis  community  of  Iraq.  However,
for such relocation to be possible,  it  would  have  to  be  on  the  basis
identified in the country guidance case of NS:  see  above,  para  129  [see
also para 136 on the country guidance case of SR) .

Summary of general conclusions

155. Our general conclusions can be summarised as follows:

i) There is no reason to seek to develop special principles of  refugee  law
to deal with cases of soldiers. The approach to the meaning  of  persecution
and protection (and of the need for protection to be practical) as  set  out
in Horvath [2000] UKHL 37 and  in  the  Persons  In  Need  of  International
Protection Regulations SI 2006/2525 is well able to accommodate such  cases.
The case of Fadli [2000] EWCA Civ 297 has to be  read  and  applied  in  the
light of in the subsequent decisions of the higher courts,  including  Sepet
and Bulbul [2003] UKHL 15 and Krotov [2004] EWCA Civ 69 as well  as  in  the
light of the Protection Regulations.

ii). Whether an asylum claimant is a soldier rather than a  civilian  has  a
significant impact on risk assessment. Assessment of any harm a  soldier  if
returned might face must  take  account  of  his  particular  circumstances,
including when he is  not  in  barracks  or  on  active  duty.  However,  in
general, serving soldiers cannot expect to  be  protected  against  military
violence.

iii). As a general rule fears a soldier may have  about  having  to  perform
military service cannot give rise to a refugee claim.  That  rule,  however,
is subject to exception. One exception already identified  by  the  Tribunal
and higher courts concerns those who would face punishment for being  forced
to participate in acts contrary to international humanitarian law  (IHL).  A
further exception may arise when serving  soldiers  face  being  exposed  by
their country's commanders to a  consistent  pattern  of  military  violence
contrary to the laws of war. However, where fighting of this kind is  taking
place the state's duty to protect its soldiery will be  heavily  attenuated,
by virtue of its primary responsibility to defend itself and  its  citizenry
and will in any event vary depending on a wide range of circumstances.

iv) Enemy targeting of a soldier off duty or of members  of  his  family  is
not necessarily contrary to IHL but may very often be contrary to IHL  norms
of military necessity, distinction and proportionality.

v) Insofar as the risk  categories  of  NS  (Iraq;  perceived  collaborator;
relocation) Iraq CG [2007] UKAIT 00046 may cover persons who  by  virtue  of
their work have become members of the Multinational Forces or the  Coalition
Provisional Authority, application of its guidance  will  need  to  bear  in
mind that the state's duty to protect them will be very limited.

vi) NH(Iraq-Yazidis)  Iraq  CG  [2004]  UKIAT  00306  is  no  longer  to  be
followed.  Whilst being a Yazidi does not as such place a person at risk  on
return to central and southern Iraq, it is a  significant  risk  factor  and
special reasons would need to exist for  not  finding  that  such  a  person
faces a real risk of persecution or treatment contrary to Article 3 ECHR.

The appellant's particular circumstances

156. Miss Akinbolu contended that we should find  that  what  the  appellant
has experienced in his home area of Mosul amounted to past persecution.   Mr
Eadie and Mr Wordsworth dispute that on the basis that at that time  he  was
a soldier and that from Fadli it is clear that the  things  that  a  soldier
could be expected to face included terrorist  attacks  on  himself  when  on
home leave and his family in his home area.

157. As noted  earlier,  we  must  take  as  our  starting  point  that  the
appellant was at that time (2005) a soldier, not  a  civilian  and  so  must
consider first of all the human rights and IHL position. Doing so, we  think
it is clear that the targeting he and his family faced  then  was,  in  both
human rights and  IHL terms, unlawful.  It  was  unlawful  when  he  himself
(along with his cousin) was individually  targeted  whilst  driving  a  car,
since there was no suggestion that his attackers wore  uniform  or  had  any
way visibly identified themselves as combatants.

158. What then of the earlier  attack  on  his  family?   Mr  Eadie  and  Mr
Wordsworth submitted that as tragic and despicable as that was,  it must  be
considered in line with Fadli principles, as part of the heightened risks  a
soldier runs. We have already explained in general terms why an attack on  a
soldier's family in  a  civilian  area  is  highly  likely  to  be  unlawful
targeting in IHL terms  and  we  have  no  doubt  that  the  attack  on  the
appellant's family was unlawful. There was no evidence to suggest  that  the
insurgents  wore  anything  to  distinguish  themselves  from  the  civilian
population or that such an  attack   observed  the  principles  of  military
necessity, distinction or proportionally. Being unlawful  military  violence
it amounted to persecution and serious  harm  and  treatment  proscribed  by
Article 3.

159. However, as Mr Wordsworth correctly observed, the appellant could  only
be said to have experienced past persecution (if at all) if it could not  be
said that  there  was  effective  state  protection  available  against  the
evident targeting of him and his family. In  this  regard  we  would  accept
that at the relevant time the background evidence  strongly  indicated  that
the authorities  in  Mosul  had  their  hands  full  even  in  dealing  with
protection of their own police against insurgent attacks. On  the  basis  of
our earlier analysis of the law, a state's duty to protect its  soldiery  is
subject to  important  practical  limits.  However,  there  is  not  just  a
question here of whether the  authorities  were  generally  able  to  afford
protection to its soldiers in the area of Mosul. There was also  a  question
of what practical protection they were able to  afford  to  this  particular
appellant/soldier. As the Tribunal stated in para 45 of IM  (Sufficiency  of
protection) Malawi [2007] UKAIT 00071, having  reviewed  Horvath  and  other
authorities:

      "Another way of putting the effect of  the  above  authorities  is  as
      follows. A state's protection has to  be  wide  enough  to  cover  the
      ordinary needs of its citizens for protection. Protection may still be
      insufficient, to prevent persecution in a  particular  case  or  in  a
      particular subcategory of cases, if an individual's (or subcategory of
      person's) needs for protection are out of the ordinary or exceptional.
      However, recognition that a  person's  (or  subcategory  of  person's)
      individual circumstances may require "additional  protection"  has  an
      important limit. As emphasised in Horvath, protection is  a  practical
      standard. In Lord Clyde's words at [60], "no-one  is  entitled  to  an
      absolutely guaranteed immunity. That would  go  beyond  any  realistic
      practical expectation."

160. By virtue of his status as a soldier, the appellant  could  not  expect
the authorities to  protect  him  in  advance  against  being  targeted  for
military violence by the insurgents. The evidence we have of the  level  and
nature of military violence at that point in time (2005) falls far short  of
demonstrating that there was a consistent pattern of violations of the  laws
of war.  At the same time, the Iraqi authorities soon became aware that  the
appellant and his family had been the victim of a targeted attack  that  was
plainly, by virtue of its gross failure to distinguish between military  and
civilian persons and property, an  indiscriminate  attack  contrary  to  the
laws of war. Once the authorities knew that, it  was  reasonable  to  expect
they would at least assess whether any special  protective  measures  should
be taken in respect of the appellant. But in fact no such steps were  taken,
either by the appellant's commanders or by the local authorities. It was  an
accepted fact that after the attack on his family and then on  him  and  his
cousin in his car, the appellant went to the local  police  who  made  clear
they could not protect him. Particularly given what we know of  the  general
situation in Mosul at that time, we  consider  Mr  Wordsworth's  submission,
that the appellant had not shown  protection  was  lacking  as  he  had  not
sought protection from higher-up authorities, to  have  a  hollow  ring.  At
that point in time the appellant  was  plainly  entitled  to  conclude  that
practical protection did not exist for him.

161. It follows from our earlier analysis of the  applicable  law  that  the
appellant experienced past serious harm against which the  authorities  were
unable to protect him and accordingly he experienced past persecution.

162. Turning to consider the issue of  current  risk,  we  remind  ourselves
that Article 4(4) (paragraph 339K of the Immigration Rules) states that  the
appellant's persecution is to  be  treated  as  a  "serious  indication"  of
continuing risk "unless  there  are  good  reasons  to  consider  that  such
persecution will not be repeated ...".

163. We are satisfied that for so long as he returned to active duty  and/or
lived in barracks he would be safe from persecution and would be  adequately
protected. We have already noted background  evidence  indicating  that  the
levels of attacks against the security forces  have  decreased  considerably
from what they had been. But in our judgment, there are no good reasons  why
the appellant would now be safe in his home area. He was clearly  identified
by local insurgents who blamed him for bringing  the  American  forces  into
northern Mosul. Even if he sought to avoid  returning  to  his  family  home
(where his wife, one of his sons and his brother had been killed)  and  went
instead to the house where he was born and his parents normally  lived,  the
two places were not far apart. In our view it is not reasonably likely  that
insurgents who had gone to the lengths of  attacking  his  family  home  and
subsequently trying to kill him elsewhere in the city would have  ceased  to
have an adverse interest in him. They would soon become aware where he  was,
anywhere within the vicinity of Mosul. We have already observed that at  the
time the local police did not consider they could protect him.  Although  Mr
Wordsworth may be right to point to an improved general  security  situation
in Iraq, we note from the later COIS  report  for  January  2009  that  even
after "Operation Lion's Roar"  the  security  situation  in  Mosul  and  its
environs was considered to remain "particularly challenging". At  para  9.74
it is stated:

      The UNSC report, 28 July 2008, stated that "Operation Lion's Roar  was
      launched against insurgent groups in Mosul and other parts  of  Ninewa
      Province." [38q] (p1) The UNSC report of 6 November  2008  stated  the
      security environment remained  "particularly  challenging"  in  Mosul,
      noting: "... the frequency of attacks in Mosul continued to  mount  in
      recent weeks and the Prime Minister  sent  further  reinforcements  to
      Mosul." [38r] (p1)"

164. It would appear that because of the pending  referendum  the  situation
in Mosul and its environs remains insecure  and  we  consider  the  evidence
does not indicate that the police or security forces, who themselves  remain
one of the favoured targets of insurgents in that part  of  Iraq,  would  be
able  to  do  much  more  for  this  appellant   than   they   did   before,
notwithstanding that his circumstances called for additional protection.

Internal relocation

165. So far as concerns whether the appellant would have a  viable  internal
relocation alternative,  however,  we  can  firstly  exclude  any  realistic
possibility that this appellant would be able to relocate  to  the  KRG.  On
the accepted facts, although  he  had  tribal  connections  in  that  region
(albeit the two Quaidi tribes there were said to be in conflict), he had  no
close family members there.  On  the  basis  of  existing  Tribunal  country
guidance  (unaffected  by  any  further  evidence  before   us),   the   KRG
authorities would not consider admitting him  in  order  to  live  in  their
area.  However,  other  aspects  of  the  appellant's  situation  are   more
complicated.

166. To begin with, we do not consider it  at  all  likely  that  those  who
persecuted him and his family members  in  his  home  area  would  have  the
wherewithal to pursue him beyond the Mosul area. We bear in mind  that  much
of the insurgent activity in Iraq is fragmented and  uncoordinated  and  the
lack of any evidence to suggest that those who attacked the  appellant  were
part of a unified network operating more widely.

167. We next consider his position as a returning soldier.  (We  do  so  not
only because that was what the Court of Appeal directed we do,  but  because
we consider that to be the position accepted by the  respondent  in  advance
of the latest hearing).  However we must do so mindful of  the  fact,  which
we draw from the background country evidence, that service  in  the  ISF  is
voluntary and there is scant evidence of punishment being visited  on  those
who choose not to serve. That being so, we consider that if  on  return  the
appellant feared being required to serve in conflict situations that   would
expose him  to military violence contrary to the  rules  of  war,  he  would
have an opportunity soon enough to quit the army.   However,  we  note  that
when describing his previous military service he  mentioned  being  sent  on
missions that went on for some time and we must also  take  account  of  the
likely context he will face at the point of return. We  accept  that  it  is
reasonably likely that initially the  Iraqi  authorities  would  return  him
directly to his barracks, but even if then posted on front-line  duty,  that
would be of finite duration.  And in any period during  which  he  would  be
continuing to serve as an on-duty  soldier  we  do  not  consider  that  the
evidence demonstrates that he would face a real risk  of  systemic  military
violence contrary to the rules  of  war.   For  reasons  given  earlier,  we
assess the evidence as falling well short of demonstrating that serving  ISF
soldiers face this type of risk in Iraq currently.

168. It remains, however, that even if the appellant chose  (and  was  able)
to quit the armed forces very quickly, he  would  still  be  an  ex-soldier.
Indeed, it seems to us that wherever he went in central or southern Iraq  it
would be reasonably likely that two things would be known  or  would  become
known, about him: one that he had served in the ISF and the  other  that  he
was a Yazidi.  We did not  understand  Mr  Eadie  or  Mr  Wordsworth,  after
discussion, to dispute either of these matters, but  we  shall  explain  our
reasons for these  findings  in  any  event.   So  far  as  the  appellant's
previous ISF service is concerned, we  note  that  the  background  evidence
indicate that throughout central and southern Iraq there are still  numerous
checkpoints, including in some places, checkpoints manned by insurgents  and
it is reasonable to assume that wherever the appellant  sought  to  relocate
he would be required to disclose certain personal particulars  and  that  he
could not be expected to conceal his previous history.   Further,  the  same
body of evidence highlights the fact that persons  who  move  into  a  local
area as strangers face considerable local suspicion and  attention:  see  NA
(Palestinians - risk) Iraq CG [2008]  UKAIT  00046.  We  do  not  think  the
appellant or any family members he managed to reunite with would be able  to
conceal for long that  he  had  been  a  soldier.  For  similar  reasons  we
consider that wherever he went it would soon become  known  that  he  was  a
Yazidi.  In this regard, we particularly bear  in  mind  the  fact  that  it
would be unlikely to take long before locals noticed that he never  attended
a mosque and he would be unable to show he was either  a  Sunni  or  a  Shia
Muslim.

169.  It  is  necessary  to  amplify  the  significance  we  attach  to  the
appellant's Yazidi origins.

170. Even though it goes too far to find that Yazidis  whose  home  area  is
outside the KRG are in general at risk currently, we bear in  mind  that  we
did earlier find that being a Yazidi is  a  very  significant  risk  factor.
Against   that   background   we   consider   the   appellant's   particular
circumstances. We have already found that he is at risk  in  his  home  area
and cannot relocate to anywhere else in the KRG (albeit not for  reasons  to
do with his Yazidi background). So he  will  be  a  person  having  to  live
outside  both  his  home  area  and  the  KRG,  i.e.,  away  from  the  only
significant Yazidi  community  in  central  and  southern  Iraq  (Mosul  and
environs). Being a Yazidi he would  not  participate  in  the  normal  daily
customs and practices of other Iraqis, Sunni or Shia (e.g.  by  going  to  a
mosque). Even assuming  he  would  attempt  to  practise  his  Yazidi  faith
privately  and  discreetly,  his  lack  of  participation  in  such   public
activities would inevitably mean he would attract attention from  neighbours
in the local area. In our judgment, it  would  only  be  a  matter  of  time
before his Yazidi identity would become known wherever  he  went.  The  mere
fact that he would be identified as a Yazidi would in itself  give  rise  to
some level of risk.

171. So far as protection is concerned, the background evidence relating  to
the Yazidi does not indicate that, whatever  the  position  as  regards  the
ability of the Iraqi authorities to protect its  citizenry  generally,  they
have been able to afford practical protection to the Yazidis  against  those
who have targeted them.

172. We remind ourselves at this point that the standard of proof in asylum-
related cases is that of a reasonable degree of  likelihood  or  substantial
grounds  for  believing.  It  is  not  the  civil  standard  of  balance  of
probabilities. Considering the appellant's history of past  persecution  and
having regard to his likely circumstances in any area of  relocation  within
Central and Southern Iraq, we consider it reasonably  likely  that  it  will
become known to the local populace that he is or was a serving  soldier  and
is a Yazidi and that these two factors, although not  enough  in  themselves
to give rise to persecution or ill-treatment, taken  together  will  suffice
to cause him to become the  target  of  fresh  targeting  for  serious  harm
against which the Iraqi  authorities  will  not  be  able  to  protect  him.
Although the author(s) of the fresh persecution may be different from  those
who persecuted him and his family previously, they will act out  of  similar
motives to those his  original  persecutors  possessed.  They  too  will  be
insurgents opposed to the GoI and the MNF and  insurgents  who  target  both
perceived Army collaborators and members of the Yazidi faith. The real  risk
of persecution which he faces will be on account of his perceived  political
opinion and his religion.

173. For the above reasons we consider that the  appellant  qualifies  as  a
refugee and that his appeal should be allowed on asylum and Article 3  human
rights grounds. Had he failed to show  that  he  had  a  Refugee  Convention
reason (imputed political opinion and  religion)  so  as  to  qualify  as  a
refugee,  we  would  have  found  that  he  was  eligible  for  humanitarian
protection under para 339C(iii) of HC395, which implements Article 15(b)  of
the Qualification Directive.



Signed


Dr H H Storey, Senior Immigration Judge



                       Appendix : Background Materials


   "Creation of a Code of  Military  Discipline  for  the  New  Iraqi  Army"
   CPA/ORD/7, 7 August 2003/23
   US State Department International Religious Freedom Report, 2003
   US State Department Report on Iraq 2003 (25 Feb 2004)
   "The Assault on the Iraqi Police", Washington Institute, 21 Dec 2004
   US State Department Report on Iraq for 2004 (26 Feb 2005)
   "Yazidis" by Christine Allison, 12 Oct 2005
   Human Rights Watch: A Face and a Name, October 2005
   Various press reports and cuttings during 2005
   "Beleaguered Yazidi  find  peace  high  in  Iraq's  northern  mountains",
   Christians of Iraq, 13 Oct 2006
   UNHCR Return Advisory and Position on International Protection  Needs  of
   Iraqis Outside Iraq, December 2006
   United Nations Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) Human  Rights  Report,  1  Nov-31
   December 2006
   "The Plight of Iraqi Refugees", testimony before US Senate  Committee  on
   the Judiciary, Jan 16, 2007
   Article by IASUK untitled circa June 2007
   UNAMI Human Rights Report, 1 April-30 June 2007
   European Council  on  Refugees  and  Exiles  (ECRE),  Guidelines  on  the
   Treatment of Iraqi Asylum Seekers and Refugees in Europe, 18 April 2007
   "Yazidi leaders voice concern over repercussions of  Dua's  de",  Kurdish
   Aspect, 2 May 2007
   UNAMI Human Rights Report, 1 April-30 June 2007
   "Horrific Stoning Death of a Yazidi Girl", Counterpunch, 8 May 2007
   UNHCR, Eligibility  Guidelines  for  assessing  International  Protection
   Needs for Iraqi Asylum Seekers, August 2007
   "Yazidi bombing is Iraq's deadliest", Sydney Morning  Herald,  17  August
   2007
   Center for  Strategic  and  International  Studies,  The  Report  of  the
   Independent Commission on the Security Forces of Iraq, 6 September 2007
   US State Department International Religious Freedom report, 2007
   Addendum  to   UNHCR's   Eligibility   Guidelines   for   Assessing   the
   International Protection Needs of Iraqi Asylum-Seekers, 17 December 2007
    "Yazidi bomb anger Mideast media", BBC News 16 August 2007
   "Desperate search for survivors among Yazidi homes destroyed by bombers",
   Independent, 16 August 2007
   "Yazidi sect has long been a target of persecution", Los  Angeles  Times,
   16 August 2007
   Article from The Long War Journal, 10 Feb 2008
   COIS report on Iraq, 15 August 2008
   Brookings Institute Iraq Index: Tracking Variables for Reconstruction and
   Security in post-Saddam Iraq, 6 November 2008
    "Post-surge violence: its extent and  nature",  Iraq  Body  Count  (IBC)
   Report 28 December 2008
   Amnesty International Annual Report for Iraq 2008
   COIS report on Iraq, January 2009
   IRIN, "Yazidi minority demands protection after killings", 3 Feb 2009
   "The Yazidi Bloodbath one in Long Line of  Persecution",  Defense  Update
   News Analysis 3, Feb 2009



