
ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL


          CP (Section 86(3) and (5); wrong immigration rule) Dominica [2006]
                                                                 UKAIT 00040


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at: Field House                   Date of Hearing:  7 March 2006
                                        Date of Promulgation: 03 May 2006


                                   Before:

  Mr C M G Ockelton Deputy President of the Immigration and Asylum Tribunal
                     Senior Immigration Judge Goldstein
                       Senior Immigration Judge Grubb


                                   Between


                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:           No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer

Where the Secretary of State (or Entry Clearance Officer) applies the  wrong
immigration  rule,  the  resulting  immigration  decision   is   technically
unlawful.  However, subject to the requirements of fairness, an  Immigration
Judge should apply the correct  rule  when  deciding  an  appeal.    If  the
appellant satisfies the requirements of the correct rule,  the  appeal  will
be allowed in full under s 86(3) of the 2002 Act.  If any (or  all)  of  the
requirements are not satisfied, the appeal will be  dismissed  in  substance
under s 86(5).  However, the appeal will be allowed in part  under  s  86(3)
to the limited (and inconsequential) extent that the decision  was  'not  in
accordance with the law'.  See also RM (Kwok On Tong: HC395 para 320)  India
[2006] UKAIT 00039.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

  1. The appellant is a citizen of the Commonwealth of Dominica born on  30
     May 1993.  She arrived in the United Kingdom on 8  December  2004  and
     was granted leave to enter for six months as a  visitor.   On  19  May
     2005, she applied for indefinite leave  to  remain  as  the  dependant
     child of JK and SK both British Citizens.  JK, she  claimed,  was  her
     mother's sister and thus, her aunt.  On 31 August 2005, the  Secretary
     of State refused her application to extend her leave  and  her  appeal
     was dismissed by an Immigration Judge, Mr P D Burns in a decision sent
     on 9 November 2005.  An order  for  reconsideration  was  made  on  18
     November 2005 by a Senior Immigration Judge.

  2. At the reconsideration hearing on 7 March 2006, neither the  appellant
     nor her  representatives,  Barant  &  Co,  Solicitors  appeared.   The
     Tribunal was satisfied that the Notice of Hearing  dated  12  December
     2005 had been properly served on the appellant and her representatives
     and  that  there  was  no  satisfactory  explanation  for  their  non-
     appearance.  Hence, it was proper to proceed in  the  absence  of  the
     appellant and  her  representatives  under  rule  19(1)  of  the  2005
     Procedure Rules and we decided to do so.

  3. The appellant's  application  was  governed  by  paragraph  299  (with
     reference to paragraph 298) of Statement  of  Changes  in  Immigration
     Rules, HC 395 as a dependent relative seeking  settlement  in  the  UK
     with a relative settled in the UK.  There is no doubt that the sponsor
     in this case is settled in the UK as she is a British Citizen.   It is
     claimed that she is the appellant's maternal aunt.  For reasons  which
     are not apparent from the file, the Secretary of  State  wrongly  made
     his decision under paragraph 302 (with reference to paragraph 301)  of
     HC 395 which governs applications in certain cases where  the  sponsor
     has only limited leave.  Before the Immigration Judge,  the  Secretary
     of State's error was recognised by the parties and, as is  clear  from
     paragraph [9] of the determination, it was  accepted  that  the  judge
     should decide the appeal on the basis  of  the  correct  rule,  namely
     paragraph 298.

  4. So far as relevant, paragraph 298 of HC 395 provides as follows:

           "The requirements to be met by a person seeking indefinite leave
           to remain in the United  Kingdom  as  the  child  of  a  parent,
           parents or relative present and settled in  the  United  Kingdom
           are that he:
                 (i) is seeking to remain with a parent, parents or relative
                 in one of the following circumstances:
                 ....
                 (d) one parent or a relative is present and settled in  the
                 United Kingdom and there are serious and compelling  family
                 or other considerations which make exclusion of  the  child
                 undesirable and suitable arrangements have  been  made  for
                 the child's care;..."


  5. The Immigration Judge dismissed the appeal on the basis that,  on  the
     evidence, the appellant had not established: (1) that the sponsor  was
     related to her as claimed (para [24]); and (2) that even if she  were,
     that there were "serious and compelling family or other considerations
     which make exclusion of the child undesirable" (paras [25]-[30]).

  6.  The  appellant's  Grounds  for  Review  and  the  basis  upon   which
     reconsideration was ordered do not assert that the  Immigration  Judge
     committed any error of  law  in  deciding  that  the  requirements  of
     paragraph 298 were not met.   Rather, the appellant  argues  that  the
     Immigration Judge should have allowed the appeal  once  it  was  clear
     that the Secretary of State had applied the  wrong  immigration  rule.
     She relies upon section 86(3)  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
     Asylum Act 2002.

  7. So far as relevant, section 86 provides as follows:

           "(3)  The Tribunal must allow the appeal in so far as it  thinks
           that -
                 (a) the decision against which the appeal is brought or  is
                 treated as being brought was not in accordance with the law
                 (including immigration rules),
                 ...
            (5)  In so far as subsection (3) does not apply,  the  Tribunal
           shall dismiss the appeal."

  8. Sections 86(3) and (5)  dictate  how  the  Tribunal  must  dispose  of
     appeals by requiring an appeal to be allowed in so far as the decision
     was "not in accordance with the law (including immigration rules)" and
     otherwise that  it  be  dismissed.   The  appellant  argues  that  the
     decision was not in accordance with "immigration rules" because it was
     taken under paragraph 301 which was the wrong rule.

  9. The argument  has  little  to  commend  it.   First,  the  appellant's
     representatives accepted at the hearing  that  the  Immigration  Judge
     should decide the appeal under paragraph 298 and the hearing proceeded
     with evidence called on that basis.  Second, it is  not  contended  in
     the Grounds of Review that the appellant could succeed under paragraph
     298, the substantive requirements of  which  are  identical  to  those
     applied by the Secretary of State  albeit  derived  wrongly  from  the
     terms of paragraph 301.   It is not  suggested  that  the  Immigration
     Judge erred in any way in deciding that the appellant did  not  fulfil
     these requirements.   If, as is suggested in the grounds,  the  appeal
     should have been allowed, such that the  appellant's  application  for
     leave remains outstanding  before  the  Secretary  of  State,  on  the
     incontestable findings of the Immigration Judge  the  appellant  could
     not possibly succeed.  Thus, if the argument is correct it could  only
     be seen as a triumph of form without substance in this case.

 10. Nevertheless, can it be said that an immigration decision  based  upon
     the wrong  immigration  rule  is  "not  in  accordance  with  the  law
     (including immigration rules)"?  Put another way,  does  the  original
     decision-maker  have  a  legal  obligation  to   apply   the   correct
     immigration rule?  The answer to that is, in our view, to be found  in
     the Immigration Act 1971 and the Rules themselves.

 11. The basis for the immigration rules is contained in sections 1(4)  and
     3(2) of the Immigration Act 1971.  Section 3(2) requires the Secretary
     of State to lay before Parliament

           "statements of rules, or of any changes in the rules, laid  down
           by him as to the practice to be followed in  the  administration
           of this Act for regulating the entry into and stay in the United
           Kingdom of persons  required  by  this  Act  to  have  leave  to
           enter..."  (emphasis added)

 12. Section 1(4) states, inter alia, that:

           "[t]he rules laid down by the  Secretary  of  State  as  to  the
           practice to be followed in the administration of  this  Act  for
           regulating   the   entry   into   and   stay   in   the   United
           Kingdom....shall include...." (emphasis added)


 13. The italicised words in both sections 3(2) and 1(4) seem to us  to  be
     ones of obligation imposing a legal duty upon those  who  "administer"
     the Act in regulating entry and stay in the UK to follow and apply the
     Rules.   The 1971 Act, on its face, requires Entry Clearance Officers,
     Immigration Officers and the Secretary of State himself to  apply  the
     immigration rules from time to time in force.  Parliament must, in our
     view, have  intended  that  this  legal  duty  required  the  relevant
     decision-maker  to  apply  the  correct   rule   applicable   to   the
     individual's circumstances put forward to gain entry to or to stay  in
     the UK.

 14.  Further,  the  obligation  is  reflected  in  the  immigration  rules
     themselves in paragraphs 1 and 4 of HC 395.  Reference is rarely  made
     to the early paragraphs of HC 395 which do, in fact, contain important
     and, sometimes, crucial provisions.  Paragraph 1 states, inter alia:

           "The Home Secretary has made changes in the Rules laid  down  by
           him as to the practice to be followed in the  administration  of
           the Immigration Acts for regulating entry into and the  stay  of
           persons in the United Kingdom...."   (emphasis added)

 15. Here again we see the words of obligation and legal duty seen early in
     sections 1(4) and 3(2) of  the  1971  Act.    Paragraph  3  makes  the
     obligation arguably even clearer:

           "These Rules come into effect on 1 October 1994 and  will  apply
           to all decisions taken  on  or  after  that  date..."  (emphasis
           added)

 16. Reading these provisions together, we are left in no doubt  that  they
     impose a legal duty upon decision-makers acting to regulate entry  and
     stay in the UK to apply the immigration rules  and,  specifically,  to
     apply the correct immigration rule applicable to the circumstances put
     forward by the individual in his application to entry or stay  in  the
     UK.  The matter can, perhaps, be tested in this way.  If it  were  not
     for  the  appellate  system  operating  in  immigration  cases,  legal
     challenges to decisions by those officials making decisions under  the
     Immigration Acts and the immigration rules would be brought by way  of
     applications for judicial review in the Administrative Court.  We have
     no doubt that an Administrative Court Judge would have  no  difficulty
     in concluding that the  decision-maker  acted  unlawfully  if  he  had
     applied the wrong immigration rule.  It is axiomatic in a  public  law
     context that a decision-maker acts unlawfully if he makes  a  decision
     on the wrong legal basis, for instance by  applying  the  wrong  legal
     provision.   Mutatis mutandis, with the appellate system  we  actually
     have in place, such a decision is "not in accordance with the law ".

 17. What does this mean for the application of sections 86(3) and  (5)  of
     the 2002 Act?  It seems to signify that the appeal, at least  to  some
     extent, should be allowed under section 86(3).   We emphasis the words
     "to some extent" because, for the reasons we now give,  in  the  usual
     case the immigration judge will go on to determine the appeal  on  the
     basis of the correct rule and the evidence before him.  The  effective
     outcome of the appeal will be determined by that process.

 18. It is within the collective experience of the members of the  Tribunal
     sitting in this case that the approach taken at  the  hearing  is  the
     normal one followed where  the  original  decision-maker  applies  the
     wrong immigration rule.  Of course, an Immigration Judge is not  under
     an obligation to "embark upon a roving expedition among the rules" for
     a rule that applies to the claimant's case (Uddin v IAT [1991] Imm  AR
     134 at p 144 per McCowan LJ).   However,  once  the  correct  rule  is
     identified, it is the Immigration Judge's  obligation  to  apply  that
     rule, subject to the requirements of fairness so that the parties have
     a proper opportunity to deal with the relevant  evidential  and  other
     issues that arise.   The issue of  fairness  will  most  likely  arise
     where the substance of the correct rule differs from that  applied  by
     the decision-maker or where the  appellant  is  unrepresented  at  the
     hearing.

 19. If the appellant succeeds on the evidence under the correct rule,  the
     appeal will, of course, be allowed in substance and not merely because
     the original decision was legally defective having been made under the
     wrong rule.

 20. If, by contrast, as in this case any (or all) of the  requirements  of
     the correct rule are not satisfied, the appeal will  be  dismissed  in
     substance.  For the reasons we have already  given,  the  decision  is
     "not in accordance with the law" but the fault in the decision as made
     is for all practical purposes cured by  the  appellate  process.   The
     appeal must be allowed to that  limited  extent  but  the  appellant's
     victory will be Pyrrhic.  There is no outstanding  application  before
     the decision-maker and no question of the Immigration Judge  directing
     further consideration of the appellant's application.

 21. The practical effect of the approach we set out above is that cases of
     this sort will be, if at all possible, decided by  Immigration  Judges
     on the evidence at a hearing.  The legislation does, after  all,  give
     the Tribunal a fact-finding role in immigration cases.  It will  avoid
     the unnecessary cycle of  appeals  being  routinely  allowed  for  the
     original decision-maker to consider the appellant's application again.



 22. Whilst this will be the proper approach in many cases  there  will  be
     instances where the immigration judge is unable to, or cannot  fairly,
     proceed  to  determine  the  appeal  on  the  basis  of  the   correct
     immigration rule.   It may be  that  because  of  the  decision-making
     process the Immigration Judge lacks the relevant evidence  upon  which
     to make his decision.  For example, recourse to evidence  relevant  to
     the correct rule - particularly where its requirements differ from the
     rule actually applied - may be impossible in an out-of-country  appeal
     where the appellant is not represented or where  there  is  no  appeal
     hearing because it is a 'paper case'.  A further example  might  arise
     where the decision-making process is so  unfair  as  to  amount  to  a
     breach of the rules of natural justice (BO (ECO's Duties per D S Abdi)
     Nigeria [2004] UKIAT 00026 - ECO's decision taken prior to date  fixed
     for interview: "a gross failure to follow ordinary legal  principle").
     In cases of this sort, the  only  proper  course  of  action  for  the
     Immigration Judge will  be  to  allow  the  appeal  as  not  being  in
     accordance with the law.  The appeal will be allowed with  the  effect
     that the appellant's application remains outstanding and there will be
     a direction that the decision-maker considers it correctly  under  the
     Rules.  This is because, in contrast to the situation in paragraph  20
     above (and in this case), the fault cannot be cured  by  the  findings
     within the appellate process.

 23. There is a further situation which  may  result  in  an  appeal  being
     partially allowed.  Suppose the Immigration Judge  is  able  to  reach
     conclusions in favour of an appellant on some of the  requirements  of
     the correct immigration rule, but  because  of  the  faulty  decision-
     making process, not able to make any findings  on  others.   That,  of
     course, is not this case because the substance of the correct rule was
     not materially different from  the  one  actually  considered  by  the
     Secretary of State.   In order to allow the appeal outright under  the
     immigration rules, the Immigration Judge must be satisfied by evidence
     or concession that all the requirements of the correct rule are met: R
     v IAT ex parte Kwok on Tong  [1981]  Imm  AR  214.   Nevertheless,  in
     respect of what the Immigration Judge has decided, the decision is not
     in accordance with the immigration rules.   As presently  advised,  it
     seems to us that in such a case, the proper course would  be  for  the
     Immigration Judge to allow the appeal to that extent for the decision-
     maker to reach a decision on the remaining requirements of the correct
     rule.

 24. In an appropriate case, there is nothing incongruous in an Immigration
     Judge allowing an appeal in part under  section  86(3)  and  otherwise
     dismissing  it  under  section  86(5).   Indeed,  it  is  specifically
     contemplated in section 86(3) which enjoins the Tribunal to allow  the
     appeal "in so  far"  as  it  was  "not  in  accordance  with  the  law
     (including immigration rules)".  It is done every day in  cases  where
     the Immigration Judge accepts the human rights grounds  of  an  appeal
     but not, for example, the asylum grounds.  The appeal  is  allowed  in
     part and otherwise dismissed.    Likewise  in  a  race  discrimination
     case, an appeal may be allowed on the  limited  basis  that  the  race
     discrimination grounds are established but otherwise dismissed because
     the Immigration Judge is  satisfied  on  all  the  evidence  that  the
     appellant did not meet the requirements of the immigration  rules:  CS
     (Race Discrimination, proper approach, effect)  Jamaica  [2006]  UKAIT
     00004.  Here, of course, the partial success may not be without effect
     as the appellant may rely upon  the  Immigration  Judge's  finding  of
     unlawful race discrimination in a County  Court  action  for  damages:
     section 57A(3), Race Relations Act 1976.

 25. That last point apart, the proper disposal of the appeal in  the  race
     discrimination example is analogous to this case.   The  Secretary  of
     State applied the wrong immigration rule and, as  a  consequence,  his
     decision was, to that extent, unlawful and "not in accordance with the
     law".  However, the Immigration Judge properly went on  to  apply  the
     correct  rule.   The  appellant  presented  her   evidence   and   the
     Immigration Judge made a number of findings leading to the  conclusion
     that she had failed to meet the requirements of paragraph 298.   Thus,
     the Secretary of State's decision was, in fact,  "in  accordance  with
     immigration rules" as determined at the hearing.   The appellant  lost
     on the substance of her appeal under the immigration rules and to that
     extent the appeal should have been dismissed under section 86(5).  The
     appellant's partial success is limited to the solace  of  knowing  the
     Secretary of State acted unlawfully.   She  is  not  entitled  to  any
     further relief, for example a direction that the  Secretary  of  State
     should reconsider her application.

Decision

 26. The Immigration Judge correctly dismissed the appeal on the  substance
     of the immigration rules.  He should, however, have allowed the appeal
     to the limited (and in this  case  inconsequential)  extent  that  the
     decision was not in accordance with the law.  We substitute a decision
     to that effect.






                                                                     A GRUBB
                                                    SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE


                                                             Date:
