
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal

                    TK (Tamils - LP updated) Sri Lanka CG [2009] UKAIT 00049

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Procession House                     |                             |
|On 27 & 28 October 2009                       |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

            Lord Justice Carnwath, Senior President of Tribunals
      C M G Ockelton, Deputy President, Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
                       Senior Immigration Judge Storey



                                   Between

                                     TK

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Chelvan, instructed by Lawrence & Co.
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Staker, instructed by Treasury Solicitors

    a) The risk categories identified in LP (LTTE area - Tamils - Colombo -
       risk?) Sri Lanka  CG  [2007]    UKAIT  00076  and  approved  by  the
       European Court  of  Human  Rights  (ECtHR)  in   NA  v  UK,  App.no.
       25904/07, remain valid.


    b) Events since the military defeat of the LTTE in May  2009  have  not
       aggravated the likely approach of  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  to
       returned failed asylum seekers who are Tamils; if anything the level
       of interest in them  has  decreased.  The  principal  focus  of  the
       authorities continues to be, not Tamils from the north (or east)  as
       such, but persons considered to be either LTTE members, fighters  or
       operatives or  persons  who  have  played  an  active  role  in  the
       international procurement network responsible for financing the LTTE
       and ensuring it was supplied with arms.


    c) The records the Sri Lanka authorities  keep  on  persons  with  some
       history  of  arrest   and   detention   have   become   increasingly
       sophisticated;  their  greater  accuracy   is   likely   to   reduce
       substantially the risk that a person of  no  real  interest  to  the
       authorities would be arrested or detained.


    d) The practice of  immigration  judges  and  others  of  referring  to
       "objective country evidence",  when  all  they  mean  is  background
       country evidence, should cease, since it obscures the need  for  the
       decision-maker to subject such evidence to scrutiny  to  see  if  it
       conforms to legal standards for assessing the quality of Country  of
       Origin Information (COI) as identified  by the ECtHR in  NA  and  as
       set out in the Refugee Qualification Directive (2004/83/EC), Article
       4(1), 4(3)(a), 4(5),4(5)(a) and 4(5)(c) and the Procedures Directive
       (2005)85/EC), Article 8(2)(a)and (b) and 8(3).



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The case of LP (LTTE area - Tamils - Colombo  -  risk?)  Sri  Lanka  CG
    [2007]     UKAIT 00076 has served as a Tribunal country  guidance  case
    on Sri Lanka since August 2007.  Along with the case of AN & SS (Tamils
    - Colombo - risk?) Sri Lanka CG [2008] UKAIT 00062 (and subject to what
    is said at para 77  below),  it  continues  to  specify  relevant  risk
    factors for cases concerning Tamils from Sri Lanka.  In a judgment of 6
    August 2008, NA v UK App.no. 25904/07,  the  European  Court  of  Human
    Rights (ECtHR) considered LP in careful detail, reaching  very  similar
    findings of fact.  Since NA there have been a number of  cases  in  our
    higher courts which have had reason to consider LP and  AN  &  SS:  see
    Appendix B. Although they have qualified one aspect of AN  &  SS,  none
    has addressed the major changes that have taken place in Sri  Lanka  in
    the past year. That is to be expected. The higher courts supervise  the
    Tribunal's country guidance system, but fact-finding  and  guidance  on
    country conditions are primarily to be undertaken (normally at a senior
    level) by the specialist body  dealing  with  statutory  asylum-related
    appeals - presently the Asylum and Immigration  Tribunal  and,  in  the
    near future, by judges of the Immigration and  Asylum  Chamber  of  the
    Upper Tribunal (UTIAC).

 2. When the Tribunal heard LP and the ECtHR decided NA the episodic  peace
    process had begun to  unravel,  leading  to  a  deteriorating  security
    situation.  A new period of fierce  military  conflict  commenced  soon
    afterwards.  The present case affords the Tribunal  an  opportunity  to
    look at whether the guidance given in LP requires modification  in  the
    light of recent developments. The  major  development  that  has  taken
    place is, of course, that in May 2009, after  a  protracted  civil  war
    lasting 26 years, the Liberation  Tigers  of  Tamil  Eelam  (LTTE)  was
    militarily defeated.

 3. Another development concerns the great number of Tamils in the north in
    camps. In the short period since we heard this case  in  late  October,
    major media sources have reported a significant change in the situation
    of those in these camps. Since the precise situation is still  unclear,
    and may remain so for some time, we do not think it would be  right  to
    delay our decision in order to learn more or to ask  the  parties  what
    they think about these reports. For  reasons  that  will  become  clear
    below, we do not consider that such reports  significantly  affect  our
    assessment or the guidance we give. All that  is  relevant  to  mention
    here is that in the period leading up to  May  2009  large  numbers  of
    people, mostly Tamils, had been displaced by the armed conflict  ending
    up in internationally-supervised IDP camps in the north. But the  post-
    war camps were of a different character.  They contained  many  of  the
    same people and served to feed and  accommodate  them,  but  they  were
    under the control of the SLA. Subject to  some  exceptions,  people  in
    these camps were deprived of their liberty. The numbers at  their  peak
    were said to comprise the largest number of displaced persons  anywhere
    in the world (the Manik Farm complex near  the  town  of  Vavuniya  had
    230,000  persons  alone).  Under  pressure   from   the   international
    community, the Sri Lankan authorities pledged to facilitate the  speedy
    return of all of those in the camps to  their  home  areas  except  for
    actual or suspected LTTE members who were being kept in "rehabilitation
    camps" (around 10,500-12,000) as soon as  those  areas  have  been  de-
    mined. Even if the very latest reports are correct, and  large  numbers
    have been allowed to leave the camps and return to their home areas, it
    is clear that, by virtue of the damage wrought on those  areas  by  the
    war, there will continue to be a very significant number of  Tamils  in
    camps in the north, even if now free to leave if they choose.

 4. In country guidance cases the Tribunal has  a  dual  function.   As  in
    every case, it must decide the appeal before it, but it also  seeks  to
    identify relevant risks that arise in relation to classes or groups  of
    persons.  It does this in two main ways: (i) by identifying one or more
    "risk categories" (usually when the evidence is sufficiently  clear-cut
    to justify a finding that the generality of  persons  in  a  particular
    category are at risk); (ii) by delineating "risk factors", i.e. factors
    of particular significance when assessing risk, a mode  usually  chosen
    when the evidence is less clear-cut. In LP the chosen approach  was  to
    identify risk factors. The appellant in this case is a national of  Sri
    Lanka who is a Tamil and who is from the north  of  that  country.  The
    principal country guidance issue is whether  (since LP) Tamils who face
    enforced removal from the UK, particularly Tamils  from  the  north  or
    east of Sri Lanka, currently face a real  risk  on  return  of  adverse
    treatment at the hands of the Sri Lankan authorities. As in LP and  NA,
    the primary focus is on the risk on return to Sri Lanka in Colombo


N.A v UK

 5. We shall have cause throughout  this  decision  to  refer  to  NA.  The
    judgment of the ECtHR in this case is  a  milestone  in  two  different
    respects.  First, while the Court has quite often  undertaken  detailed
    assessment of  country  conditions  in  asylum-related  cases  invoking
    Article 3, it had never  before  done  that  by  reference  to  country
    guidance criteria as set out by a domestic court or tribunal,  in  this
    instance the UK AIT. At para 129 it stated that  when  considering  the
    individual risk to returnees, it was "in principle legitimate, to carry
    out that assessment on the basis of the  list  of  'risk  factors'"  as
    identified by the AIT in LP. By virtue of the disagreement between  the
    parties in NA as to the  relative  value  of  particular  sources,  the
    December 2006 UNHCR Position paper in particular, the Court  also  felt
    it necessary to articulate in greater detail than previously  its  view
    of the relevant criteria that decision makers should apply  to  Country
    of Origin Information (COI).  In the latter respect,  it  seems  to  us
    that, at least within the context of Article  3  jurisprudence,  judges
    should now be assessing COI by the standards set out by  the  Court  at
    paras 132-135 of NA (which can be summarised as accuracy, independence,
    reliability,  objectivity,   reputation,   adequacy   of   methodology,
    consistency and corroboration).  Indeed,  within  the  closely  related
    context of asylum and humanitarian protection  claims,  very  much  the
    same standards have now become, by  virtue  of  EU  legislation,  legal
    standards:  see  the  Refugee  Qualification  Directive   (2004/83/EC),
    Article 4(1), 4(3)(a), 4(5),4(5)(a)  and  4(5)(c)  and  the  Procedures
    Directive (2005)85/EC), Article 8(2)(a)and (b) and 8(3).

 6. Secondly, it is clear that the court's endorsement of the validity of a
    system of country guidance such  as  is  applied  in  the  UK  was  not
    unconditional. It was given only because the Court was  satisfied  that
    the UK  AIT  had  conducted  a  careful  and  comprehensive  assessment
    weighing different sources according  to  their  objective  merit.  The
    Court also fully recognised that country guidance is not inflexible; it
    must be applied by reference to new evidence as it  emerges;  otherwise
    it would fall foul of the principle of ex nunc assessment of risk.  Our
    country guidance system can only expect to have authority  domestically
    and command respect abroad, therefore, if it maintains these standards.


 7. The emphasis we place on assessment based on objective merit prompts us
    to make one further  comment.  It  is  still  widespread  practice  for
    practitioners and judges to refer to "objective country evidence"  when
    all they mean is background country evidence. In our view, to refer  to
    such evidence as "objective" obscures the need for  the  decision-maker
    to subject such evidence to scrutiny to see if it conforms to  the  COI
    standards just noted. This practice appears to have had its origin in a
    distinction between evidence relating to an individual  applicant  (so-
    called "subjective evidence") and evidence about country conditions (so-
    called"objective evidence"), but as our subsequent deliberations on the
    appellant's  case  illustrate  (see  below  paras  153-9),  even   this
    distinction can cause confusion when there is an issue about whether an
    appellant's subjective fears have an objective foundation. We hope  the
    above practice will cease.

Appeal history


 8. The appellant in this case is a national of Sri Lanka who  is  a  Tamil
    and who is from the north of that country. Her  appeal  has  a  lengthy
    history, which we detail below, but the  upshot  is  that  we  are  now
    tasked with conducting a second stage reconsideration of her appeal.

 9. The appellant applied for asylum on 10 November 2006 claiming  to  have
    entered the UK  by  air  four  days  previously.  On  8  May  2007  the
    respondent refused her application.  In a determination notified  on  7
    September 2007 Immigration Judge (IJ)  Higgins  dismissed  her  appeal.
    The appellant was successful in obtaining an order for reconsideration.
    In a decision dated 3  January  2008  Senior  Immigration  Judge  (SIJ)
    Southern found a material error of law (see Appendix A).   On  8  April
    2008 IJ Mitchell heard her appeal  afresh  but  again  her  appeal  was
    dismissed.  On 11 August 2008 permission to  appeal  to  the  Court  of
    Appeal was granted.  A consent order issued by Longmore LJ ensued on  8
    January 2009, remitting her case to the Tribunal.  It is now before us.

10. It is  important  to  say  something  about  the  basis  on  which  our
    reconsideration  is  to  proceed.   The  statement  of   reasons   that
    accompanied this order was made on the basis that IJ Mitchell  arguably
    failed to take into account the deteriorating security situation in Sri
    Lanka.  However, it was agreed that his findings of fact  made  on  the
    appellant's history should stand.  He concluded  that  the  appellant's
    account was credible and that the findings of fact made by  IJ  Higgins
    should be accepted.

11. The appellant's account is that she is a Tamil from Kilinochchi.   Born
    in 1975, she spent her early years there but moved with her  family  to
    live in Vavuniya from 1999 to 2002.  Her father was shot dead by Indian
    peace-keepers in 1987.  She formed a relationship  with  a  Mr  X.  Her
    mother made enquiries and discovered he was involved with the LTTE. Her
    mother disapproved of that. The appellant  found  work  as  a  computer
    demonstrator.  As a result of a  thaw  in  relations  between  the  Sri
    Lankan government and the LTTE, the appellant and her mother were  able
    to return to Kilinochchi in December 2002. Mr X visited her there;  her
    mother became reconciled to their relationship; in September  2003  the
    two of them decided to marry.  That  marriage  was  not  to  be:  Mr  X
    identified himself with the Karuna group (who had broken away from  the
    LTTE) and was unable any longer to visit Kilinochchi,  which  was  then
    LTTE heartland. The LTTE detained the appellant for two weeks,  seeking
    to discover where Mr X had gone, but released her on condition she keep
    them informed of visitors to her home.  Events in  the  first  part  of
    2006 led to a decision that she should  leave  Kilinochchi;  the  peace
    process had begun to collapse; violence escalated.   Being  afraid  the
    LTTE would press her into service, her mother sent her to her uncle  in
    Vavuniya who took her to his  brother-in-law  in  Colombo.  She  stayed
    there for three months. On 28  September  2006  her  uncle's  wife  was
    taking her to a nearby hospital because  she  was  ill.   Crossing  the
    Wellawatta bridge by rickshaw, they were stopped at an army checkpoint.
      She  produced  her  ID  card  showing  her  registered   address   as
    Kilinochchi. She did not speak Sinhalese  but  through  her  aunt  they
    asked her a lot of questions, including what she was doing in  Colombo.
    In her statement of 19 December 2006 she said:

         "They suspect me as an LTTE suicide member and plant  the  bomb  in
         Colombo. My aunty ... explained a lot, but they  said  'She  is  an
         LTTE member and we are going to arrest her'. They arrest me at that
         spot and took me to an army camp for further  inquiry,  where  they
         beat me and gave further electric shock."

12. The appellant went on to describe how  on  the  third  night,  two  men
    without uniform came to her cell, saying they  would  arrange  for  her
    release in return for sexual favours. Her refusal was of no avail; both
    raped her.  On 10 October 2006 two army men fetched her from  her  cell
    and took her in an army jeep; after a half an hour drive they told  her
    to get out.  She still had her ID card with her.   At  a  Hindu  temple
    nearby, she was met by Mr X who explained that when he was in the  same
    camp (as one of the Karuna  group  co-operating  with  the  Sri  Lankan
    army), he had learnt by chance she was there.  He had then  called  the
    camp commander asking that she be released.  The commander had  agreed.
    In her interview record, the appellant said her boyfriend  had  assured
    the commander she had nothing to do with the LTTE.  After returning  to
    her uncle's house in Colombo the appellant, with help from  her  uncle,
    decided to leave Sri Lanka.  Mr X still wanted to marry her but she  no
    longer wanted that as in her eyes his involvement with the  LTTE  meant
    he must be a murderer. We shall say more about her latest circumstances
    later.

Procedure

13. The hearing of  this  case  lasted  two  days.   As  with  other  cases
    identified as suitable for intended country guidance, the  parties  had
    undertaken considerable preparation in advance; the Tribunal had held a
    Case Management Review (CMR) hearing  at  which  the  specific  country
    guidance issues (involving a review of LP) were identified; and further
    directions were given about production of  background  country  reports
    and expert witnesses.  Further  correspondence  took  place  to  ensure
    preparations were proceeding satisfactorily.  All this was designed  to
    ensure the hearing  before  us  could  be  devoted  simply  to  hearing
    evidence and submissions.  That did  not  happen.  One  major  item  of
    evidence relied on by the appellant, the expert report from  Dr  Smith,
    was only produced the day before the hearing, but both  sides  were  at
    fault. On the first day of the  hearing  time  was  lost  dealing  with
    matters that should have been resolved between the parties  beforehand.
    At the end of the second day we had to direct that Mr Chelvan  conclude
    his  half-completed  submissions  in  writing.   It   is   appropriate,
    therefore, that we make several linked observations:

       i) First, a party who instructs an expert  should  make  very  clear
          what ground the expert is expected to cover.  In this  case  much
          of Professor Good's main report was quite unnecessarily taken  up
          with  treatment  of  events  predating  LP.   We  would  add  (in
          anticipation of our comments on some aspects of Professor  Good's
          report) that the expert should be reminded of the need to address
          clearly and objectively the relative weight of "disparate  pieces
          of evidence" (see per Brooke LJ in Karanakaran v SSHD [2000] INLR
          122, 133).


    (ii) Secondly, all parties should understand that when a  case  is  set
         down to review existing country guidance, the latter is to be taken
         as a starting-point.  The Tribunal has not ruled out that  in  some
         cases there could be  a  challenge  to  the  historic  validity  of
         Tribunal  country  guidance  (although  such  would   require   the
         production of  evidence  pointing  both  towards  and  against  the
         accuracy of that guidance at the relevant time: see AM & AM  (Armed
         conflict; risk categories) CG Somalia [2008] UKAIT 00091); but that
         will be rare.  Ordinarily (as here), the  process  is  incremental:
         the parties do not seek to  dispute  that  the  Tribunal's  country
         guidance was valid at the time, but only to argue that it now needs
         alteration in  the  light  of  fresh  evidence  (see  AIT  Practice
         Direction 18.2).  That being the case, there is no  place  for  the
         wholesale reiteration  of  background  country  evidence  that  was
         before the previous Tribunal. Expert reports should not trawl  over
         old ground. There may be limited scope for some earlier referencing
         material, e.g. below we discuss the extent to  which  recent  UNHCR
         evidence has modified the 2006 UNHCR position paper on  Sri  Lanka.
         It may sometimes be helpful for an expert to recapitulate important
         historical events.  Here, however, brevity is imperative.


    (iii)    Thirdly, whilst it is legitimate for the parties  to  seek  to
         ensure the Tribunal has before it  the  most  up-to-date  materials
         (because asylum-related appeals are governed  by  the  Ravichandran
         principle: see Saber (AP) v the Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
         Department) [2007] UKHL 57, para 13), it is quite unacceptable  (as
         happened in this case) that large supplementary bundles  should  be
         served on the eve of the hearing.   Proper  prior  preparation  and
         proper compliance with Tribunal directions should obviate the  need
         for anything except  supplementary  skeleton  arguments  and  small
         numbers of the most  recent  press  cuttings.  Failure  to  observe
         Tribunal directions governing such matters not  only  causes  delay
         during the hearing but puts undue strain on the Tribunal  who  seek
         to come to such  hearings  fully  apprised  of  all  the  documents
         pertaining to the case.

14. On the morning of the hearing Mr Chelvan made two applications, one for
    a witness summons, the other for an adjournment. We refused  both.  The
    witness summons was requested in respect of one of  the  authors  of  a
    report by the Foreign and Commonwealth Office Migration Directorate who
    had conducted interviews of a range of sources in Sri Lanka during  the
    period  23-29  August  2009  (hereinafter  the  "FCO   report").    The
    respondent had earlier undertaken to make one of its authors  available
    to give evidence but this  had  not  proved  practicable.   Mr  Chelvan
    submitted that it was prejudicial to the appellant's  case  if  he  was
    unable to cross-examine  at  least  one  of  them.   In  our  view  the
    respondent had  used  best  endeavours  to  make  one  of  the  authors
    available; the respondent was not in any event under  a  duty  to  call
    either as  a  witness;  the  report  was  essentially  an  information-
    gathering, not an evaluative, exercise; Professor Good in  his  summary
    report had broadly approved its methodology; it was open to Mr  Chelvan
    in submissions to ask us to attach less weight to the report by  virtue
    of his inability to cross-examine upon  it.  As  regards  Mr  Chelvan's
    application for an adjournment, which was based in part on  his  desire
    to be able to question one of the FCO report's authors and in  part  on
    his wish for more time to obtain further evidence in response  to  late
    additional material served by the respondent, we considered  that  none
    of these factors justified adjournment. In  the  event  we  allowed  Mr
    Chelvan  short  adjournments  during  the  hearing  and  a  short  time
    following the completion of the hearing to complete his submissions.

The  evidence of Dr Smith and Professor Good

15. As often happens at  such  hearings  the  bulk  of  the  live  evidence
    comprised examination of the experts.   In  LP  and  in  AN  &  SS  the
    Tribunal heard from both Dr Smith and Professor  Good.   The  same  two
    appear as experts in this case.  Leaving aside our disappointment  that
    both (especially Professor Good) should have seen fit to  go  over  old
    ground, it is convenient if we summarise the written and oral  evidence
    of each in turn.

Dr Smith: written report

16. Dated 26 October 2009, Dr Smith's  written  report  describes  how  the
    civil war between the Sri Lankan  government  and  the  LTTE  had  gone
    through four phases or chapters. The last phase  -  "Eelam  IV"  -  had
    recommenced  in  2006  and  intensified  significantly  through   2007.
    Weakened by the defection of Colonel Karuna, the LTTE commander in  the
    east, Sri Lanka's military leaders were able during 2008 and early 2009
    to focus far more on fighting the LTTE in the north and throughout  the
    early months of 2009 were able to force the LTTE to retreat to a narrow
    tract of coastline to the north  of  Mullaitivu.  Both  sides  suffered
    heavy casualties, but on 16 May 2009, President Rajapakse was  able  to
    declare a resounding military victory. During the final days  the  LTTE
    leader, Prabhakaran was killed,  along  with  the  bulk  of  his  close
    advisors.

17. The plight of many Tamil civilians from  the  north  during  the  final
    stages of the conflict caught the attention of the  world's  media.  On
    the one hand, he said, "it became increasingly evident  that  the  LTTE
    had used its own people as a protective shield"; on the other hand,  he
    said, "the Sri Lankan security  forces  paid  scant  attention  to  the
    plight of the civilian victims and the result was suffering and carnage
    on a massive scale, - an estimated 20,000+ civilians  died  during  the
    final days of Eelam IV and thousands more were injured".

18. In Dr Smith's opinion,  although  the  LTTE  has  been  defeated  as  a
    conventional military force "for many years to come", it remains to  be
    seen whether it will re-emerge. If it does, new recruits will  have  to
    come primarily from the ranks of the IDPs originally from the Vanni. Dr
    Smith considered that the LTTE's international procurement network  was
    now - following the arrest in Kuala Lumpur on 6 August 2009  of  a  man
    called KP, aka Selvaraja  Pathmanathan   -  "rudderless  and  may  have
    became criminalised and significantly disrupted". The impact of  LTTE's
    military defeat on the Sri Lankan diaspora was uncertain.   The  future
    leaders of Tamil nationalism might not be associated with the LTTE.

19. So far as the Sri Lankan government was concerned, Dr Smith  said  that
    its  strategy  remained  to  emasculate  the  LTTE  and   prevent   its
    recrudescence. The east remained on high security alert. In  the  north
    the 250,000 or so IDPs currently in camps in and around  Vavuniya  were
    being  screened  to  identify  any  LTTE   supporters   and   potential
    infiltration from "fifth columns".  His estimate was that  some  12,000
    captured or surrendered LTTE were detained in separate camps and  their
    future was uncertain.  The army planned to increase  its  numbers  from
    200,000 to 300,000 to protect against an LTTE  revival,  based  upon  a
    perceived risk of LTTE members  overseas  returning  to  resurrect  the
    movement under a new leadership. In Colombo "efforts to  identify  LTTE
    underground cells are ongoing"; security was tight and many checkpoints
    and "High Security Zones" remained in place. The Sri Lankan  Parliament
    continues to vote to extend the state of emergency laws monthly.

20. Despite statements from government leaders talking about giving  Tamils
    in the north and east limited autonomy, Dr Smith  considered  that  the
    Sinhalese political elite seemed  set  on  an  exclusionary  policy  of
    triumphalist nationalism, increasingly based on powerful  families  and
    political Buddhist clergy. Conflict in Sri  Lanka  had  generally  been
    accompanied  by  human  rights  abuses  which  had   drawn   increasing
    condemnation from the international community.

21. According to Dr Smith all these factors had "massive implications"  for
    a person from the north who was in Colombo as a returned asylum seeker.
     An intense focus upon Tamils in  Colombo  through  cordon  and  search
    operations and checkpoints was likely to continue:

         "When stopped, Tamils are required  to provide a valid  reason  for
         being in Colombo, which was generally assumed to  be  a  verifiable
         business concern,  home  address,  property  interest,  employment,
         seeking  medical  help  or  travelling  abroad.  Anybody  of  Tamil
         ethnicity who fails to meet one of these requirements is considered
         a potential LTTE sympathiser."

22. In his opinion, the situation in Colombo was unlikely  to  improve  for
    some time.  The defeat of the LTTE in the north would make the security
    forces even more concerned about the risk of suicide bombing especially
    in Colombo designed as revenge for events in the north:  "This  means",
    he wrote, "that conditions for a returning Tamil  from  the  north,  in
    Colombo, are exceedingly poor at present  and  almost  certain  to  get
    worse".

23. Dr Smith considered, as a result of interviews he had conducted with  a
    retired senior military  officer  in  September  2008  (General  (retd)
    Lionel Bagatelle), that  the  government's  record-keeping  had  become
    increasingly  systematic  and  centralised  through  the  work  of  the
    Military Intelligence Corps. Such records "varied in their  length  and
    detail, depending upon the  level  of  adverse  interest.  All  records
    included information on family members".  Every suspect detained by the
    security forces resulted  in  a  record  being  raised.   The  Criminal
    Investigations Department  (CID)  and  Security  Intelligence  Services
    (SIS) were engaged in a comprehensive exchange  of  information.   Once
    details of a detainee had been entered on to the database, "they remain
    there for life".   Even if the detainee were  released  from  detention
    without charge, "'the system' will still identify them on return..."

24. As regards procedures at Colombo  Airport,  the  arrivals  section  was
    completely  modernised  in  2005  and  Dr  Smith's  recent   experience
    suggested that the security systems had been upgraded.  The  Department
    of Immigration and Emigration (DIE)  had  a  computerised  registration
    system and the SIS database was linked to it, although the CID and  SIS
    no longer seemed to share information.  The authorities at the  airport
    had available to them a centralised electronic database  and  had  been
    instructed "to closely monitor and report the details of the people who
    are entering and leaving the country".

25. So far as these systems would impact on the  appellant,  Dr  Smith  was
    confident that, as she had been previously detained in Colombo in 2006,
    her detention and the adverse interest of the security  forces  in  her
    then would have resulted in her relevant details having  been  recorded
    and transferred to the centralised, electronic  database  available  to
    the authorities at the airport in Colombo.  Since the  authorities  had
    recently recognised the need for increased vigilance  at  the  airport,
    "principally to prevent the return of LTTE sympathisers, supporters and
    cadres", the appellant was likely to appear on the database as a person
    of adverse  interest  and  would  likely  be  detained.   If  she  were
    detained, it was likely she would  be  at  risk  of  being  ill-treated
    again.

26. Dr Smith  acknowledged  that  the  situation  in  Jaffna  had  improved
    significantly, but nevertheless, the humanitarian community  considered
    the Jaffna peninsula to be an "open  prison"  and  Jaffna  a  "garrison
    town".  Moreover, in Jaffna, as  elsewhere,  this  appellant  would  be
    subject  to  security  checks  and  her  name  would  come  up  on  the
    computerised database that would be used.  In any event, she would need
    to secure permission from the Ministry of Defence to travel  to  Jaffna
    and would face lengthy security checks, both on departure and en route.
     It was unlikely she would be allowed to go to Kilinochchi as  most  of
    the inhabitants were in the IDP camps,  and  there  was  a  very  heavy
    military presence: "... she would clearly stand out and  be  questioned
    and most certainly detained,  with  the  real  possibility  of  intense
    interrogation".

Dr Smith: oral evidence

27. Leaving out Dr Smith's reiteration of matters covered  in  his  report,
    his evidence was in summary as follows. His background was in  security
    and defence. Formerly an academic, he now worked as  a  consultant.  He
    referred to the Criminal Records Form document that he had submitted to
    the Tribunal. It had been given to him 9-12 months ago, but was likely,
    he considered, to be similar  to  one  completed  by  the  CID  at  the
    airport.  He had been told it was to be introduced soon, so he expected
    it was now in use. The difference from previous forms was that  it  was
    more comprehensive and designed for computer entry of  the  information
    entered on it.   It  was  impossible  to  say  unequivocally  that  the
    appellant would be detained at the airport, but her ID card  showing  a
    Kilinochchi residence and her previous detention on suspicion of  being
    a  "Black Tiger" (suicide bomber) made that very  likely.  He  did  not
    consider that the end of the war meant security levels  had  decreased.
    There was residual concern about LTTE remnants and  about  LTTE  cadres
    coming back into the country. The authorities  would  not  be  flexible
    towards  enforced  returnees.  There  was  concern  about  persons  who
    originated from the conflict zone.

28. In cross-examination,  Dr  Smith  said  his  assessment  of  government
    databases at the airport was based on interviews he  had  conducted  in
    Colombo. He said he broadly accepted that if the appellant was not on a
    database accessible at the airport, she would not appear on a  database
    at any checkpoint either and  would  not  be  detained.   Risk  at  the
    airport was the  dominant  risk.   He  accepted  that  almost  all  his
    evidence predated the end of the war and that much of his assessment of
    the position now was expressed in tentative language, but  he  believed
    it to be certain that the  authorities  feared  that  there  were  LTTE
    cadres still in Colombo. Asked about the website known as TamilNet,  he
    said it made an effort to  be  comprehensive,  but  it  was  very  much
    reliant on ad hoc sources. It was extraordinarily difficult for  anyone
    outside the security services  to  know  whether  failed  asylum-seeker
    returnees were detained at the airport; he could not  say  whether,  if
    such detentions occurred, reports of them would end up on TamilNet.  He
    did not himself believe that the LTTE had been completely eliminated.

29. The government had developed ways of identifying Tamils of  concern  to
    them.  In cordon and search  operations  carried  out  in  Colombo  the
    majority of people were released relatively quickly, but those who  had
    no reasonable reason to be in the city would inevitably be  of  adverse
    interest.  The longer the detention, the more likely the ill-treatment.
    Even for a Tamil who  had  gone  to  Colombo  to  flee  the  LTTE,  the
    authorities might not see it that way.

30. Dr Smith said he was  not  meaning  to  say  that  the  DIE  and  other
    officials at the airport  would  have  open  access  to  a  centralised
    computerised database; only that the "system" in place at  the  airport
    would cause a check with such a database: the Immigration Officer was a
    filter; he or she handed suspects  on  to  the  CID  or  SIS.   It  was
    important  in  the  appellant's  case  that  she  had  left  Sri  Lanka
    illegally; that would be discovered on return and the authorities would
    want to question her. If a person had been released from  detention  in
    Colombo because of influence, the record  would  not  necessarily  show
    that; nobody could tell; all that was certain was that the record would
    not disclose any bribe. He accepted that very large numbers  of  failed
    asylum seekers would be seen by the authorities in Sri Lanka as  having
    been economic migrants and would be of no interest to them at all.  But
    there would be some who were of adverse interest. "We do not have  hard
    information... much more work is needed on this".   He  was  not  aware
    that the Sri Lankan Guardian was a problematic source.

31. In re-examination, Dr Smith emphasised that in recent times  there  had
    been a lot of deliberate misinformation put out by both parties to  the
    conflict; the evidence regarding the article in the Sri Lanka  Guardian
    was inconclusive.  Tamil men were more likely than Tamil women to be of
    adverse interest to the authorities, but  not  by  much.  The  evidence
    showing that  the  authorities  ill-treated  people  in  detention  was
    legion. Even initial vigorous interrogation could involve violence  and
    abuse.

32. In answer to questions from the panel, Dr Smith said he had only spoken
    to a handful of Tamils who had been  detained  at  checkpoints  (one  a
    year); in each case they happened to be English  speakers.   He  agreed
    that the Criminal Record form exhibited by him contained no section  to
    record previous detention, except as a result of conviction.  Asked  to
    clarify whether his position was that the authorities thought the  LTTE
    cadres they sought would  be  "home  grown"  rather  than  coming  from
    abroad, he  said  that  the  home  grown  cadres  would  be  the  "foot
    soldiers", but  that  higher  profile  ("officer")  LTTE  members  were
    expected to return from abroad. He did not agree that as  a  result  of
    military defeat of the LTTE the authorities would be less interested in
    sympathisers and supporters. He agreed that there were some indications
    to show the level of adverse interest in Tamils  might  be  diminished,
    but they did not yet indicate any improvement  in the area of security.

Professor Good: written reports

  .
33. From Professor Good we had two reports,  the  first  dated  19  October
    2009, the second, a supplementary report dated 25  October  2009.   The
    first, stretching to some 137  pages  is  the  longest  country  expert
    report this panel has ever seen. Such inordinate length places a  quite
    unwarranted burden on the tribunal and the other parties,  particularly
    where, as already noted, much of it deals at  unnecessary  length  with
    evidence of events predating LP. Be that as it may, we must do our best
    to identify and take account of its relevant parts


34. Professor Good stated that the evidence  strongly  suggested  that  the
    identities of returned failed asylum seekers, as well as information on
    their prior  activities,  prior  detention  or  previous  offences  and
    appearances on wanted lists, were likely to be on  a  central  database
    and so, under certain circumstances, to be known  to  the  authorities.
    Indeed, given the intense government interest currently in  identifying
    LTTE sympathisers, "one might expect a greater degree  of  interest  at
    present than hitherto".  With the  military  defeat  of  the  LTTE  the
    government had more resources and attention available to devote to such
    investigations. Having routed the LTTE  at  home,  the  government  was
    increasingly focusing on destroying the group's networks overseas.

35. According to Professor Good, the list of risk factors in  LP  "provides
    the best  start point at present" though the relative importance of the
    factors listed might  well  have  altered,  e.g.  through  there  being
    increased focus on the diaspora, making  links with a known  centre  of
    LTTE activity, such as Toronto or London, of greater importance.

36. Were the appellant to come to the adverse interest of  the  authorities
    and be detained in an official way, this would most likely happen under
    the provision of the Prevention of Terrorism Act (POTA)  and  Emergency
    Regulations which violate international standards.  "There  continues",
    he wrote, "to be overwhelming evidence of the routine use of torture by
    the security forces against detainees with  impunity".  Police  use  of
    torture was also endemic.  Professor Good cited  the February  2009  US
    State Department report statement that:

         "[t]he government's respect for  human  rights  declined  as  armed
         conflict escalated. The overwhelming majority of victims  of  human
         rights violation, such as killings and disappearances,  were  young
         male Tamils, while Tamils were only 16% of the overall population."

37. Professor Good  also  cited  recent  observations  by  the  UN  Special
    Rapporteur on Torture, Professor Manfred Nowak,  detailing  the  army's
    indiscriminate targeting of Tamil civilians in the war. Professor  Good
    identified many sources indicating that the security forces continue to
    enjoy effective impunity regarding human rights violations.  In a later
    section  of  his  report  Professor  Good  chronicled  various  reports
    detailing the significant numbers  of  disappearances  and  abductions,
    often with Tamils as the victims,  carried  out  either  by  government
    agents or paramilitary groups.


38. In Professor Good's opinion there had been a  widespread  incidence  of
    rape as an aspect of, or in association with, the ethnic conflict.

39. In  a  subsection  headed  "Ill-treatment  of  returned  failed  asylum
    seekers" Professor Good referred to having  been  supplied  with  "four
    recent determinations [three of them by AIT judges] which  accept  that
    torture did in fact occur when failed asylum seekers were returned". He
    also referred to an ongoing deportation appeal by a Canada-based  Tamil
    refugee previously deported in December 2005, a report  in  Hansard,  2
    November 2006 (Column 598W), concerning the deaths of  two  individuals
    in Sri Lanka after they had been returned to Sri Lanka by the UK, and a
    report from a French NGO (Cette France-L�) concerning  the  killing  in
    Sri Lanka of a returnee from France.

40. Since the military defeat  of  the  LTTE  there  had  been  "heightened
    scrutiny of refugees and others arriving in Sri Lanka". In  support  of
    this proposition he referred to several items  of  evidence:  a  letter
    from the British High  Commission  (BHC)  Colombo  to  UKBA,  dated  22
    January 2009, reporting on the arrival in Colombo of a charter  flight,
    carrying the first group of failed asylum applicants  deported  to  Sri
    Lanka under a new agreement between the UK and Sri Lanka governments; a
    TamilNet report of 7 June 2009 about the  arrest  of  two  Tamils  from
    Mullaitivu after they had returned from  abroad; a Sri Lankan  Guardian
    report of 10 June 2009 regarding fifteen Tamils visiting  from  the  UK
    who were said to have been taken into custody  and  held  incommunicado
    for nearly two weeks to ascertain whether they had links to  the  LTTE;
    reference in the same source to a Tamil woman visitor having been  held
    at the airport for three hours on suspicion of having  participated  in
    recent demonstrations in London and another visitor being asked to  pay
    a bribe of Rs2,000,000; a report  of  30  June  2009  in  the  Canadian
    newspaper, The  Star,  about  a  (non-Tamil)  shadow  Canadian  foreign
    minister refused entry; a TamilNet report of 16  September  2009  about
    four Sri Lankans (three of them Tamils) remanded in custody  on  return
    from Fiji for alleged connections with the LTTE; a report on the Global
    News website of 17 September  2009  on  the  detention  of  a  Canadian
    citizen of Tamil ethnicity and the plight of  four  Canadians  held  in
    camps set up to house ex-combatants and war-displaced civilians; and  a
    report of 6 October 2009 from the Australian newspaper The Age, and the
    Colombo Daily Mirror quoting a very senior Sri  Lankan  policeman  (DIG
    Nimal Mediwaka) as saying that it is "normal procedure for any  illegal
    asylum seeker deported back to the country to be arrested".


41. According to Professor Good, risk to returned asylum seekers would  not
    be confined to the international airport. In mass round-ups  of  Tamils
    in Colombo, particular interest was shown in failed asylum  applicants.
    Over the past two years,  he  wrote,  the  authorities  had  sought  to
    persuade, or even to force, Tamils from the  north  or  east  to  leave
    Colombo.  Regarding checkpoints, since the  end  of  the  conflict  the
    position appeared to be that they had remained at or even above wartime
    levels; although, following a Supreme Court  ruling,  checkpoints  were
    now mobile. There was and would continue to  be  significantly  greater
    suspicion of Tamils, particularly those unable to  speak  Sinhalese  or
    whose accounts or documentation showed them to come from areas  in  the
    north or east, or who were associated with  the LTTE. He  cited  a  BBC
    report of 15  October  2008  quoting  a  minister  in  the  Sri  Lankan
    government  as  saying  that  anybody  carrying  identity  cards   with
    addresses from rebel-held areas was immediately  arrested.  All  Tamils
    coming to Colombo were required to register with the police.

42. Could the  appellant  internally  relocate  to  the  north  in  safety?
    Professor Good was adamant that she could not because she would  easily
    be apprehended by the authorities; in  Sinhalese  areas  she  would  be
    conspicuous; to get  to  Tamil  areas  would  involve  passage  through
    numerous checkpoints.  Virtually the entire population of the Vanni was
    in detention camps. The very  fact  that  the  appellant  was  seen  as
    someone from Kilinochchi trying to get to Jaffna  would  only  increase
    suspicion and make checks on her past history very likely.  In  Jaffna,
    High Security Zones were still in place and Jaffna had  been  described
    by humanitarian agencies as a  garrison  town.   Whether  she  went  to
    Jaffna or the  east,  the  appellant  would  also  face  the  practical
    problems of being stigmatised as an unmarried single mother.

43. Professor Good drew attention  to  the  April  2009  UNHCR  Eligibility
    Guidelines for Assessing the International Protection Needs  of  Asylum
    Seekers from Sri Lanka ("the April 2009 Guidelines)" and the July  2009
    Note on the applicability of the 2009 Sri Lankan guidelines ("the  July
    2009 Note"), both of which identified Tamils from  the  north  and  the
    east as at risk of human rights violations in all other  parts  of  Sri
    Lanka.

44. In a section dealing with the approximately 250,000 or more Tamils held
    in 41 government camps in the north,  Professor  Good  highlighted  the
    continuing occurrence of abduction of children by paramilitary  groups,
    reports of the escape of some 20,000 IDPs (believed to be LTTE  cadres)
    and growing international concern about harsh conditions  in  these  de
    facto detention camps.

45. His report also dealt with risk to the relatives of LTTE  members;  the
    possible risk of the appellant's child being separated from her if  she
    were detained for any length of time; and with long term  risk,  viewed
    in the context of the past three decades  of  Sri  Lankan  history.  He
    considered that despite conciliatory noises,  the  governing  Sinhalese
    elite would continue to attempt to marginalise the Tamil minority, thus
    sowing the seeds for further ethnic conflict.  Extrajudicial activities
    by pro-government paramilitaries were likely to increase in scope.   He
    concluded:

         "It seems clear that the government's interest  in  uncovering  all
         those who have 'links with the LTTE' [a reference to a statement by
         Prime Minister Wickramanayaka in July 2009] will continue into  the
         foreseeable future under any circumstances. That interest would  be
         further intensified and prolonged if, as I believe is quite likely,
         the LTTE or some successor organisation acquires  the  capacity  to
         carry out sporadic acts of violence or terrorism."

46. Professor Good noted that the FCO  Travel  Advice  for  Sri  Lanka,  as
    updated on 14 October 2009, recognised the possibility of detention  on
    the basis of Tamil ethnicity.

47. As regards the appellant's status as a rape victim and a single mother,
    both  of  these  would  cause  disownment  by  her  family  and  social
    ostracism.  In a city like Colombo, in addition to any risk  she  would
    face as a Tamil from the north, the main problem she would  face  would
    be sexual vulnerability.  Lack of childcare facilities  would  make  it
    very difficult for her to find work.  Her stigmatisation  would  damage
    her daughter's marriage prospects.

48. The supplementary report from Professor  Good  dated  25  October  2009
    commented on a Foreign and Commonwealth Office report produced  by  the
    respondent shortly before the hearing entitled  Report  of  Information
    Gathering Visit to Colombo, Sri Lanka 23-29 August 2009 (hereafter "the
    August 2009 FCO Report": see below, paras 84-87), giving broad approval
    to its methodology, although  noting  that  contrary  to  the  Report's
    assertion that it made no attempt to provide  analysis,  it  inevitably
    involved a degree of selectivity. He also noted a  clear  tendency  for
    the official spokespersons to "play down"  the  difficulties  faced  by
    Tamils and for representatives of NGOs and human rights bodies to  draw
    attention to them. The Report did not in  his  view  provide  "coherent
    evidence as to what is 'really' happening [in Sri Lanka] at present".

49. His supplementary report also commented  on  the  collated  figures  of
    detentions and abductions of Tamils in Colombo for July-September  2009
    produced by the respondent.  Whilst  accepting  that  TamilNet  reports
    were of value, Professor Good  emphasised  that  the  website  was  not
    omniscient and could not form the basis  of  any  kind  of  statistical
    analysis.

Professor Good's oral evidence

50. In his oral evidence, Professor Good said that there  was  no  evidence
    that the degree of scrutiny of returnees exercised by  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities was lessening.  Evidence was not  presenting  itself  in  a
    coherent way at this stage.  That the government saw an increasing need
    to identify anyone with LTTE connections was demonstrated by their mass
    detentions of so many people in the north currently.  Although  in  his
    main report he  had  referred  to  the  Sri  Lankan  Guardian  as  pro-
    government; having investigated  further,  he  would  now  say  it  was
    independent. There were fabricated stories and reports put out by  both
    sides. TamilNet was likely to report most incidents  affecting  Tamils,
    but  it  was  unlikely  to  know  about   individual   experiences   at
    checkpoints.  He had not been able to discover any report about fifteen
    UK visitors said to have been arrested on return  in  June  other  than
    that in the Sri Lanka Guardian.

51. Professor Good agreed that whilst he was qualified to  talk  about  the
    situation in the country generally, the way the Sri Lankan  authorities
    dealt with and kept security records and exchanged information was  not
    his area of expertise. His  expertise  was  not  better  than  the  raw
    material he had set out in his reports.  He could not say  whether  the
    fact that there were still many checkpoints in  Colombo  and  elsewhere
    meant that a lot of people were being  stopped,  but  he  presumed  the
    checkpoints were maintained  for  a  reason.   He  agreed  that  recent
    evidence did not show many Tamils were detained at  these  checkpoints.
    He agreed that much of the evidence in his main  report  pre-dated  the
    end of the conflict, but the reality was that there was little evidence
    to hand about the post-conflict situation.  He  maintained  his  belief
    that the authorities kept a centralised computerised database which had
    been progressively improved.  With the levels of terrorism  which  they
    had experienced, the Sri Lankan authorities had reason to store records
    and check individuals.  The evidence set out in his reports led him  to
    believe that the authorities were able to establish the  identities  of
    people at checkpoints, even if they  were  not  on  Watched  or  Wanted
    lists.  His guess was that it was more likely that a  police  detention
    would find its way on to a computer database than  an  army  detention;
    paramilitary detentions would be less likely even than that  to  be  in
    the computer database.

52. Professor Good was asked about his statement in his  main  report  that
    the appellant was likely, if detained, to be held under  Prevention  of
    Terrorism Act (POTA) powers.  Mr Staker for the Respondent pointed  out
    that at present there were only 1,200 persons held in this way  in  the
    whole of Sri Lanka.  Professor Good was asked  whether  POTA  detention
    was likely in the appellant's case:  he said that it depended  on  what
    the  authorities  believed  about  her.   There  was  no  evidence,  he
    maintained, that torture was any less likely just because the  war  had
    ended The culture of impunity seemed no  better  post-conflict.   If  a
    Tamil from the north were returned to Vavuniya today he  or  she  might
    end up in a  detention  or  rehabilitation  camp.  In  the  north,  the
    appellant would not excite interest just because she was in  Jaffna  or
    other places in  the  north.  He  was  not  aware  of  any  significant
    incidents of intercommunal violence since the end of the conflict,  but
    unmet grievances against the Sinhalese majority could lead  to  renewed
    violence.

53. In re-examination, Professor  Good  reiterated  his  opinion  that  the
    appellant would not be allowed to travel to the north.  He  thought  it
    was significant that in the north some people in  detention  camps  who
    had been released after being screened had been re-arrested;  that  was
    evidence of continuing adverse interest in  those  connected  with  the
    LTTE.  There were recent sources indicating  rape  in  detention  still
    occurred.  It must be recalled that because of the stigma  there  would
    not be a high incidence of reporting of such rape. Either in Colombo or
    Jaffna the appellant  would  be  quite  vulnerable.  If  a  woman  were
    detained, she was likely to be sexually abused.

54. In answer to questions from the panel, Professor Good said there was no
    evidence that the level of official scrutiny of Tamils from  the  north
    had relaxed.  The authorities might now have better intelligence  about
    those with LTTE connections, but they had made  clear  that  they  were
    continuing  to  look  for  such  people.   He  could  not  say  if  the
    authorities  in  Colombo  had  recently  changed  from  their  previous
    position of pressurising Tamils from the  north  to  leave  whilst  the
    detention camps in the north were full. If the appellant were genuinely
    suspected of being a suicide bomber in the past, she would be  regarded
    as high-profile.   He  reiterated  his  opinion  that  the  numbers  of
    paramilitaries were likely to increase notwithstanding plans to  expand
    the size of the army; the government needed such people for their close
    knowledge of the Tamil community.

The Evidence of Mr D Becker

55. The only other oral evidence was from Mr  Becker,  a  Higher  Executive
    Officer of the UKBA.  He spoke to his witness statement of  13  October
    2009 concerning collation by him of data on returns to Sri Lanka  under
    the UKBA Assisted Voluntary Return (AVR) programmes and his information
    gathering  on  the  assistance  the  International   Organisation   for
    Migration (IOM) provides to voluntary and  enforced  returnees  to  Sri
    Lanka. His statement explained that there are currently three main  AVR
    programmes: the Voluntary Assisted Return and  Reintegration  Programme
    (VARPP) for asylum seekers; the Assisted Voluntary Return of  Irregular
    Migrants (AVRIM) scheme and the Facilitated  Return  Scheme  (FRS)  for
    foreign national prisoners.

Background Evidence

56. In LP the  Tribunal  looked  at  a  considerable  volume  of  available
    background country information and reports  up  to  early  April  2007:
    these were set out in an appendix. Already in LP the evidence was  that
    the formal peace process was beginning to break down. In some parts  of
    the country there was fighting and the security concerns In Colombo and
    elsewhere were increasing.  In AN and SS, heard in  mid-February  2008,
    the Tribunal noted the formal  end  of  the  ceasefire  and  heightened
    security in Colombo.


57. In NA in mid-2008, the ECtHR not  only  reviewed  the  information  and
    guidance given in LP but conducted its own fact-finding so as to ensure
    it could reach an ex nunc assessment of risk (para 112).  It noted that
    particularly since the formal end to the  cease-fire  between  the  Sri
    Lankan authorities and the LTTE, there had been a deterioration in  the
    security situation in Sri Lanka (para 124).   Having  examined  closely
    further information to hand concerning developments in Sri Lanka  since
    LP, the Court concluded there was nothing  in  that  information  which
    would require it to reach a different  conclusion  of  its  own  motion
    (para 125). Since these three cases, of course,  there  have  been  the
    dramatic changes we have already alluded to.  However, their relatively
    recent nature (the  military  defeat  of  the  LTTE  only  having  been
    accomplished in May 2009) means  that  there  is  comparatively  little
    evidence to hand  about  the  post-conflict  situation  and  even  less
    evidence regarding the current approach of the Sri  Lankan  authorities
    to enforced returnees from abroad. Nevertheless, the principal  country
    reports and other sources that have become available since NA  do  cast
    some light on the changing circumstances leading up to  the  events  in
    April 2009 and thereafter. Since they have been drawn  on  by  the  two
    experts in their own reports, we do not need (save in respect of three)
    to elaborate on them separately.  Among them are: the Home Office  COIS
    report on Sri Lanka for June 2009; the COIS Bulletin on Sri  Lanka,  13
    October 2009; the US State Department report  for  2008,  published  in
    February 2009; the Human Rights Watch report, "Sri Lanka: Tigers  under
    the bed", 18 June 2009; the Amnesty International report,  "Sri  Lanka:
    Twenty years of make believe", 11  June  2009;  the  UNHCR  Eligibility
    Guidelines, April 2009 and the UNHCR Note of July 2009; the August 2009
    FCO report, the FCO Country profile on Sri Lanka,  updated  14  October
    2009 and the final report prepared for the European Commission by three
    independent  experts,  "The  Implementation  of  certain  Human  Rights
    Conventions in Sri Lanka", Final Report, 30 September  2009  (the  "GSP
    Plus report").

58. The picture that emerges from these and other reports is fairly  clear.
    The 26 year war between the Sri Lanka Government and the LTTE ended  in
    May 2009.  During its course some 70,000 - 100,000 people  were  killed
    and another one million displaced.  The final stages  of  the  military
    conflict were characterised  by  serious  violations  of  international
    humanitarian law committed by both  sides.   Despite  promises  by  the
    President to reunite the country through a political package that would
    devolve power to Tamil people,  the  government  continues  to  operate
    under a state of emergency, the security  and  human  rights  situation
    remains challenging. In the north over 250,000 people were  being  held
    (at least until very recently) in conditions described by UN  officials
    as akin to internment.  Some who had  been  released  were  re-arrested
    after release.  Living conditions in the camps are poor.  In the  light
    of the recent GSP Plus report,  it  is  unclear  whether  the  EU  will
    continue to allow Sri Lanka duty-free access to its  markets,  although
    capital investment in the country by China and India is increasing  and
    it may be that the country has already  fallen  into  their  sphere  of
    influence.

59. So far as the general security situation is concerned, it is clear that
    the government is  intent  on  maintaining  security  at  high  levels.
    However, post-conflict, there are some signs of  a  relaxation  in  the
    intensity of checks at checkpoints, a reduction in the number and level
    of cordon and search operations in Colombo and accompanying arrests and
    in the number of abductions and disappearances.  There  are  no  recent
    reports of any significant incidents  of  intercommunal  violence.  The
    government has made numerous statements expressing  its  concern  about
    LTTE remnants and its intent to track down remaining LTTE  cadres.   It
    has also  expressed  its  resolve  to  dismantle  the  LTTE's  overseas
    procurement network.  At the same time, it has also made  a  number  of
    statements in broader terms expressing  its  intention  to  pursue  all
    those with links to the LTTE.

60. As both experts acknowledge, in all the copious  materials  before  us,
    there is no firm post-conflict evidence as to the likely  treatment  of
    returnees. Both parties have therefore sought to highlight the state of
    the evidence concerning three matters seen as having  particular  value
    in helping evaluate this issue: the  nature  of  the  records  used  or
    consulted  by  the  Sri  Lanka  authorities  at  Colombo  international
    airport; the procedures employed by the Sri Lankan authorities  at  the
    airport in respect of failed  asylum  seekers/enforced  returnees;  and
    recent incidents of returnees who have met with  difficulties.   It  is
    convenient if we deal with the evidence concerning these  (as  well  as
    some other specific items of evidence) when giving our assessment.


Submissions


61. We mean no disrespect to the parties by  choosing  to  summarise  their
    submissions only briefly; indeed we are grateful for  the  considerable
    care both took to address all  relevant  issues;  however  we  find  it
    convenient to deal with the salient points each raised when we come  to
    them below.


62. Mr Chelvan's submissions were broadly to the effect  that  the  country
    guidance in LP stood in need of some revision, in particular so  as  to
    identify Tamils from the north and  east,  especially  those  from  the
    Vanni or former conflict areas, as either a risk category or a separate
    risk factor. We should, he said, consider  that  for  persons  in  this
    category the level of risk had increased since LP and NA were  decided.
    With the military defeat of the LTTE, the  authorities  were  now  more
    able to devote resources to identifying those with links to  the  LTTE.
    We should follow the opinion of the  two  experts  that  failed  asylum
    seekers would face a real risk of arrest and detention at the  airport,
    certainly if the authorities had  a  record  relating  to  them  giving
    details of any previous arrest or detention.

63. In relation to the appellant's case, he emphasised that it was  not  in
    dispute that she had suffered  serious  past  persecution  due  to  the
    suspicion of the Sri Lankan authorities that she was a suicide  bomber.
    He urged us to find that she would be at  risk  in  her  home  area  of
    Kilinochchi  and  would  not  have   a   viable   internal   relocation
    alternative, first because she would be at risk of arrest and detention
    and ill treatment at the airport or  subsequent  checkpoints,  secondly
    because in her particular circumstances as a young Tamil woman  who  is
    now a single parent, sexually vulnerable, and without  any  network  of
    family support, life for her in Colombo would be unduly  harsh  and  it
    would not be reasonable to  expect her to relocate there or  indeed  to
    any other part of Sri Lanka.


64. Mr Staker's submissions argued that  we  should  not  depart  from  the
    premise of previous case law, which was that risk of persecution or ill
    treatment only arose for those whom the Sri Lanka authorities suspected
    of involvement with the LTTE at a sufficiently high  level.  We  should
    find that the risk factors in LP continued to be valid. He asked us  to
    focus on the issue of risk to the appellant at the point of  return  at
    Colombo airport and thereafter at checkpoints. He  contended  that  the
    evidence concerning arrests and detention at  the  airport  adduced  on
    behalf of the appellant did not withstand examination. As  regards  the
    appellant, we should find that the authorities were unlikely to have  a
    record on her and that she would not come to their  adverse  attention,
    lacking as she did any LTTE profile. Her circumstances as a young Tamil
    from the north with a young child would  not  cause  life  for  her  in
    Colombo to be unduly difficult, nor would relocation to Jaffna or other
    parts of Sri Lanka.


Our assessment: general issues


65. We have already identified the  principal  country  guidance  issue  we
    intend to decide in this case:  whether  (since  LP)  Tamils  who  face
    enforced removal from the UK, particularly Tamils  from  the  north  or
    east of Sri Lanka,  currently face a real risk  on  return  of  adverse
    treatment at the hands of the Sri Lankan authorities. That  means  that
    we do not seek to address the issue of risk from the  LTTE,  which  was
    last dealt with in AN & SS. However, we think it relatively clear  that
    in the light of the military defeat of the LTTE, it  is  unlikely  that
    this head of risk will play much part in most Sri Lankan asylum-related
    appeals for the immediate future at least. Our decision is not  -   any
    more than was the Tribunal's in LP or the ECtHR's in NA -  intended  to
    cover all categories of persons who might face difficulties  on  return
    to Sri Lanka. Despite Mr Chelvan's late exhortations, we do not  cover,
    for example, possible risk to journalists or NGOs. Certain  preliminary
    observations about some of the evidence are in order.

The evidence of Dr Smith and Professor Good


66. Reports submitted by Dr Smith and Professor  Good  were  considered  in
    depth by the Tribunal in LP and in AN & SS. The Tribunal's response  in
    both cases can be summarised as follows: considerable weight  was  seen
    to attach to their reports insofar as they afforded a digest of a great
    body of relevant evidence.  On some matters  their  own  evaluation  of
    that evidence was also accorded considerable weight, on others less so.
     We take much the same view of the reports they have prepared for  this
    case. What, however, seems clearer now from their reports before us  is
    that in relation to the factual background to the core issues  we  have
    to decide - in particular risks to Tamil returnees at the  airport  and
    other checkpoints, especially those said to arise from the existence of
    specific records of previous detentions  -  both  experts  acknowledged
    that they had little or no distinct  expertise.  Professor  Good  is  a
    social anthropologist who said such security-related  issues  were  not
    his area of expertise.  Dr Smith, whose expertise  was  in  this  area,
    acknowledged that  in  relation  to  the  situation  post-conflict  his
    evaluation was based largely on inferences from the background items of
    evidence he had collated in his report, coupled with his past  research
    based on interviews with various Sri Lankan officials and others in Sri
    Lanka in 2008 and earlier dates. His interviews with various Sri Lankan
    officials were a valuable source of information, but  did  not  prevent
    him from acknowledging that as to what the situation was since May 2009
     "[w]e do not have hard information... much  more  work  is  needed  on
    this".  In relation to his interviews  of  those  who  had  experienced
    problems at checkpoints, it transpired that they concerned a very small
    number (one a year) and were confined to those who spoke English.

67. Mr Chelvan sought  to  argue  that  just  because  an  expert's  report
    consisted in opinion not based wholly on available  evidence  this  did
    not reduce its weight: he cited in support FK (Kenya) [2008]  EWCA  Civ
    119.  Very much the same argument was adduced by Counsel in AN & SS (Mr
    A McKenzie) and in our view should be rejected for very much  the  same
    reasons SIJ McKee gave in that case at para 102:

          "...while we do not disagree with the proposition that  an  expert
          is entitled to  form  an  opinion  based  on  his  experience  and
          expertise, without necessarily  having  a  panoply  of  'objective
          facts' to back up that opinion, we think that  the  weight  to  be
          given to the opinion even of a distinguished expert will  diminish
          in inverse proportion to the amount of observable facts  which  he
          can marshal in support of his opinion. Sedley LJ's analysis in  FK
          (Kenya) was not, in our view intended to give approval to  experts
          not sourcing their reports, but to warn against  disregarding  the
          expertise of a report's author when assessing  the  value  of  his
          report".


68. We do not wish to discourage experts  from  providing  reports  dealing
    where relevant with issues of risk on return to a country's airport  or
    at subsequent checkpoints; indeed we continue to  think  that  on  such
    matters the Tribunal needs all the help it can get.  But we  do  expect
    clearer demarcation by them as between parts  of  their  reports  where
    they have expertise and parts where they do not.


The UNHCR evidence


69. We need shortly to discuss the most recent UNHCR  position  on  asylum-
    related cases involving Tamils from the  north  and  east,  but   would
    clarify here that in relation to the approach of the Tribunal to  UNHCR
    evidence in respect of Sri Lanka, we continue to take the same view  as
    the Tribunal did in LP (para 203) and the ECtHR  did  in  NA  (at  para
    127), namely that "substantive weight" should be  accorded  it,  albeit
    the views expressed by UNHCR cannot be decisive in  the  Tribunal's  or
    the Court's assessment of  risk  to  Tamils  returning  to  Sri  Lanka.
    Although we have a UNHCR July 2009 Note  post-dating  the  end  of  the
    conflict, we note that it largely relies on and reiterates the evidence
    from its April 2009 Guidelines.  UNHCR  has  a  significant  number  of
    personnel on the ground in various parts of Sri Lanka; however, so  far
    as procedures at the airport was concerned, their Protection Officer in
    Colombo said to the authors of the August 2009 FCO  report  that  UNHCR
    had little involvement with this type of issue.

The British High Commission (BHC), Colombo evidence


70. In view of certain criticisms made by Mr Chelvan of  the  BHC,  Colombo
    evidence in this case, we need to make a specific comment on it. In  LP
    the Tribunal had to consider five letters from the BHC  going  back  18
    months. Agreeing with Buxton LJ in AH, IG & NM (Sudan) [2007] EWCA  Civ
    297 that it was appropriate for the  Secretary  of  State  to  seek  to
    adduce evidence  from  diplomatic  and  consular  channels  in  country
    guidance cases, the Tribunal considered that the BHC,  Colombo  letters
    should be given equal  value  to  that  of  a  well-informed,  balanced
    country expert  who  provided  sources  and  evidence  of  his  or  her
    expertise: see para 205. It is true that  in  NA   the  Court  did  not
    accept some aspects of the BHC, Colombo evidence relating to the use of
    computer technology by the authorities at  Colombo  airport  (see  para
    136); however, at para 121 they echoed the Tribunal's general  view  in
    LP, noting that  "through their diplomatic missions and  their  ability
    to gather information, [States] will often be able to provide  material
    which may be highly relevant to the Court's   assessment  of  the  case
    before it" (para 121); and elsewhere other aspects of the BHC  evidence
    were accepted. We consider that when assessing  the  more  recent  BHC,
    Colombo letters produced to us we should adopt the same approach:  they
    are a source to which we attach value but which have to  be  considered
    on their merits.

The Sri Lankan government and the LTTE


71. Having given  some  preliminary  observations  regarding  some  of  the
    evidence we turn to assessment of the  general  situation.  It  is  too
    early to tell whether the LTTE will re-emerge as an organisation intent
    on continuing insurgency against the  Sri  Lankan  authorities,  albeit
    there is broad agreement that it would take  years  for  it  to  become
    again a conventional military force.  For  its  part,  the  Sri  Lankan
    government has adopted a policy of trying to drive  home  its  military
    victory by weeding out LTTE remnants. The most graphic illustration  of
    this new policy was provided  by  the  screening  procedures  conducted
    amongst the 250,000 or more people or more held (until  very  recently)
    in camps in the north as a result of displacement and/or capture during
    the final stages of the war. In the course of flushing the LTTE out  of
    its traditional strongholds the Sri Lankan  authorities  have  gathered
    considerable  intelligence  about  the  LTTE  membership  and   support
    structures. Outside the north there is evidence that  persons  who  are
    seen to have actively assisted the LTTE, e.g.  with  fund-raising,  are
    being pursued with a view to prosecution.

72. There is also a certain amount of government talk  about  pursuing  all
    those who have links with the LTTE.  Putting that talk beside the  fact
    that in a broad sense almost the entire population of the  north  could
    be said to be perceived as having links with the LTTE,  both  Dr  Smith
    and Professor Good consider that there is  currently  a  real  risk  of
    adverse  interest  from  the  Sri   Lankan   authorities   at   Colombo
    international airport towards any Tamil originating from the north  and
    the east of the country.  They allude to the fact  that  UNHCR  in  its
    April 2009 Guidelines and its July 2009 Note  identifies  "Tamils  from
    the  north  and  east"  as  a  distinct  risk  category  deserving   of
    international protection.

73. Whilst we consider that in many  respects  the  reports  from  the  two
    experts accurately reflect background country reports, e.g. in pointing
    out that it is predominantly Tamils from the north and  east  who  have
    been the target  for  abductions,  forced  disappearances,  cordon  and
    search  operations,  and   arrests   and   detentions   at   government
    checkpoints, we cannot agree with some of the specific inferences  they
    draw from this evidence for a number of reasons.  First, whilst we lack
    full evidence of the post-conflict situation in  Sri  Lanka,  there  is
    nothing to suggest that (outside the north of the country)  the  levels
    of adverse interest in Tamils from the north and east are  any  greater
    than they were in mid-2008 when the ECtHR decided the case of NA.  That
    is significant because it was the Tribunal's assessment in LP, affirmed
    by the ECtHR, that Tamils as such, including  Tamils  from  the  north,
    were not at real risk of persecution or serious harm.

74. Secondly, the subjection (until very recently) of some 250,000 or  more
    persons in the north to a process of  screening  to  establish  whether
    they are involved with the LTTE has been understandably the subject  of
    strong  criticism  from  international  organisations.   But   (whether
    justified or unjustified) its raison d'�tre was plainly that  those  in
    the camps were persons who were physically present in or  proximate  to
    the areas where the LTTE were in control or where the Eelam IV fighting
    took place.  As such, it is  clear  that  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities
    considered     that     their     number     would     include     LTTE
    fighters/cadres/operatives.  We do not  see  any  reason  to  view  the
    treatment during the period May-late November 2009 of  those  in  these
    camps as a template for how the authorities are treating or  intend  to
    treat Tamils in other parts of  the  north  outside  the  camps  or  in
    Colombo in particular.  As  we  explain  further  below,  there  is  no
    documentary evidence to indicate that  Tamils  in  Colombo  are  facing
    higher levels of adverse interest than was the case before the  end  of
    the conflict.

75. Thirdly, we are not persuaded that the Sri Lanka authorities would have
    as much interest as before in persons in some way linked  to  the  LTTE
    unless they were LTTE members/cadres or persons with an active role  or
    profile in that organisation. We note that  in  the  period  since  the
    peace process began to break down, almost all of the security  measures
    undertaken by the authorities were in response to LTTE  armed  actions,
    whether conventional military offences or guerrilla activities such  as
    suicide bombings. Yet even in that context the assessment made  by  the
    ECtHR during this period was that it would  still  only  be  Tamils  of
    sufficient level of interest to the authorities who would face  a  real
    risk of ill-treatment.  With the eclipse of the LTTE as a  conventional
    military force, and the decimation of its leadership, there is less  to
    respond to. Dr Smith and Professor Good maintain that this  development
    means that the authorities are now able to focus more of their  efforts
    on those having links with the LTTE in the broader sense,  but  (again)
    that is not borne out by any  evidence  showing  that  in  Colombo  the
    levels of adverse interest in Tamils (or  Tamils  from  the  north  and
    east) has increased.  In  the  absence  of  fuller  evidence,  our  own
    assessment can only be tentative but if anything it seems to us  likely
    that the authorities now have a lesser level  of  adverse  interest  in
    Tamils linked with the LTTE only in a  broad  sense,  by,  e.g.  merely
    being from the north.  During the conflict it was logical  in  security
    terms for the authorities to be concerned not just about  LTTE  cadres,
    but also about the sizeable  number  of  persons  who  were  considered
    likely to aid the LTTE cadres materially by, e.g. supplying  them  with
    petrol or food.  Post-conflict, however, it is  difficult  to  see  why
    such persons would be as much of a concern.

76. So far as concerns the likely approach of the Sri Lankan authorities to
    returned failed  asylum  seekers,  we  consider  therefore  that  their
    principal focus would be  on  persons  considered  to  be  either  LTTE
    members fighters or operatives or persons who  have  played  an  active
    role in the international procurement network responsible for financing
    the LTTE and ensuring it was supplied with arms.


Risk on return to a person whose home area is in the north or east

77. The Tribunal's decision in LP focused on the issue of risk on return in
    Colombo for a Tamil whose home area was in the north  (see  para  234).
    The ECtHR in NA adopted a similar approach (para  123)  However,  since
    the Tribunal's specific decision on whether LP was at risk in his  home
    area as set out in para 228 of its determination  was  quashed  by  the
    Court of Appeal and remitted back for the Tribunal to consider and make
    findings as to the risks if any  in  his  home  area  (Jaffna)  (Appeal
    No.C5/2007/2328), its observations on risk in the home area  cannot  be
    taken as guidance.  Given the current position in the  north,  with  so
    many people still in camps (at least until very recently), we would not
    venture any  firm  generalisations.  We  do  not  think  that  for  the
    generality of Tamils there will be a risk of serious harm from the  Sri
    Lankan authorities in their home area; indeed,  we  note  that  neither
    expert suggested that this would be the case, even on the basis of  the
    evidence as to the situation in the camps as it stood at  the  date  of
    hearing.  However, if a person's home area is a former conflict zone or
    is where (or near to where) camps  are  still  currently  located,  the
    position  is  less  clear.  If  they  possess  some   individual   risk
    characteristics, their position calls for a  more  nuanced  assessment.
    Below we have felt able to make an assessment of risk to the  appellant
    in her home area, but that is highly fact-specific and we do not  think
    at this point in time, with the situation regarding the camps appearing
    to be so much in flux, any more precise guidance would be appropriate.

Risk on return at Colombo International Airport

78. As already indicated, there are three aspects of the issue of  risk  on
    return at the airport that require specific attention.

79. We turn first to the matter of records available to the authorities  at
    the airport.  In NA the ECtHR found that there is  a  greater  risk  of
    detention and interrogation at the airport than in Colombo City  "since
    the authorities will have a greater control over the passage of persons
    through any airport than they will over the population at large".  Both
    parties were in broad agreement with that proposition and  we  consider
    it continues to have efficacy.  In NA,  having  considered  conflicting
    accounts put forward by the appellant and the UK Government as  to  the
    procedures  followed  at  Colombo  airport  and  the  nature   of   the
    information technology there, the ECtHR concluded that:


         "...at  the  very  least  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  have   the
         technological means and procedures in  place  to  identify  at  the
         airport failed asylum seekers and  those  who  are  wanted  by  the
         authorities. The court further finds that it is a logical inference
         that the rigour of the checks at the airport is capable of  varying
         from time to time,  depending  on  the  security  concerns  of  the
         authorities"  (para 136).


80. As was the case before the ECtHR, so before us  there  was  conflicting
    evidence on such procedures. The respondent adduced  letters  from  the
    BHC in Colombo indicating that the CID at the airport  scarcely  seemed
    to use computers.  Some of the sources interviewed by  the  authors  of
    the August 2009 FCO report lent weight to  that  view.   Dr  Smith  and
    Professor Good, by contrast,  averred  not  only  that  all  government
    officials at the airport relied on  computer  systems,  but  also  that
    there was now in existence a centralised computer database to which all
    three - DIE officers, the CID and the SIS - had access.  Like the ECtHR
    we do not find it necessary to decide on  the  precise  nature  of  the
    record-keeping systems in use. On the one hand,  we  think  significant
    weight should be attached to the BHC's recent evidence that  the  DIE's
    is an immigration-specific database and  that  CID  computers  are  not
    linked to any national database (see letter  of  28/8/2008).   We  also
    agree with Mr Staker that it is implausible that the SIS and CID  would
    be content for mere DIE officers to have unrestricted access  to  their
    file particulars, some of which would probably be highly sensitive.  We
    gained little help from the forms  adduced  by  Dr Smith  as  ones  he
    thought might now be in use at the airport  since  they  were  Criminal
    Record forms and contained no place for  an  entry  to  be  made  of  a
    detention other than one imposed as a result of a conviction.   On  the
    other hand, as noted by the ECtHR in NA, there is considerable evidence
    to suggest that thorough  checks  can  be  carried  out  on  returnees.
    Whatever the precise position, it is sufficiently clear that  returnees
    can  be  subject  to  direct  or  indirect  checks  utilising  computer
    databases, which may alert the authorities to  particulars  which  make
    them of specific interest.

81. Assuming records are held at the airport or can be checked from  there,
    the more difficult question concerns who they will cover and whether in
    particular every arrest and detention by  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities
    results in a record being raised. In  a  much-repeated  submission,  Mr
    Chelvan insisted that the ECtHR in NA had already found  that  the  Sri
    Lankan authorities  would  have  a  record  of  all  past  arrests  and
    detentions.  We are bound to say, we can discern no such finding in NA.
    When concluding that there was likely to have been an  official  record
    made of NA's six detentions, the Court  carefully  avoided  making  any
    findings on how complete records in general would  be:  see  para  145.
    Further, it was the evidence of Mr  Chelvan's  own  witness,  Professor
    Good, that the likelihood of records being kept of  detention  depended
    in part on who had made the arrest/detention: his evidence was  that  a
    record of an army detention was  less  likely  than  one  of  a  police
    detention.

82. A further question concerns the likely contents of  these  records.  We
    are prepared to accept that in the past  10-20  years  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities may  well  have  taken  steps  to  place  more  particulars
    relating to LTTE suspects on file and to transfer those  onto  computer
    databases.  At the same time, it seems clear that such steps will  have
    enabled them  to  indicate  a  clearer  profiling  of  security  risks.
    Significantly, Dr Smith's own evidence, drawn in part  from  interviews
    he had conducted in Sri Lanka as recently as 19  September  2008  (with
    General (retd) Lionel Bagatelle), was that data contained  in  official
    records pays close attention to detail and records and  the  levels  of
    threat posed by the individual: "The records varied in their length and
    detail, depending upon the level of adverse interest"  (para  103).  At
    one point in his oral evidence he emphasised that "the  government  had
    developed ways of identifying Tamils of concern to them". He also  said
    that all  records  included  information  on  family  members.  In  our
    judgment this is one of the most important items of  evidence  to  have
    come to hand since LP and NA. It strongly suggests that the accuracy of
    date-recording has improved. In our view greater accuracy is likely  to
    reduce substantially the risk that a person of no real interest to  the
    authorities would be arrested or detained.


Procedures for returnees


83. The Tribunal in LP and in AN & SS and the Court in NA had  considerable
    evidence as to the procedures employed at Colombo airport in respect of
    returnees, albeit nearly all of it was indirect.  Whilst  much  of  the
    evidence we had was  of  a  similar  nature  and  confirmed  a  similar
    picture, it is  important  to  summarise  its  purport.   The  evidence
    provided by the BHC letters of 18 and 28 August 2008  was  as  follows.
    Some information regarding returned failed asylum seekers was likely to
    be notified in advance to the authorities in Sri Lanka  by  their  High
    Commission officials in London, at least when they had  been  contacted
    to assist with issuing emergency travel documents.  (Before issuing  an
    emergency travel document, the High Commission would have details of an
    applicant confirmed against records held  in  Colombo  and  would  thus
    satisfactorily confirm the holder's nationality and identity).  In  any
    event, on return such persons were likely to be asked  questions.   DIE
    officials were likely to record the arrival of these  persons  manually
    into a logbook; CID and SIS officers might also be  involved.  The  CID
    kept records (including photographs) of persons  arriving  in  Colombo,
    having been deported back to Colombo. In a letter dated 22 January 2009
    an official of the BHC, Colombo  described  witnessing  the  return  of
    thirteen Sri Lankan failed asylum seekers on 15 January 2009.  He noted
    that the adult returnees were each  interviewed  by  DIE  officers  for
    around 10-15 minutes, then for the same length of time by officers from
    SIS, who also took photographs of each returnee.   The  returnees  were
    then taken down to the CID office where  they  went  through  virtually
    identical interviews, again taking some 15-20 minutes. The BHC  officer
    said he saw no checking of returnees' details on any computer and there
    did not seem to be a "joined-up" approach between the  three  agencies.
    In a letter dated 26 October 2009 the BHC, Colombo  said  that  an  IOM
    spokesperson stated:

         "The procedures at the airport had increased in the recent past  in
         the way they handle returnees, either voluntary or deported  cases.
         This relates to  carrying  out  identity  check-ups,  any  previous
         criminal record etc and not related  to  violation  of  immigration
         procedures to our understanding. Immigration procedures  are  still
         very quick when it comes to our returnees. Even when  it  comes  to
         State Intelligence Services (SIS) check-ups, they are flexible with
         our returnees too. We had only one UK voluntary returnees  who  was
         held for questioning by SIS recently. They were held  for  6  hours
         and 15 minutes. The reason we were told was that the  returnee  was
         kept waiting until the clearance was obtained from SIS headquarters
         and the local police station  in  Vavuniya,  the  returnee's  final
         destination."

FCO report of August 2009

84. The most  up-to-date  evidence  otherwise  was  that  obtained  by  the
    respondent concerning the treatment of returnees as  contained  in  the
    FCO report of August 2009 which sought  information  from  a  range  of
    sources in Sri Lanka on, among other issues, the issue of "treatment of
    Tamils at Colombo Airport".  According to the CID Superintendent at the
    airport, new procedures had been  introduced  from  5  August  2009  in
    relation to deportees.  The DIE spokesman said that  DIE  recorded  the
    details of all returnees in a register (logbook) before referring  them
    to the CID (or sometimes the SIS) "without  any  harassment".  DIE  had
    access to an "alert" list relating to court orders, warrants of arrest,
    jumping bail, escaping from detention,  as  well  as  information  from
    Interpol and the SIS computer system.  A senior  intelligence  official
    was recorded as saying that the SIS was notified by the Sri Lanka  High
    Commission in London about planned enforced returns  from  the  UK  and
    that the SIS interviewed every deportee and ascertained the grounds for
    their deportation.  A CID Police Superintendent  at  the  airport  said
    that airline officers normally  advised  the  DIE  of  returnees.   DIE
    confirmed nationality and then passed  the  deportee  to  the  SIS  who
    checked to see if they had  any  links  to  the  LTTE.   [If  so],  the
    deportee would then come to the CID for questioning.  This source  also
    said that the CID now photographed and wet fingerprinted all deportees.
     Returnees were held while checks were being conducted in the  person's
    area of origin. Persons suspected of being  associated  with  the  LTTE
    would be handed over to the Terrorist Investigations Department  (TID).
    These procedures could take some hours, although not more than 24.

85. The Deputy Solicitor General said that if there was  any  suspicion  or
    evidence of an involvement in terrorist activities, a suspect would  be
    detained.  A UNHCR Protection Officer, whilst stating that  "UNHCR  had
    little involvement with this type of  issue",  said  that  high-profile
    cases, such as those suspected of having  involvement  with  the  LTTE,
    would be taken away for further questioning.  On the issue  of  whether
    Tamil returnees would be treated the same as other returnees,  all  the
    government sources and one or two  government  officials  thought  they
    would be, but the UNHCR Protection  Officer  thought  that  in  general
    Tamils were more likely to be targeted for further questioning  by  the
    CID.  A leader of one of the opposition parties (Mano Goneson, MP) said
    that Tamils were more vulnerable today  than  during  the  war  as  the
    government was out to destroy whatever was left of the LTTE.  He  spoke
    about four returnees who had  gone  missing  the  previous  week  (from
    Dubai, Kuwait, Canada and France).

86. The Swiss representative said that some returnees  had  been  arrested;
    some only for a few hours, some for longer.  He  said  that  last  year
    there were 9 cases of forced returns from  Switzerland  to  Sri  Lanka;
    some of them were questioned but many were not. Those most likely to be
    targeted were those suspected of long affiliation  with  the  LTTE  and
    those people who might be IDPs who had escaped from camps.  "The  usual
    suspects are young Tamils with ID cards from Jaffna,  Vanni  etc.".  It
    was also stated that "females with a Vanni National Identity Card (NIC)
    may  also  be  targets".  Professor  Wijesinha  from   the   government
    department with responsibility for protecting human rights in Sri Lanka
    was not aware of any detentions at the airport or  of  those  returning
    even from well-known LTTE  fund-raising  hubs,  being  the  subject  of
    adverse attention.

87. The FCO report sources were in  broad  agreement  on  the  question  of
    police registration. To stay in Colombo  one  must  register  with  the
    police and provide details of place and duration of stay.  People  must
    provide their ID card (NIC) and complete a form. If they did  not  have
    an NIC they could  provide  a  letter  from  the  Grama  Seveka  (local
    official); passports and emergency travel  documents  were  acceptable.
    The IOM representative said that the system was  aimed  at  identifying
    Tamils from the north and the east.  Whilst some of the  sources  spoke
    of difficulties encountered  by  Tamils  seeking  to  register  (or  to
    register for more than six  months),  none  made  any  mention  of  any
    incidents of persons being arrested  and  detained  in  the  course  of
    registering,  although  it  is  noted  that  Tamils  without   identity
    documents were more generally likely to  face  problems  in  encounters
    with the police and army in Colombo.

88. We shall draw further on this report when dealing with risk factors.

89. It will be apparent that even amongst  Sri  Lankan  government  sources
    there is not complete agreement about airport procedures for returnees.
     Some of the BHC evidence is inconsistent. Some of the  terms  used  by
    the report's informants are unclear.  It  may  be,  as  Professor  Good
    suggested in  another  context,  that  the  word  "arrest"  could  mean
    anything from a check to a formal apprehension: We do not know  whether
    by "deportees" is meant in the main persons deported to Sri  Lanka  for
    criminal  or  immigration  offences  abroad  or  covers  all   enforced
    returnees, including  failed asylum seekers as such.  We have  also  to
    bear in mind that the Sri Lankan Government sources and the  opposition
    MP, Mano Gonesan, may well not be objective. However, the picture  that
    emerges is certainly not one  of  routine  arrests  and  detentions  of
    returnees  and,  apart  from  the  opposition  MP,  none  identify  any
    significant  occurrence  of  returnees  per  se  meeting  with  adverse
    treatment.  There appears to be routine questioning and  failed  asylum
    seekers appear to be subject to  questioning  from  DIE,  CID  and  SIS
    officers.  Questions appear to  cover  the  length  of  their  absence,
    details of the routes by which they travelled  abroad  from  Sri  Lanka
    and, it seems, any links with the LTTE. There  is  no  mention  of  any
    specific action taken against returnees found to have exited Sri  Lanka
    illegally.


Incidents of adverse treatment at the airport on return


90. One of the main pieces of evidence on which Mr Chelvan relied  was  the
    section  of  Professor  Good's  report  -  a  report,   we   emphasise,
    purportedly prepared specifically for the hearing before us in  October
    2009 - dealing with recorded cases of adverse treatment on return.   We
    are bound to say this section is one of the least satisfactory parts of
    his report and leads us to doubt his expertise or credibility  on  this
    subject-area more than the Tribunal did in LP or AN & SS. At  para  117
    he states that he has  learnt  of  "four  recent  determinations  which
    accept that torture did in fact occur when failed asylum  seekers  were
    returned".  The facts in those cases, he adds, "are crucial in  forming
    my overall opinion in this matter".  We must first of all query his use
    of the adjective "recent" since the  first  three  determinations  were
    dated March 2005, January 2005 and December 2006 respectively.  LP,  it
    is to be recalled, was decided in December  2007.   We  are  even  more
    bemused that he should see the facts of these cases as "crucial" to his
    opinion on the issue of current risk of ill-treatment  on  return  when
    the returns of failed asylum seekers relied  on  in  these  cases  took
    place  on  dates  even  earlier  -  in  2002,  2003,  2004   and   2003
    respectively. We were not supplied with copies of these determinations,
    but we would in any event not have seen ourselves as necessarily  bound
    by the findings of fact made by the judges in them, particularly  given
    that it may well have been (if they were failed  asylum  seekers)  that
    they had not been found credible by judges in earlier appeals.  In  the
    first of these  cases  a  witness  statement  from  the  appellant,  Mr
    Vigithiran, was provided to the Tribunal in AN & SS,  so  that  it  has
    already been the subject of further Tribunal examination. Although  the
    appellants in the second and third cases had clearly been approached by
    Professor Good to obtain their consent  to  their  determination  being
    referred to in this case,  the  appellant's  representatives  have  not
    produced to us any written statement from them.  We are quite unable to
    agree that these cases cast useful light on the position post-LP.

91. Professor Good also referred to the deportation  appeal  of  a  Canada-
    based Tamil refugee said to have been tortured after  previously  being
    deported to Sri Lanka in December 2005.  Leaving aside  the  fact  that
    the return in question was not  recent,  we  note  that  this  person's
    appeal was said to be still undetermined.   Further,  Professor  Good's
    own account of the facts in that case was that the torture involved was
    not inflicted until some three years later  when  he  was  abducted  or
    arrested in Colombo.

92. At para 129 Professor Good referred to  "some  instances"  having  been
    reported "in which returned failed asylum seekers have been  killed  in
    Sri Lanka". However, Professor Good did not dissent from the  statement
    made by UK Home Office Minister Liam Byrne on 17 November  2006  (which
    he goes on to quote), clarifying that the deaths concerned  took  place
    some considerable time after the persons  concerned  had  returned  and
    passed through airport controls, without any  evident  relationship  to
    either their prior asylum claims or subsequent returns. As regards  the
    third case, based on a report by the French  NGO  Cette  France-L�,  it
    concerned someone forcibly returned to Sri Lanka on 30 August 2005  who
    was killed by soldiers in February 2007.

93. At para 135 Professor  Good  considered  the  relevance  of  the  above
    evidence to the BHC Colombo letter of 22  January  2009  detailing  the
    treatment on return of a group of failed asylum seekers  from  the  UK.
    Whilst agreeing that this evidence confirmed what  was  already  known,
    namely that most  returnees  pass  through  the  airport  successfully,
    Professor Good added several comments, one of which is as follows:


         "What the evidence reported in this section shows, equally clearly,
         is that even at the height of the ceasefire, not all returnees  did
         so."


94. With respect, significant parts of the evidence in this section of  his
    report were not about ill-treatment  at  the  airport  but  about  ill-
    treatment inflicted elsewhere  considerably  later,  with  no  apparent
    causal connection, so he was not comparing like with like.  And  whilst
    we can agree that evidence of  what  happened  at  the  height  of  the
    ceasefire casts some light on the post-conflict  situation,  his  cases
    concerned events several years ago.

95. This section of his report nevertheless identified (at  paras  137-144)
    some evidence relating to post-May 2009 incidents.  We  shall  look  at
    this later on when dealing with recent  media  reports,  but  we  would
    express our bewilderment at Professor Good's statement a little further
    on about what he described in para 143 as "the most recent such  report
    I have seen".  It is that from the Australian Age (followed up  in  the
    Colombo Daily Mirror of 6 October 2009) in  which  a  very  senior  Sri
    Lankan policeman (DIG Nimal Mediwaka) was quoted as saying that it  was
    "normal procedure for any illegal asylum seeker deported  back  to  the
    country to be arrested."  At para 144 Professor Good stated:

         "This assertion goes beyond what was previously known, but  has  to
         be taken very seriously in view of the  seniority  of  the  officer
         involved".


96. Had we not heard oral evidence form Professor Good  commenting  further
    on this report, we would have understood the above words as any  normal
    reader would - as indicating that it was evidence not to  be  dismissed
    lightly.  In oral evidence, however, Professor Good made clear that  he
    attached little credence  to  this  report.   Given  that  only  a  few
    paragraphs earlier in the same section of his  report  he  himself  had
    said that "it seems always to have been the case  that  most  returnees
    pass through the airport successfully" (para 135),  that  qualification
    was perhaps not very surprising.  This report was certainly part of the
    evidence relating to returns, but  it  turned  out  that  on  Professor
    Good's more precise assessment of its value was the  opposite  of  that
    which might be derived by a careful reader of his  written  report.  We
    have mentioned this matter in some detail because  we  are  aware  that
    Tribunals are sometimes invited to act on his written reports alone.

97. That brings us to the reports from TamilNet and other  media  regarding
    cases since May 2009 of returnees facing difficulties on return to  Sri
    Lanka, some of which Professor Good did refer to in this section of his
    report, but which we can  best  deal  with  by  going  to  the  sources
    themselves.

Recent evidence concerning returnees

98. We are satisfied  that  in  January  2009  the  UK  government  removed
    thirteen failed asylum seekers on a charter flight to  Colombo  airport
    and that all passed  through  controls  there  without  any  particular
    difficulty. Not only was that the evidence  of  the  BHC  official  who
    attended and witnessed the processing of these individuals,  but  there
    were no subsequent reports in the media about any of those who  arrived
    on this flight meeting with difficulties.  This  is  evidence  about  a
    return that took place prior to the end of the war and  so  it  is  not
    evidence about the new position.  However, given  that  it  took  place
    relatively recently and at a time when armed conflict in the north  was
    intense and there was great concern about  LTTE  bomb  attacks  in  the
    capital, it does cast some light.

99. There  are  reports,  mainly  from  TamilNet,  of  some  post-May  2009
    incidents affecting returnees. TamilNet reported that  on  8  June  two
    Tamils who had "returned from abroad" had been arrested in a  house  in
    Colombo.  On 14 June two Tamil youths who had arrived  from  Qatar  had
    been arrested as they were about to leave the airport in a vehicle.

100. Although not a TamilNet report, it is convenient to deal here with  the
    controversial Sri Lankan Guardian report of  10  June  2009,  cited  by
    Professor Good at paragraph 139  of  his  main  report,  claiming  that
    fifteen  Tamils  from  the  UK  were  taken  into  custody   and   held
    incommunicado for nearly two weeks to ascertain whether they had  links
    to the LTTE.  Professor Good stated in the  same  paragraph  that  this
    source also said that a Tamil woman was held for  three  hours  at  the
    airport on suspicion of  having  participated  in  a  recent  [anti-Sri
    Lankan government] demonstration in London. We shall have more  to  say
    about this source below.

101. There is a report in the appellant's bundle in which  a  spokesman  for
    Hounslow Tamil Community Centre (TCC) claimed that the  UK  authorities
    had deported at least twelve Sri Lankans  in  July  2009.   Neither  Mr
    Chelvan nor the two experts sought  to  rely  on  this  claim.  In  the
    absence of any corroboration, we attach no credence to it, particularly
    given the unequivocal statement  made  by  Mr  Saunders  of  UKBA  that
    removals of enforced returnees were suspended in May  2009.   (Even  if
    the TCC claim  were accepted  as true, we observe that there have  been
    no reports in the Sri Lankan press of any returnees from the UK in that
    month meeting with problems.)

102. A TamilNet report related that on 17 July a Tamil youth  arriving  from
    Dubai  was  arrested  at  the  airport  and  taken  into  custody;  the
    authorities said he had photographs of LTTE  leader  V.  Pirababum  and
    other LTTE documents. Another TamilNet report states that on 29 July  a
    Tamil youth was arrested by the National Intelligence Bureau of the Sri
    Lankan police on his arrival from South Africa. He had been arrested by
    the South African authorities and  detained  there  for  the  last  two
    years; he had been escorted on the flight by a South  African  official
    who handed him over to the DIE officials.

103. We have already noted that the August 2009 FCO report  refers  to  Mano
    Ganesan, leader of an opposition party saying in late  August  that  he
    had heard of 4 persons who had gone missing at the airport the previous
    week after  having  arrived  from  Dubai,  Kuwait,  Canada  and  France
    respectively; he said that one of  the  2  persons  returned  from  the
    Middle East was currently detained by the TID.  However,  this  is  not
    corroborated by any other source and Mr Chelvan did not seek to rely on
    it.

104.  On  16  September  TamilNet  reported  that  magistrates  had  further
    remanded in custody four persons, three of them  Tamil,  who  had  been
    arrested by CID officials at the airport on their return from Fiji  for
    their alleged connections with the LTTE.

105. A TamilNet report of  19  October  mentioned  an  incident  on  the  17
    October involving  eleven  Tamil  youths  who  had  just  travelled  to
    Singapore but who had been refused entry there; they were said to  have
    been arrested and detained on return by the State Intelligence Unit  of
    the Sri Lankan police.

106. We find it difficult to draw any clear inferences from these  items  of
    evidence. We have already explained why we attach no weight to the  TCC
    report and the claim made by opposition MP,  Mano  Ganesan,  concerning
    several returns in early August  2009.   The  TamilNet  reports,  which
    accounts for most of those we have, are in a different category: albeit
    most are not corroborated by other sources produced  to  us,  that  may
    well be because they are recent. Over the past few years major  country
    reports have treated TamilNet reports seriously. It was  common  ground
    between the parties that TamailNet is a source  that  seeks  to  report
    everything it hears about. But even accepting as we do that its reports
    ( whether or not accurate) broadly cover  most  reported  incidents  in
    which Tamils have met with significant difficulties in Sri Lanka,  they
    do not tell us much about overall patterns or trends.  Some  appear  to
    concern returnees  who  have  met  with  difficulty  because  they  had
    committed or were suspected of  having  committed  crimes  abroad.   In
    several cases it would appear that the person concerned may  well  have
    had strong LTTE connections.  We take into account, of course, that the
    Sri Lankan authorities may allege such connections untruthfully, but on
    the face of the reports, we cannot discount that in those  cases  those
    arrested were persons of a certain profile. Overall there is  a  dearth
    of evidence indicating that since the end  of  the  conflict  returning
    Tamils with no such profile are experiencing adverse treatment  at  the
    hands of the authorities

107. What is most interesting is  that  in  several  instances  the  reports
    appear to have come to the attention of TamilNet because there had been
    complaints (both to the police and human rights  bodies)  made  by  the
    relatives of those concerned. This tends to confirm, in our view,  that
    when Tamils return to Colombo from abroad they  make  known  beforehand
    the details of their impending arrival and relatives and/or friends  or
    others, normally go to meet them and are thus able to learn if anything
    untoward happens to them and report it if it does. Although the  dearth
    of evidence referred to above cannot be regarded as decisive, it is  of
    some significance, particularly given that, as we have noted, over  the
    past year the eyes of the world, of international organisations and  of
    NGOs have been on Sri Lanka.

108. As regards the Sri Lanka Guardian report of 10 June  2008,  we  do  not
    attach any weight to it. It is not corroborated by any other source. It
    was the subject of a specific inquiry  by  the  respondent  of  BHC  in
    Colombo who replied in an e-mail dated 26  October  2009  that  despite
    "extensive enquiries" they were unable to substantiate the story. Their
    Airport Liaison Officer (ALO) who was said to spend "a  great  deal  of
    time at the airport" knew nothing of it.  Mr Chelvan  points  out  that
    this e-mail went on to doubt the alleged original source of the report,
    in terms that were quite inaccurate. Even accepting that to be correct,
    it does not  alter  our  view  that  the  contents  of  the  report  is
    unreliable.


Home Office statistics

109. We noted earlier the written and oral evidence  of  Mr  Becker  of  the
    UKBA. The data he  presented  covered  the  total  number  of  assisted
    voluntary returns under VARPP and AVRIM.  VARPP is a  scheme  begun  in
    2002 for asylum seekers currently within the asylum process  and  those
    granted leave to remain on  the  basis  of  their  asylum  claim.  Such
    persons are given tailored reintegration assistance as well as  a  �500
    relocation  grant  and,  where  required,   provision   of   short-term
    accommodation and child care fees.  The data  supplied  is  of  limited
    assistance because it groups together VARPP and AVRIM returnees  except
    for the period for 1 July - 30  September  2008,  during  which  period
    there were 23 VARPP and 9 AVRIM returnees. Mr Becker's  statement  also
    recorded what the UKBA Returns Liaison Unit had to say about assistance
    provided by IOM to enforced returnees to Sri Lanka. They explained that
    since 2006 IOM agreed with the UK authorities and the Government of Sri
    Lanka to document uncooperative failed asylum seekers:


         "IOM agreed to provide a travel assistance grant through its office
         in Colombo to enforced returnees. It was then agreed  to  reimburse
         IOM a sum equivalent to cover onward transportation costs by bus to
         anywhere in Sri Lanka, including overnight accommodation  where  it
         was necessary as part of the journey."


110. Mr Becker also  provided  data  on  the  number  of  assisted  enforced
    returns for 2006 (4), 2007 (4) and 2008 (4).  For 2009 there  were  21,
    including the 13 persons returned on the 15 January  2009  flight.  The
    Colombo-based Migration Delivery Officer is cited as saying that whilst
    some of the enforced returnees remain in Colombo, "a majority travel to
    areas such as Jaffna, Puttalam, Trincomalee  etc".   The  same  officer
    adds that "I knew that many [of] IOMs, VARPP returnees  go  to  Jaffna,
    Puttalam, Trincomalee etc."  In an Annex details are given about travel
    to various areas. Travellers to Northern Province,  (Vavuniya,  Mannar,
    Kilinochchi   and   Mullaitivu)   are   said   to   require    security
    clearance/approval, except that no passenger is allowed  to  travel  to
    Kilinochchni and Mullaitivu Districts "due to security reasons". Travel
    to Northern Province - Jaffna Peninsula - is said to be  by  air.  With
    VARPP returnees IOM coordinates the clearance procedure.


Recent evidence concerning checkpoints and search operations in Colombo


111. As already noted, the ECtHR considered that the  main  point  at  which
    Tamil returnees were likely to face a risk of  adverse  treatment  from
    the authorities was Colombo international airport.   Both  the  experts
    before us agreed that the airport  was  the  dominant  point  of  risk.
    However both also emphasised that being successful in  passing  through
    controls at the  airport  was  no  guarantee  that  one  would  not  be
    apprehended later. That insight could be said to be borne out by one of
    the examples we  noted  in  our  treatment  above  of  Colombo  airport
    incidents: see the TamilNet report about an incident of  14  June  2009
    (see above, para 100).  Further, there is a report from TamilNet  dated
    25 June 2009 concerning two Tamil youths whose vehicle was stopped at a
    road block in Seeduwa area after they had returned from  Singapore  and
    they were arrested and detained  on  suspicion  of  being  involved  in
    terrorist activity.  Another TamilNet report of 28 August 2009 concerns
    a Tamil youth from Jaffna abducted outside a lodge in Colombo;  it  was
    said he had been expelled from Malaysia where he had sought  refuge  in
    2006.

112. Media  sources  such  as  TamilNet  continue  to  report  a  number  of
    incidents  in  Colombo  of  arrest  and/or  detentions  of  Tamils   at
    checkpoints in Colombo or in the course of search operations,  although
    the frequency and scale of such incidents  has  clearly  lessened  from
    what they were in the period of Eelam IV,

113. A TamilNet report dated 8 June refers to  police  having  arrested  two
    Tamils (who had returned from abroad) in their house in Colombo.  There
    are other reports for the following dates: 12 June, concerning a cordon
    and search operation resulting in the detention of 33 Tamils (  it  was
    said that was because they had failed to register with the police);  20
    June, describing the police arrest  of  twelve  Tamil  civilians  in  a
    cordon and search operation ( they were  said  to  have  been  detained
    because they had failed to prove their identity);  23 June,  describing
    a similar arrest of seven Tamil youths;   26  June,  dealing  with  the
    arrest of seventeen Tamil civilians; 1 July, dealing with the arrest of
    three Tamils civilians suspected of being escaped detainees from one of
    the camps in Vavuniya and supporters of the LTTE; 26 July, regarding  8
    Tamil youths from Jaffna;  2  August,  concerning  hundreds  of  Tamils
    interrogated  during  large  scale  search   operations   (no   arrests
    reported); 3 August (arrest of five  Tamil youths); 8 August (arrest of
    two Tamil residents of Jaffna; 9 August (one Tamil suspected  of  being
    an LTTE active member); 14 August (twelve Tamil youths said to be  from
    north, east and upcountry), 25 August (several  Tamils  civilians);  28
    August (four Tamils youths); 31 August, concerning four Tamil civilians
    from the north and east (they were said not to have registered with the
    police in the area); 11 September  (two Tamil youths); 1 October  (five
    Tamil youths); 7 October  (one  Tamil  youth);  8  October  (two  Tamil
    youths); and 12 October (3 Tamil youths).

114. We note that in LP and AN & SS the Tribunal  had  similar  evidence  of
    incidents of this type, as did the ECtHR  in  NA.   In  light  of  that
    evidence it was noted  that  Tamils  most  at  risk  of  arrest  and/or
    detention in the course of such checks or searches were those  who  did
    not have ID documents or who had not registered with the local  police.
    Whilst as a result of a Supreme Court ruling  in  2007,  there  are  no
    longer permanent checkpoints, it is clear that many mobile  checkpoints
    still operate in Colombo. What can we glean from this type of evidence?
    It often  gives  incomplete  particulars,  for  example,  the  TamilNet
    reports do not  always  specify  whether  the  Tamils  arrested  and/or
    detained are from the north or  east.  However,  even  making  generous
    allowance for the likelihood that the TamilNet reports are  not  likely
    to cover all actual incidents, it would seem that the frequency of such
    incidents and the numbers involved have reduced considerably from  what
    they were in the period immediately preceding the end of the  conflict;
    certainly there appear to be fewer incidents of wide scale  cordon  and
    search operations accompanied by mass detentions. In  the  most  recent
    such operation we know of, on 1 August 2009. there were no  reports  of
    arrests of detentions. That appears to be the only  large-scale  cordon
    and search operation recorded during the period May  2009-late  October
    2009. It is difficult to tell from the TamilNet reports of the  various
    incidents how many of  those  arrested  were  persons  who  had  no  ID
    documents or who had failed to register with the local police.  Overall
    we see no reason to take a different view  from  that  reached  by  the
    ECtHR in NA,  that  the  evidence  of  checks  and  cordon  and  search
    operations in Colombo does not indicate that either Tamils generally or
    Tamils from the north and east more specifically face a  real  risk  of
    arrest or detention.

Recent evidence of checkpoint incidents outside Colombo


115. As to checkpoints outside Colombo, the respondent submitted a  list  of
    reports from TamilNet covering arrests from June  2009  of  Tamils  and
    others in the north east, as well as in  other  regions  of  Sri  Lanka
    excluding Colombo; the list also covers other types  of  incidents.  Mr
    Chelvan has not sought  to  suggest  that  this  list  missed  out  any
    relevant items known to the experts.  In  our  judgment,  the  evidence
    does not suggest that the authorities manning checkpoints  would  check
    or rely on data different from that consulted by those manning  airport
    controls. We are prepared to accept that this evidence  indicates  that
    Tamils travelling to areas in the north that have been recent  conflict
    zones or are the  sites  of  government  camps  holding  civilians  are
    subject to closer scrutiny as to their  eventual  destination  and  the
    purpose of their journey. On the other hand, since it appears  that  in
    order to be allowed to set off on journeys to such  areas  Ministry  of
    Defence permission is needed, possession of such clearance is likely to
    answer any doubts officials may have.


FCO travel advice

116. In its travel advice for  Sri  Lanka   (still  current  at  26  October
    2009), the FCO  notes that although the conflict has ended:

          "...politically motivated violence,  abductions  and  criminality
         persist throughout the country, particularly in the north and east.
         The Government maintains its State of Emergency, under which it has
         extensive  anti-terrorism  powers.  Increased   security   measures
         including checkpoints remain throughout the country.  Always  carry
         formal photographic identification with you. Detentions  do  occur,
         particularly of people of Tamil ethnicity."

117. Further down, the advice stated that the LTTE were believed  to  retain
    some capability to mount terrorist attacks and that "heightened  levels
    of  security  (e.g.  checkpoints,  roadblocks)  ...are  likely  to   be
    maintained for the foreseeable future". It gave details of suicide bomb
    attacks in 2009, the last of which took place on 10  March  2009  at  a
    political gathering in Akuressa, near Matara. It was  also  noted  that
    the security situation across the east was volatile. The  advice  noted
    that in the north the coastline and adjacent  territorial  sea  of  the
    Trincomalee, Mullaitivu, Jaffna, Kilinochchi and Mannar  administrative
    districts in the north and east had been declared restricted  zones  by
    the Sri Lankan authorities and should be avoided.

118. One reason for quoting from this advice  is  to  pinpoint  why  we  see
    little merit in Mr Chelvan's submission  that  in  light  of  this  FCO
    advice "Tamil ethnicity by itself was a risk category  for  detention".
    All this report states is that detentions of persons of Tamil ethnicity
    is that they "do occur", something not at all in dispute.  This  advice
    forms part of the evidence but it really helps very little in assessing
    either the scale of detentions or as to what is likely to provoke them.



Home Office policy on returns


119. In a written statement dated 9 September 2009, Mr A P Saunders  of  the
    Country Specific Policy Team, UKBA, stated that throughout  the  period
    May 2006 until May 2009 the government's policy on returns to Sri Lanka
    had been to encourage voluntary returns in the first  instance  and  to
    enforce returns where a failed asylum seeker was  unwilling  to  depart
    voluntarily.  Noting that on 23 October 2007, the ECtHR  had  requested
    the UK government to suspend enforced returns to Sri Lanka pending  the
    outcome of a test case before that court,  Mr  Saunders  said  that  in
    response the government had  declined  to  suspend  returns.   However,
    after  the  ECtHR  published  its  eventual  judgment  in  NA,  the  UK
    government wrote to the Court in August 2008 giving an undertaking that
    all Sri Lankan failed asylum seeker removal  cases  would  be  reviewed
    against the NA judgment prior to removal and claimants would be allowed
    to submit further evidence in support of their cases. As a result:


         "The court accepted our undertaking on which basis they lifted  the
         Rule 39 measures on the large numbers of other cases which had been
         filed with the Court concerning the safety of returns to Sri Lanka.
         It is not accepted that this amounted to a stay on removals to  Sri
         Lanka, as removals were effected in cases that did not result in  a
         grant  of  leave  or   a   further   appeal   right,   after   that
         consideration."

120. Mr Saunders noted, however, that since 18 May 2009, the government  had
    not made any enforced returns, pending a review of the situation in Sri
    Lanka following the end of the conflict on 18 May 2009.  In  a  witness
    statement dated 26 October 2009, Mr  P  Douglas  of  the  UKBA  Country
    Analysis and Returns Strategy Team stated that:

         "This review is now  complete  and  our  usual  practice  regarding
         enforced returns is confirmed."


121. Mr Chelvan sought to submit that this evidence  revealed  that  between
    18 May 2009 and sometime in late  October  2009  the  Home  Office  had
    adopted a policy to suspend enforced returns to Sri Lanka and that this
    could only have been because of an acceptance that the level of risk to
    such returnees had altered for the worse. In support he  cited  remarks
    by  HH Judge Pelling QC in  R (B) and the Secretary of  State  for  the
    Home Department [2009] EWHC 2273 (Admin).  At paragraph 18, having  set
    out the contents of a  witness  statement  from  Mr  A  Saunders  (very
    similar to the one produced to us), Judge Pelling QC stated:


         "In my judgment this statement is as significant for what  it  does
         not say as for what it does say. First, at least one reason for the
         review must be not so much about the end of hostility itself but  a
         concern about possible human rights abuses against the minority  in
         the aftermath."


122. We cannot assent to Mr Chelvan's submission.  During  this  period  the
    government continued to run its AVR programme, which it could not  have
    done if it believed the situation in Sri Lanka put  minority  returnees
    per se at risk.  During the relevant period the  Home  Office  did  not
    revise its Operational Guidance notes appertaining to enforced returns.
    It made perfect sense that in May 2009, the Home Office  should  decide
    to review their guidance, given that the end of a 26-year long conflict
    had at least the potential to alter categories at  risk  significantly.
    Such a view did not entail any acceptance of an actual change in the UK
    government's view of risk categories.  (Likewise it seems  to  us  that
    the earlier undertaking to the ECtHR in the wake of NA caused a  change
    to the processing of Sri Lanka cases, not to an alteration of  existing
    policy).  There  is  simply  not  the  information  available  for  any
    conclusion to be drawn as to whether there were any additional  reasons
    for the stated review. Accordingly, with respect to Judge  Pelling,  we
    do not regard ourselves as bound by the above  comment  which  was  not
    necessary for the decision and made in a quite different context.

The LP risk factors


123. In LP at para 238 the Tribunal stated:
         "During the course of the determination we have considered a list
         of factors which may make a person's return to Sri Lanka a matter
         which would cause the United Kingdom to be in breach of the
         Conventions. As in previous country guidance cases, this list is
         not a checklist nor is it intended to be exhaustive. The factors
         should be considered both individually and cumulatively. Reference
         should be made to the earlier parts of this determination where the
         factors are considered in more detail but for ease of reference
         they are set out here. There are twelve and they are not in any
         order of priority:-
                 "(i) Tamil ethnicity.
                 (ii) Previous record as a suspected or actual LTTE member
                 or supporter.
                 (iii) Previous criminal record and/or outstanding arrest
                 warrant.
                 (iv) Bail jumping and/or escaping from custody.
                 (v) Having signed a confession or similar document.
                 (vi) Having been asked by the security forces to become an
                 informer.
                 (vii) The presence of scarring.
                 (viii) Returned from London or other centre of LTTE
                 activity or fund-raising.
                 (ix) Illegal departure from Sri Lanka.
                 (x) Lack of ID card or other documentation.
                 (xi) Having made an asylum claim abroad.
                 (xii) Having relatives in the LTTE."
124. To some extent the assessment we have just given  of  particular  items
    of evidence has already adumbrated our understanding  of  risk  factors
    presently, but it makes sense to deal discretely with the central issue
    raised in this case of whether the risk factors, as set out in  LP  and
    further analysed by the ECtHR in NA require modification in  the  light
    of recent developments in Sri Lanka. We have already stated that we  do
    not seek in this case to decide whether recent events merit the  adding
    of two entirely new risk factors (journalists and NGOs).   As  heralded
    earlier, we are only concerned,  as  was  LP,  with  factors  affecting
    Tamils and to what extent they need modifying or modified  application.



125. In AN & SS, the Tribunal adopted the refinement suggested by Collins  J
    in Thangeswarajah & Others [2007] EWHC 3288 (Admin) who considered that
    several of the LP risk factors were better characterised as "background
    factors" - namely: (i), (vii), (viii), (ix), (x), (xi) - in that  "they
    do not in themselves indicate a real risk, but they are  matters  which
    if there is a factor which does give rise to  a  real  risk  that   the
    individual will be suspected of involvement in the  LTTE,  add  to  the
    significance of that". So too did Toulson LJ in VS (Sri  Lanka)  [2008]
    EWCA Civ 271.  However, we note that in NA, despite referring  to  this
    observation of Collins J, the Court did not expressly adopt it  and  on
    balance we consider the LP risk factors continue to hold good  as  they
    stand.  The desire for refinement is a valid one, especially  when  the
    risk factors run into double figures, but it seems to us that it can be
    achieved without any  subdivision.   We  see  an  intrinsic  danger  in
    differentiating between "risk factors" and "background factors" if  the
    former are then elevated to de facto risk categories,  which  they  are
    not. The wisdom we derive from the ECtHR's analysis of the LP  approach
    is that it treats each factor  as  furnishing  a  point  of  focus  for
    considering related  indicators  and  also  allows  for  adjustment  in
    respect of each in the light of new evidence (in  LP  and  in  NA  some
    factors were considered to  be  merely  contributory,  others  as  more
    significant).  Further it seems to us that the process  adopted  in  LP
    itself at paragraphs 207-222 is not in practice substantially different
    from that suggested by Collins J.

126. The above comment also helps provide the framework for  our  review  of
    the risk factors in LP, to which we now turn (the LP numbering  of  the
    risk factor is given in brackets).


Tamil ethnicity (i)

127. In LP the Tribunal wrote:


         "[Tamil ethnicity] is clearly a relevant starting point in any  Sri
         Lankan case at  the  current  time.  We  remind  ourselves  of  the
         objective figures we have noted above, and  the  need  for  caution
         when assessing risk in Sri Lanka, especially Colombo. Coupled  with
         that must be the knowledge of where applicants  came  from  in  Sri
         Lanka, where they have grown up, and their involvement (or lack  of
         it) with Tamil  organisations  whether  voluntary,  involuntary  or
         otherwise. In addition it is also  necessary  to  distinguish  what
         were known as "Sri Lankan Tamils", that is those who  predominantly
         come from the  areas  in  the  north  and  east,  and  "Indian"  or
         "Plantation" or "Hill" Tamils who are more widely spread, but  were
         more recent immigrants to Sri Lanka from Tamil  Nadu  and  southern
         India and originally were primarily  involved  as  workers  on  tea
         plantations. The background evidence shows different risk  profiles
         for the subgroups of those with  Tamil  ethnicity.   We  have  also
         noted that considerations of age and perhaps gender should be taken
         into account".


128. The Tribunal went on to identify a higher propensity  on  the  part  of
    the Sri Lankan authorities to target young male  Tamils,  but  rejected
    the notion that this subcategory was itself a risk category.

129. In the light of the most recent evidence it is clear  that  it  remains
    the case that young male Tamils are at relatively higher level of  risk
    than other Tamils; it is they who are more  likely  to  be  subject  to
    incidents of arrest and detention. Because most of the TamilNet reports
    refer simply to "persons", we cannot be sure females are not  involved,
    but the virtual absence of any reference to them is striking.  The  Sri
    Lanka Guardian article referred to earlier made  mention  of  a  recent
    incident involving a female returnee, but we  have  found  this  report
    unreliable. However, in view of the fact that in the  August  2009  FCO
    report the Swiss Embassy representative stated  that  "females  with  a
    Vanni National Identity card (NIC) may also be targets", we consider it
    right to be cautious. Whilst therefore  we  conclude  that  on  balance
    young female Tamils will not face the same level of risk as young  male
    Tamils, we concur with Dr Smith and Professor  Good's  assessment  that
    relative youth remains a more important indicator of risk than gender.

130. (Leaving aside his submissions about journalists and  NGO  members)  Mr
    Chelvan canvassed the addition of a separate but related  risk  factor,
    namely "Tamils from the north and east", especially from the  Vanni  or
    former-conflict zones. He emphasised that it was now the  view  of  the
    UNHCR, as expressed in its April 2009  Guidelines  and  its  July  2009
    Note, that this group was at particular risk. Indeed, as  we  read  his
    submissions, he asked us to find that this group should now  constitute
    not merely a separate risk factor but a separate risk category.

131.  We are surprised that Mr Chelvan should  posit  that  UNHCR  has  only
    recently held such a view. Its December 2006 Position Paper stated that
    Tamils from the north and east were at risk of targeted  violations  of
    their human rights and recommended that all  asylum  claims  of  Tamils
    from the north or east  should  be  favourably  considered.   Both  the
    Tribunal in LP and the ECtHR in NA (see  paragraphs  65-68)  considered
    that paper, yet decided that the evidence did not support such a view.

132.   Having  considered  the  further  evidence  before  us,  we  are  not
    persuaded that Tamils from the north and east constitute either a stand
    alone risk category or a separate risk factor.  The  situation  in  Sri
    Lanka has changed dramatically since LP but not such as to  place  this
    category of Tamils  in  a  significantly  different  position.  We  are
    prepared to accept that the fact that a person found  to  be  from  the
    north, especially from an area where the LTTE previously held it as  an
    LTTE stronghold, would be regarded with an increased level of suspicion
    in the mind of Sri Lankan authorities carrying  out  checks.   We  also
    accept that  (at  least  up  until  very  recently)  in  the  north  an
    extraordinary number of Tamil civilians were being held in  camps  that
    effectively deprived them of their liberty and that they  were  subject
    there to individual screening to see if they  were  involved  with  the
    LTTE. That being the case, we  consider  that  assessment  of  risk  to
    Tamil returnees from abroad whose home areas are either former conflict
    zones or places where there are still  SLA-run  camps  will  require  a
    nuanced treatment having particular regard to their  past  history  and
    circumstances . But what we are concerned with  in  asylum-related  Sri
    Lankan cases is the different question of risk to Sri Lanka  to  Tamils
    from the north (or east) if they are returned to Colombo.   As  already
    explained, we do not think that what is  happening  presently  to  many
    Tamils in the north is an accurate index of what will happen to  Tamils
    originally from the north who face return from abroad to Colombo.

133. For Tamils originating from the north  and  east  seeking  to  stay  in
    Colombo, the thrust of the evidence contained in the expert reports and
    the major country reports is that this category faces a higher risk  of
    being arrested treated  adversely  than  Tamils  who  are  resident  in
    Colombo. The FCO travel advice still current on 26 October  2009  noted
    that arrests/detentions of those of Tamil ethnicity do occur.  However,
    this evidence does  not  indicate  that  the  level  of  risk  of  such
    arrests/detentions is presently higher than  it  was  at  the  time  of
    either LP or NA; indeed, the totality of the evidence appears  to  show
    that the level of risk to Tamils of being arrested and/or  detained  is
    lower today. In addition, the evidence before us does not  support  the
    proposition that the authorities in  Colombo  can  be  continuing  with
    their reported policy of pressurising or forcing Tamils from the  north
    to return. Professor Good (like Dr Smith) highlighted  this  policy  in
    his written  report  but  in  evidence  to  us  he  accepted  that  the
    authorities cannot really want Tamils originating from  the  north  and
    east heading  back  to  the  north  in  any  numbers,  when  they  were
    struggling to cope with the huge numbers of Tamils from  the  north  in
    camps. The situation in the camps may now be changing, but for the time
    being, we consider that we should be cautious about assuming  that  the
    authorities in Colombo would automatically consider all Tamils  without
    a  reason  for  being  in  Colombo  related  to   business,   property,
    employment, seeking medical help or travelling abroad as potential LTTE
    sympathisers.


Previous record as a suspected or actual LTTE member or supporter (ii)


134. From our earlier discussion, it will be evident that a previous  record
    held on a person describing him as an  actual  LTTE  member  may  be  a
    factor likely to give risk to a real risk of serious  harm.  Much  will
    depend on the precise circumstances; events are very much at the  stage
    where the Sri Lankan authorities are hoping that existing LTTE  members
    will follow the example of the Karuna  breakaway  group  and  join  the
    country's   mainstream   political   system;   they   also   speak   of
    "rehabilitating" LTTE members. However, for a returnee, a record noting
    past membership would very likely lead to detention for a period and we
    continue to  think  that  in  relation  to  persons  detained  for  any
    significant period, ill-treatment is  a  real  risk.   The  same  would
    apply, in our judgment, to persons currently suspected  of  being  LTTE
    members; if that is how their record describes them, then detention and
    ill-treatment are likely consequences.

135.  There is a further point about records. We consider that in  light  of
    the evidence from Dr Smith regarding the increasing  sophistication  on
    the part of the Sri Lankan authorities in their record-keeping,  it  is
    reasonably likely that records will also  contain  indications  of  the
    level of security threat that an individual is or is not considered  to
    pose: see above para 82.


Previous criminal record and/or arrest warrant (iii)


136. In LP at para 211 the Tribunal stated:


         "Both parties appear to agree that returning a young Tamil with  an
         outstanding arrest warrant, validly found on the facts, will  be  a
         significant factor.  This  does  not  alter  the  previous  country
         guidance determinations in cases such as Jeyachandran or the  Court
         of Appeal case of Selvaratnam. Again the issue will be to establish
         the credibility of the criminal record, or an arrest  warrant,  and
         decide if it is reasonably  likely  to  exist  in  respect  of  the
         applicant.  An outstanding arrest  warrant,  or  previous  criminal
         record, is thus, in our view, a significant factor that needs to be
         taken into account in the assessment of the totality of  the  risk.
         However, it does not mean of itself, that the applicant has a well-
         founded fear of persecution (or other serious harm)  on  return  to
         Sri Lanka for that reason alone."


137. On the evidence before us we  consider  these  observations  remain  as
    valid now as they were then. It may be that, if  the  criminal  history
    concerned is unrelated to LTTE  activities  and  is  not  recent,  this
    factor will carry less weight, but the treatment of those in  detention
    for any significant period appears to be  just  as  likely  to  involve
    serious harm in LTTE and non-LTTE related cases alike.

Bail jumping and/or escape from custody (iv)

138. In LP it was held that:

         "213. ... We agree with the logic that those who have been released
         after going to court and released from custody or formal  bail  are
         reasonably likely, on the evidence, to be not only recorded on  the
         police records as bail jumpers but obviously on the  court  records
         as well."


139. Such persons would have "a profile that could place them at high  level
    of risk of being identified from  police  computers  at  the  airport".
    Their treatment was seen to depend upon the basis on  which  they  were
    detained in the first  place,  taken  together  with  their  particular
    profile. The evidence pointed to someone with a record  as  an  escapee
    from the government detention or as a bail jumper from the court system
    being, in some cases, at real risk of persecution or serious  harm.  We
    observe, in passing, that the Tribunal in LP made very clear here  that
    it was not the existence of a record per se that created  the  relevant
    risk but "a record as an escapee...or as a bail jumper from  the  court
    system".

140. The Tribunal strongly rejected the suggestion, however, that into  this
    category should be placed those released  after  payment  of  a  bribe,
    albeit:

         "...[m]uch will depend on the evidence relating to the formality of
         the detention (or lack of it), and the manner in  which  the  bribe
         was taken and the credibility of the total story.  If the detention
         is an informal one, or it is highly  unlikely  that  the  bribe  or
         'bail' has been officially recorded, then the  risk  level  to  the
         applicant is likely to be below that of real risk."


141. None of the evidence submitted in  this  case  points  to  a  different
    conclusion.

Signing a confession or similar document (v)

142. Similarly, nothing before us suggests that we should take  a  different
    view of this risk factor than that adopted by the  Tribunal  in  LP  at
    para 215.


Refusing requests by security forces to become an informer (vi)


143. The same observation applies in respect of LP, para 216.


The Presence of Scarring (vii)


144. So too in respect of LP, para 217.  Given  that  a  specific  focus  of
    current interest is in tracking down LTTE cadres, it is  reasonable  to
    assume that where there are other significant  factors  in  play,  this
    would bring an applicant to the attention of the  authorities.  A  body
    inspection  then  becomes  more  likely  and  discovery   of   scarring
    consistent with battle-related  injuries  may  intensify  the  risk  of
    arrest, detention and subsequent ill-treatment.

Return from London or other centre of LTTE activity or fund-raising (viii)


145. In LP this factor was seen as highly case-specific and so dependent  on
    the presence of other significant factors giving rise to suspicion of a
    returning failed asylum seeker.  Mr Chelvan pointed out  that  that  Dr
    Smith regarded one of the new priorities of the Sri  Lankan  government
    as being to dismantle the overseas procurement network, a  priority  it
    can put more resources into now it is no longer tied up  with  fighting
    the LTTE in Sri Lanka. Professor Good also identified  this  factor  as
    one that had increased in significance for this reason. However, in our
    assessment, whilst such increased concern  is  likely  to  enhance  the
    level of risk to persons who are principal or high profile  figures  in
    overseas fund-raising activities, it will not raise the level  of  risk
    to failed asylum seekers returned from the  UK  who  simply  happen  to
    arrive back in Sri Lanka following removal from London. The appellant's
    submissions on this point were based on mere supposition.  Evidence  to
    indicate that the Sri Lankan authorities take  a  greater  interest  in
    returnees from a specific location is  somewhat  inconclusive:  in  any
    event, none of the  recent  TamilNet  evidence  recorded  any  incident
    affecting a returnee from the UK.

Illegal departure from Sri Lanka (ix)

146. Whilst considering this factor  to  be  very  much  case-specific,  the
    Tribunal in LP agreed that there was  evidence in  the  Hotham  Mission
    Report (see LP, paras 126-7)   and in the evidence of Dr Smith and  the
    Canadian IRB "that it may now in the heightened level of insecurity  in
    Sri Lanka, add to the profile" (para 219). The ECtHR in NA  also  noted
    the IRB evidence of 22 December 2006 which stated:


         "Persons who leave Sri Lanka using false documents or who enter the
         country under irregular or suspicious circumstances are  reportedly
         more likely to be singled out and questioned  under  the  country's
         current state of emergency (ibid;  see  also  Daily  News  15  Sept
         2006). The state of emergency reportedly  permits  the  Sri  Lankan
         authorities to make arrests without warrant and to  detain  persons
         for up to 12 months without trial (US 8 Mar.2006). Under Section 45
         of the country's Immigrants and Emigrants  Act,  amended  in  1998,
         persons found guilty of travelling with  forged  documents  may  be
         subject to a fine of between 50,000 and 200,000 Sri  Lankan  Rupees
         (LKR) (approximately CAD 533 (XE.com 12 Dec. 2006a) to  CAD  2,1333
         (ibid 12 Dec.2006b) and a jail term ranging from one to five  years
         (Sri Lanka 1998)."

147. In their evidence to us, both Dr Smith and Professor Good thought  this
    factor would now have greater significance, but they adduced  virtually
    no evidence in support and we can find little to support  such  a  view
    except in respect of those known to have used forged documents to leave
    Sri Lanka. As to the reference to the "heightened level of insecurity",
    we think that by virtue  of  the  conflict  having  ended,  the  level,
    however described, cannot be as high as it  was  then.  In  the  recent
    August 2009 FCO report there is very little  to  suggest  that  illegal
    exit is treated as in itself a basis for arrest  or  detention  at  the
    airport or subsequent checkpoints. Given that a  claim  by  Sri  Lankan
    failed asylum seekers to have made an illegal exit is not uncommon,  it
    is surely significant that, in the words of Dr Smith  before  us,  very
    large numbers of failed asylum seekers would be seen by the authorities
    in Sri Lanka as having been  economic  migrants  and  would  be  of  no
    interest to them at all ;and, in the words of  Professor  Good  in  his
    main report, "it seems always to have been the case that most returnees
    pass through the airport successfully" (para 135).

Lack of ID card or other documentation(x)

148. In LP the Tribunal accepted Professor Good's evidence that carrying  an
    ID card in Sri Lanka "has become a must" and lack of it could lead to a
    higher risk (para 220). We continue to take the same view. However, the
    evidence we have from the BHC, Colombo and the August 2009  FCO  report
    demonstrates that failed  asylum  seekers  are  issued  with  emergency
    travel documents after checks have been made with the Sri  Lankan  High
    Commission in  London.   Ordinarily,  possession  of  such  a  document
    enables returnees to pass through  airport  controls.   There  is  very
    little evidence to suggest that for returnees (even if their  emergency
    travel documentation is taken from them at the airport) the process  of
    applying for ID documentation in Colombo is either difficult or subject
    to significant delay. The authorities appear well-used to dealing  with
    the issuance of replacements  passports/  travel  documents.  Professor
    Good did contend at para 168 of his main report that the risk of  being
    discovered to have been previously detained and to be a returned failed
    asylum  seeker  was  "likely  to  be  particularly  intense  when  [the
    appellant]  presents  herself  for  registration...",  but  offered  no
    evidence in support and in the background materials there is  virtually
    no evidence to indicate that persons  are  arrested  or  detained  when
    seeking ID documentation and or when registering with the local police.

Having made an asylum claim abroad (xi)

149.  Like the Tribunal in LP we have no hesitation in  accepting  that  the
    process for putative returnees applying for  travel  documentation  (or
    replacement passports) from the Sri Lankan High Commission in London is
    likely to result in information regarding such persons being passed  on
    to the authorities in Colombo. Indeed,  at  least  in  the  context  of
    returns by way of a charter flight, there would appear to  be  specific
    liaison between the UKBA, the BHC, ILM and the Sri Lankan  authorities.
    Whether, however,  such  information  is  treated  by  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities as a cause for any particular interest  appears  even  more
    doubtful now than before,  in  view  of  the  evidence  concerning  the
    January 2009 charter flight return of thirteen failed  asylum  seekers.
    Given the likely fact they were known in  advance  by  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities at the airport to be failed asylum seekers, we regard it of
    some significance that there is no evidence whatsoever that any one  of
    them met with difficulties.  Professor Good posits that for  individual
    returnees, the process would be quite different, but on our analysis of
    the recent evidence in recent media reports and  the  August  2009  FCO
    report, the evidence does not indicate that it would.   We accept  that
    the January 2009 return pre-dates the  end  of  the  conflict,  but  if
    anything it seems to us that at that (conflict-intensive) point in time
    scrutiny of returnees would  have  been  higher  than  now.  Given  the
    importance the Tribunal in LP attached to  BHC  evidence  that  in  the
    past, at least, lists of failed asylum seekers have been in  the  hands
    of Sri  Lankan  police  conducting  cordon  and  search  operations  in
    Colombo, we think it justified to retain this as  a  risk  factor,  but
    would regard it as likely now to be  a  relatively  minor  contributing
    factor at best.

Having relatives in the LTTE (xii)


150.  In LP the Tribunal stated:


         "222. This factor we consider is again a  highly  logical  one  but
         again needs to be taken into account with  the  totality  of  other
         evidence and the profile of the other family members. On  its  own,
         without established and credible evidence of  the  details  of  the
         other family members and their known role or involvement  with  the
         LTTE, it will be of limited weight."

151.  That  observation  continues  to  reflect  the  preponderance  of  the
    evidence before us.

152. In the nature of country guidance the Tribunal will have  to  keep  the
    situation in Sri Lanka under review, particularly  given  that  as  all
    were agreed in the context of this case there  was  as  yet  relatively
    little evidence to hand about  the  post-conflict  situation.  However,
    even if it transpires that the LTTE recommences  insurgent  activities,
    we would expect decision-makers to bear in mind that even at a previous
    period when such attacks  were  frequent  (and  the  LTTE  also  had  a
    conventional military status), successive Tribunal decisions  have  not
    seen the situation as one in which failed asylum seekers from the north
    or east face a real risk  of  ill  treatment  on  the  basis  of  those
    characteristics alone.

Our Assessment: the appellant's case


153. It is for the appellant to prove her  case  that  she  is  entitled  to
    refugee  protection,  humanitarian  protection  and  Article   3   ECHR
    protection to the standard of reasonable degree of likelihood  or  real
    risk. We must consider her case in the context of  the  evidence  as  a
    whole. If we are satisfied that by virtue  of  having  been  raped  and
    subjected to electric shock whilst  in  army  detention  the  appellant
    suffered past persecution, we must bear in mind that  Article  4(4)  of
    the Qualification Directive (paragraph 339K of the  Immigration  Rules)
    states that the appellant's persecution is to be treated as a  "serious
    indication" of continuing  risk  "unless  there  are  good  reasons  to
    consider  that  such  persecution  will  not  be  repeated  ...".  When
    considering internal relocation, we must apply the  guidance  given  by
    the House of Lords in Januzi [2006] UKHL 5 and AH (Sudan)  [2007]  UKHL
    49, which closely mirrors the two-pronged test set out in Article 8  of
    the same Directive (para 339O of the Rules) and which  is  conveniently
    summarised as comprising first a test of "safety" and second a test  of
    "reasonableness". Given the agreement  between  the  parties  that  the
    armed conflict in Sri Lanka is now over, no issues arise under  Article
    15(c) of the Directive (para 339C(iv) of the Rules).

154. The appellant's evidence is best  considered  in  two  parts:  evidence
    about her historic situation and evidence about her  recent  situation.
    As to the former, we have already noted that the findings of fact  made
    by the previous IJs are to stand. Before us the appellant did not  give
    evidence but produced two written  statements,  one  dated  16  October
    2009, the other dated 26 October 2009.  The parties were able to  reach
    agreement as to how that evidence was to be assessed, in the  following
    terms:

         "It is agreed that the appellant gave birth to a  daughter  in  the
         United Kingdom on 13 December 2008 and  that  if  returned  to  Sri
         Lanka her daughter would accompany her.  The  appellant  claims  to
         fear that if returned to Sri Lanka she  would  have  no  family  or
         social network on which she could rely.


         The Secretary of State does not put his case on the basis that  she
         does have such a network.


         The appellant claims to fear that if returned  to  Sri  Lanka,  she
         would be arrested, detained and mistreated on account  of  being  a
         Tamil from Vanni and on account of being a suspected  LTTE  suicide
         bomber; and on account  of  having  previously  been  detained  and
         mistreated in Sri Lanka, and that she would be socially  ostracised
         and mistreated on account of being an unmarried single parent.


         The Secretary of State does not put his case on the basis that  she
         does not have such subjective fears. The  parties  agree  that  the
         question whether any such fears have an objective basis is a matter
         for the other evidence in the case.


         The appellant claims to have  a  mother,  aunts  and  other  family
         members who were in Kilinochchi when she left.


         The Secretary of State does not put his case on the basis that  she
         does not."


155. In the course of submissions argument arose over the precise  ambit  of
    the accepted findings  of  fact  pertaining  to  the  appellant's  past
    history. Mr Chelvan sought to maintain that as  the  previous  IJs  had
    both found the appellant credible, the accepted findings should include
    the fact that she had been told by those who arrested and detained  her
    in 2006 that they suspected she was a LTTE suicide  bomber:  see  above
    para 11.  Mr Staker remonstrated that neither of the IJ's had made  any
    specific findings to this effect.  As we made clear during the hearing,
    we consider Mr Chelvan is right about this. It is  manifest  that  both
    IJs  found  the  appellant's  account   credible   without   any   real
    qualification  and  the  statement  of  reasons  agreed  upon  by   the
    respondent said that those findings of fact were to stand.  We  accept,
    therefore, that the appellant was told by  the  authorities  then  that
    they suspected her of being an LTTE member. Nevertheless (as  we  shall
    come to shortly), we were not with Mr Chelvan in what he sought to make
    of this aspect of the appellant's evidence.

156. As regards the appellant's recent statements, both of  which  post-date
    the hearing  before  IJ  Mitchell,  the  position  is  different.   The
    agreement cited above makes clear: (i) that this evidence properly  set
    out the appellant's subjective fears;  but  (ii)  that   (save  in  one
    respect) whether any such fears have an objective basis is a matter for
    assessment in light of the evidence taken as a whole. The limited  area
    of  exception  concerns  the  appellant's  family  circumstances.   The
    respondent does not dispute that if  returned  to  Sri  Lanka  (and  in
    contrast to her position when she left), she would not have a family or
    social network on which she could rely.  Given that what the  appellant
    says in her recent statement about her  mother  currently  being  in  a
    Vavuniya army camp tallies  with  the  background  evidence  about  the
    situation in that area, we see no reason to take a different view.

157. The value of  the  appellant's  evidence  as  set  out  in  the  recent
    statements is otherwise limited.  Much of the statement of  16  October
    2009 consisted in the appellant's own surmise about  what  records  the
    authorities would hold on her and her own  observations  about  country
    conditions and risk factors in Sri Lanka, without any suggestion  there
    or anywhere else that she possesses any recent  or  reliable  knowledge
    about such matters. Its principal importance then is in  verifying  the
    changes in  her  domestic  circumstances.   On  13  December  2008  her
    daughter was born.  She no longer has any contact with the father,  who
    cut off contact when she told him  she  was  pregnant.   She  does  not
    believe her family would accept her (her  sister's  husband  no  longer
    speaks to her) and she believes that ordinary people in Sri Lanka would
    stigmatise her too.  She said she had not  had  any  contact  with  the
    family who put her up in Colombo for three months in 2006 and she  does
    not believe they would be prepared to help her again.  On the basis  of
    this evidence we accept that she faces return to Sri Lanka as a  single
    mother and someone who may not be able to look to any family support or
    friendship network.

158.  The appellant also says in her recent statement that she had  attended
    one of the demonstrations that took place in London in the  early  part
    of 2009 protesting about  the  government's  conduct  during  the  last
    stages of the civil war.  She said she thought this would  add  to  the
    risk she faced on return, but that was not  a  point  advanced  on  her
    behalf by Mr Chelvan and we do not consider that her mere attendance at
    such a demonstration (during a period when  large  numbers  of  UK  Sri
    Lankans were in attendance) would make any difference to how she  would
    be perceived on return.

159. The appellant also stated  that  if  she  returned  her  mental  health
    situation would deteriorate and she would not be  able  to  access  any
    treatment.  However, whilst we attach very significant  weight  to  the
    fact that she was the victim of a double rape in 2006, the only medical
    report put into evidence did not identify her as someone who  continued
    to be significantly traumatised. Her ability  to  access  treatment  if
    needed is  entirely  a  matter  to  be  decided  by  reference  to  the
    background country evidence.

160. We turn next to consider  whether,  given  the  appellant's  particular
    circumstances as just outlined, she will on return be at real  risk  of
    adverse treatment from the authorities. That requires an examination of
    the strength of her claim to be at real  risk  of  serious  harm  as  a
    result of an accumulation of the risk factors identified in  LP  (which
    we have found to have  continuing  efficacy)  in  the  context  of  the
    evidence as a whole. We must carry  out  this  examination  having  due
    regard to the general situation in Sri Lanka as assessed  earlier.   So
    far as  the  risk  factors  are  concerned,  we  need  to  address  two
    questions: (i) what risk factors are engaged  in  her  case;  and  (ii)
    whether singly or cumulatively they give rise to a real risk of serious
    harm.

161. In order to assess whether the appellant is  eligible  for  refugee  or
    humanitarian protection we shall address first the issue of risk in her
    home area. We consider that we should proceed on the basis that she has
    established such a risk.  We must take into account that she is someone
    who, following her apprehension at a checkpoint in Colombo was detained
    and whilst in detention was  raped  and  subjected  to  electric  shock
    treatment.  Whilst not formally conceding that she would be at risk  in
    her home area, Mr Staker did accept she could not travel to that  area.
    He also accepted that this was because the  Sri  Lanka  government  had
    prohibited  it  for  security  reasons.  It  is  not  in  dispute  that
    Kilinochchi is a former conflict zone. We lack  clear  evidence  as  to
    whether there have  been  (or  continue  to  be)  government  camps  in
    Kilinochchi. Dr Smith's evidence, based on what was  happening  in  the
    north at the  date  of  hearing,  was  that,  if  in  Kilinochchi,  the
    appellant would be "certainly detained and with the real possibility of
    intense interrogation"; Professor Good's evidence on this matter was to
    similar effect; their evidence  on  this  was   not  challenged  by  Mr
    Staker.  It is established law that in assessing risk under the Refugee
    Convention we must do  so  by  considering  the  issue  hypothetically,
    assuming return to that area today, even if in fact (as here) a  person
    cannot access that area. (On the very latest news reports, the SLA have
    said that persons in the camps in the north are free to leave and  many
    have now left or are in the process of doing so, but there  is  nothing
    to indicate that the authorities in the areas  where  there  are  camps
    have ceased to ensure all persons in the area have been screened.) Were
    this appellant to arrive in Kilinochchi, with her young daughter now we
    are satisfied that she would find herself in  an  extremely  vulnerable
    situation. She would very likely to be stopped and checked and it would
    come to light that she was not someone who had been in a camp  and  was
    not someone, accordingly, who had been screened.  She might be detained
    so that she can be screened, if for no other reason than that  she  had
    come to an area regarded as off limits for state security reasons.  She
    might be ordered to go elsewhere. We cannot  see  in  either  of  these
    scenarios that the appellant could in any meaningful sense be  said  to
    have achieved safety from persecution or serious harm. It may  be  that
    the situation in Kilinochchi will normalise in due course,  but  it  is
    too early to assume that. We think it right to accept for  the  purpose
    of this case that  the appellant would face a real risk of  persecution
    and serious harm in her home area and that it would be  for  a  Refugee
    Convention reason, based on her Tamil ethnicity. It may be,  given  the
    latest information that the situation  in  regard  to  the  camps  will
    continue to change fast and that in a few weeks or months time we would
    not reach the same decision as we do here, but our duty is to  make  an
    ex nunc assessment.  Accordingly, the sole  issue  in  the  appellant's
    case is whether she has a viable internal  relocation  alternative.  In
    considering that, we must have regard first of  all  to  the  issue  of
    safety and secondly to the issue of reasonableness.

162. It  is  particularly  important  in  the  appellant's  case  that  when
    considering safety outside of her home area we keep in the forefront of
    our minds that she has been the victim of past persecution -  and  past
    persecution arising in the context of her apprehension at a  government
    checkpoint. That being the case, we must ask ourselves  throughout  our
    subsequent analysis whether there  are  good  reasons  for  considering
    there would not be a repetition of the same type of  incident  and  its
    sequelae.  We begin by noting that it is agreed  by  the  parties  that
    several of the risk factors are not engaged in this case: the appellant
    does not have a previous  criminal  record  and/or  outstanding  arrest
    warrant (iii); she did not sign a confession or similar  document  (v);
    she does not have any scarring (vii); and she does not  have  relatives
    in the LTTE (xii).  We consider that two  other  factors  can  also  be
    regarded as of no significance in this  case.   The  appellant  accepts
    that she was not asked to become an informer, but says  in  her  recent
    statement that it is possible her former  boyfriend  (Mr  X)  may  have
    promised the  authorities  that  she  would;  that,  however,  is  pure
    speculation on her part and we find it extremely  unlikely;  so  factor
    (vi) is not engaged.  Whilst accepting that the  appellant  has  an  ID
    card, Mr Chelvan submits that as she has  no  passport  she  will  face
    significant difficulties in obtaining documentation needed to  live  in
    Colombo. However, in light of our earlier assessment of  documentation,
    we are satisfied that she will have been issued either with a  passport
    or (more likely) emergency travel documentation before she  leaves  the
    UK  and  once  in  Colombo  would  be  able  to  obtain   any   further
    documentation needed to live in Colombo relatively quickly and  without
    the process  exposing  her  to  any  significant  risks  of  arrest  or
    detention: hence factor (x) is not engaged.

163. What risk factors are engaged?  Four patently  are:  she  is  of  Tamil
    ethnicity (i); she will be returning from one of the  overseas  centres
    of LTTE activity or fund-raising (viii); she has made an  asylum  claim
    abroad (xi); she made an illegal departure from  Sri  Lanka  (ix).   As
    explained earlier, it is necessary to apply each of  these  factors  to
    the particular circumstances of her case in the context  of  the  light
    shed on them by our current assessment of the background  situation  in
    Sri Lanka.

164. We deal first with Tamil  ethnicity  (i),  bearing  in  mind  that  the
    Tribunal in LP found that the background evidence shows different  risk
    profiles for sub-groups of those with Tamil ethnicity.  Earlier, we did
    not accept that young female Tamils will face the same level of risk as
    young male Tamils, although we concur with Dr Smith's Professor  Good's
    assessment that relative youth remains a more  important  indicator  of
    risk than gender. Like the Tribunal in AN & SS,  when  considering  the
    position of Miss AN (para 114), we think the fact  that  the  appellant
    will return with a small child will lessen somewhat the risk of adverse
    interest in her, although the  authorities  will  remain  watchful  for
    female LTTE operatives. She is someone who does  not  speak  Sinhalese,
    but that is something she will  have  in  common  with  a  considerable
    number of other Tamils in Colombo. Because the appellant has an ID card
    she is considerably less likely in our  opinion  to  be  targeted  than
    those young Tamils without one.

165. We have already explained why we do not consider  the  risk  factor  of
    "Tamil ethnicity" requires supplementing with a  further  risk  factor,
    "Tamils from the north and east,  especially  from  the  Vanni  or  ex-
    conflict zones".  In that context we did accept, however, that a  young
    Tamil found to be from the north, especially from  an  area  where  the
    LTTE previously held it as an LTTE stronghold, would be  regarded  with
    an increased level of suspicion in the mind of Sri  Lankan  authorities
    carrying out checks.  The appellant is from Kilinochchi, an area  where
    fighting recently  took  place  (and  which  was  formerly  the  LTTE's
    headquarters).  We would also accept that her  being  from  Kilinochchi
    was one factor (perhaps the decisive factor)  behind  the  decision  to
    arrest and detain her at  a  checkpoint  in  Colombo  and  at  an  army
    detention centre thereafter in late 2006.

166. Clearly on return the appellant will be known to have been  in  London,
    a centre of activity and fund raising (viii).  We  have  already  noted
    that whilst we accept that post-May 2009 the Sri Lankan authorities are
    intent on dismantling the LTTE's overseas network, their concerns would
    appear to centre on those seen  as  actively  involved  in  procurement
    activities, not persons perceived as mere supporters  or  sympathisers.
    We have already found that  the  appellant  had  no  political  profile
    before she left Sri Lanka and has not acquired one since her arrival in
    the UK; we do not regard her attendance at one demonstration in  London
    in early 2009 as likely to have any appreciable effect on  how  she  is
    perceived on return.

167. We have already assessed that in the  current  circumstances  the  mere
    fact  of  having  made  an  asylum  claim  abroad  will  have   minimal
    significance in the mind of the Sri Lanka  authorities  on  return.  We
    have already highlighted the evidence of both Dr Smith that very  large
    numbers of failed asylum seekers would be seen by  the  authorities  in
    Sri Lanka as having been economic migrants and would be of no  interest
    to them at all ;and that of Professor Good  in  his  main  report,  "it
    seems always to have been the case that most returnees pass through the
    airport successfully" (para 135).The  BHC  letter  of  24 August  2006
    (noted in para 181 of LP)  accepted that lists of failed asylum seekers
    could form part of such operations directed at Tamil areas of  Colombo,
    but this pre-dates the end of the conflict by  some  considerable  time
    and in any event does not demonstrate that those on such lists were  in
    fact the  subject  of  any  ill-treatment.   We  have  found  that  the
    appellant would not be considered as involved in any way with the LTTE.
    However, even were they to perceive her as  an  LTTE  sympathiser,  for
    reasons given earlier, we think that the  eclipse  of  the  LTTE  as  a
    conventional military  organisation  makes  it  less  likely  that  the
    authorities would continue to be concerned about persons likely  to  be
    suspected of  performing  auxiliary  tasks  confined  to  helping  that
    organisation run.  In any event, it is a factor that remains  at  best,
    as stated in LP (and echoed in NA) "a contributing  factor  that  would
    need other, perhaps more compelling, factors added to it before a  real
    risk of persecution or serious harm could be established" (para 221).

168. As regards (ix), illegal departure from  Sri  Lanka,  we  have  already
    observed that we do not consider this is likely to be a factor of  much
    significance except where there is clear evidence of use of forged  Sri
    Lankan documents. It is unclear from her evidence whether the  passport
    she left Sri Lanka on was false or genuine, but it is  not  in  dispute
    that she had with her a genuine ID card.

169. The crux of the appellant's case depends on assessment of her  position
    in relation to the risk factors (ii) and (iv), i.e. "previous record as
    a suspected or actual LTTE  member  of  supporter"  and  "bail  jumping
    and/or escaping from custody".  There is no question  of  her  being  a
    bail jumper, but in all other respects the relevance of these two  risk
    factors as they apply to her is contentious.

170. We doubt that any record would  have  been  raised  on  the  appellant.
    That is not principally because her  detention  was  by  soldiers  and,
    according to Professor Good, army detentions  are  less  likely  to  be
    recorded than police detentions.  Nor has it anything to  do  with  the
    fact that her detention happened  three  years  ago,  since  we  accept
    records in Sri Lanka can go back some  fifteen  years.   It  is  rather
    because of the circumstances of her  release.   The  appellant  and  Mr
    Chelvan have made much  of  the  fact  that  those  circumstances  were
    unorthodox.  We can certainly accept that to  be  released  by  a  camp
    commander on the intervention of a member of the Karuna faction was  an
    unusual or unorthodox occurrence.  However, we cannot accept that as  a
    result of this occurrence  the  authorities  could  have  continued  to
    regard her as of adverse interest.  Being  someone  who  was  initially
    suspected of being a suicide bomber it is not plausible in our judgment
    that the camp commander could have agreed to her release unless he  was
    completely sure as a result of information given by Mr X that  she  was
    not anything of the kind and that she  was  in  fact  someone  entirely
    unconnected with the LTTE: she stated in her asylum interview that  "he
    assured them I had nothing to do with the LTTE". It would have been  an
    act of high irresponsibility for a camp commander to have released  her
    otherwise, particularly in the context of late 2006  when  concerns  to
    deter suicide bomb attacks in the  capital  had  the  highest  security
    priority.  Further, she was  allowed  to  keep  her  ID  card  (whether
    because it had never been taken from her or because they returned it to
    her does not much matter), thus ensuring that she would not be  subject
    to further apprehension on the basis that she was undocumented. In  our
    judgment for a record to have been made of her arrest and detention  in
    such circumstances is highly unlikely. Mr Chelvan submits that hers was
    "not an official  release  without  charge"  but  whether  or  not  her
    detention was towards the official end of spectrum  or  not,  there  is
    really nothing to suggest that any charge was made.

171. However, even assuming, contrary to what we have found, that  a  record
    will have been made of her arrest/detention and that it will have found
    its way onto an official database  accessible  to  authorities  at  the
    airport or other checkpoints, we still do not  consider  she  would  be
    viewed adversely.  For if a record was raised in respect  of  her  2006
    arrest and detention, then it is very likely  to  record  that  initial
    suspicions about her  had  been  allayed.  In  this  regard  we  attach
    significant weight to the evidence from both  Dr  Smith  and  Professor
    Good  concerning  the   increasing   sophistication   of   Sri   Lankan
    intelligence (Dr Smith's being based in part on interviews he conducted
    in Sri Lanka in 2008).  We acknowledge that we rely here on  inferences
    drawn from the surrounding evidence  as  well  as  on  a  common  sense
    reckoning that it would surely be in the interests of the  authorities,
    in any record kept of the  fact  of  her  2006  detention,  to  specify
    whether she was still regarded as a security threat or not.

172. In a supplementary submission Mr Chelvan argues that to take  the  view
    that records held would specify whether someone was  regarded (or still
    regarded) as a security threat would be contrary to what was stated  by
    Carnwath LJ in AS (Sri Lanka) [2009] EWHC 1763 (Admin) at para 54, when
    reviewing recent authorities dealing with Sri Lanka asylum cases:  "The
    decisions of the courts did not turn on  the  precise  content  of  the
    records or whether  they  were  likely  in  themselves  to  identify  a
    claimant as of serious interest". We make  two  separate  responses  to
    this submission.

173.  The  first  is  historical.   In  all  of  the  past  cases   in   the
    Administrative Court on which Mr Chelvan seeks to  rely,  including  AS
    (Sri Lanka),  the issue was specifically whether a fresh  claim  has  a
    reasonable prospect of success; there was no assessment on the  merits.
    It is true that the statement at para 54 of  AS  drew  on  the  ECtHR's
    judgment in NA (which at para 145 insists that "the  greatest  possible
    caution should be taken when, as in the applicant's [NA's] case, it  is
    accepted that a returnee has previously been detained and a record made
    of that detention"). However, it seems to us that in this  passage  the
    ECtHR was primarily seeking to highlight that if the  authorities  find
    someone has a record it is more likely that the person in question  may
    become of interest to the authorities during his or her passage through
    the airport. The ECtHR goes on to note that the Sri Lankan authorities'
    "interest in particular categories of returnees  is  likely  to  change
    over time in response to domestic developments and may increase as well
    as decrease", thereby acknowledging that the nature of the interest  is
    contingent on the category of returnee. Further, in  this  passage  the
    ECtHR drew expressly on the Tribunal decision  in  LP  and  in  LP  the
    Tribunal only considered that those who were on Wanted or Watched lists
    held at the airport and who were actively wanted by the police  or  who
    are on a watch list for a significant offence might be at risk of being
    detained at the airport (para 239).

174. The second response  focuses  on  the  current  position.  As  we  have
    highlighted throughout, country guidance is an incremental  process  in
    which the Tribunal seeks to decide on whether any reassessment of  risk
    categories or factors is  needed  in  the  light  of  changing  country
    conditions. The additional evidence before us in this case has  led  us
    to scrutinise more than previously the matter of records  kept  by  the
    authorities. Like the ECtHR we continue to think that great caution  is
    needed in respect of someone known to  have  a  previous  record  of  a
    detention, but, like the ECtHR in NA, we  also  think  that  the  basic
    question we have to decide is whether an applicant can establish a real
    risk "that he or she would be of sufficient interest to the authorities
    in their efforts to combat the LTTE as to warrant his or her  detention
    and interrogation" (NA, para 133) in the light  of  all  the  available
    evidence. In this regard it seems to us that what  will  determine  the
    extent of interest the authorities  at  the  airport  will  show  in  a
    returnee is not the existence of a record  but  what  any  record  will
    disclose. We fully accept that learning of  the  mere  existence  of  a
    record is likely to result in the individual  concerned  being  checked
    and/or interrogated more than someone without a record, but we  do  not
    consider that the evidence demonstrates that that in  itself  leads  to
    the individual being detained for any significant period. This  may  be
    considered a change of emphasis from that taken by the  ECtHR  in  para
    145 of  NA but it remains that for the ECtHR the question of  risk  was
    all  about  profile.  Further,  as  the  judgment  in   NA   repeatedly
    emphasises, assessment of risk must be done on an ex nunc basis  taking
    account of the state of the evidence now.

175. Having considered all the  evidence  we  conclude  that  the  appellant
    would be safe in Colombo. At  the  initial  stage,  on  return  through
    Colombo airport, the appellant would not meet with  adverse  treatment.
    If any check were made on her to ascertain  whether  a  record  existed
    concerning her, we think it would draw a blank, but even if it did find
    there was a record, that record would negate any identification of  her
    as someone linked  with  the  LTTE.   She  would  be  identified  as  a
    (relatively) young Tamil from Kilinochchi, but it would quickly  become
    apparent that she has not been there for over three years and so cannot
    have been in the area when Eelam  IV  took  place.   Plainly  from  our
    findings earlier about general procedures at Colombo airport, she  will
    likely face questioning from either DIE or CID or SIS officials, or all
    three.   But  there  is  no  proper  basis  for  considering  that  her
    Kilinochchi origins, even coupled with a record of her  2006  detention
    and other risk factors having  some  application  to  her  case,  would
    suffice in themselves to provoke adverse interest.

176. As someone reasonably  likely  to  be  able  to  pass  through  airport
    controls successfully, we do  not  find  the  appellant  would  be  the
    subject of adverse treatment at subsequent checkpoints in Colombo.  The
    evidence taken as a whole does not indicate that arrest  and  detention
    of persons purely because they come from Kilinochchi or former conflict
    zones in the north is a common occurrence. Unlike a significant  number
    of young Tamils who are arrested and/or detained  at  checkpoints,  the
    appellant has a valid ID card; there is no reason to consider that  she
    could not obtain further documentation needed to live in  Colombo  with
    relative ease. We have found that the  authorities  would  not  have  a
    record of her arrest and detention, but (to repeat) even  if  they  did
    this would show that it had been concluded she was  not  involved  with
    the LTTE.

177. In view of our finding that the appellant would be safe in Colombo,  it
    is unnecessary for us to assess whether she might also  achieve  safety
    in Jaffna or other parts of Sri  Lanka  outside  Colombo,  although  in
    general terms we have already stated that apart from areas now used (at
    least until very recently) for or  near  to  government-run  camps,  we
    cannot see that Tamils from the north could not relocate to  Jaffna  or
    those other parts, although much would depend on  an  analysis  of  the
    individual circumstances and, of course, whether it was not  just  safe
    but also reasonable to expect such persons to relocate.

178. Having established that the appellant  could  relocate  to  Colombo  in
    safety, it remains necessary to consider whether it would be reasonable
    or unduly harsh for her to do so in all the circumstances of her  case.
    It seems to us that the submissions based on her likely  poor  economic
    circumstances or likely homelessness founder before the clear  evidence
    that the UK Government and the IOM between them offer  a  reintegration
    package to assist returnees. There is no basis for suggesting, nor  did
    Mr Chelvan so suggest, that if required to return the  appellant  would
    not seek to avail herself of such a package.

179. It remains true, of course, that the appellant will return as a  single
    mother without any family or friendship networks reliably accessible to
    her. Over time we do not think she would be unable to renew links  with
    some family members. Her sister in Canada still speaks to  her  on  the
    phone, despite her brother-in-law refusing to talk to her or help  her;
    be that as it may, we shall proceed on the  contrary  basis.  Professor
    Good considered that her status as an  unmarried  single  mother  would
    mean she was stigmatised and ostracised, but the evidence he  draws  on
    appears mainly to  relate  to  rural  Tamil  communities,  not  to  the
    situation in Colombo.  We note that the protracted civil  war  and  the
    Tsunami have resulted in many families being  separated  and  displaced
    and that there are a very significant number of widows  and  fragmented
    families. According to the UNIFEM 'Gender Profile of  the  Conflict  in
    Sri Lanka' last updated in January 2008, there are approximately 30,000
    female-headed households in Sri  Lanka  and  an  estimated  40,000  war
    widows for whom the loss of male breadwinners has created vulnerability
    to economic hardship (see COIS  report,  26  June  2009,  para  23.19).
    Viewed in the round, we consider the evidence to demonstrate that as  a
    single unmarried mother the appellant would face some  difficulties  in
    Colombo, but not that these would be unduly harsh. In  this  regard  we
    bear in mind that she has employment experience (in the computer field)
    and a relatively good standard  of  education;  that  she  spent  three
    months in Colombo, so will have some familiarity with the  city;  that,
    as already noted, the medical evidence does not  demonstrate  that  she
    currently has any significant psychological problems and in  any  event
    there are available medical facilities in Colombo to assist persons  in
    this category; and that she will have start-up assistance with  finance
    and if necessary accommodation (in that regard she will  be  in  a  far
    better position than some other female Tamils who arrive from the north
    in Colombo penniless and homeless).

180. For the above reasons we conclude  that  the  appellant  would  have  a
    viable internal relocation alternative in Colombo. Hence her appeal  on
    asylum, humanitarian protection and Article 3 grounds must fail.

181. Throughout this determination  the  appellant's  personal  identity  is
    anonymised. In written submissions Mr Chelvan  made  reference  to  the
    need for the Tribunal to  consider  an  anonymity  and  confidentiality
    order to ensure that the appellant's personal details would not  become
    known, through publicity, to the authorities in Sri Lanka. However,  he
    did not in the event make any specific application. We  would  observe,
    nonetheless, that in light of our  findings  on  her  case  we  do  not
    consider that it would make any difference to her likely  treatment  on
    return if her details were known.


Article 8


182. In submissions Mr Chelvan contended (somewhat cursorily) that in  light
    of the situation the appellant and her daughter would face  on  return,
    even with IOM assistance:

         "...the risk of sexual exploitation and social ostracism will  have
         a sufficiently grave consequences as to engage  Article  8.  Whilst
         the interference  will  be  in  accordance  with  the  law,  it  is
         submitted that this would be disproportionate as it  renders  A  on
         return as a social pariah".

183. We consider that this submission stands to be rejected  for  very  much
    the same reasons  we  have  rejected  it  in  the  context  of  asylum,
    humanitarian protection and Article 3 It is accepted that the appellant
    would return together with her child and whilst  she  might  well  face
    some difficulties in being able to live, find accommodation and work in
    Colombo, but we do not consider that these would be of such a level  as
    to render her removal disproportionate.

184. For the above reasons:

    The IJ materially erred in law.


     The decision we substitute  for  his  is  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
    appeal on asylum, humanitarian protection and human rights grounds.

Signed:




Dr H H Storey, Senior Immigration Judge

                                 APPENDIX A

REASONS FOR THE DECISION THAT THERE IS AN ERROR OF LAW IN THE  DETERMINATION
[by SIJ SOUTHERN, 3 JANUARY 2008]

1.   Having found as a  fact  that  the  appellant  had  been  subjected  to
    serious harm in  Sri  Lanka  at  the  hands  of  the  authorities  (see
    paragraphs 38 and 40 of the determination) the  immigration  judge  was
    required to identify good reasons for  considering  that  such  serious
    harm would not be repeated: paragraph 339K of HC 395.  His assertion at
    the end of paragraph 46 of his determination that he was satisfied that
    "the risk of that happening again is not a risk that  can  properly  be
    categorised as real" was not sufficient. It was a material error of law
    for the Immigration Judge to dismiss the appeal on this basis.

2.   It was a material error of law for the immigration judge to  leave  out
    of account, when assessing whether it would be unduly harsh  to  expect
    the appellant to re-establish herself in Colombo, the fact that, on his
    findings, the appellant  had  been  detained  and  ill-treated  by  the
    authorities when travelling within Colombo in the past.

3.   That being the case the decision of the Immigration  Judge  to  dismiss
    the appeal cannot stand  and  the  Tribunal  must  substitute  a  fresh
    decision to allow or to dismiss the appeal.   The  starting  point  for
    that reconsideration shall be the findings set out  between  paragraphs
    32 - 40 of the determination of the Immigration Judge."






                                 APPENDIX B

PRINCIPAL CASES ON SRI LANKA SINCE LP (LTTE AREA - TAMILS - COLOMBO -
RISK?) SRI LANKA CG [2007] UKAIT 00076


European Court of Human Rights

NA v United Kingdom (Application  no.  25904/07)  European  Court  of  Human
Rights, 17 July 2008


Court of Appeal

VS (Sri Lanka) [2008] EWCA Civ 271

R (on the application of AK) (Sri Lanka) v Secretary of State for  the  Home
Department [2009] EWCA Civ 447

R (on the application of RS) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
[2009] EWCA Civ 688


Administrative Court

R (on the application of Sivanesan)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
Department [2008] EWHC 1146

Veerasingam v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2008] EWHC 3044

R (on the application of Aruliraivan) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
Department [2009] EWHC 30

R (on the application of SS (Sri Lanka)) v Secretary of State for  the  Home
Department [2009] EWHC 223

R (on the application of Nirmalakumaran) v Secretary of State for  the  Home
Department [2009] EWHC 1169

R (on the application of AS (Sri Lanka)) v Secretary of State for  the  Home
Department [2009] EWHC 1763 (Admin)

R(on the application of Shanmugarajah) v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
Department [2009] EWHC 1888 (Admin)

R (on the application of B) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
[2009] EWHC 2273 (Admin)

Asylum and Immigration Tribunal

AN & SS (Tamils - Colombo - risk?) Sri Lanka CG [2008] UKAIT 00063





                                 APPENDIX C


                            BACKGROUND MATERIALS

|          |Document                                       |Date          |
|          |                                               |              |
|          |Disregard for Civilian safety appalling, Human |02.08         |
|          |Rights Watch (HRW)                             |              |
|          |Fear in the capital of Sri Lanka, BBC          |04.02.08      |
|          |Return of the dreaded white van, Sunday Leader |10.02.08      |
|          |Sri Lankan civilian toll appalling, BBC        |13.02.08      |
|          |Petition against Vavuniya separation, BBC      |19.02.08      |
|          |Colombo station attack kills 11, BBC           |29.02.08      |
|          |Recurring Nightmare, HRW                       |03.08         |
|          |Sri Lanka: 'Disappearances' by security forces |06.03.08      |
|          |a national crisis, HRW                         |              |
|          |Independent Panel resigns, International Herald|06.03.08      |
|          |Tribune (IHT)                                  |              |
|          |Colombo, Sri Lanka, New York Times             |09.03.08      |
|          |Torture widely practiced in Sri Lanka, UN      |09.03.08      |
|          |Rapporteur                                     |              |
|          |Responses to Information Requests (National    |08.04.08      |
|          |Identity Card),                                |              |
|          |Immigration and Refugee Board                  |              |
|          |White van victims at CID TID                   |20.04.08      |
|          |Deadly bomb kills 23, CNN                      |25.04.08      |
|          |Woman dies under interrogation, TamilNet       |29.04.08      |
|          |Civil Volunteer Force in Action, Daily Mirror  |02.05.08      |
|          |Situation Report: After Muhamalai debacle, war |04.05.08      |
|          |on free media                                  |              |
|          |No right to be there, Desmond Tutu             |15.05.08      |
|          |Police refuse to take action on rape of girls, |23.05.08      |
|          |Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC)           |              |
|          |Wikramanayaka stops one day service to obtain  |26.05.08      |
|          |NIC, TamilNet                                  |              |
|          |Don't visit Colombo, Mano Ganesan MP           |07.06.08      |
|          |SLA Army demands personal information from     |25.06.08      |
|          |families in Vadamaraadchchi, TamilNet          |              |
|          |Tens of thousands at risk, Amnesty             |08.08         |
|          |International (AI)                             |              |
|          |Abducted in Batticaloa and escaped in Colombo, |07.08.08      |
|          |TamilNet                                       |              |
|          |Abductee girl escapes in Vaazhaichcheanai,     |12.08.08      |
|          |TamilNet                                       |              |
|          |Letter BHC re: National Identity Cards in Sri  |18.08.08      |
|          |Lanka                                          |              |
|          |Tamils live in fear of forces, Associated Press|31.08.08      |
|          |(AP)                                           |              |
|          |Civil Defence Force in action, Daily Mirror    |01.09.08      |
|          |1200 Tamils in detention in Western Province,  |02.09.08      |
|          |TamilNet                                       |              |
|          |Outsiders quit Colombo, tells Defence          |13.09.08      |
|          |Secretary, TamilNet                            |              |
|          |Security intensified after bus bombing in Sri  |16.09.08      |
|          |Lanka, AP                                      |              |
|          |Census to prevent LTTE attacks, Defence        |21.09.08      |
|          |Secretary, Island                              |              |
|          |Lanka Govt to screen displaced Tamils, DAWN    |21.09.08      |
|          |Census Chaos, The Nation                       |21.09.08      |
|          |Police order journalist not to film, Reuters   |21.09.08      |
|          |Obtaining an INC is tedious, Daily Mirror      |23.09.08      |
|          |Pain of Sri Lanka aid pullout, BBC             |23.09.08      |
|          |Tamils resent surveillance in capital, AFP     |24.09.08      |
|          |Bodies of arrested found, BBC                  |10.10.08      |
|          |Sri Lanka Tamils 'being arrested', BBC         |10.15.08      |
|          |Police use registration details to arrest      |17.10.08      |
|          |Tamils, Daily Mirror                           |              |
|          |Govt defends Tamil registrations, ABC          |17.10.08      |
|          |Abducted politician escapes torturers, BBC     |19.10.08      |
|          |Police uniform clad men abduct Tamil returnee  |27.10.08      |
|          |from Korea, TamilNet                           |              |
|          |Prisoners in appalling conditions, Daily Mirror|28.10.08      |
|          |Suicide bombers in the guise of pregnant women,|07.11.08      |
|          |beggars, etc                                   |              |
|          |Political Prisoner to fast in Colombo,         |09.11.08      |
|          |Anuradhapura, TamilNet                         |              |
|          |74 Tamil political prisoners transferred to    |19.11.08      |
|          |Magazine prison,                               |              |
|          |TamilNet                                       |              |
|          |End Detentions & Aid restrictions, HRW         |12.08         |
|          |7 deserters escape from army custody, TamilNet |01.12.08      |
|          |Katunayake airport security tightened, TamilNet|02.12.08      |
|          |Ethnic filtering at checkpoint, TamilNet       |06.12.08      |
|          |Sri Lanka's 'Somalia Conditions', BBC          |10.12.08      |
|          |19 Tamils arrested in Gampaha, TamilNet        |27.12.08      |
|          |Large scale search in Colombo, TamilNet        |27.12.08      |
|          |Bomb blast in Colombo, TamilNet                |28.12.08      |
|          |65 Tamil youths arrested, TamilNet             |31.12.08      |
|          |Clarion Monthly News Letter                    |01.09         |
|          |2 killed in Colombo blast, BBC                 |02.01.09      |
|          |Police register migrants from North-East, Daily|05.01.09      |
|          |mirror                                         |              |
|          |Several suicide bombers in Colombo, Daily      |06.01.09      |
|          |Mirror                                         |              |
|          |Sri Lanka renew Tamil Tiger ban, BBC           |07.01.09      |
|          |Sri Lanka journalist shot dead, BBC            |08.01.09      |
|          |Government is responsible for killing, BBC     |08.01.09      |
|          |Row over Sri Lanka's editor murder grows as    |14.01.09      |
|          |diplomat censured, AFP                         |              |
|          |TTE captive treated, Daily Mirror              |16.01.09      |
|          |Prison break in Anurudhapura, Daily Mirror     |17.01.09      |
|          |Civilians killed in Sri Lanka, BBC             |18.01.09      |
|          |3 LTTE suspects escape from prison, Sunday     |19.01.09      |
|          |Times                                          |              |
|          |2 soldiers treated in rebel held hospital,     |20.01.09      |
|          |Daily News                                     |              |
|          |Tamil prisoners stripped naked, beaten by      |20.01.09      |
|          |Sinhala guards,                                |              |
|          |TamilNet                                       |              |
|          |War crimes turn to rape of the fleeing,        |28.01.09      |
|          |TamilNet                                       |              |
|          |Humanitarian Policy Group article, "Livelihoods|02.09         |
|          |and protection in Sri Lanka"                   |              |
|          |US State Department Report: Sri Lanka 2009     |25.02.09      |
|          |War on the Displaced, Sri Lankan Army and LTTE |02.09         |
|          |Abuses against Civilians in the Vanni, HRW     |              |
|          |Victims of war, Economist                      |03.02.09      |
|          |Tamil refugees shelled, Sunday Times           |01.02.09      |
|          |Sri Lanka army shells hit hospital, The        |02.02.09      |
|          |Independent                                    |              |
|          |Sri Lanka journalists 'risk death,' BBC        |03.02.09      |
|          |Fears grow for trapped civilians, Times        |03.02.09      |
|          |Hospital attacked again, BBC                   |03.02.09      |
|          |Patients killed in cluster bomb attack,        |04.02.09      |
|          |Guardian                                       |              |
|          |Moves to arrest Sinhala MP, Daily Mirror       |04.02.09      |
|          |Dozens dead in fighting, BBC                   |04.02.09      |
|          |Sri Lanka's civilian tragedy, Guardian         |04.02.09      |
|          |120 Tamil young men, women detained in Colombo,|06.02.09      |
|          |TamilNet                                       |              |
|          |13 civilians arrested in Chilapam, Dehiwela,   |09.02.09      |
|          |TamilNet                                       |              |
|          |At least 28 killed in suicide blast, Reuters   |09.02.09      |
|          |BBC suspends Sri Lanka broadcasts, BBC         |09.02.09      |
|          |9 Tamils arrested in Gampaha, TamilNet         |11.02.09      |
|          |Situation under-reported, UN Secretary General |12.02.09      |
|          |Medical facilities no longer functioning -     |12.02.09      |
|          |International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC)|              |
|          |7 upcountry Tamils arrested in Kandy, TamilNet |12.02.09      |
|          |Barbed wire villages raise fears, Times        |13.02.09      |
|          |Sri Lanka rejects British Special Envoy, Times |13.02.09      |
|          |Tamil tries to set himself on fire in Downing  |16.02.09      |
|          |Street, Guardian                               |              |
|          |8 Tamils arrested in Katunayake, TamilNet      |17.02.09      |
|          |Rebels deny shooting at civilians, Voice of    |17.02.09      |
|          |America (VOA)                                  |              |
|          |A Harrow Tamil matyrs himself to protest       |18.02.09      |
|          |against Sri Lanka government, Harrow Times     |              |
|          |38 civilians arrested in Gampaha, TamilNet     |18.02.09      |
|          |120 Tamil women forced to abort their children,|18.02.09      |
|          |Harrow Times                                   |              |
|          |Tamil killed himself 'to guide others to       |19.02.09      |
|          |liberation', Guardian                          |              |
|          |Police arrest 9 Tamil youths in Mannar,        |19.02.09      |
|          |TamilNet                                       |              |
|          |LTTE identifies killed POW, TamilNet           |19.02.09      |
|          |Civilian slaughter in Sri Lanka, BBC           |20.02.09      |
|          |S Lanka rebels attack Colombo despite losses,  |20.02.09      |
|          |BBC                                            |              |
|          |Army arrests 10 Tamils in Kalmunai, TamilNet   |21.02.09      |
|          |12 Tamils arrested in South, TamilNet          |22.02.09      |
|          |Price of SL army expansion is paid in grief, LA|22.02.09      |
|          |Times                                          |              |
|          |20 youths arrested in Amparai, TamilNet        |23.02.09      |
|          |23 Tamils arrested in Kuchuveli, TamilNet      |23.02.09      |
|          |Police arrest 4 Tamils in Kandy, TamilNet      |23.02.09      |
|          |US Senate Panel discuss Sri Lanka, VOA         |25.02.09      |
|          |Conflict limits access to health, Daily Mirror |26.02.09      |
|          |SL Editor arrest criticised, BBC               |27.02.09      |
|          |Sri Lanka may need bail out, Bloomberg         |27.02.09      |
|          |12 Tamils arrested in upcountry, TamilNet      |27.02.09      |
|          |Cordon, search operation in Trinco stepped up, |28.02.09      |
|          |TamilNet                                       |              |
|          |UN Security Council fight for Sri Lanka, Times |28.02.09      |
|          |Editor arrested and beaten, HRW                |03.09         |
|          |Displaced civilians traumatised, Integrated    |01.03.09      |
|          |Regional Information Network (IRIN)            |              |
|          |Police arrest 8 Tamil youths in Colombo,       |02.03.09      |
|          |TamilNet                                       |              |
|          |Police arrests 13 youths in Gampaha, TamilNet  |03.03.09      |
|          |STF kills mother raped girl, TamilNet          |03.03.09      |
|          |Arrest of young Tamils escalate in Colombo,    |04.03.09      |
|          |TamilNet                                       |              |
|          |Sri Lanka faces war catastrophe, BBC           |04.03.09      |
|          |Canada asked to suspend deporting Lankans,     |05.03.09      |
|          |Daily Mirror                                   |              |
|          |UNHCR Position Paper                           |04.09         |
|          |UNHCR  - Eligibility Guidelines for assessing  |09.04.09      |
|          |the international protection needs of Asylum   |              |
|          |seekers from Sri Lanka                         |              |
|          |The Independent - I have no choice but to die  |10.04.09      |
|          |The Independent - A fight to the death in      |10.04.09      |
|          |Westminster                                    |              |
|          |The Independent - Three decades of bloody      |19.04.09      |
|          |conflict                                       |              |
|          |The Independent - No one is safe as tigers     |19.04.09      |
|          |fight to the death - war zone traps 150,000    |              |
|          |Tamil Tigers accuse Sri Lankan army of         |21.04.09      |
|          |massacring civilians, Telegraph                |              |
|          |Fears of bloodbath, Times                      |22.04.09      |
|          |Clinton: Sri Lanka causes untold suffering,    |22.04.09      |
|          |Reuters                                        |              |
|          |The  Independent - Tamil  rebels surrender -   |23.04.09      |
|          |but hunt for their leader goes on              |              |
|          |The Times - Victory without humanity can be no |30.04.09      |
|          |triumph                                        |              |
|          |The Independent - Miliband meeting ends in     |01.05.09      |
|          |sharp                                          |              |
|          |exchange                                       |              |
|          |The Independent - Tamils fear retribution as   |01.05.09      |
|          |war reaches its climax                         |              |
|          |The Times - Banned British envoy arrives to    |04.05.09      |
|          |press for ceasefire with besieged Tamil Tiger  |              |
|          |rebels                                         |              |
|          |UN: Killing of Tamils civilians 'a bloodbath', |11.05.09      |
|          |Times                                          |              |
|          |Outrage grows over Tamil deaths, BBC           |11.05.09      |
|          |The Independent - Day of slaughter in Sri Lanka|11.05.09      |
|          |blamed on government guns                      |              |
|          |Shelling kills dozens at Sri Lankan hospital,  |12.05.09      |
|          |BBC                                            |              |
|          |The Sunday Times - China's aid has been crucial|16.05.09      |
|          |to victory                                     |              |
|          |The Times - Troops and rebels fight to the     |16.05.09      |
|          |death as civilians are trapped                 |              |
|          |The Times - catastrophe in Sri Lanka           |16.05.09      |
|          |The Observer - Sri Lankan army claims total    |17.05.09      |
|          |victory over Tamil Tigers                      |              |
|          |The Observer - Fears grow for safety of doctors|17.05.09      |
|          |who reported civilian slaughter                |              |
|          |Effigy of David Miliband burnt in Colombo,     |18.05.09      |
|          |Times                                          |              |
|          |Tigers admit defeat as the army stalks         |18.05.09      |
|          |remaining rebels of 26 year conflict           |              |
|          |In Sri Lanka the war is over but Tamil Tiger   |21.05.09      |
|          |remnants suffer brutal revenge, Guardian       |              |
|          |Tamil refugees face 2 year interment,          |21.05.09      |
|          |Independent                                    |              |
|          |The Times - we should boycott the callous Sri  |21.05.09      |
|          |Lanka                                          |              |
|          |Regime                                         |              |
|          |The Times - Red Cross halts aid as 300,000     |21.05.09      |
|          |refugees beg for food and water                |              |
|          |The Times - War Monk sets his sights on Britain|21.05.09      |
|          |after ruthless victory                         |              |
|          |Paramilitaries 'abducting Tamil children from  |22.05.09      |
|          |Sri Lankan camps', Times                       |              |
|          |Surrendered Tigers killed, Times               |24.05.09      |
|          |The Sunday Times - Tigers begged me to broker  |24.05.09      |
|          |surrender                                      |              |
|          |Journalists continue to face threats, The      |24.05.09      |
|          |Observer                                       |              |
|          |UN Sec General: 'the most appalling scenes',   |24.05.09      |
|          |CNN                                            |              |
|          |Even in victory, secrecy and evasion prevail,  |24.05.09      |
|          |Guardian                                       |              |
|          |News of the world - Hidden from the world,     |24.05.09      |
|          |innocent captives of terror                    |              |
|          |Sri Lanka accused of ethnic cleansing,         |25.05.09      |
|          |Telegraph                                      |              |
|          |Sri Lanka rejects Tigers' offer, BBC           |26.05.09      |
|          |Fears that Sri Lanka to occupy the north,      |27.05.09      |
|          |Australian                                     |              |
|          |Tamil refugees beg to learn fate of relatives  |27.05.09      |
|          |held as terrorists, Times                      |              |
|          |State of Emergency to remain, Guardian         |27.05.09      |
|          |No victory in Sri Lanka, The New York Times    |27.05.09      |
|          |Agony, uncertainty for Sri Lanka's war         |27.05.09      |
|          |displaced, AFP                                 |              |
|          |LTTE cadres killed, Daily Mirror               |27.05.09      |
|          |Epidemic waiting to happen, Christian Aid      |27.05.09      |
|          |Canadian Embassy attacked in Colombo, Daily    |28.05.09      |
|          |Mirror                                         |              |
|          |Sri Lankan Puppets in the hands of Emerging    |01.06.09      |
|          |Superpowers,                                   |              |
|          |Telegraph                                      |              |
|          |The Times - India complicit in 20,000 Sri      |01.06.09      |
|          |Lankan deaths                                  |              |
|          |TamilNet Article, "SLA gunfire heard in        |01.06.09      |
|          |Ariyaalai in Jaffna"                           |              |
|          |Tamil detainees kept in appalling conditions,  |02.06.09      |
|          |World Socialist Web Site (WSWS)                |              |
|          |Article from TamilNet, "33 Tamils arrested in  |02.06.09      |
|          |Wellampitya"                                   |              |
|          |Article from TamilNet, "Injured Tamil youth    |02.06.09      |
|          |dies in Colombo"                               |              |
|          |Aid workers forced to Sri Lanka, Times         |03.06.09      |
|          |TamilNet Article, "SLA searches for LTTE cadres|03.06.09      |
|          |in Vilpattu"                                   |              |
|          |Vanni IDPs live in appalling conditions, Chief |04.06.09      |
|          |Justice                                        |              |
|          |TamilNet Article, "Tamil civilian reported     |04.06.09      |
|          |missing in Bandarawela"                        |              |
|          |25 Tamil youths arrested in Colombo, TamilNet  |04.06.09      |
|          |TamilNet Article, "Kandy court remands Mannaar |07.06.09      |
|          |Tamil woman"                                   |              |
|          |TamilNet Article, "Tamil jeweller's body found |07.06.09      |
|          |in Nanu Oya"                                   |              |
|          |Article from TamilNet, "2 Tamil foreign        |08.06.09      |
|          |returnees arrested in Wellawatte"              |              |
|          |Fears for relatives' survival, Eastern Courier |10.06.09      |
|          |TamilNet Article, "Tamil youth abducted in     |10.06.09      |
|          |white van in                                   |              |
|          |Sammaanthu'rai"                                |              |
|          |TamilNet Article, "SLA impedes transport of    |11.06.09      |
|          |goods by lorries to Jaffna"                    |              |
|          |Article from TamilNet, " 3 Malaysian citizens  |12.06.09      |
|          |arrested in Wellawatte with LTTE photos"       |              |
|          |TamilNet Article, "White van armed men abduct  |12.06.09      |
|          |woman NGO staffer in Batticaloa"               |              |
|          |TamilNet Article, "21 Vanni Tamils sent to     |12.06.09      |
|          |Boosa, 3 reported missing from Pulmoaddai"     |              |
|          |Article from TamilNet, " 13 Tamils arrested in |13.06.09      |
|          |Gampaha"                                       |              |
|          |TamilNet Article, "SLA shoots, injures         |15.06.09      |
|          |fisherman in Jaffna seas"                      |              |
|          |Article from TamilNet, "9 Tamil youths arrested|16.06.09      |
|          |in Colombo                                     |              |
|          |Article from TamilNet, "2 Tamil youths arrested|17.06.09      |
|          |in Katunayake airport on arrive from Qatar"    |              |
|          |Human Rights groups letter to President Obama, |18.06.09      |
|          |TamilNet Article, "SL Police shoot 3 persons   |18.06.09      |
|          |dead in Vavuniyaa"                             |              |
|          |TamilNet Article, "Two UN staff reported       |19.06.09      |
|          |missing in Vavuniyaa"                          |              |
|          |Article from TamilNet, "12 Tamils arrested in  |20.06.09      |
|          |Wellawatte"                                    |              |
|          |Article from TamilNet, "Police detains 3 Tamil |20.06.09      |
|          |youths in Colombo"                             |              |
|          |France condemns arrests of UN personnel, Daily |23.06.09      |
|          |Mirror                                         |              |
|          |Sri Lanka said to detain lawmaker, MSNBC       |23.06.09      |
|          |Article from TamilNet, "7 Tamil youths arrested|23.06.09      |
|          |in Colombo"                                    |              |
|          |Sri Lankan reporter 'kidnapped,' BBC           |25.06.09      |
|          |Article from TamilNet, "Tamil Woman journalist |25.06.09      |
|          |abducted, later released"                      |              |
|          |TamilNet Article, "SLA shoots dead youth in    |25.06.09      |
|          |Thenmaraadchi"                                 |              |
|          |TamilNet Article, "Restrictions for Tamil      |25.06.09      |
|          |civilians visiting Mannaar"                    |              |
|          |Sri Lanka astrologer is arrested, BBC          |26.06.09      |
|          |Article from TamilNet, "Police arrest 17 Tamils|26.06.09      |
|          |in Wellawatte"                                 |              |
|          |Country of Origin Information Service Report   |26.06.09      |
|          |Sri Lanka, UKBA                                |              |
|          |TamilNet Article, "18 Tamil youths arrested in |26.06.09      |
|          |Ampaa'rai"                                     |              |
|          |TamilNet Article, "SLRC woman volunteer killed |27.06.09      |
|          |in Point Pedro"                                |              |
|          |TamilNet Article, "SLA provides security to    |27.06.09      |
|          |Tamily dailies' distributors in Jaffna"        |              |
|          |2 foreigners involved in a LTTE suicide plot,  |28.06.09      |
|          |Colombopage                                    |              |
|          |Sri Lanka can tale legal action against Tamil  |28.06.09      |
|          |Diaspora, Minister says, Colombopage           |              |
|          |2 suspects escape from Police cells,           |28.06.09      |
|          |Colombopage                                    |              |
|          |Foreigners among those arrested over plot to   |28.06.09      |
|          |kill President,                                |              |
|          |The Nation                                     |              |
|          |TamilNet Article, "Vavuniyaa Tamil Christian   |28.06.09      |
|          |teacher reported missing in Colombo"           |              |
|          |LTTE chief's parents take to Colombo for Police|29.06.09      |
|          |probe,                                         |              |
|          |Colombopage                                    |              |
|          |TamilNet Article, "SLA vehicle accidentally    |29.06.09      |
|          |kills civilian in Jaffna"                      |              |
|          |Sri Lanka's expanding peacetime army, BBC      |29.06.09      |
|          |Administration of ports under Immigration      |30.06.09      |
|          |Department,                                    |              |
|          |Colombopage                                    |              |
|          |Tamils people are being disenfranchised and    |30.06.09      |
|          |victimised, Elie Wiesel                        |              |
|          |UNHCR Note on applicability of the  2009 Sri   |07.09         |
|          |Lanka Guidelines                               |              |
|          |Article from TamilNet, "3 Tamil civilians      |01.07.09      |
|          |arrested in Colombo"                           |              |
|          |Lawyers put Sri Lanka in the dock, BBC         |01.07.09      |
|          |Tamil refugees forced into sex rackets, The    |02.07.09      |
|          |Australian                                     |              |
|          |SL President says IDPs can seek asylum in      |02.07.09      |
|          |Europe, Daily                                  |              |
|          |Mirror                                         |              |
|          |TamilNet Article, "2 Tamil youths abducted in  |02.07.09      |
|          |Batticaloa"                                    |              |
|          |Tamil refugees may end up in permanent camps,  |03.07.09      |
|          |Times                                          |              |
|          |TamilNet Article, "Vavuniyaa-Horowopottana road|03.07.09      |
|          |re-opened for public transport"                |              |
|          |TamilNet Article, "School principal shot dead  |04.07.09      |
|          |in Vavuniyaa"                                  |              |
|          |TamilNet Article, "SLA soldier killed in       |04.07.09      |
|          |confrontation with LTTE in Batticaloa"         |              |
|          |No welfare for Sri Lanka's Tamils, Aljazeera   |06.07.09      |
|          |Security in entire Sri Lanka will be           |07.07.09      |
|          |systematically established, PM says,           |              |
|          |Colombopage                                    |              |
|          |TamilNet Article, "Former Tamil policeman      |07.07.09      |
|          |knifed to death in Batticaloa"                 |              |
|          |The Times - Thousands die in Tamil "welfare    |10.07.09      |
|          |village"                                       |              |
|          |TamilNet Article, "Abducted youth released in  |10.07.09      |
|          |Jaffna"                                        |              |
|          |TamilNet Article, "Seven Tamil youths reported |11.07.09      |
|          |missing in Batticoloa"                         |              |
|          |TamilNet Article, "Tamil civilian reported     |14.07.09      |
|          |missing in Kinniya"                            |              |
|          |Article from TamilNet, " 3 Tamil youths, travel|20.07.09      |
|          |agent arrested in Colombo"                     |              |
|          |TamilNet Article, "2 corpses of youths washed  |20.07.09      |
|          |ashore in the islets of Jaffna"                |              |
|          |TamilNet Article, "Altogether 4 bodies washed  |21.07.09      |
|          |ashore in the islets of  Jaffna"               |              |
|          |TamilNet Article, "3 washed ashore bodies in   |23.07.09      |
|          |the islets of Jaffna identified"               |              |
|          |Article from TamilNet, "2 Tamil youths arrested|25.07.09      |
|          |in Colombo"                                    |              |
|          |Article from TamilNet, "8 Tamil youths arrested|28.07.09      |
|          |in Colombo"                                    |              |
|          |TamilNet Article, "Young couple knifed to death|29.07.09      |
|          |in Jaffna"                                     |              |
|          |Article from TamilNet, "Youth shot dead in     |31.07.09      |
|          |Colombo"                                       |              |
|          |TamilNet Article, "Police recover bodies of 2  |31.07.09      |
|          |youths killed in Delkanda"                     |              |
|          |Article from TamilNet,  "Tamil youth arrested  |01.08.09      |
|          |in Katunayake airport"                         |              |
|          |TamilNet Article, "Ki'linochchi GA arrested    |01.08.09      |
|          |under PTA"                                     |              |
|          |Article from TamilNet, "Hundreds of Tamils     |01.08.09      |
|          |interrogated                                   |              |
|          |in Colombo"                                    |              |
|          |TamilNet Article, "Commencement of bus service |01.08.09      |
|          |via A9 route from Jaffna doubtful"             |              |
|          |TamilNet Article, "Bus service via A9 route    |02.08.09      |
|          |from Jaffna to begin Sunday"                   |              |
|          |TamilNet Article, "EPDP candidate attacked in  |02.08.09      |
|          |Jaffna"                                        |              |
|          |Article from TamilNet, "5 Tamil youths arrested|03.08.09      |
|          |in Colombo"                                    |              |
|          |Article from TamilNet, "Hundreds of Tamils     |04.08.09      |
|          |interrogated in Colombo"                       |              |
|          |TamilNet Article, "TNA candidates, supporters  |04.08.09      |
|          |attacked by government party men in Vavuniyaa" |              |
|          |TamilNet Article, "Headless male corpse washed |07.08.09      |
|          |ashore in the islets of Jaffna"                |              |
|          |Article from TamilNet, " 2 Tamil youths        |08.08.09      |
|          |arrested in Wellawatte"                        |              |
|          |Article from TamilNet, "2 Tamils arrested in   |09.08.09      |
|          |Colombo"                                       |              |
|          |   Article from TamilNet, "2 Tamil youths      |09.08.09      |
|          |arrested in Colombo"                           |              |
|          |  TamilNet Article, "7 bodies of Tamil Nadu    |09.08.09      |
|          |fishermen washed                               |              |
|          |ashore in Jaffna identified"                   |              |
|          |Letter British High Commission Colombo ("BHC") |05.08.09      |
|          |to Country of Origin Information Service       |              |
|          |("COIS") re: Sri Lanka: Security and           |              |
|          |Development of Eastern Province                |              |
|          |Article from TamilNet, "Tamil civilian arrested|11.08.09      |
|          |at KIA still under detention"                  |              |
|          |TamilNet Article, "Student reported missing in |11.08.09      |
|          |Jaffna"                                        |              |
|          |Tamil net article, titled, SLA travel 'pass'   |12.08.09      |
|          |system to continue in Jaffna                   |              |
|          |TamilNet Article, "Arrested youths shot dead,  |13.08.09      |
|          |dumped on railway track in Colombo"            |              |
|          |TamilNet Article, "Tamil businessman arrested  |13.08.09      |
|          |in Wellawatte"                                 |              |
|          |Article from TamilNet, "12 Tamil youths        |14.08.09      |
|          |arrested in Colombo"                           |              |
|          |TamilNet Article, "7 Tamilnadu traders arrested|14.08.09      |
|          |in Batticaloa"                                 |              |
|          |Article from TamilNet, "Bodies of 2 Up-Country |15.08.09      |
|          |Tamil Women found in canal in Colombo HSZ"     |              |
|          |TamilNet Article, "Human remains recovered in  |16.08.09      |
|          |abandoned land in Batticaloa"                  |              |
|          |TamilNet Article, "Decomposed bodies of two    |16.08.09      |
|          |youths found in Gampaha"                       |              |
|          |TamilNet Article, "Human remains unearthed in  |17.08.09      |
|          |Mannaar"                                       |              |
|          |TamilNet Article, "8 Tamil youths arrested in  |19.08.09      |
|          |Anurdhapura,"                                  |              |
|          |Polonnaruwa"                                   |              |
|          |UKBA, Operational Guidance Note: Sri Lanka     |20.08.09      |
|          |Article from TamilNet, "JVP Councillor         |21.08.09      |
|          |detained"                                      |              |
|          |TamilNet Article, " 4 Vanni doctors released on|24.08.09      |
|          |conditional bail"                              |              |
|          |TamilNet Article, "Special search operations   |25.08.09      |
|          |conducted in Wellawatte"                       |              |
|          |TamilNet Article, "STF shoot 2 Tamils dead in  |26.08.09      |
|          |Batticaloa"                                    |              |
|          |TamilNet Article, "Colombo Police arrest 3     |26.08.09      |
|          |upcountry Tamil youths"                        |              |
|          |The independent - Video that reveals truth of  |27.08.09      |
|          |Sri Lankan War Crimes                          |              |
|          |TamilNet Article, "Tamil civilian reported     |27.08.09      |
|          |missing in Vavuniyaa"                          |              |
|          |TamilNet Article, "Tamil youth abducted in     |27.08.09      |
|          |Puththa'lam"                                   |              |
|          |Article from TamilNet, "4 Tamil youths arrested|28.08.09      |
|          |in Colombo City"                               |              |
|          |Article from TamilNet, "Jaffna Tamil youth     |28.08.09      |
|          |abducted in Colombo"                           |              |
|          |TamilNet Article, "2 Tamil political prisoners |28.08.09      |
|          |killed in Welikada"                            |              |
|          |Article from TamilNet, "SC Directs AG to       |29.08.09      |
|          |expedite inquiry into Tamil detainees in       |              |
|          |prison"                                        |              |
|          |TamilNet Article, "Tamil youth shot, injured   |29.08.09      |
|          |identified as an IDP"                          |              |
|          |TamilNet Article, "Tamily youth shot injured in|30.08.09      |
|          |Ampaa'rai"                                     |              |
|          |Article from TamilNet, "4 Tamil youths arrested|31.08.09      |
|          |in Katunayake HSZ"                             |              |
|          |TamilNet Article, "26 Civilians arrested by TID|01.09.09      |
|          |in Mannaar in August                           |              |
|          |TamilNet Article, "Young woman's body recovered|01.09.09      |
|          |in Jaffna"                                     |              |
|          |TamilNet Article, "Boy dies in mine explosion, |01.09.09      |
|          |2 children injured in Jaffna"                  |              |
|          |TamilNet Article, "Tamil woman arrested in     |01.09.09      |
|          |Wellawatte"                                    |              |
|          |UN envoy seeks probe into 'horrendous' video,  |02.09.09      |
|          |CNN                                            |              |
|          |TamilNet Article, "Tamil civilian reported     |02.09.09      |
|          |missing in Mannaar"                            |              |
|          |Racket to help Tigers escape from IDP camps,   |03.09.09      |
|          |Daily Mirror                                   |              |
|          |TamilNet Article, "3 JVP journalists to be     |04.09.09      |
|          |detained, JVP supporter abducted"              |              |
|          |TamilNet Article, "2 Up-Country Tamils found   |05.09.09      |
|          |dead in Maskeliya"                             |              |
|          |TamilNet Article, "Batticaloa Tamil resident   |05.09.09      |
|          |arrested in Katunayake airport"                |              |
|          |TamilNet Article, "CES allows 142 Jaffna       |06.09.09      |
|          |lorries to transport goods to South"           |              |
|          |TamilNet Article, "Time of the Thugs- Dr       |06.09.09      |
|          |Saravanamuttu"                                 |              |
|          |LTTE threat still alive - Head of Police, BBC  |07.09.09      |
|          |LTTE member on assassination mission arrested, |07.09.09      |
|          |Colombopage                                    |              |
|          |Sri Lanka's 'legal' persecution, AFP           |07.09.09      |
|          |Witness Statement of Mr Andrew Phillip Saunders|09.09.09      |
|          |Another prominent LTTE cadre who secured his   |09.09.09      |
|          |release through bribery rearrested, Colombopage|              |
|          |C4 Explosives found in hill capital,           |09.09.09      |
|          |Colombopage                                    |              |
|          |Journalists who fled country behind Channel 4  |09.09.09      |
|          |episode, Daily News                            |              |
|          |TamilNet, Channel-4 broadcast of internment    |09.09.09      |
|          |camp conditions irks Colombo                   |              |
|          |Article from TamilNet, "3 Tamil civilians      |10.09.09      |
|          |missing, abducted in Colombo"                  |              |
|          |Sri Lanka's top envoy hits out at EU as cut in |10.09.09      |
|          |�1bn trade  concession looms, Guardian         |              |
|          |Letter BHC to COIS re: Population Statistics   |10.09.09      |
|          |- Colombo                                      |              |
|          |2 men who supplied vehicles to LTTE arrested,  |11.09.09      |
|          |Sunday Times                                   |              |
|          |Article from TamilNet, "2 Tamil youths arrested|11.09.09      |
|          |in Colombo"                                    |              |
|          |ICRC denied access to Tiger suspects, Daily    |11.09.09      |
|          |Mirror                                         |              |
|          |Fear for safety of UN official, The Age        |12.09.09      |
|          |Harassed Tamils in prison-like camps in Sri    |13.09.09      |
|          |Lanka, Guardian                                |              |
|          |Hounslow Tamil's terrified to speak out,       |13.09.09      |
|          |Thisislocallondon                              |              |
|          |UK suspends forced removals - UKBA, This is    |13.09.09      |
|          |local London                                   |              |
|          |Tamils rail under Sri Lanka's heel, Guardian   |14.09.09      |
|          |3 Tamil youths arrested in Mathavachchi,       |14.09.09      |
|          |TamilNet                                       |              |
|          |Police arrest 5 Tamils, Muslim civilians in    |14.09.09      |
|          |Puttalam, TamilNet                             |              |
|          |TamilNet Article, "Blood stained body of woman |14.09.09      |
|          |recovered in Vavuniyaa"                        |              |
|          |How Sri Lanka governs through detentions,      |15.09.09      |
|          |Global post                                    |              |
|          |TamilNet Article, "8 Tamil civilians arrested  |15.09.09      |
|          |in Thanthirimalai"                             |              |
|          |Fears for Human Rights in Sri Lanka, Financial |15.09.09      |
|          |Times                                          |              |
|          |The Guardian - Eyewitness to carnage - The     |16.09.09      |
|          |British woman caught in brutal civil war       |              |
|          |Court further remands 4 returnees from Fiji,   |16.09.09      |
|          |TamilNet                                       |              |
|          |The Guardian - As the shells fell, we tried to |16.09.09      |
|          |save lives with no blood or medicine           |              |
|          |Letter BHC to COIS re: Sri Lanka: Security and |17.09.09      |
|          |Development of Jaffna District                 |              |
|          |UN 'extremely frustrated', Daily Mirror        |17.09.09      |
|          |Lawmaker: Sri Lanka re-detains released        |17.09.09      |
|          |refugees, AP                                   |              |
|          |Canadian stuck in Sri Lankan terror law,       |17.09.09      |
|          |National Post                                  |              |
|          |Office of the United Nations High Commissioner |17.09.09      |
|          |for Human Rights (OHCHR),  'Sri Lanka should   |              |
|          |permit an impartial investigation into the     |              |
|          |'Channel 4 videotape', says UN expert.         |              |
|          |TamilNet Article, "3 Tamil youths arrested in  |17.09.09      |
|          |Vavuniyaa"                                     |              |
|          |TamilNet Article, "Body of Tamil woman         |17.09.09      |
|          |recovered in Vavuniyaa"                        |              |
|          |TamilNet Article, "Two Up-Country Tamil girls  |17.09.09      |
|          |molested by Sri Lankan policeman, businessmen" |              |
|          |UN warning over displaced Tamils, BBC          |18.09.09      |
|          |LTTE family members' details unearthed, Daily  |18.09.09      |
|          |Mirror                                         |              |
|          |Colombo continuing 'detentions', Aljazeera     |18.09.09      |
|          |Sri Lanka's unrule of law, Director, AHRC      |18.09.09      |
|          |Prison guards assault detainees, TamilNet      |18.09.09      |
|          |Letter from ILPA to Amelia Wright , Head of    |18.09.09      |
|          |asylum policy                                  |              |
|          |TamilNet, 'From one prison to another': Sri    |19.09.09      |
|          |Lanka's 'resettlement'                         |              |
|          |Article from TamilNet, "Two Up-Country Tamil   |19.09.09      |
|          |girls reported missing in Colombo"             |              |
|          |TamilNet Article, "Election violence on the    |19.09.09      |
|          |increase in SPC election"                      |              |
|          |The GSP + report: could we have it better,     |20.09.09      |
|          |Sunday Times                                   |              |
|          |TamilNet Article, "Trinco Tamil youth abducted |20.09.09      |
|          |in Batticaloa"                                 |              |
|          |KP's associate nabbed at airport, Daily Mirror |21.09.09      |
|          |UN rep says execution investigators close to SL|21.09.09      |
|          |Govt, Radio                                    |              |
|          |Australia                                      |              |
|          |South Asia Intelligence Review (SAIR) of the   |21.09.09      |
|          |South Asia Terrorism Portal (SATP), LTTE       |              |
|          |proposed Provisional Transnational Government  |              |
|          |of Tamil Eelam will function as an organization|              |
|          |of Tamil Diaspora, says US based LTTE leader   |              |
|          |Human Rights Watch, Sri Lanka: World Leaders   |22.09.09      |
|          |Should Demand End to Detention Camps           |              |
|          |TamilNet Article, "Woman swallows cyanide, dies|22.09.09      |
|          |in hospital"                                   |              |
|          |TamilNet Article, "4 Tamil youths arrested in  |23.09.09      |
|          |Up-country"                                    |              |
|          |TamilNet Article, "Police shoot, injures       |23.09.09      |
|          |civilian in Thenmaraadchi"                     |              |
|          |TamilNet Article, "Young Tamil mother reported |23.09.09      |
|          |missing                                        |              |
|          |Up-Country"                                    |              |
|          |TamilNet, Tamil technologist feared            |24.09.09      |
|          |extra-judicially executed in Colombo           |              |
|          |TamilNet Article, "3 youths injured in SLA     |25.09.09      |
|          |landmine explosion in Jaffna"                  |              |
|          |TamilNet, SLA shoots 6 including women,        |26.09.09      |
|          |children in Cheddiku'lam camp                  |              |
|          |South Asia Intelligence Review (SAIR) of the   |28.09.09      |
|          |South Asia Terrorism Portal  (SATP), LTTE      |              |
|          |communication system is still working, says    |              |
|          |Minister of Export Development and             |              |
|          |International Trade G.L. Peiris                |              |
|          |BBC Article, "Sri Lanka Recruits Tamil Police" |28.09.09      |
|          |TamilNet Article, "Tamil political prisoners in|28.09.09      |
|          |Anuradhapura, Jaffna to begin fast"            |              |
|          |TamilNet Article, "SL Army bus kills Tamil girl|28.09.09      |
|          |student in Vavuniyaa"                          |              |
|          |The Implementation of certain Human Rights     |30.09.09      |
|          |Conventions in Sri Lanka - final report by the |              |
|          |European Commission                            |              |
|          |Article from TamilNet, "5 Tamil youths arrested|01.10.09      |
|          |in Colombo"                                    |              |
|          |TamilNet Article, "Medical doctor arrested in  |01.10.09      |
|          |Vavuniyaa"                                     |              |
|          |TamilNet Article, "IDP from Vavuniyaa camp     |01.10.09      |
|          |arrested by Kandy Police"                      |              |
|          |Asian Human Rights Commission, Sri Lanka:      | 02.10.09     |
|          |Opposition demands dismantling of war time     |              |
|          |security measures                              |              |
|          |TamilNet Article, "10 Tamil, Muslim civilians  |02.10.09      |
|          |arrested in Chilaapam"                         |              |
|          |TamilNet Article, "Girl killed, 11 wounded,    |02.10.09      |
|          |personal enmity triggers off van bomb"         |              |
|          |Article from TamilNet, "5 Tamil youths arrested|03.10.09      |
|          |in Negombo"                                    |              |
|          |TamilNet Article, "SLA soldier opens fire,     |03.10.09      |
|          |Captain, soldier killed"                       |              |
|          |   Article, "US Responds to Sri Lanka Protest  |04.10.09      |
|          |over                                           |              |
|          |Clinton remark"                                |              |
|          |Article from TamilNet, "Bank Officer released, |05.10.09      |
|          |wife under detention"                          |              |
|          |TamilNet Article, "Civilian killed during      |05.10.09      |
|          |curfew hours in Thenmaraadchi"                 |              |
|          |Asian Human Rights Commission, Sri Lanka: The  |06.10.09      |
|          |Arson attack and the abysmal lawlessness       |              |
|          |TamilNet Article, "CID arrests 3 Tamil youths  |06.10.09      |
|          |at Medawachchiya"                              |              |
|          |TamilNet, 250,000 Tamils in dire humanitarian  |07.10.09      |
|          |need, says British Minister                    |              |
|          |Daily Mirror - Objective, Accurate and Reliable|07.10.09      |
|          |information" lost in UN system                 |              |
|          |Article from TamilNet, "Tamil youth arrested in|07.10.09      |
|          |Colombo"                                       |              |
|          |Amnesty International, Sri Lanka: Displaced now|08.10.09      |
|          |trapped between the military and the impending |              |
|          |monsoon                                        |              |
|          |Daily Mirror - Fate of 40 LTTE suspects in     |08.10.09      |
|          |A'pura prison                                  |              |
|          |Article from TamilNet, "2 Tamil youths arrested|08.10.09      |
|          |in Colombo"                                    |              |
|          |TamilNet Article, "4 Tamil youths arrested in  |08.10.09      |
|          |Ampaa'rai"                                     |              |
|          |Daily Mirror - Deportation - Search goes on for|09.10.09      |
|          |missing SL                            mum - pg |              |
|          |A2                                             |              |
|          |Daily Mirror - Lankans refugee's deportation   |09.10.09      |
|          |put on hold                                    |              |
|          |Daily Mirror - We still haven't defeated LTTE's|09.10.09      |
|          |global terror network                          |              |
|          |TamilNet Article, "2 Tamils, a Muslim arrested |09.10.09      |
|          |in Chilaw"                                     |              |
|          |Daily News  - Minister confident of positive   |10.10.09      |
|          |decision over                                  |              |
|          |GSP+ -                                         |              |
|          |Human Rights Watch, Sri Lanka: Tensions mount  |10.10.09      |
|          |as camp conditions detriorate                  |              |
|          |Daily News - UNP making lame excuses now       |10.10.09      |
|          |Daily news - Sri Lankans among illegal         |10.10.09      |
|          |immigrants arrested in UK                      |              |
|          |Sunday Observer - Mega development drive in    |11.10.09      |
|          |North pg 8                                     |              |
|          |Article from TamilNet, "Police arrests Tamil   |11.10.09      |
|          |youth in Negombo"                              |              |
|          |TamilNet Article, "Tamil family man reported   |11.10.09      |
|          |missing in                                     |              |
|          |Chammaanthu'rai"                               |              |
|          |Article from TamilNet, "3 Tamil youths arrested|12.10.09      |
|          |in Colombo"                                    |              |
|          |Tamil civilian arrested in Chilaapam, TamilNet |12.10.09      |
|          |Sri Lanka Bulletin                             |13.10.09      |
|          |Country of Origin Information Report Sri Lanka,|13.10.09      |
|          |UKBA                                           |              |
|          |TamilNet Article, "Tamil family man's corpse   |13.10.09      |
|          |found in Kandy"                                |              |
|          |Witness Statement of David Becker, UKBA        |13.10.09      |
|          |Reuters India - Exclusive - EU probe slams Sri |16.10.09      |
|          |Lanka on rights, trade at risk                 |              |
|          |TamilNet Article, "SL Police arrests 2 Tamils  |16.10.09      |
|          |in Negombo"                                    |              |
|          |TamilNet Article, "SL Police arrests Tamil man |16.10.09      |
|          |in Uppuve'il"                                  |              |
|          |Witness statement of the Appellant             |16.10.09      |
|          |TamilNet Article, "Jaffna judges, magistrates, |18.10.09      |
|          |lawyers can travel via A9 road with SLA        |              |
|          |permission"                                    |              |
|          |UKBA Sri Lanka: Enforced returns of failed     |19.10.09      |
|          |asylum seekers                                 |              |
|          |29 Tamils youths arrested in Katunayake in 2   |19.10.09      |
|          |incidents TamilNet                             |              |
|          |Deportation of Sri Lankans under review by     |19.10.09      |
|          |Britain - Daily                                |              |
|          |Mirror                                         |              |
|          |TamilNet Article, "Muslim driver abducted by   |19.10.09      |
|          |men in white van in Colombo"                   |              |
|          |Expert report of Prof. Anthony Good dated      |19.10.09      |
|          |19.10.09 enclosing his report on fact - finding|              |
|          |mission visit to Sri Lanka dated 10 - 20 /02/06|              |
|          |TamilNet Article, "Tamil trader abducted in    |22.10.09      |
|          |Batticaloa"                                    |              |
|          |Letter from ILPA addressed to Phil Douglas     |22.10.09      |
|          |titled, Sri Lanka Enforced returns of failed   |              |
|          |asylum seekers                                 |              |
|          |TamilNet Article, "SL Police arrest 2 Tamil    |23.10.09      |
|          |youths at Katunayake"                          |              |
|          |Article from Daily Mirror online titled,       |23.10.09      |
|          |suspected LTTE female area leader arrested in  |              |
|          |Ampara                                         |              |
|          |TamilNet Article, "5 Tamils arrested in        |24.10.09      |
|          |Vavuniyaa, Ampaa'rai"                          |              |
|          |TamilNet Article, "Army colonel, wife arrested |24.10.09      |
|          |for plotting to kill Rajapakse                 |              |
|          |TamilNet Article, "Court remands EPDP cadre in |24.10.09      |
|          |robbery case"                                  |              |
|          |TamilNet Article titled, stop settling in      |24.10.09      |
|          |Tamil, Muslim Owned land                       |              |
|          |BBC Sinhala.com article titled, Released IDP's |25.10.09      |
|          |re - arrested                                  |              |
|          |Supplementary report of Prof Goode             |25.10.09      |
|          |SLA refuses permission to Jaffna civilians in  |25.10.09      |
|          |Vavuniyaa camps to return home                 |              |
|          |Letter British High Commission (BHC), Colombo  |26.10.09      |
|          |to TSol                                        |              |
|          |Statement of Phil Douglas, UKBA                |26.10.09      |
|          |   Article from the Daily Mirror online,       |26.10.09      |
|          |"Defence Authorities                           |              |
|          |Reject fake web stories."                      |              |
|          |Email from BHC, Colombo                        |26.10.09      |
|          |Expert report of Dr Smith                      |26.10.09      |
|          |Letter from appellant's representatives        |26.10.09      |
|          |TamilNet article titled, 5 Tamils including 2  |26.10.09      |
|          |women arrested in East, West                   |              |
|          |TamilNet Article titled, Vanni IDP's continued |26.10.09      |
|          |to be detained in Jaffna district camps        |              |
|          |Contacting family in Vanni region, ICRC        |Undated       |
|          |UN seeks full access to Sri Lankan refugee     |Undated       |
|          |camps, CNN.com                                 |              |
|          |The Sunday Times - Rebel leaders make historic |Undated       |
|          |offer to disarm as Sri Lankan troops close in  |              |
|          |to end 25 years of civil war and threaten more |              |
|          |slaughter on the battlefield.                  |              |
|          |Copy Sri Lankan landing card                   |Undated       |
|          |Photograph of Colombo Municipal Council bill   |Undated       |
|          |board                                          |              |
|448.      |US State Department report, "Report to congress|Undated       |
|          |on incidents during the recent conflict in Sri |              |
|          |Lanka - 2009"                                  |              |
|450.      |FCO Report of Information Gathering Visit to   |Undated       |
|          |Colombo, Sri Lanka 23-29 August                |              |




