
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal

                         PO (Trafficked Women) Nigeria CG [2009] UKAIT 00046




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |                            |
|On 6th November, 2008                |                            |
|And on 7th January, 2009             |                            |
|And on 13th January, 2009            |                            |


                                   Before

                      Senior Immigration Judge Chalkley
                      Senior Immigration Judge A Jordan
                                 Mrs M L Roe

                                   Between

                                     PO

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms P Chandran of Counsel instructed by Wilson & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


 1) In general terms, women and girls in Nigeria do not face a real risk of
    serious harm from human traffickers, but the  risk  is  heightened  for
    females under 40 years of age living in  suburban  areas  with  a  poor
    level of education.  However, where it can be shown that an  individual
    does face a real risk of being forced or coerced into  prostitution  by
    traffickers, the issue of whether she will be able to access  effective
    protection from the authorities will need to be carefully considered in
    the light of background evidence.

 2) There is in general no real risk of  a  trafficking  victim  being  re-
    trafficked on return to Nigeria unless it  is  established  that  those
    responsible for the victim's initial trafficking formed part of a  gang
    whose members were to share in the victim's earnings or a proportion of
    the victim's target earnings in circumstances where the victim fails to
    earn those target earnings.  It is  essential  that  the  circumstances
    surrounding the victim's initial trafficking  are  carefully  examined.



                           DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    The appellant is female, a citizen of Nigeria  and  was  born  on  5th
    July, 1979.  She appeals against the decision of the respondent,  taken
    on 19th April, 2005, to direct her removal as an illegal entrant.

Immigration history

2.    This appeal has a lengthy history.  The appellant entered  the  United
    Kingdom on 10th January, 2005, and claimed asylum on 1st  April,  2005.
    The appellant travelled to the United Kingdom with a "Mr  Osagie"  who,
    unbeknown to the appellant at the time, brought the  appellant  to  the
    United Kingdom for the purposes of working as a prostitute.  Mr  Osagie
    retained the appellant's passport, which he had obtained  in  her  name
    and which included a visa for the United Kingdom.  She is an orphan who
    had been cared for by her aunt "Becky" for whom she  had  worked  since
    the age of 12, selling water in her home city, Benin City, Edo State.

Basis of the appellant's claim to asylum

3.    The appellant met Mr Osagie who, like  the  appellant,  lived  in  Edo
    State and she sometimes met him at her church, although, when there was
    no Sunday church service, he used to visit her.   He  was,  apparently,
    well-known in Benin City and he told  her  when  they  arrived  in  the
    United Kingdom that he was bringing girls into the United  Kingdom  for
    prostitution.  He had previously told her that he was a businessman  in
    Nigeria and persuaded the appellant to travel to  the  United  Kingdom,
    because he had promised her a job working in his factory in the  United
    Kingdom.

4.    The appellant fears return to Nigeria, because, she claims, she is  at
    risk from people traffickers.  She fears being re-trafficked, either by
    the same people or by a different gang and also fears retribution  from
    members of Mr Osagie's trafficking  gang  who,  because  the  appellant
    escaped, will not have been paid for the various roles that  they  have
    played in her transportation to the United Kingdom.  Additionally,  the
    appellant  believes  that  she  would  have  difficulty  in   obtaining
    accommodation and employment and this would increase the  risk  to  her
    from the people trafficking gangs.

Appeal history

5.    The appellant's appeal was first heard on  27th  September,  2005,  at
    Hatton Cross before IJ Malins.  On 21st November, 2006, a panel of  the
    Tribunal (Waumsley and Spencer  SSIJ)  concluded  that  IJ  Malins  had
    materially  erred  in  law  in  her   determination   and   ordered   a
    reconsideration hearing before a different Immigration Judge.  In doing
    so, the panel decided that IJ Malin's findings of fact, recorded by her
    at paragraphs 12.1 and 12.2 of her determination, were to be preserved,
    "unless further evidence emerges during the stage  two  reconsideration
    hearing which demonstrates that the appellant's account is not in  fact
    true".

6.    We have  set  out  at  paragraph  9  below,  IJ  Malin's  findings  at
    paragraphs 12.1 and 12.2 of her determination.

7.    The appeal was then heard on  26th  February,  2007  by  IJ  Elizabeth
    Grant.  She  dismissed  the  appellant's  asylum  appeal,  humanitarian
    protection  appeal  and  human  rights  appeal   in   a   determination
    promulgated on 5th March, 2008.  The  appellant  sought  an  order  for
    reconsideration, which was refused.

8.    The appellant subsequently  appealed  to  the  Court  of  Appeal.   In
    granting leave to appeal on 24th October 2007, Sedley LJ said this:

         "1.      The appellant, represented today  by  Ms  Chandran,  is  a
             young Nigerian woman who was brought to this country by a  man
             who I think can be  briefly  and  accurately  described  as  a
             Nigerian gangster, for the purposes of enforced  prostitution.
             After months of repeated rape she escaped and, with  the  help
             of the Poppy Project, sought refuge and protection here.   Her
             reward has been the decision of the Home Office  to  send  her
             back to Nigeria.


         2. An Immigration Judge (Mrs Malins) allowed  her  appeal,  holding
             her entitled to both refugee and humanitarian protection.  The
             Home  Office's  appeal  to  the  AIT,   however,   secured   a
             reconsideration on all issues except certain  specified  facts
             which had been determined by Mrs  Malins  in  the  appellant's
             favour.  Although it now appears from the pink form (as it  is
             called) that the reconsideration was formally directed  to  be
             before a panel of two Immigration Judges, one of them to be  a
             Senior or Designated Immigration Judge, in the event it was re-
             heard by a  single  Immigration  Judge,  Mr  Grant  (sic)  who
             reached a decision  opposite  to  that  of  Immigration  Judge
             Malins.


         3. This question of the constitution of the Tribunal, in  my  view,
             itself calls for investigation.  In the reasons given  by  the
             judges conducting  the  first  stage  of  the  reconsideration
             decision, at paragraph 21, reference is made to 'a full  stage
             II reconsideration before a  different  Immigration  Judge'  -
             which  conflicts  with  the  order  itself  to  which  I  have
             referred.  This is a matter which I think  requires  attention
             because it is arguable that if the direction  was  for  a  two
             judge panel, the single judge second-stage reconsideration was
             a nullity.


         4. This is a ground which I have given Ms  Chandran  leave  to  add
             because it is only on the late disclosure  of  the  pink  form
             that it has come to her attention.  But she  seeks  permission
             to appeal against the determination on a  number  of  grounds,
             which I have to say at once Auld LJ, on consideration  of  the
             papers, considered to be no  more  than  challenges  to  fact-
             finding in what was, for  better  or  worse,  a  thorough  and
             careful determination.


         5. On renewal, however, Ms Chandran submits that her  case  is,  in
             more than one respect, a viable legal challenge and not merely
             a dispute about the facts.  The first ground is that the first
             stage Tribunal - having found  two  discrete  errors  of  law,
             namely in relation to internal relocation and  sufficiency  of
             protection  - ought to have limited the second stage to  these
             two matters and not to set  the  whole  case  (bar  the  fact-
             findings in paragraphs 12.1 and 12.2)  at  large  again.   She
             cites in her skeleton argument sufficient  authority  in  this
             court to give the point life, albeit it is a point  which  she
             has been able to take only (in relation to the other point) on
             sight of the pink form.


         6. The submission which needs to  be  added  to  the  grounds  (and
             again, for which she needs and  has  my  leave)  is  that  the
             second Immigration Judge  ought  therefore  not  to  have  re-
             determined the issues of whether the  appellant's  fears  were
             well-founded and whether she was  a  member  of  a  particular
             social group, both of which had been determined in her  favour
             and as to which no error of law had been found.


         7.  If  the  well-foundedness  of   the   appellant's   fears   was
             legitimately before the second Tribunal, it is submitted  that
             the Immigration Judge's  decision  on  it  is  flawed  by  his
             failure to take into account the expert in-country evidence of
             Ms Olateru-Olagbegi, which  had  been  accepted  and  accorded
             weight by the first Immigration Judge.  This, too, with  great
             respect to the contrary view of Auld  LJ,  I  consider  to  be
             arguable as an issue of law and not merely of fact because  it
             is evidence which is capable of having had a  critical  impact
             on the outcome.  With it goes  a  submission  that  other  in-
             country evidence going to the sufficiency  of  protection  and
             emanating from the US State Department and UNHCR has also been
             ignored.  There may, in my view, be substance in Ms Chandran's
             contention that the second Immigration Judge has cherry-picked
             unfairly among the in-country evidence to which  he  did  give
             attention.


         8. There are then submissions that  the  second  Immigration  Judge
             ignored relevant and undisturbed  fact-findings  made  by  the
             first Immigration Judge; that he erred in his approach to  the
             relationship of internal flight to the objective foundation of
             the fear of persecution;  that  his  re-determination  of  the
             applicant's  membership  of  a  particular  social  group  was
             deficient, and that evidence about her mental  state  and  the
             impact on it of  removal  was  dismissively  treated  by  him.
             These submissions too  appear  to  me  viable;  the  remainder
             probably less so; but since they interlock I do not propose to
             sever any of them at this stage.  It will be  for  Counsel  to
             make the most realistic and economic presentation that she can
             of her points when the appeal, for which  I  propose  to  give
             permission, comes on.


         9. There is, however, in my judgment, another reason  for  granting
             permission to appeal.  This woman was brought to this  country
             by a criminal who should not have been  allowed  in,  and  was
             compelled by force to provide sexual services  to  men  living
             here.  Her reward, now that she has finally escaped, is to  be
             returned to a country where  she  will  certainly  be  without
             social or familial support, will be  expected  to  move  to  a
             strange region and to try to find work there and  might  still
             be at risk from the same predator.  Some might  think  she  is
             owed better than this.  This court is not a court  of  morals,
             but is a court which, in my view, will want to look with great
             care at an outcome such as was arrived at  here  by  a  single
             Immigration  Judge  in  sharp  contrast  to  that  of  another
             Immigration Judge and  at  a  hearing  which  it  appears  was
             intended to be conducted by a two-judge  panel,  one  of  them
             senior in status.


         10.      I  would  add  this.   The  test  applied  by  the  second
             Immigration Judge was the test of exceptionality which is  now
             known  to  be  an  incorrect  application  of  Article   8(2).
             Although this error was not at present one  of  Ms  Chandran's
             grounds, it may be that the moral case which I have  mentioned
             would have been accorded rather more  weight  if  the  correct
             exercise of assessing not exceptionality  but  proportionality
             had  in  fact  been  gone  through.   This  too  may   deserve
             attention."


9.    By order dated 7th January, 2008, Laws LJ ordered  that  IJ  Elizabeth
    Grant's determination should be set aside.  In a Statement  of  Reasons
    it appears that the order of the Court of Appeal was by way of  consent
    of the parties.  Paragraphs 5 and 6 of the Statement of Reasons say:-

         "5.      The parties are agreed that the determination of 5th March
             2007 is flawed, insofar  as  the  findings  on  the  issue  of
             sufficiency  of  protection  and  internal   relocation   were
             insufficiently clearly reasoned.  It is  further  agreed  that
             the issues of:


             a.  whether or not the appellant would be exposed  to  a  real
                  risk of persecution from her former trafficker in her home
                  town; and


             b.  whether the appellant was a member of a 'social group'


             had been determined in the appellant's  favour  by  the  first
             Immigration Judge and  were  not  matters  which  fell  to  be
             reconsidered at the second stage.


         6. The parties are  therefore  agreed  that  the  matters  for  re-
             determination on remittal should consist of:-


             a.  whether or not the  Nigerian  authorities  could  offer  a
                  sufficiency of protection to the appellant, whether in her
                  home town or elsewhere in Nigeria;


             b.  whether internal relocation would be unduly harsh;


             c.  whether the appellant's claim under  Article  8  and/or  3
                  should succeed, including whether  the  medical  statement
                  issues raised by the  appellant  entitle  her  to  succeed
                  under these provisions.


         7. It is further agreed that the AIT's findings at  paragraph  12.1
             and 12.2 of the  first  determination  of  10th  October  2005
             should stand in any reconsideration hearing.  In addition, the
             evidence of Ms Hove (paragraphs 11, 12,  13,  paragraph  20  -
             excluding the last sentence of that paragraph - and  paragraph
             27), in the re-determination of 5th March,  2007  should  also
             stand, to avoid the need for Mrs Hove to have to give evidence
             for a third time.


         8. The AIT is  requested  to  give  further  consideration  to  the
             listing notes of 21st November 2006  from  Senior  Immigration
             Judge Waumsley, which advised that the reconsideration hearing
             should take place in front of a two Judge panel, including one
             Senior Immigration Judge or  one  District  Immigration  Judge
             (sic)."

10.   It is necessary to set out the findings of  IJ  Malins  at  paragraphs
    12.1 and 12.2 of her determination, because they have  been  preserved.
    They are as follows:-

         "12.1 Credibility


            I found the appellant to have been a credible witness and accept
             almost all her evidence.  It is common  ground  that  she  was
             trafficked from Nigeria to the  UK  for  sexual  purposes  and
             there  is  nothing  in  the  appellant's  evidence,  nor   the
             supporting expert evidence, which is  inconsistent  with  this
             situation.


            I also accept that from the seriously disadvantaged position  of
             an escaped  penniless  victim  of  trafficking  in  a  foreign
             country, the appellant faced a desperate  challenge  surviving
             at large in the UK, until she was befriended by the impressive
             Polly Project.  It may be that the sheer desperation  inherent
             in the appellant's position, explains the only section of  the
             appellant's story which  I  have  difficulty  in  accepting  -
             namely, her detailed account of her treatment by Leeds Police.
              But this is no core issue.


            Having accepted the appellant's 'status' as a trafficked  woman,
             I must now determine whether in Nigeria, she faces  a  serious
             possibility of persecution for  a  Convention  reason  in  the
             event of her return and further, whether there is a real  risk
             of Article 3 or 8 harm  befalling  her  in  Nigeria,  in  that
             event.


            To assist in reaching my conclusions, I first make some relevant
             findings of fact:


         12.2     Findings of Fact


             (a) I find that the appellant is  a  woman  of  26,  of  basic
                  education  and  no  qualifications.   She  gave   me   the
                  impression of being meek, vulnerable and generally  unable
                  to cope with  the  harsh  situation  in  which  she  finds
                  herself and possibly, too, with situations less harsh;


             (b) the appellant has no family at all in Nigeria.  Her father
                  died before she was born and  her  mother  in  childbirth.
                  There are no siblings;


             (c) the appellant came willingly to the UK in total  ignorance
                  of the true purpose of her journey arranged by  Mr  Osagie
                  but rather, expecting to  secure  mainline  employment  to
                  improve her life and that  of  Aunt  Becky  -  then  still
                  living;


             (d) that consequently, the appellant did not flee Nigeria  due
                  to having there, a well-founded fear of persecution.   She
                  is accordingly, if a refugee, a refugee sur place;


             (e) that the man who so efficiently arranged  the  appellant's
                  trafficking, is a professional  violent  criminal  with  a
                  power base in Nigeria and probably in the UK and with easy
                  ingress to and egress from the UK - however arranged.  The
                  report of Ms  Bisi  Olateru-Olagbegi  LLB.,  MCI.Arb  (UK)
                  contained the following opinion on Mr Osagie, relevant  to
                  his profile:-


                 '[P's] description of her trafficker fits the  description
                  of traffickers generally, as they usually  pretend  to  be
                  wealthy by  wearing  heavy  and  expensive  jewellery  and
                  parading in posh expensive cars.  It is  common  knowledge
                  in Nigeria that wealthy people wield power  and  sometimes
                  have security men with or without uniforms.  Consequently,
                  [P's] account  of  the  profile  of  her  trafficker  with
                  bodyguards is very plausible.  In any  case,  traffickers,
                  especially for  international  trafficking,  usually  move
                  with  syndicated  gangs  with  different   categories   of
                  criminal  players.  For  example,  different  actors   are
                  involved in  recruitment,  forging  of  travel  documents,
                  facilitating  issuance  of  visas  or   accompanying   the
                  trafficked victims.


                 The traffickers who actually  accompany  victims,  usually
                  have  some  clout  so  facilitate  their  passage  through
                  immigration  both  in  Nigeria  and   foreign   countries.
                  Therefore, I am of the opinion that [P's] trafficker,  who
                  in fact accompanied her to Manchester, must be  a  wealthy
                  man with a significant amount of influence and clout.'"

11.   It is also necessary for us to have regard to paragraphs  11,  12,  13
    and paragraph 20, (excluding the last sentence of that  paragraph)  and
    paragraph 27 of the determination of IJ Grant.  Those paragraphs stand,
    in order to avoid the need for Ms Hove to give  evidence  for  a  third
    time.  Those paragraphs are as follows:-

         "11.     I heard evidence from Ms Silva Hove of The Poppy  Project.
             Ms Hove adopted her witness statement which can  be  found  at
             page 3 of bundle D.  In her witness statement Ms  Hove  states
             as follows:


             '1. I make this statement in support of [PO's] application for
                  asylum.


             2.  I refer to my previous statement of 27/09/05  for  details
                  of my involvement with the appellant.  The purpose of this
                  witness statement is to provide the court with  an  update
                  of the appellant's case  since  my  witness  statement  of
                  27/09/05 was submitted to the court.

             3.  I see [P] at least once a month and speak to  her  on  the
                  phone every two weeks.  Further [P] knows she can  contact
                  me whenever she needs anything.  Recently with her medical
                  problems and her hospital appointments I have been  seeing
                  her more regularly.

             4.  [P] attempted to have  counselling  again  with  WAGM,  in
                  November 2005.  Unfortunately this again was too upsetting
                  for her and also she began to have serious  problems  with
                  her health.  I know that she was suffering from continuous
                  bleeding and she was taken to hospital on two occasions in
                  an  ambulance  in  February  and  March  2006.   She   was
                  subsequently diagnosed with suffering from fibroids.  As a
                  result  [P]  told  me  she  did  not  wish   to   continue
                  counselling as it  was  getting  too  much  for  her.   In
                  addition  her  health  problems  were  causing  her  great
                  distress and actually making it physically  difficult  for
                  her to attend her counselling sessions.  In my  view  this
                  made  her  reluctance  to  attend  counselling   perfectly
                  understandable.

             5.  Further the difficulty in discussing past  experiences  is
                  not  uncommon  amongst  the  women  I  have  worked   with
                  especially when they feel unsettled.   When  there  is  an
                  outstanding asylum application it is common for trafficked
                  women to put their emotions on hold.  It  is  as  if  they
                  function on survival mode.  Some women take up counselling
                  at a later stage when they become more  settled  and  they
                  feel safe enough to discuss their experiences.  It is  not
                  uncommon that at the point asylum or some kind of leave is
                  granted, that women's  emotional  issues  surface  as  the
                  worry of being returned home to  a  traumatic  past  often
                  makes them put everything else on  hold.   Once  this  has
                  been dealt with  a  woman  is  now  able  to  express  the
                  suppressed emotions.  Women at  this  stage  require  high
                  level of support and assistance.

             6.  In terms of [P's] emotional and mental  state  it  remains
                  precarious.  She is still in my view operating on survival
                  modes.  After her operation in September 2006 to treat her
                  fibroids she had expected to recover quickly and when  the
                  bleeding  continued  she   was   very   distressed.    The
                  outstanding  asylum  matter  is  also  causing  her  great
                  distress.  However [P] is making effort with her  studies.
                  She has obtained a  mini  IT  qualification  and  she  has
                  enrolled on another course, English, Maths and IT.   These
                  are all positive steps that help [P] not to dwell  on  her
                  past but this is only a temporary measure.  She  can  only
                  truly get on with her life and begin her emotional healing
                  once she has  stability  in  respect  of  her  immigration
                  status.

             7.  In terms of  the  police  investigation  the  police  were
                  unable  to  conclude   their   investigation   positively.
                  Therefore [P's] file has been stored away and in the event
                  that a similar case arises  which  provides  more  details
                  about Mr Osagie and his associates then [P's] case can  be
                  re-investigated.  It is common in  trafficking  cases  for
                  cases to remain unresolved until a  further  complaint  is
                  made  where  further  information  or   details   can   be
                  provided.[P] was very disappointed  when  she  heard  this
                  news.

             8.  Poppy supports victims of trafficking for as long as there
                  are specialist needs related to trafficking.   We  conduct
                  regular reviews every three  months  and  we  assess  what
                  provisions are required.  Poppy Projects focuses on  women
                  who need a high level of support such as [P].   When  this
                  need  subsides  to  a  low  level  of  care  we   have   a
                  resettlement worker who continues to support  women  until
                  they access other local support services  or  have  become
                  more independent.  This support  diminishes  according  to
                  the needs of our clients.  In my view [P]  still  needs  a
                  great deal of support.  As I explained earlier even if she
                  is granted some kind of status leave in the United Kingdom
                  [P]  will  likely   require   great   support   especially
                  emotionally.

             9.  I believe that it is highly likely that if [P] is returned
                  she will be at serious risk not only from  her  trafficker
                  but other traffickers who prey on vulnerable  women.   [P]
                  is highly vulnerable as she has no family, no contacts and
                  therefore no social network.  She  has  never  had  a  job
                  independently.  She has limited education.

             10. Moreover [P's] mental state and her physical problems make
                  her  even  more  vulnerable  to   exploitation   and   re-
                  trafficking.  [P] still reports that she  has  nightmares;
                  she is easily startled and finds it difficult to cope with
                  minor disturbances to her routine.   [P]  still  finds  it
                  difficult to access support  independently  as  she  lacks
                  confidence in herself - she easily puts herself down.  All
                  these are consistent with someone who has gone  through  a
                  traumatic   experience.    These   factors   are    highly
                  problematic for her and make her an easy target for  other
                  traffickers.   In  my  view  these  ongoing  psychological
                  effects would make [P's] return to Nigeria intolerable  as
                  they heighten the risk of her being harmed

             11. [P] will need safe accommodation and  ongoing  support  in
                  order to begin to  live  a  normal  life.   Based  on  the
                  information available to me from IOM London who we  liaise
                  with  in  arranging  voluntary  return  the  support   for
                  trafficking victims in Nigeria in my  view  is  inadequate
                  and  not  sufficient  to  protect  [P]  from   being   re-
                  trafficked.   Any  support   that's   temporary   is   not
                  sufficient as victims of trafficking suffer  an  extremely
                  wide range of health problems of which many are severe and
                  enduring.  It is therefore essential for women to have the
                  appropriate assistance and support available that  fosters
                  their well-being, independence and re-integration.'

         12.      In evidence-in-chief Ms Hove was  asked  to  explain  what
             risks there were to the  appellant  if  she  was  returned  to
             Nigeria and Ms Hove was honest and candid in  explaining  that
             this depends on the support available to her on return because
             at the present time the appellant has not started dealing with
             any of her emotional problems and has stopped counselling  and
             due to her physical health  problems  if  she  does  not  have
             adequate support this  will  increase  her  vulnerability  and
             increase her risk of being trafficked.  Ms Hove is only  aware
             of what is available in Nigeria from  conversations  with  IOM
             (the International Organisation for Migration) and  they  have
             told her that temporary accommodation is available but because
             of limited funding there is  not  always  space  as  only  two
             shelters are available.  Ms Hove does not think the  provision
             in Nigeria is adequate and she is basing her  opinion  on  the
             information  she  has  received  from  IOM.   Because  of  the
             appellant's particular needs they have had  to  refer  her  to
             specialist doctors having to deal  with  so  many  things  and
             because of this she has not started engaging with a counsellor
             to deal with her emotional problems and as a  result  Ms  Hove
             believes she needs long term support of more than three to six
             months and where there is no outside support or only temporary
             support Ms Hove takes the view that she is  more  at  risk  on
             return.

         13.      In cross-examination Ms Hove confirmed  that  she  had  no
             expertise on risk on return for young women in Nigeria but was
             basing her comments on evidence to the Poppy Project on  women
             they have worked with who have been re-trafficked and who have
             no-one to protect them in terms of family.

         20.       I  have  considered  the  submissions   raised   by   the
             appellant's representative in seeking to  distinguish  JO  [JO
             (internal relocation  -  no  risk  of  retrafficking)  Nigeria
             [2004] UKIAT 00251] and I have also considered the appellant's
             claim in the context of the evidence given  by  Ms  Hove.   Ms
             Hove was candid and honest in her evidence before me that  the
             Poppy Project have no particular experience of women returning
             to Nigeria and Ms Hove herself has no personal  experience  of
             returning women  to  Nigeria.   She  does  have  some  general
             knowledge of re-trafficking through  the  work  of  the  Poppy
             Project but nothing which is specifically relevant to Nigeria.
              She was genuinely concerned about the appellant's mental  and
             physical  health  issues  and  the  availability  of  adequate
             support for the appellant on return and was candid and  honest
             in indicating in answer to a question as to the risks, if any,
             the appellant would face  if  returned  to  Nigeria  that  her
             answer would depend on the support available to the  appellant
             on return because she has not yet started dealing with any  of
             her emotional problems and has  stopped  counselling  and  her
             physical health problems  mean  that  if  she  does  not  have
             adequate support this  will  increase  her  vulnerability  and
             increase her chance of being re-trafficked.  ..........


         27.      Ms Hove of the Poppy Project has  had  conversations  with
             IOM (an international organisation also  referred  to  by  the
             respondent in the  refusal  letter).   Ms  Hove  was  able  to
             confirm what is already set out in the refusal letter  and  in
             the background material placed before me, which  is  that  IOM
             operate two shelters for trafficked  women  in  Nigeria.   IOM
             have  told  Ms  Hove  that  the  accommodation  available   is
             inadequate and that victims of trafficking are  only  entitled
             to remain in sheltered accommodation for up to two weeks.  The
             accommodation is temporary accommodation."


12.   At the commencement of the hearing, the  Tribunal  clarified  with  Ms
    Chapman which of the documents quoted or  referred  to  in  the  expert
    report of Ms Bisi Olateru-Olagbegi had been included within the  bundle
    of background evidence and which had not.  She agreed  to  provide  the
    Tribunal with copies of those documents that had not been included.  We
    pointed out to her that in paragraph 11  of  the  determination  of  IJ
    Grant,  Ms  Sylva  Hove's  statement  makes  reference  to  an  earlier
    statement.  Ms  Chandran  confirmed  that  the  earlier  statement  was
    included within the bundle at page 24.  She confirmed also that  copies
    of all medical reports prepared in respect of the  appellant  had  been
    reproduced and started at page 111 of  the  bundle.   The  2008  United
    States Trafficking People Report was in the bundle, although  the  2007
    bundle was not.  Ms Chandran advised the Tribunal that a  copy  of  the
    Home Office Operational Guidance Note on  Nigeria  was  in  the  second
    bundle at pages 136 to 142.

13.   Mr Tufan advised us that he had only been served with the  bundle  the
    day previously (as, it transpired, had the Tribunal), despite the  fact
    that clear directions had been issued several  weeks  previously.   The
    Tribunal agreed that, if necessary, it would allow additional time  for
    him to digest it before making submissions.

Oral Evidence of Ms Bisi Olateru-Olagbegi

14.   We then heard  oral  evidence  from  Ms  Bisi  Olateru-Olagbegi.   The
    witness was in Nigeria and a telephone link  had  been  established  to
    enable a conference call to take place in the British  High  Commission
    in Lagos.  The Chairman ensured that Ms Olateru-Olagbegi  was  able  to
    hear the Tribunal properly and she agreed to let the panel know if  she
    had any difficulties at any time.

Evidence in chief

15.   Ms  Olateru-Olagbegi  confirmed  her  full  names  and  that  she  was
    employed as an executive director of the Women's Consortium of  Nigeria
    (WOCON).  She explained that she had qualified as a  solicitor  to  the
    Supreme Court of Nigeria in 1976 and was  a  Member  of  the  Chartered
    Institute of  Arbitrators  in  London.   She  confirmed  that  she  had
    prepared reports in respect of the appellant.  The first report was  at
    page 70 of tab B of the appellant's bundle  and  was  dated  7th  July,
    2005.  The second report was at page 80 of tab  B  of  the  appellant's
    bundle and was dated 26th July,  2005.   Her  most  recent  report  was
    reproduced at page 193 of the bundle  and  was  dated  11th  September,
    2008.

16.   The witness confirmed that she had read her  most  recent  report  and
    that she did not wish to alter or amend it, or any of the earlier ones.



17.   Counsel referred the  witness  to  her  most  recent  report  and,  in
    particular, to paragraphs 2.1.5 and 2.1.6 of it.   She agreed with  the
    quotation from the Norwegian Fact-Finding Mission to Nigeria  of  March
    2006 when it referred to trafficking and human  smuggling  gangs  being
    notoriously "loosely organised".  She also  agreed  with  the  Nigerian
    Report when it referred to the fact that the networks are, "often  very
    efficient" and this made it more difficult  for  the  police  to  fight
    crime.  She suggested that the issue  of  trafficking  is  an  emerging
    issue in Nigeria and the reality is that the police simply do not  know
    how to tackle crime.  They find it  extremely  difficult  to  prosecute
    traffickers.  She emphasised that trafficking networks  comprise  teams
    of different people, each of whom perform a different role  within  the
    group,  such  as  photographers,  forgers  and  those  responsible  for
    transporting people across the borders.

18.   In referring to  paragraph  2.2.1  of  her  most  recent  report,  the
    witness explained that there were complex  reasons  for  what  she  had
    described as being, "the alarming growth of  the  phenomenon  of  human
    trafficking in Nigeria".  Undoubtedly, the economy features  large,  as
    does  globalisation;  everyone  is  trying  to  move  to  better  their
    prospects.  A third  reason  is  gender;  victims  of  trafficking  are
    invariably women because of endemic discrimination within Nigeria.  The
    majority of women suffer  discrimination  and  this  discrimination  in
    society  makes  them  more  vulnerable  to  exploitation  than   males.
    Finally,  she  suggested,  there   has   simply   been   no   effective
    implementation of the laws and  strategy  against  trafficking,  partly
    because of the inability to arrest those involved; partly  because  the
    victims are offered no effective protection to prevent  re-trafficking;
    and lastly because there are no effective measures to prevent those  at
    risk from being trafficked in the first place.

19.   Ms Olateru-Olagbegi explained that the Nigerian police simply have  an
    inability to arrest people traffickers.  They are ill-equipped and  the
    ordinary policeman on the street is not aware of any  trafficking  laws
    in Nigeria.  It is only those members of the Anti-Trafficking Unit  who
    have any semblance of understanding in the law.

20.   Ordinarily, in Nigeria when it comes to crime, the police  are  simply
    inefficient.  Crimes  against  highly  placed  personalities,  such  as
    murders, are simply not detected. For example, the Attorney General and
    Minister of  Justice  was  murdered,  as  was  the  candidate  for  the
    Governorship of Lagos  State,  but  she  explained,  no  one  was  ever
    arrested or prosecuted.

21.   The  position  deteriorates,  as  Ms  Olateru-Olagbegi  suggested,  in
    relation to women.  This  is  because  of  the  general  discriminatory
    attitude in Nigerian society.  The police treat  crimes  against  women
    with gender bias and levity, simply because the crimes  involve  women.
    The police themselves are widely corrupt and wealthy criminals can  and
    do use their influence with the police.   Women  are  poorer  than  the
    perpetrators and whoever is wealthier comes  out  better.   This  is  a
    finding of fact, she said, by the United Kingdom,  Danish  Fact-Finding
    Mission referred to in paragraph 2.3.2 of the latest report, where  the
    Mission said, "Any prosecution which is brought as a result  of  police
    action will invariably be in favour  of  the  wealthier  party  to  the
    complaint."

22.   Counsel then referred the witness to what she had said in her  report,
    concerning the availability  of  shelters  for  the  victims  of  human
    trafficking at paragraph 2.2.3.  The  witness  agreed  that  there  are
    seven shelters, but, she said, not all of them  are  operational.   The
    only operational ones are those referred to in the latest report.   The
    other shelters are  only  just  beginning  and  not  operational.   The
    witness knows this from her own personal  knowledge,  because  she  has
    visited them.  Her organisation works closely with  Nigeria's  National
    Agency for the Prohibition of Trafficking  in  Persons  (NAPTIP).   The
    only shelters are in Lagos, Benin and Abuja.

23.    Ms  Olateru-Olagbegi  confirmed  that  she  was   involved   in   the
    preparation of the UNESCO Report at page 89 in the appellant's  bundle.
    Page 93 of the bundle confirms that the Policy Papers for UNESCO (which
    the witness was involved in) were validated  in  Lagos  in  2005.   The
    Danish Report of April 2008 at page 223, confirms that her organisation
    was consulted by the delegation.

24.   The witness confirmed that she did  not  believe  that  the  appellant
    would obtain any protection from her traffickers in her  home  area  of
    Benin.  The shelter is smaller and run very much like  an  institution.
    Inmates are restricted in their movements and cannot leave the shelter.
     They are only permitted to stay for a maximum of between two weeks and
    one month.  The witness explained that the NAPTIP shelters offered more
    in the way of protective custody for inmates.

25.   She confirmed that human traffickers operate in and around  Benin  for
    the purposes of finding victims.  The facilities  offered  at  shelters
    are  minimal.   There  are  no  psychiatric   facilities   or   medical
    counselling and some of the shelters offer courses, but not necessarily
    those appropriate to offer  training  for  work  which  would  generate
    income for the victims.  In any event, NAPTIP  has  limited  prospects.
    Because the number of victims is simply not known, NAPTIP have no  idea
    when the number of places in  the  shelters  on  offer  to  victims  is
    exceeded and it becomes a strain on the government; when the budget  is
    spent, that is it.

26.   Many of the victims do not wish to stay in shelters and at  least  two
    girls have jumped boundary fences to escape.  The shelters operate very
    much like a boarding house and the inmates do nothing  and  simply  sit
    around all day.  Because of the bad past experiences which of them have
    had, they believe that they are still being further imprisoned.

27.   For this appellant the shelters would not offer her  protection.   Now
    that she has a baby, she would not be accepted in a shelter because, as
    far as Ms Olateru-Olagbegi is aware, they do not  have  facilities  for
    the care of babies.  She did not believe that the  appellant  would  be
    safe in her home area, because her local shelter is in Benin and it  is
    easy for traffickers to find her there,  because  they  operate  there.
    Over the last three years Ms Olateru-Olagbegi did  not  think  anything
    has changed, or the risk to her from them had diminished,  because  the
    gang who were involved in trafficking the appellant were  not  able  to
    maximise their profit and recoup the �50,000 which she was supposed  to
    make before she escaped.  As long as  members  of  the  gang  have  not
    received the money they expected to make from her, then she is at  risk
    from them.  Now she has a  baby  and  is  older  the  position  is  not
    changed.  She was trafficked when she was 25 or 26, but  29  is  not  a
    hurdle to being trafficked.  Forty year old women are trafficked.   The
    appellant will be at risk whatever age she is, 18, 29 or  40.   If  she
    fits the picture of those who can make money, she is at risk,  said  Ms
    Olateru-Olagbegi.

28.   The witness was then referred to paragraph 2.2.8 of  her  report  and,
    in particular, to the Committee of the  Elimination  of  Discrimination
    against Women (CEDAW) Report on Nigeria, reproduced at page 204 of  the
    appellant's bundle.  The  provisions  relating  to  the  protection  of
    victims are simply inadequate.  The findings have been quoted in  other
    NGO Reports.  The witness agreed that she chaired the Review Committees
    of the NGO Reports.

29.   Ms Olateru-Olagbegi said that there is  no  long  term,  or  adequate,
    long term protection, available for the appellant  throughout  Nigeria,
    or in Benin itself.  There  has  been  no  significant  change  in  the
    situation since 2005.  For those less privileged, there are no shelters
    and no social security.  No  adequate  protection  is  offered  by  the
    police from violence and there are no NGOs  who  can  offer  long  term
    adequate protection for victims of violence either.

30.   If the appellant were to avoid Osagie, the trafficker, in  Benin,  she
    would still be at risk from the  network.   If  she  has  no  immediate
    protection she would be homeless and if she becomes homeless, she would
    be at risk of being  re-trafficked  or  of  prostitution  in  order  to
    survive.  Given her circumstances, as an unskilled  unqualified  single
    mother with no family ties, she runs the risk of  being  homeless.   It
    would be difficult for her to obtain accommodation, or the money to buy
    it.  She would be homeless. As a single mother  in  Nigeria  she  would
    regarded as  someone  who  is  promiscuous,  because  of  gender  bias.
    Nigerian culture expects every young woman to be living  at  home  with
    her parents or guardians until she gets married. A single  woman  would
    not be offered accommodation, because she would be viewed  as  being  a
    prostitute.  She would have no adult male to pose  as  her  husband  or
    father and in order for her to obtain accommodation she would  have  to
    have an adult male, or she would be homeless.

31.   On being referred to the appellant's certificate in  IT,  the  witness
    suggested that the appellant may have a possibility of obtaining a job,
    but in Nigeria the rates of employment are very high and the  employers
    always prefer males for job vacancies.  She would  have  no  family  to
    introduce her to an employer and it would be difficult for her to  find
    any employment without connections.  Her  computing  certificate  would
    not help her to obtain employment.

32.   The victims of trafficking who return  to  Nigeria  used  to  have  to
    undergo HIV tests on arrival.  This  was  because  of  the  numbers  of
    returnees from Italy,  but  HIV  testing  is  no  longer  carried  out.
    However, Ms Olateru-Olagbegi confirmed that this had  not  changed  the
    stigma which society  in  Nigeria  attaches  to  those  returnees  from
    abroad.  When HIV testing was being undertaken, the  public  perception
    of returnees from Europe was that they were infected with HIV and  were
    prostitutes.  This, she suggested, would be the case in the appellant's
    case.  She would be  viewed  with  suspicion.   If  she  were  to  need
    accommodation, then she would  have  to  disclose  her  background.   A
    landlord would want  to  know  something  about  her  background  as  a
    prospective tenant, to ensure that she was  not  involved  with  crime.
    The landlords of premises let to people involved in criminal  acts  are
    themselves at risk and they would want to  avoid  letting  to  somebody
    involved in criminal acts.  She would invariably have to  explain  that
    she had returned from Europe and that would be sufficient for her to be
    perceived as being a prostitute with HIV/AIDS. No one in Nigeria wishes
    to be associated with such persons.

33.   In Nigeria people are dying from stigmatisation.  People do  not  have
    access to help from hospitals etc and  because  of  this  they  die  of
    stigmatisation.

Cross-Examination by Mr Tufan

34.   The witness confirmed that she went in search of Mr Osagie, but  could
    find no trace of him.  The difficulty she had was that she did not have
    his  full  name.   "Osagie"  is  a  common  surname.   The  appellant's
    description of Mr Osagie fits so many people with  that  name  in  that
    church.  Traffickers do, in any event, use  pseudonyms  and  often  use
    many different names.  "Osagie" might not  have  been  his  real  name.
    This witness did not know of the appellant's family friend, "Sarah".

35.   At NAPTIP-run shelters,  children  from  the  age  of  8  upwards  are
    admitted Ms Olateru-Olagbegi said, if they are trafficked, but  mothers
    who have babies are not accepted.  They do not admit orphans.  They  do
    not have facilities for babies.

36.   Victims of trafficking are offered protection by  NAPTIP,  but  it  is
    simply inadequate.  It is stated at page  74  of  the  bundle,  in  the
    Danish Report, that victims actually leave the shelter before they  can
    be certain to be out of danger, because many victims  do  not  wish  to
    stay.  The same report, at page 76, reports that NAPTIP receive  people
    at the airport.  This is true, but they are only permitted to stay  for
    two nights and then they are asked to leave.

37.   The witness said that she was aware of the Committee for  the  Support
    of the Dignity of Women (COSUDOW) and knows Reverend  Sister  Florence,
    who in the Danish Report, suggests that victims are offered protection,
    but the shelter can only accommodate eighteen women.  The  shelter  was
    opened in September last.  They opened the shelter, because  there  had
    been a shelter for a couple of years,  but  there  was  no  electricity
    there  until  September.   They  helped  one  or  two  girls  prior  to
    September, but they had no shelter until it opened recently.  They  now
    have a house but they have no facilities for babies  and  they  do  not
    offer inmates any mental counselling.  They are hoping to  improve  the
    shelter.

38.   The witness was referred  to  paragraphs  2.2.20  and  2.2.23  of  her
    report and confirmed that, "Abbey" who was  referred  to  in  paragraph
    2.2.20 subsequently had to have her leg amputated.  Another was  buried
    alive; it is recorded in the newspaper.

39.   Mr Tufan referred the  witness  to  paragraph  2.2.24  of  her  latest
    report in which the Reverend Sister Florence admitted that she  had  no
    information about the  killing  of  a  victim  by  the  traffickers  in
    Nigeria.  The witness explained that  the  last  incident  occurred  in
    September, more recently.

Re-examination by Ms Chandran

40.   Ms Olateru-Olagbegi  confirmed  that  the  COSUDOW  shelter  was  non-
    functional until September  2008.   The  witness  and  Reverend  Sister
    Florence did not give evidence together.  The shelter was only formally
    opened in September, 2008.  The Reverend Sister Florence says that  she
    refers cases to  the  Anti-Human  Trafficking  Unit,  but  Ms  Olateru-
    Olagbegi said that she had no evidence that this unit was able to offer
    any protection to the victims of trafficking.  The case of a woman  who
    was burned alive was treated as a victim of trafficking and it did  not
    help her.

Questions Put to the Witness by the Tribunal

41.   The Tribunal put  several  questions  to  the  witness,  in  order  to
    clarify her evidence.

42.   The Lagos population was, she suggested, in the region of  20  million
    people.  In Nigeria, women undertake all types of work, including shops
    and as street traders,  carers  etc.   Women  also  work  in  executive
    positions, but the proportion of  females  compared  to  men,  is  much
    larger in the informal work sectors.  Women account for only  some  20%
    of the working population in executive positions.

43.   The witness agreed that not every job would call for the appellant  to
    produce a reference.  She suggested that there were  many  homeless  in
    Lagos and the additional problem for the appellant is that she does not
    know who is  in  the  trafficking  network  that  was  responsible  for
    bringing her to the United Kingdom.  Most trafficking networks  operate
    in Lagos.  In 2002, Ms Olateru-Olagbegi met two  trafficked  women  who
    had returned from Italy.  On their return the traffickers were  waiting
    and almost took them.   The  traffickers  followed  the  victims  to  a
    trafficking shelter.

44.   Ms Olateru-Olagbegi did not know how  traffickers  become  aware  that
    trafficking victims are being returned to Nigeria but, she  said,  they
    are well placed people who use bribery and  corruption  and  do  become
    aware of the return of a trafficked victim.   They  follow  up  on  the
    victim and know when the victim  is  being  returned  to  Nigeria  from
    abroad.  Women are simply viewed as being a commercial commodity.  They
    are not trafficked in groups or in large  numbers;  they  normally  are
    trafficked singly.

45.   There were clinics in Lagos for the treatment of  minor  ailments  and
    if a victim in a shelter needed to go to hospital,  the  shelter  would
    provide the means to  attend.   The  number  of  people  trafficked  in
    Nigeria is the most  difficult  thing  to  calculate  because  Nigerian
    records are so poor.  The records showed that some  50,000  women  were
    trafficked for sex during last year, Ms Olateru-Olagbegi added.

46.   In the five years of action since the existence of NAPTIP, there  have
    been over 200 arrests of suspected traffickers, but only 17 traffickers
    have been prosecuted.

47.   This appellant runs the risk  of  falling  into  the  hands  of  other
    members of the same group who trafficked her.  The police do attempt to
    investigate crimes, but only if the victim agrees to pay the  police  a
    bribe.  The police have no money, they have no equipment and they  rely
    on bribes.

48.   The shelters provided by other NGOs in Nigeria include one  in  Abuja,
    but they would not be able to give the appellant  adequate  protection.
    They would not be able to offer a full  package  of  integration,  long
    term with healthcare facilities.  A trafficked person needs counselling
    as a result of the experiences she has undergone.  They  would  not  be
    able to offer halfway homes for two or three years.  Two or three talks
    by an unqualified counsellor are simply insufficient.

Further Questions Put by Ms Chandran

49.   The number of convictions for trafficking in Nigeria  are  negligible,
    said Ms Olateru-Olagbegi.  She confirmed that Europe is the main  place
    that people are trafficked to from Nigeria.

50.   Ms Olateru-Olagbegi  said  that  she  understood  that  prior  to  the
    appellant's escape she was told by her traffickers that  she  would  be
    made to earn �50,000 before she would be released.  Since she  has  not
    made that money, she would, therefore, be  at  risk  of  re-trafficking
    from  the  same  gang.   Nigerian  officials  are  complicit   in   re-
    trafficking.  They are able to obtain visas and assist in the  movement
    of victims  across  borders.   This  is  an  additional  risk  for  the
    appellant.  Ms Olateru-Olagbegi said that earlier this year she  met  a
    Spanish returnee and while the returnee was still  at  the  airport,  a
    strange woman appeared and asked the returnee not to go with NAPTIP.

51.   Returnees are documented by the Immigration  Service  who  take  their
    history and take  all  their  records.   There  is  complicity  between
    traffickers and the Immigration Service.  The  Immigration  Service  in
    Nigeria is itself very corrupt.


Oral Evidence of the Appellant

Evidence in chief

52.   The appellant confirmed her full names and address and identified  her
    signature at the foot of her witness statement at pages 20  and  22  of
    the bundle.  She confirmed that the statement was true to the  best  of
    her knowledge.

53.   Counsel indicated that the appellant was  only  relying  on  the  most
    recent statement of the appellant and not her earlier ones.

54.   The appellant confirmed that she had not had any contact with  anybody
    in Nigeria since she left.  Aunt's friend, Sarah, told  her  about  her
    aunt's death.  The appellant's son is now 14 weeks old.  The  appellant
    confirmed that she had no friends or accommodation that  she  can  live
    with anywhere in Nigeria.

Cross-examination by Mr Tufan

55.   The witness confirmed that she was now housed by NASS.   She had  been
    housed by The Poppy Project between April  2005  and  June  2006.   She
    confirmed that Mr Osagie never tried  to  contact  her  in  the  United
    Kingdom, but added that it was because he does not know where  she  is.
    He could, however, easily find her in Nigeria, because it is  not  like
    this country.  The law in this country is strong, but  in  Nigeria  the
    police can do nothing to stop him and he can buy them.

56.   The appellant explained that  she  hid  Sarah's  telephone  number  by
    placing it in a tear in the seam of her jeans.  It was not in her jeans
    pocket when she escaped, because she knew that she would be in  trouble
    as soon as she arrived in the United Kingdom.

57.   In Nigeria her aunt's house had been rented  by  her  aunty,  but  the
    appellant did not know what had happened to it.  The  witness  had  not
    contacted Sarah since, although she did try  to  call  her  three  days
    after she left Osagie.  She tried again two weeks  later  but  was  not
    able to get through.   The  appellant  believed  that  Sarah  might  be
    frightened of traffickers herself.

58.   The witness confirmed that in her most recent statement she refers  to
    someone with a similar name having  been  arrested,  but  she  did  not
    believe that he was the same person.  In Nigeria she  studied  for  six
    years and completed primary school.  She  did  not  complete  secondary
    school.  Primary school is like nursery  school  here.   She  confirmed
    that her aunt had been ill with cancer while she was in  Nigeria.   The
    appellant had been selling water for her aunt.  That took care of  them
    both.

59.    When  referred  to  the  computer  course  she  had  undertaken,  the
    appellant confirmed that it was a basic course but that she  could  not
    complete her studies.  She went to several colleges but was  told  that
    she needed papers.  She cannot do any further study  because  she  does
    not have leave.  She did Level 1 English and  is  trying  to  undertake
    level 2.

Re-examined by Ms Chandran

60.   The piece of paper with Sarah's name on it was  in  her  luggage  when
    she arrived in the UK.  During the first week  Osagie  started  telling
    her about prostitution and on the fifth day the appellant  removed  the
    paper from her things.  There was a split in the seam of her jeans  and
    most of the time the piece of paper remained there.  The appellant  had
    it when she left Osagie's house and called Sarah three days  later  and
    two weeks later she phoned again and the phone went dead.

61.   Her aunt rented the accommodation that they lived in  in  Nigeria  and
    her aunt paid the rent.  Her aunt did not pay  the  appellant  anything
    for selling water; she did not earn any money.  She handed over all the
    money she took from selling water to her  aunt.   Her  aunt  also  sold
    water.

62.   The appellant was a Roman Catholic when she was in  Nigeria,  but  now
    she no longer practises.  She did not know that she would  be  able  to
    obtain help in Nigeria from the church, because that does not happen in
    Nigeria.  She now attends a Pentecostal Church in the United Kingdom.

63.   Between 2005 and 2006 she was receiving counselling, but had  to  stop
    it when she suffered from fibroids and was not able to leave  the  home
    since, she has given birth to her  baby.   She  now  regularly  sees  a
    health worker who comes once a week.  The appellant has told the health
    worker about counselling and the health worker has called her  recently
    to say that she would provide the appellant with the  telephone  number
    of a counsellor.

Further Cross-examination by Mr Tufan

64.    Last  year  the  appellant  was  being   prescribed   anti-depressant
    medication but she stopped when she became pregnant and has not resumed
    it.  It was her first general medical practitioner who  prescribed  it.
    She has not seen a psychiatrist.  There was no  further  re-examination
    by Counsel.

Oral Evidence of Nelda Johnson

Evidence in chief

65.   The witness is a senior support worker at the Poppy Project.  She  was
    referred to her statement at pages 42 to 53 of the  appellant's  bundle
    and confirmed that it was her signature at the end.  She has  read  the
    statement recently and the contents are true.  Ms Hale is now the  team
    leader of the Acute Team at  the  Poppy  Project.   The  Poppy  Project
    accepts women needing both accommodation  and  support.    The  witness
    began working with the appellant in 2007.  The appellant  is  on  "step
    down support", because of the length of time she has received it.   The
    witness and the appellant meet once a month face-to-face and  at  other
    times there is an out of hours service provided.

66.   The witness has noticed  a  difference  since  working  with  PO  (the
    appellant).  A lot of pressures on  the  appellant  have  been  brought
    about by a deterioration in her mental health.  The Poppy  Project  has
    no control over NASS accommodation.  PO's first accommodation was a one
    bedroom flat, provided by landlords who won a tender with  NASS.   They
    have since lost the tender.  The  appellant  was  then  transferred  to
    shared accommodation.  The accommodation was  inadequately  maintained.
    The accommodation had rats and there were holes  in  the  flooring  and
    inadequate lighting.  The appellant was moved to another property where
    she occupies a downstairs room.  Unfortunately, it is tiny,  comprising
    one room and this  is  impacting  on  her  mental  health  because  her
    property is in boxes piled together.  She  suffers  from  outbursts  of
    crying and insomnia.  She refuses to talk.

67.   The witness confirmed that she only knows about the  circumstances  in
    Nigeria from the Poppy Project, Research and  Development  Team.   From
    her own personal knowledge she has no information at all  about  people
    returned who were supported by the Poppy Project.  Part  of  the  Poppy
    Project function is to facilitate returns to  other  countries  and  in
    order  to  do  this,  work  with  the  International  Organisation  for
    Migration.  IOM speak to victims and IOM then tell the Poppy Project if
    they have adequate information or not and about other facilities in the
    country of destination.  If  they  do  not,  then  the  women  are  not
    returned.  Nigeria is the second largest service  user  destination  in
    relation to trafficked women.  There are no returns there.  The largest
    destination is Lithuania.  There are no returns to Ukraine.  The  Poppy
    Project deals with a number of countries, at least 30.

Cross-examination by Mr Tufan

68.   The witness stated  that  she  had  referred  in  her  report  to  the
    appellant having tried to attend short courses.  Her report is correct.
     She would have to pay for the courses herself until she has  leave  to
    remain. There are, according to the  Danish  Report  (page  48  of  the
    appellant's bundle) numerous shelters available for trafficked women in
    Nigeria but they are not specifically reserved for trafficking victims.
     This raises doubts in the witness's mind as to whether or not there is
    adequate support for different client groups in  one  shelter.   Within
    the Poppy Project there is one research worker dedicated to undertaking
    research about the countries with whom the Poppy  Project  is  working.
    This is a permanent role.  The Poppy Project is funded  by  the  Office
    for Criminal Justice Reform.

69.   In relation to  education,  generally  asylum  seekers  are  sometimes
    limited in the courses they can do if they do not have leave to remain.
     They may not be able to attend a course because they  cannot  pay  the
    course fees.  In the appellant's case, the appellant had difficulty  in
    completing the course.  She was suffering from fibroids  and  sometimes
    had to be taken by ambulance to hospital.

Questions put by the Tribunal in order to clarify the Witness's Evidence

70.   Each client is offered  a  "needs"  assessment  on  the  basis  of  an
    assessment of the availability of services in the country to which they
    are to be  returned.   Returns  by  the  Poppy  Project  are  voluntary
    returns.  Clients are asked what they want.  IOM help to set up  loans,
    accommodation and jobs for people returning to their own country.

Re-examination by Counsel

71.   The witness believed that the appellant is a very  vulnerable  person.
    The appellant is unable to help herself and the witness has to ask  for
    support for her.  The doctor's report also causes  the  witness  to  be
    concerned, because the Doctor raises concerns as to how  the  appellant
    will progress on her return to Nigeria.

72.   At this stage the appeal was adjourned for  lack  of  time  until  7th
    January.  Ms Chandran confirmed that there were no further witnesses.

Hearing on 7th January 2009

74.   The Tribunal  pointed  out  that  following  the  adjournment  of  the
    hearing on 6th November, 2007, a  direction  had  been  issued  in  the
    following terms:-

           "The appellant shall, no later than 12th December,  2008,  serve
        on the respondent and file with the Asylum and Immigration  Appeals
        Tribunal full copies of all reports referred to  or  quoted  by  Ms
        Bisi Olateru-Olagbegi, unless full copies  of  such  documents  are
        already in the bundle prepared for the Tribunal at its  hearing  on
        6th November last."


75.   The Tribunal enquired whether this direction had  been  complied  with
    since it did not appear that any such documents had been submitted.

76.   Counsel explained that her instructing solicitors had not forwarded  a
    copy of the direction to her, but she said that the direction would  be
    complied with this afternoon.

77.   Ms Chandran then drew the Tribunal's attention to the  fact  that  the
    Presenting Officer, apart from submitting the Tribunal's decision in FB
    (Lone Women - PSG -  internal  relocation  -  AA  (Uganda)  Considered)
    Sierra Leone [2008] UKIAT 00090 and a copy of  the  Country  of  Origin
    Information Report for Nigeria  dated  5th  December,  2008,  had  also
    submitted e-mail correspondence between the Presenting Officer and  Mrs
    L N Oguejiofore, Director of Counselling and Rehabilitation at  NAPTIP.
    Counsel explained that since the Presenting Officer  had  received  the
    expert witness's report prior to the hearing, any such  enquiries  with
    NAPTIP could and should be carried out prior  to  the  hearing.   As  a
    result, Counsel submitted that if the Tribunal were  minded  to  accept
    the  e-mail  correspondence  from  the  Director  of  Counselling   and
    Rehabilitation at NAPTIP, then, she submitted, the Tribunal also  ought
    to consider and take into account an up-to-date  witness  statement  by
    way of response, from Mrs Olateru-Olagbegi.

78.   Mr Tufan explained  that  he  had  sought  clarification  from  NAPTIP
    because, during cross-examination, it had been claimed by Mrs  Olateru-
    Olagbegi that a person with a child would not be admitted to a  shelter
    in Benin.  Counsel suggested that these points had already been made by
    the expert in her written report which was available to the  Presenting
    Officer prior to the commencement of the hearing.

79.   After adjourning briefly, we decided to admit the additional  evidence
    on behalf of the respondent in the form of  the  e-mail  correspondence
    with the Director of Counselling and Rehabilitation at NAPTIP, Ms  L  N
    Oguejiofore, and advised Counsel that we would also accept the expert's
    response, being a third addendum to her original expert report  subject
    to the right of the Presenting Officer to re-examine the expert.

80.   The Presenting Officer confirmed that he had no  such  application  to
    make.

The evidence

81.   Medical notes from Prime Care Forensic Medical with  entries  for  4th
    and 5th April, 2005


      Unfortunately the medical  notes  are  handwritten  and  not  entirely
    legible.  They appear also  to  have  been  written  in  some  form  of
    "shorthand".  However, an entry on 4th May, notes  that  the  appellant
    complained of being subjected to torture by means of  regular  beatings
    and burning with cigarette ends.  It also notes that the appellant  has
    "voodoo marks".  Scars were said to be visible on the appellant's  left
    upper thigh and right buttock.


82.   Psychological Report by Dr Nicoletta Capuzzo 6th July 2005


        In this report, the author, a Chartered  Psychologist  specialising
        in Post-Traumatic Stress, reported that the appellant was suffering
        from Post Traumatic Stress and a  Major  Depressive  Disorder.   At
        paragraph 5 of her report, Dr Capuzzo said this:-

             "5.01     The first issue  was  to  assess  [the  appellant's]
                  current mental state.  Based upon my  interview  of  [the
                  appellant], my observation of [the appellant's] emotional
                  and behavioural reactions to her experiences and from  my
                  experience of having worked with trauma survivors for  an
                  extended period of time, I am of  the  opinion  that  she
                  presents  with  Post  Traumatic  Stress   Disorder.    In
                  addition she presents with a major depression,  which  is
                  moderate to severe in nature.


             5.02       As  I  outlined  in  Appendix  2  above,  both  are
                  recognised psychiatric disorders and are codified in  the
                  Diagnostic  and  Statistical   Manual   for   Psychiatric
                  Disorders iv (DSM iv  American  Psychiatric  Association,
                  1994).


             5.03       Furthermore,  I  am  of  the  opinion   that   [the
                  appellant's]  current  psychological  difficulties   have
                  originated from the traumatic events she had  experienced
                  in Manchester.  Specifically  her  experiences  of  being
                  repeatedly physically and sexually abused at the hands of
                  Mr Osagie and his colleagues.


             5.04       My  opinion  is  based  on  the  following   facts:
                  Firstly, as indicated in my  curriculum  vitae  (Appendix
                  1), I have extensive clinical experience of working  with
                  survivors of trauma.  In light of this I  firmly  believe
                  that [the appellant's] verbal  reports  of  the  horrific
                  events she experienced and her cognitive,  emotional  and
                  behavioural reactions to  these  experiences  are  wholly
                  realistic.


             5.05      Secondly, as outlined in  the  research  section  of
                  this report (paragraphs 3.04 to 3.10)  the  psychological
                  difficulties with which [the appellant] presents  are  in
                  accordance  with  the  empirical   literature   for   the
                  development  of  PTSD  and   co-morbid   problems   (e.g.
                  depression) with survivors of traumatic life events  such
                  [as] rape.


             5.06      [The appellant] has yet to receive any  professional
                  help for her psychological difficulties.   Although  [the
                  appellant] said that she finds it difficult to talk about
                  her  experiences  due  to  painful  memories  and   their
                  associated distressing emotions, she felt that she  would
                  like  some  guidance  in  how  to  manage  her  difficult
                  feelings and behaviour.


             5.07      I would strongly recommend that she receives  formal
                  psychological   intervention.    Cognitive    Behavioural
                  Therapy (CBT) is seen as  the  treatment  of  choice  for
                  those who are suffering from PTSD and has  recently  been
                  advocated  in  guidelines  drawn  up  by   the   National
                  Institute for Clinical Excellence (Department  of  Health
                  and British Psychological Society, 2005).


             5.08      Cognitive Behavioural Therapy is  available  on  the
                  National Health  Service.   Given  that  [the  appellant]
                  resides in East London and City Mental Health  Trust  she
                  can be referred, by a  Consultant  Psychiatrist,  to  the
                  Institute of Psycho-trauma,  St  Bartholomew's  Hospital,
                  William Harvey House, 61 Bartholomew  Close,  London  EC1
                  7BE.  This is a tertiary service which  provides  CBT  to
                  those who have PTSD as  a  result  of  a  traumatic  life
                  event.  An interpreter will be provided  if  a  patient's
                  first language is not English.


             5.09       Briefly,  treatment  would  last  between  ten  and
                  sixteen sessions and would focus on educating the patient
                  about the nature of PTSD and  its  associated  disorders,
                  reconstructing negative appraisals of the trauma and  its
                  consequences and re-living and re-constructing  traumatic
                  memories through imaginal exposure.


             5.10       It  was  evident  from  the  interview  that   [the
                  appellant] found it  extremely  painful  to  discuss  her
                  experiences  of  physical  and  sexual  abuse.   Firstly,
                  discussing the  past  brought  up  painful  memories  and
                  overwhelming feelings, which she was  unable  to  manage.
                  Moreover, [the appellant] is ashamed of her  experiences.
                  She believes that perhaps  she  could  have  stopped  her
                  perpetrators from abusing her and perhaps she should have
                  foreseen what would happen to her.


             5.11      She said that she feels disgusted with herself (e.g.
                  she cannot bear to look at herself in the  mirror).   She
                  also believes that she is a "dirty and bad person".  [The
                  appellant] said that she fears others will find out about
                  her past and will also  see  her  in  a  negative  light.
                  Consequently, she has  refrained  from  discussing  these
                  events to others.


             5.12      I am of the opinion that as a consequence  of  these
                  beliefs   [the   appellant]   found   it   difficult   to
                  independently disclose what had happened  to  her.   This
                  would have been particularly so had a man questioned her.


             5.13       Throughout  my  clinical  career  of  working  with
                  sexually abused women this is a typical clinical picture.


             5.14      At the time of my interviewing [the  appellant]  she
                  had yet to undergo an HIV test.  She told me that she was
                  afraid of what the results would show.  She added that if
                  she had HIV this would indicate how disgusting  a  person
                  she was.


             5.15       Since  my  interviewing  [the  appellant]  she  has
                  plucked up the courage to be tested for HIV.  The results
                  have yet to be confirmed.   However,  given  her  current
                  mental state, I am concerned that a positive result would
                  compound  her  psychological  state.   Specifically  [the
                  appellant] suffers from a moderate to severe  depression.
                  Her depression is characterised by suicidal ideation.  It
                  is possible that a positive result would exacerbate  this
                  particular problem and could lead to  her  attempting  to
                  take her own life.


             5.16      [The appellant] fears  returning  to  Nigeria.   She
                  believes that Mr Osagie or other traffickers  will  force
                  her back into sexual slavery  as  she  has  no  means  of
                  protection (e.g.  living  relatives,  social  network  or
                  knowledge of agencies that could protect her).  Given her
                  current mental state, it is possible that being  forcibly
                  returned to Nigeria and given her fears; her mental state
                  would rapidly decline.


             5.17      The Poppy Project and Eve's Housing for  Women  have
                  so far helped [the appellant].  In combination they  have
                  provided her with emotional and physical security.   This
                  to some degree has stopped [the appellant's] mental state
                  from deteriorating further.  Should they be  withdrawn  I
                  am of the opinion that  [the  appellant's]  psychological
                  state will deteriorate to the extent  that  she  will  no
                  longer be able to function in  any  aspect  of  her  life
                  (e.g. socially,  occupationally  or  educationally)  with
                  support from  these  two  services  and  a  psychological
                  therapy programme [the appellant] may have  a  chance  of
                  reconstructing her life."

83.   Medical Report from Dr Chris Lacey dated 14th July, 2007


    a)     This referred to the appellant claiming to have  been  subjected
         to  repeated  assaults  after  having  been  abducted  and  falsely
         imprisoned between  January  and  mid-March  2005.   The  appellant
         claimed that apart from being abducted and held against  her  will,
         she was physically assaulted and raped on  a  daily  basis  by  her
         abductor.  She was punched and slapped across the face and all over
         the body, kicked by the booted feet of her  assailant,  burnt  with
         cigarettes, hit with a belt and dragged by the  hair  during  these
         assaults.  She also claimed that her assailant  inflicted  "voodoo"
         marks on her body using a razor blade  and  black  powder  commonly
         found in Nigeria.  The appellant reported a poor appetite resulting
         in loss of weight, much sleep disturbance, and  mood  changes  with
         tremendous   resulting   anxiety,   night   sweats   and   frequent
         palpitations.  She expressed the fear that her abductor would  find
         her and the consequences for her would be dire.


    b)     A number of cigarette burns were noted on the appellant's  body,
         one on her right buttock, one on the left lower anterior thigh, one
         on the inner aspect of the left mid-thigh, one in the  upper  third
         aspect of the left inner thigh and one in the right groin difficult
         to delineate because of  the  presence  of  stretch  marks.   These
         wounds were said to be consistent with healed cigarette burns.


    c)     Dr Lacey also noted a vertical pigmented flat scar 0.6  cm  long
         and 0.2 cm wide on the lateral aspect of the appellant's right  arm
         consistent  with  a  fingernail  impression.   She  also  noted   a
         pigmented irregular scar overlaying the mid-inguinal region in  the
         right groin consistent  with  a  friction  burn  from  having  been
         dragged along the floor.   There were a number of  multiple  linear
         small pigmented superficial lesions over the appellant's body which
         were caused, claimed the appellant, by a razor blade and then being
         rubbed with black powder.  In her summary and conclusion, Dr  Lacey
         says:-

             "[The appellant] reports a horrific period of  internment  and
             physical and mental abuse over a period of  approximately  two
             months at the beginning of 2005.  This resulted in a number of
             physical injuries which are documented in the  above  section.
             The history given by [the appellant] is  consistent  with  the
             lesions described above.  The  circular/ovid  lesions  on  the
             left leg and groin are consistent  with  healed  burn  lesions
             caused by a lighted cigarette being held  to  the  skin.   The
             pigmented lesions listed on  the  torso  are  consistent  with
             tattooing caused by an unknown substance and with the  history
             given.


             [The   appellant]   is   obviously   depressed    and    quite
             psychologically traumatised by this ordeal.   However  a  full
             psychological  assessment  was  beyond   the   remit   of   my
             instructions and therefore not undertaken.  I  would,  however
             recommend that she receives  formal  psychological  assessment
             and support following this most traumatic event."


84.   Letter of 23rd February, 2007  from  Dr  Dorman,  Homerton  University
      Hospital


         The  author  of  this  report,  is   the   appellant's   consultant
         gynaecologist. He reported that the appellant attended  gynaecology
         outpatient clinic  on  25th  January,  2006  giving  a  history  of
         worsening problems with heavy painful periods over the  past  year.
         The appellant disclosed a history of  having  been  bought  to  the
         United Kingdom and sexually exploited.  An ultrasound  scan  showed
         the appellant to have multiple uterine fibroids.


85.   Psychological Report of Dr Roxanne Agnew-Davies 19th March, 2008


         a) In a lengthy, and at times rather repetitive report, the  author
             expressed the opinion that the appellant is suffering  from  a
             complex and severe form of Post Traumatic Stress Disorder  and
             that she has additional  symptoms  which  cannot  be  subsumed
             under this diagnosis.  This, Dr  Agnew-Davies   said,  is  not
             unusual.   The  author  suggests  that  there  is   sufficient
             evidence to  conclude  the  presence  of  a  Major  Depressive
             Episode and to diagnose Major Depressive Disorder in  addition
             to Post-Traumatic Stress  Disorder.   She  believed  that  the
             appellant  was  extremely  vulnerable  from  a   psychological
             perspective and suggests that the  appellant  access  symptom-
             focused cognitive  behaviour  therapy  which  might  help  her
             address her negative  thoughts,  sleeping  problems,  appetite
             loss and fear symptoms.


         b) Under the heading, "Implications of Disorders for Vulnerability"
             the author said this:-

             "4.3.1    Such a severe psychological  reaction  as  noted  in
                      this case has been associated with biological factors
                      or the way the body  reacts  in  response  to  danger
                      (Yehuda et al, [1998]), not just in the  present  but
                      with respect to  memories  of  past  danger  and  the
                      anticipation  of  future  harm.   For  instance  [the
                      appellant]  is  easily  terrified  and  triggered  by
                      'little things' to record past  abuse  and  hence  to
                      experience associated distress.  Research  has  shown
                      that trafficked women exist in a heightened state  of
                      arousal.  Instead of the normal response  to  danger,
                      which would be to fight or flee, people held  against
                      their will are unable to do either.   After  repeated
                      abuse, instead, they become unable to turn off  their
                      basic biological alarm mechanisms  (Saporta  and  Van
                      Der Kolk, [1992])  and  they  are  locked  into  'red
                      alert'.  For example, Zimmerman et  al  [2006]  state
                      (p76):


                           'As traffickers made women believe they  were  in
                           imminent danger, women existed  in  a  heightened
                           state of alert, recognising the limits  of  their
                           ability to protect themselves.   In  response  to
                           this type of  lethal  danger,  the  normal  human
                           reaction   triggers   integrated   physical   and
                           psychological   responses   that   prepare    the
                           individual to either flee  the  situation  or  to
                           defend herself from imminent  danger.   When  the
                           threat is chronic, individuals are often able  to
                           'turn off' their  'basic  biological  and  safety
                           alarm mechanisms and remain  constantly  prepared
                           to defend  themselves  against  life  threatening
                           events'.   Some  experts  have  speculated   that
                           repetitive  helplessness   of   this   kind   may
                           'disorganise cognitive  process'  or  disable  an
                           individual's  instinctive  ability   to   respond
                           appropriately.'


             4.3.2      These  women  are  at  risk  of  recurrence  of  or
                      heightened symptoms  of  PTSD  particularly  if  they
                      encounter stressful or traumatic events (Marshall  et
                      al [1999]; Osuch et al [2001]) such as being asked to
                      recall their experiences or to enter situations  with
                      which past trauma is associated.  This would  include
                      trauma focus therapy or return to country of  origin,
                      in which she believes Mr Osagie will await her.  [The
                      appellant] is  particularly  vulnerable  to  becoming
                      psychologically overwhelmed because her  memories  of
                      the abusers are easily triggered, if not omnipresent.
                       In other words, she has an extremely  low  threshold
                      for the experience of intrusive symptoms.


             4.3.3     When triggered, any client with PTSD  is  likely  to
                      experience  hyper-vigilance  (extreme  and   constant
                      scanning of the environment to anticipate danger) and
                      hyper-arousal (pronounced  startle  reactions,  panic
                      symptoms) as well as Avoidance symptoms, which impede
                      her capacity to cope.   Symptoms of hyper-arousal and
                      hyper-vigilance (particularly in the context of  [the
                      appellant's]  symptoms  of  anxiety)  are  likely  to
                      include  the  following:  breathing  faster   (hyper-
                      ventilation), heart rate  acceleration,  chest  pain,
                      slowing of the  digestive  system,  nausea,  urge  to
                      urinate  and  defecate  and  increased   visual   and
                      auditory sensitivity.  I think that it is likely that
                      these in  turn  would  exacerbate  [the  appellant's]
                      existing symptoms of sleeping difficulties,  loss  of
                      appetite and reports of physical  pain.   When  these
                      symptoms become so  intense,  many  people  are  pre-
                      occupied with their internal experience and are  more
                      likely to experience a panic  attack.   Consequently,
                      they cannot  focus  on  external  events  such  as  a
                      conversation   or   take   appropriate   actions   in
                      situations of risk.


             4.3.4     Symptoms of Avoidance  create  a  different  set  of
                      challenges for the patient.   Post  Traumatic  Stress
                      Disorder  (as   defined   in   the   Diagnostic   and
                      Statistical  Manual  of  the  American  Psychological
                      Association)   is   characterised   by    'persistent
                      avoidance  of  triggers   or   numbing   of   general
                      responsiveness' including efforts to avoid 'thoughts,
                      feelings  or  conversations  about  the  trauma'  and
                      'inability to  recall  an  important  aspect  of  the
                      trauma'.  In other words (Dutton  [1992]  'Denial  is
                      often used to  cope  with  the  emotional  aftermath'
                      (P107).  These are exacerbated by feelings of  shame,
                      as in this case.  Whether or not they make  conscious
                      efforts, victims of sexual abuse like [the appellant]
                      adopt internal  avoidance  strategies  (dissociation)
                      because    they    re-experience    being    trapped.
                      Dissociation   means    that    clients    experience
                      unconscious, automatic reactions over which they have
                      no control and of which they may not even  be  aware.
                      In basic terms, they 'switch off mentally',  to  cope
                      with what is perceived as repetition of the  assault.
                      I witnessed this phenomenon  more  than  once  in  my
                      interview with  [the  appellant]  and  she  described
                      behaviours consistent with this occurrence.


             4.3.5     In effect, because she cannot run away or fight, the
                      victim absents herself from the scene, or its memory,
                      and  although  she  may  continue  minimal  function,
                      essential  aspects  will  not  be  available  to  her
                      conscious  mind.   I  found  evidence  that  this  is
                      already a problem for [the appellant].  The  critical
                      nature of dissociation is that it is unconscious  and
                      not  amenable  to  the  client's  conscious   control
                      without skilled therapeutic intervention  over  time.
                      Moreover, no matter how willing a client is to try to
                      cope, if she imagines that she  is  at  risk,  it  is
                      likely that she will dissociate at  an  early  stage,
                      and therefore she will remain in  the  situation  and
                      unable to take appropriate action.


             4.3.6     It is a common sign of severe  trauma  that  victims
                      have  a  foreshortened  sense  of  future  and  often
                      consider death  as  a  preferable  option,  which  is
                      controlled  in  this  case   by   [the   appellant's]
                      religious convictions.  In addition I  do  not  think
                      [the appellant] presents  a  current  suicidal  risk,
                      because of her hope for a family life with her child.
                        This   opinion   is   despite   clinical   research
                      (summarised by Humphreys, 2003; Golding, 1999)  which
                      shows that women who experience violence are at least
                      four times more likely to attempt to take their lives
                      than women in the  wider  population  and  the  after
                      effects of sexual assault suggest  at  least  20%  of
                      rape victims make an attempt to kill themselves  (Foa
                      and Rothbaum,  1998).   However,  I  would  not  feel
                      confident if there was a problem with  the  birth  or
                      she returned to Nigeria that this would not become an
                      issue, particularly in the light  of  her  depressive
                      symptoms.   Suicide attempts  are  most  likely  when
                      hopelessness is coupled with  low  self  esteem,  and
                      there is evidence in this case that [the appellant's]
                      self esteem is fragile (Dutton, 1992).


             4.3.7     Additional symptoms  of  complex  and  severe  PTSD,
                      especially in trafficked women, include lack of  self
                      determination (after it has been dictated by  others)
                      and feeling detached from people  (Zimmerman  et  al,
                      2006).   [The   appellant]   has   shown   remarkable
                      resilience in holding on to her belief that she is  a
                      good person and that Mr Osagie's abuse was unfair and
                      unjust, to the extent that she resisted  his  efforts
                      to force her into prostitution.   While  evidence  of
                      strength of character that she attributes to  growing
                      up in Africa, there is no doubt that her self  regard
                      has been  damaged  and  the  mistrust  that  she  now
                      experiences is profound, even to the extent that  she
                      is suspicious about her pastor's motives.  A distinct
                      but related psychological phenomenon  in  traumatised
                      victims is that they tend to perceive people,  events
                      or situations categorically, rather than in  degrees;
                      people are divided into 'enemies' or 'heroes'  and  a
                      person cannot appropriate degrees of  trust  (Herman,
                      1992).   In  turn,  these  symptoms   result   in   a
                      maladaptive response.  In effect, [the appellant]  is
                      likely to continue to isolate herself and  is  likely
                      to  continue  to  experience  a  sense   of   ongoing
                      helplessness, passivity,  and  in-action;  such  that
                      with  repeated  failure,  she  may  simply  give   up
                      attempts to respond appropriately  (Saporta  and  Van
                      Der Kolk, 1992).  In the past, these  phenomenon  led
                      to Battle Women Syndrome (Walker, 1984).


             4.3.8     The depressive symptoms  in  conjunction  with  PTSD
                      impact  on  her  concentration  and  memory  and  her
                      decision that she cannot cope with college,  is  also
                      negative for her prognosis.  Her trouble  controlling
                      her misplaced anger further jeopardises the chance of
                      informal social support; this is a clinical  concern,
                      because social support is one of the best  predictors
                      of recovery (or deterioration) in mental health.


             4.3.9     In summary, I found this client to  be  particularly
                      vulnerable.  As one instance, my clinical  experience
                      has shown that victims of  sexual  abuse,  especially
                      those  with  symptoms   of   depression   like   [the
                      appellant] adopt Avoidance Strategies when they  feel
                      trapped.  This renders them less capable of  escaping
                      a potentially dangerous situation.  In basic terms, a
                      'freeze' to cope  with  anticipated  assault,  rather
                      than adopting a normal 'fight' or  'flight'  response
                      (confronting the  aggressor  and  appropriate  escape
                      action), which would be more typical  of  people  who
                      had  not  previously  been  abused.   This   'freeze'
                      reaction is particularly likely in someone like  [the
                      appellant] who was  unable  to  escape  from  abusive
                      situations over prolonged periods."

        c)    Discussing the likely impact of return, the author said  that
             she  believed that the appellant's:

             "Current symptoms render her less able to adjust to return  to
             Nigeria than a healthy person, or one who has not  experienced
             abuse.    She  is  likely  to  be  triggered   to   heightened
             flashbacks, which in turn would increase  her  symptoms  in  a
             spiralling fashion.   These  would  not  just  include  hyper-
             vigilance and hyper-arousal (anxiety and  fear  symptoms)  but
             she is more likely to experience a worsening  of  her  already
             severe depressive symptoms,  including  despair,  hopelessness
             and suicidal ideas.  My  professional  opinion  is  that  [the
             appellant's]  return  to  Nigeria  would   cause   significant
             detriment to her mental health  and  jeopardise  her  recovery
             prospects."


86.   The Second Report of Dr Agnew-Davies dated 15th September, 2008


         a) In the summary of her conclusion, the author  reports  that  she
             found that the appellant:


                  "Continues to present with a complex, chronic  and  severe
                  form of Post Traumatic Stress Disorder  (PTSD)  and  Major
                  Depressive Disorder.   I  found  a  deterioration  in  her
                  degree  of  arousal  and  in  her   capacity   to   manage
                  interpersonal relationships, resulting  in  breakdowns  in
                  her primary support systems and increased isolation.   Her
                  psychiatric conditions are extremely unlikely  to  resolve
                  spontaneously and render  her  vulnerable  in  the  longer
                  term.  I think that she needs  specialised  trauma-focused
                  therapy to recover.  [The appellant] is highly  likely  to
                  continue to suffer clinically  significant  and  prolonged
                  psychological problems until this occurs.  She will remain
                  vulnerable  to  relapse  when  her  current  symptoms  are
                  resolved.  Her psychological conditions impair her  coping
                  strategies and render  her  vulnerable  in  situations  of
                  risk.  My professional opinion is that  [the  appellant's]
                  return to Nigeria would cause  further  detriment  to  her
                  mental health and undermine her parenting capacity."


         b) Dr. Agnew-Davies went on to suggest that the author  found  that
             there had been no improvement in the appellant's mental health
             since the first report and  two  incidences  of  deterioration
             including a substantial increase in her symptoms of anxiety or
             arousal.  In discussing the  prognosis  and  implications  for
             behaviour and vulnerability, the author said:-


             "4.2.1    My opinion outlined  in  Section  4.2  of  my  first
                      report still holds.   I  reiterate  my  prognosis  in
                      4.2.3, formed  on  the  basis  of  research,  that  I
                      anticipate  that  [the  appellant]   is   likely   to
                      experience longer term difficulties (over six to nine
                      years  once  she  feels  safe  and  has   access   to
                      specialist support),  because  of  the  severity  and
                      complexity of her symptoms.  I think it is  extremely
                      unlikely that  she  can  recover  her  mental  health
                      spontaneously without long  term  professional  help.
                      When this help has been obtained, I  also  think  she
                      will continue to experience residual problems,  which
                      are less amenable to change.


             4.2.2     In my first report (4.2.4) I recommended  that  [the
                      appellant] access CBT Therapy with a view  to  longer
                      term specialist trauma-focused therapy as Dr  Capuzzo
                      also recommended in her  report  in  2005.   Since  I
                      believe  she   is   extremely   vulnerable   from   a
                      psychological  perspective,   I   would   hope   that
                      arrangements  could   be   made   either   with   the
                      appropriate mental health service or  through  social
                      services for  them  to  provide  baby  care  or  home
                      visits.  I also think that any supportive/therapeutic
                      contact, such as those provided by  women  and  girls
                      network, a planned London service  for  sexual  abuse
                      survivors or social groups such as  mother  and  baby
                      groups provided by Sure Start or a combination, would
                      be of help  (as  indicated  in  the  literature  e.g.
                      Gordon,  1996)   particularly   in   view   of   [the
                      appellant's] isolation.  This is because the disorder
                      of PTSD has been associated with 'impairment  of  the
                      person's ability to  function  in  social  or  family
                      life' (National Centre for PTSD, 2005) and  it  bears
                      repetition  that  social  support  is  a  significant
                      predicator of recovery, whilst isolation is likely to
                      cause deterioration in mental health (e.g. Department
                      of Health, 2003).


             4.2.3     In Section 4.3 of my first report I outlined various
                      aspects of the client's psychological  profile  which
                      was associated with vulnerability,  deterioration  in
                      mental health and/or to the  risk  of  further  harm.
                      [The appellant's] profile at that time, which has not
                      improved, included hyper-vigilance,  arousal  (indeed
                      this   has   deteriorated);    Avoidance    including
                      Dissociation;  lack   of   self   determination   and
                      detachment  from  people  (which   has   also   shown
                      deterioration) and depressive  symptoms.   In  short,
                      the implications are that  this  client  cannot  take
                      appropriate action in situations of risk and  becomes
                      quickly  overwhelmed  by  internal   processes   that
                      disable her from responding appropriately."


         c) She went on to suggest that the appellant would  not  gain  full
             recovery without developing assurance that  she  is  safe  and
             secure.  It said that the  appellant  was  a  responsible  and
             caring mother  and  that  her  child's  birth  has  given  the
             appellant a reason to live and a purpose to which she is  very
             committed.   Dr. Agnew-Davies recommended that  services  like
             Sure Start or Home Start were put in place for  the  appellant
             immediately.  She confirmed that she did not  wish  to  revise
             any part of her opinion about the likely detrimental impact of
             return to Nigeria on the appellant's mental health, but  added
             that she did not believe that the appellant was  fit  to  work
             and anticipates that on return  to  Nigeria  her  capacity  to
             parent her baby appropriately would be disabled.  She did  not
             believe that she would be able to manage his  age  appropriate
             developmental   needs   without   specialist    trauma-focused
             therapeutic help to recover her mental health.


Expert Opinion of Ms Olateru-Olagbegi dated 26th July 2005

87.   In her initial opinion, Ms Olateru-Olagbegi sets  out  her  impressive
    curriculum vitae.  She is a Nigerian practising lawyer (with,  at  that
    time, some 29 years post-qualification experience), a Notary Public and
    a member of the Chartered Institute of Arbitrators.    She  is  also  a
    gender consultant and expert on issues involving human trafficking.  Ms
    Olateru-Olagbegi is, very clearly,  a  lawyer  committed  to  combating
    human trafficking in Nigeria and committed to the welfare of women  and
    children.  She is Executive  Director  of  the  Women's  Consortium  of
    Nigeria (WOCOM),  a  non-governmental  organisation  committed  to  the
    promotion of the rights of women and children  and  the  attainment  of
    equality, development and peace.  WOCOM holds a special United  Nations
    consultative status and is focused on the issues of  human  trafficking
    at national, regional and international levels.

88.   In 1996 Ms Olateru-Olagbegi was appointed one of the  two  researchers
    commissioned by the United  Nations  Special  Rapporteur  on  "Violence
    against Women, Its Effects and Consequences" to conduct the first study
    on the issue of trafficking in women in Nigeria, as part of the African
    study on the issue.  As a result of the research of  the  organisation,
    WOCOM pioneered the launch of the campaign against human trafficking in
    Nigeria in 1997.  Since that time, she has been personally involved  in
    several research  studies  and  publications  on  the  issue  of  human
    trafficking in Nigeria and has made several presentations at  national,
    regional and international levels on the issue.

89.   Third Further Addendum to Expert Opinion by Bisi Olateru-Olagbegi

      This addendum was prepared by the expert following the  conclusion  of
    her having given evidence to the Tribunal on 6th  November.   Following
    the hearing, the appellant's solicitors forwarded  copy  correspondence
    to her sent by Mr Tufan to NAPTIP and the reply  from  Mrs  Oguejiofor.
    In her report, Ms Olateru-Olagbegi, explains  that  she  was  asked  to
    comment on the following issues:-

         "1.      Whether a returning victim of  trafficking  with  a  young
             baby will be admitted  to  NAPTIP  shelters  and  whether  the
             shelters have the relevant adequate facilities for such victim
             and baby.


         2. Whether a returning victim with a  baby  would  be  met  at  the
             airport.


         3. Whether a NAPTIP shelters have counselling or medical facilities
             for victims who suffer from post-traumatic stress disorders."


90.   Ms Olateru-Olagbegi said this in her report:-

         "Issue 1


         1.1      First I wish to adopt my opinion as stated  in  my  second
             further  addendum  dated  11th  September,   2008   especially
             paragraph 2.2 on 'Government/state and civil society  capacity
             to protect returnee trafficked persons' in particular  I  wish
             to reiterate as stated in paragraph 2.2.15 that I do not doubt
             the willingness and enthusiasm of NAPTIP  officials  to  admit
             any  returnee  victim  including  victim  with  child  who  so
             consents to its shelter, though I am not aware of any previous
             admission of trafficked victims and their babies in the NAPTIP
             shelters.  However the shelters as they are presently designed
             do not have  facilities  for  childcare  such  as  cr�che  and
             necessary privacy for a nursing mother.  The response  of  the
             NAPTIP official Mrs Oguejiofor to the issue raised by the Home
             Office did not  state  that  there  are  such  facilities  for
             childcare.   The  mere  admission   into   a   temporary   and
             institution-style shelter without the necessary facilities for
             rehabilitation and reintegration  will  not  provide  adequate
             care, assistance or protection  to  any  returning  victim  of
             trafficking.


         1.2      Furthermore, NAPTIP reliance  on  its  collaboration  with
             Federal  Ministry  of  Women  Affairs  for  the  Provision  of
             Temporary Fostering  is  in  my  opinion  not  adequate  care,
             assistance or protection for a victim and a  child.   From  my
             experience victims of  violence  or  who  have  had  traumatic
             experiences usually suffer  worse  trauma  if  separated  from
             their children and in any case there is  no  fact  to  support
             that the appellant would give up her baby for fostering albeit
             even  temporarily.   Although  the  Nigerian  Government   has
             exhibited political will to address the  issue  of  trafficked
             victims in reality the government shelters and its  personnel,
             lacked the adequate facilities and capabilities for a  variety
             of reasons, including inadequate funding, to care for,  assist
             or protect the trafficked victims.  The incapacity of Nigerian
             government to care, assist or protect the victims was  alluded
             to in the recent Country of Origin  Information  Report  dated
             5th December 2008 at 31.07 where it states and I quote  'While
             Nigeria assisted an increased number of victims,  the  quality
             of care provided was  compromised  by  inadequate  funding  to
             shelters' (see HTTP://www.homeoffice.gov.uk/rds/pdfs08/nigeria-
             081208.doc).


         Issue 2


         2. I am aware that NAPTIP will meet returning victim at the airport
             if it has prior knowledge and information of such return.


         Issue 3


         3.1      I wish to restate my opinion in paragraph 2.216 of  expert
             report dated 11th September 2008 and  wish  to  state  further
             that NAPTIP shelters only have first aid clinics within  their
             premises with opportunity for referrals to hospitals  in  case
             of emergencies.


         3.2      The shelters do not have qualified mental health therapist
             to treat victims with post traumatic stress disorders  (PTSD).
             All the services that  such  nurses  and  social  workers  can
             render is some counselling as was attested to by Mr Morka head
             of the NAPTIP Lagos shelter who in response to a  fact-finding
             mission in 2007 who was quoted as follows:  'According  to  Mr
             Morka, the women and children housed in  the  shelter  receive
             food, necessary treatment and some counselling' (Italics mine)
             (see  Country  of  Origin  Information  Report  Nigeria   13th
             November, 2007 paragraph 31.12).  In my opinion social workers
             or nurses who undergo some  ad  hoc  training  in  counselling
             would not have the necessary capacity, expertise and skills to
             provide the mental health therapy for a trafficked  woman  who
             has post traumatic stress disorder the  nature  of  which  the
             appellant has.


         3.3      An assessment of this situation of Nigerian NAPTIP shelter
             and its incapacity and lack of trained personnel was  referred
             to in a USAID  study  on  the  rehabilitation  of  victims  of
             trafficking  in  group  residential  facilities   in   foreign
             countries a study conducted pursuant to the trafficked  victim
             protection Reauthorisation Act, 2005  published  in  September
             2007.  On page 25 of chapter 19 of the report it states and  I
             quote: 'The majority of shelters reviewed in  this  study  had
             some  form  of  counselling  services  available  to  victims.
             However, an assessment of a government-run shelter in  Nigeria
             found that counsellors often lacked  specialised  training  in
             trafficking-related trauma.  This assessment also  noted  that
             the shelter's  atmosphere  is  an  important  element  in  the
             psychological well-being of trafficking victims.  Residing  in
             a facility that is similar  to  one's  home,  rather  than  an
             'institution' and having access to recreational facilities may
             help shelter residents  achieve  emotional  release  from  the
             trauma        they        have        experienced.'        See
             HTTP://www.usaid.gov/our_work/cross-
             cutting_programmes/wid/pubs/ShelterStudy_aug2007.pdf"

         Conclusion

        Although the Nigerian Government through the  NAPTIP  officials  is
        willing to address the situation of  trafficked  returnee  victims,
        the reality is such that  it  lacks  the  capacity  and  facilities
        presently will be inadequate protect and re-integrate the appellant
        in this case as a returnee trafficked victim [Sic].  The reality is
        such that in the case of the appellant, a highly vulnerable  victim
        of trafficking who suffers from significant mental health illnesses
        as a result  of  her  experiences  and  has  particular  needs  for
        specialist forms of assistance for herself and care  for  her  very
        young child, the temporary nature of shelter that NAPTIP asserts it
        is  able  to  provide,  together  with  a   lack   of   specialised
        counselling, is inadequate to her needs.  In addition  the  removal
        of  her  child  from  her  even  by  way  of  temporary   fostering
        arrangements by NAPTIP cannot be considered  an  adequate  form  of
        assistance, rehabilitation or protection for the appellant in  view
        of her bonds with her child especially considering  the  fact  that
        she has no other family at all and the conditions of  her  on-going
        mental trauma.  Further, in the absence of any clear and specialist
        provision of counselling  and  re-integration  assistance  for  the
        appellant in this case by NAPTIP it is perfectly possible that  her
        trauma will continue and may indeed worsen in the  NAPTIP  shelter,
        which it is recalled, is  an  institution-style  temporary  shelter
        that does not provide any long-term or durable care, protection  or
        assistance for a woman with the appellant's family background,  her
        history of severe exploitation, her lack of any family  support  in
        Nigeria and her current high level needs, not only as  a  returning
        victim of sex trafficking, but as the vulnerable mother of a  young
        infant child."

Further Addendum to Expert Opinion dated 7th July, 2005

91.   Included within the appellant's bundle at page 193 to page 220  was  a
    further addendum to the expert report of Ms Bisi Olateru-Olagbegi.   In
    it she explains that she has been  asked  to  comment  further  on  the
    following issues:-

         "-       Whether the appellant's level of vulnerability to  be  re-
             trafficked has increased now that she is a lone female with  a
             child and no family support;


        -  whether there is support for the appellant as a returned  former
             victim of trafficking by  the  Nigerian  authorities  including
             NAPTIP the agency in charge of human trafficking cases;


        -  whether any NGOs in Nigeria would be in a position to  help  the
             appellant and her child if returned and, if so, to what extent;


        -  the appellant is from Benin  City,  Edo  State  if  returned  to
             Nigeria would avoid returning to her  home  area  in  order  to
             avoid being targeted by the same criminals who  trafficked  her
             into the UK (sic).  How feasible would be it for the  appellant
             to relocate from Edo State  to  other  parts  of  the  country,
             particularly as a lone female with a  dependant  child  and  no
             support;


        -  what is the rate of criminal convictions against traffickers  in
             Nigeria from the time of the first application of the appellant
             to date and to highlight any  steps  that  had  been  taken  to
             tackle trafficking and in particular the corruption inherent in
             it and whether said changes have had any impact;  what  is  the
             data on any re-trafficking statistics;


        -  what are the details of any government support networks, such as
             social  services  that  the  appellant  can  avail  herself  of
             together with a  child  in  Nigeria,  given  that  she  has  no
             practical skills, is virtually uneducated and has no access  to
             family support and  has  been  diagnosed  with  post  traumatic
             stress disorder and major depressive disorder;


        -  what stigma if any is faced by former victims of trafficking  as
             a group and whether this stigma is equivalent to that faced  by
             prostitutes in Nigeria."

92.   In the  addendum,  Ms  Olateru-Olagbegi  explains  that  thousands  of
    Nigerians,  especially  women  and  children  are  victims   of   human
    trafficking to various parts of the world, especially to Europe for sex-
    related work.  She quoted Mr Godwin Morka,  the  Lagos  zonal  head  of
    NAPTIP, suggesting in September 2007 that over  50,000  Nigerian  women
    have been  trafficked  to  various  countries  in  Europe.   Women  and
    children constitute  the  largest  percentage  of  victims  and  female
    children and young adult women are  more  trafficked  than  their  male
    counterparts because they are considered  better  suited  for  domestic
    labour and the sex trade.

93.   She explained that women are regarded in  Nigeria  as  being  inferior
    and subjected  to  gender  bias.   As  such,  the  Nigerian  female  in
    particular  is  more  vulnerable  to   being   trafficked   than   male
    counterparts.  Most victims are  said  to  be  predominantly  from  Edo
    State.  The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime suggested that  an
    estimated 94% of women trafficked for commercial sexual exploitation to
    Europe come originally from Edo State.

94.   Ms Olateru-Olagbegi believed that having been born in Benin City,  Edo
    State, where the appellant lived at all material times before  she  was
    trafficked, the appellant  would  be  at  greater  risk  of  being  re-
    trafficked.  Her poor socio-economic background coupled with  the  fact
    that she is an orphan increases her vulnerability to being  trafficked.



95.   Ms Olateru-Olagbegi suggests that  the  victims  of  trafficking  face
    risk, not only from those people who had direct contact  with  them  at
    the  time  of  the  transaction,  but  also  others  involved  in   the
    trafficking transaction, such as recruiters, forgers and  producers  of
    travel documents and fake identities, corrupt immigration officials who
    facilitate  travels,  foreign  collaborators,  the  receivers  of   the
    destination and accompanying transit agents, the Juju  priests  in  the
    case  of  traditional  oaths  and   family   members   who   facilitate
    negotiations.  However,  in  the  appellant's  case,  nobody  else  was
    involved in her  trafficking,  apart  from  Mr  Osagie.   There  is  no
    question of her having been recruited by agents or family  members,  of
    there being anybody producing  any  forged  travel  documents  or  fake
    identities, or any corrupt immigration officials having facilitated the
    appellant's travel, or of  any  foreign  collaborators  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

96.   The appellant was an orphan and brought  up  by  her  aunt.   She  was
    engaged in the sale of  water.   Her  poor  socio-economic  conditions,
    suggested the report, made her vulnerable  to  being  trafficked.   The
    fact that she has no family ties with anybody in Nigeria makes her more
    susceptible and were  she  to  be  deported  this  would  compound  her
    vulnerability to further abuse or being re-trafficked.

97.   Ms Olateru-Olagbegi suggested also that  because  the  appellant  does
    not know of the identity and location of the members  of  the  Nigerian
    trafficking criminal network responsible for her being trafficked, this
    will place her at  an  even  greater  risk.   She  suggested  that  the
    appellant risks  reprisals  from  those  members  of  the  network  who
    assisted her passage from the Nigerian borders,  all  of  whom  have  a
    monetary interest in her.

98.   The NAPTIP  shelters  are  regarded  more  or  less  as  institutional
    custody where the movements of victims  are  said,  to  be  restricted.
    This is  because  NAPTIP  agencies  are  a  protection  as  well  as  a
    prosecution agency and the protective custody which in effect restricts
    the movements  of  residents  is  designed  to  safeguard  the  rescued
    trafficked persons temporarily  from  the  traffickers  and/or  further
    abuse.   She said that NAPTIP has only recorded a  marginal  number  of
    convictions.  The US State  Report  on  Trafficking  in  Persons,  2008
    states that during the last  year  NAPTIP  reported  investigating  114
    trafficking cases, 62 of which were prosecuted.  Of the 62 cases, seven
    resulted in convictions and 51 are pending in the courts.  Ms  Olateru-
    Olagbegi suggested that there have only been 34  convictions  over  the
    five years operation of NAPTIP.  Given  that  there  are  thousands  of
    trafficked women and children, the number of  arrests  and  convictions
    constitute a negligible percentage.  This, she  said,  means  that  the
    traffickers continue with impunity.

99.   She is  firmly  of  the  opinion  that  a  deportee  trafficked  woman
    returned to Nigeria will not receive  adequate  protection  to  prevent
    further abuse or attack from her traffickers and/or  agents  or  enable
    her proper re-integration into society.

100.   At  paragraph  2.2.15,  Ms  Olateru-Olagbegi  suggests  that  if  the
    appellant consents to stay in a shelter she will only  be  accommodated
    for a maximum of twelve weeks which is insufficient for her to be fully
    integrated and  to  recover  from  the  trauma  of  trafficking.    She
    suggested also that  the  shelters,  as  presently  designed,  are  not
    conducive to accommodate mothers  with  infant  children  such  as  the
    appellant and her child as there are no facilities for babies  such  as
    cr�ches and shelters.

101.  She criticised  the  NAPTIP  shelters  for  their  lack  of  necessary
    facilities  for  mental  health  counselling,  medical   and   societal
    integration  and  explains  that  qualifying  psychiatrists   are   not
    currently employed within the shelters.  The ability  of  the  Nigerian
    government to protect victims of trafficking is, she  suggested,  below
    the standard for adequate protection.

102.  Ms Olateru-Olagbegi suggests that the Law  Enforcement  Agencies  were
    usually reluctant  to  investigate  violent  crimes,  especially  those
    against women and children unable to pay for the costs of investigation
    or bribe investigating officers because of the corruption.   The  power
    of wealthy people to influence the action of police has  been  attested
    to in the British Danish fact-finding Mission Report.

103.  She said that in her opinion, the appellant's fears of reprisals  from
    the trafficker and his network members in any part of Nigeria are well-
    founded as to date; there is  still  no  adequate  state  structure  to
    protect victims of violence or trafficking.  The risk to the  appellant
    is greater because she has also failed to repay the total sum  for  the
    debt bondage.  Another dimension to the risk suffered by the  appellant
    if returned is societal  stigmatisation  and  persecution.   Stigma  is
    associated with  deported  or  repatriated  women  and  girls  who  are
    generally  perceived  as   trafficking   persons   with   prostitution,
    irrespective of the reasons for their deportation.  The media initially
    portrayed deportees  as  "prostitute  who  had  brought  shame  to  the
    country" and publicly paraded them in the media.  Deported  trafficking
    persons are also initially forced to undergo HIV/AIDs tests and so this
    has also fuelled the public perception  that  deportees  are  not  only
    prostitutes but carriers of HIV  and  AIDs  virus  leading  to  further
    stigmatisation.

104.  This appellant will be regarded by her community as  someone  who  has
    been trafficked to the UK for prostitution and stigmatised as a  person
    with HIV/AIDs.  She will therefore suffer rejection and persecution  in
    consequence of her perceived status in any part of  Nigeria,  suggested
    Ms Olateru-Olagbegi.

105.  Accommodation will be difficult for the appellant.  Single  women,  no
    matter  how  wealthy,  find  it  difficult  to  rent   properties   for
    accommodation and exercise their rights as men would do.  This  is  due
    to the age-long patriarchy and gender-bias against  women.   Women  who
    live alone are regarded as being promiscuous and of low moral standard.
     Single women are either never married or divorced and, if widowed, are
    expected to live with members of the deceased's husband's  family.   At
    best they are therefore regarded as divorced women and also regarded as
    flirts and generally as "bad  women".   The  situation  of  a  deportee
    victim of trafficking will eventually become known in any community  in
    which she resides in Nigeria.  Her bid  to  secure  accommodation  will
    result in prospective landlords wanting to know her background  because
    they would not wish to accommodate  armed  robbers  and  criminals  who
    might implicate the landlords.  Faced with the need for  the  appellant
    to  disclose  her  background  and  perspective  landlords,  especially
    because she would need to seek  accommodation  in  an  area  with  some
    cultural affinity with her, she will be in danger of being found out by
    members of her trafficker's criminal network.  The  absence  of  strong
    family ties coupled with the lack of necessary educational skill and no
    safe home to go to will cause further difficulties for  the  appellant.
    Being unable to access employment and without any skills the  appellant
    will suffer hardship, including hunger, lack  of  clothing  and  a  low
    standard of living which will adversely affect  her  welfare.   Without
    employment she will be  unable  to  access  the  high  cost  of  health
    services  in  Nigeria.    There  is  no  health   insurance   currently
    operational for the benefit of the poor or low income earners  and  the
    appellant, who would be homeless and destitute in Nigeria,  would  have
    no access to good health facilities especially mental health facilities
    which she needs as well as proper  health  facilities  for  her  infant
    child.

Submissions

106.  Mr Tufan suggested that the three issues for the Tribunal were:-

           "1.   To decide whether the Nigerian authorities would  be  able
                 `to offer protection to the appellant on return to Nigeria;
                 alternatively
             2.  would internal relocation be unduly harsh; and
             3.  the appellant's Article 3 and Article 8 claims."


107.  Mr Tufan reminded us that the Tribunal found  the  appellant  credible
    on the last occasion but, he submitted,  the  appellant  had  not  been
    credible in respect of her evidence to this Tribunal in relation to her
    aunt's friend when she referred to having her aunt's friend's telephone
    number sewn into her  jeans.   He  suggested  that  this  part  of  the
    appellant's evidence was not credible.

108.  The Tribunal asked Mr Tufan if he was able  to  explain  with  reasons
    why he suggested that the appellant's evidence was  not  credible.   He
    responded by saying that, "the likelihood of such matters occurring  is
    unlikely".

109.  Mr Tufan pointed out that the expert evidence  claimed  that  she  had
    sought the appellant's trafficker, Mr Osagie in Nigeria, but  he  asked
    us to note that the expert had apparently not made any attempt to  seek
    or make contact with the appellant's aunt's friend.  Mr Tufan asked  us
    to consider whether the trafficker was likely  to  have  a  network  of
    contacts or the power to find the appellant on her  return  to  Nigeria
    and submitted that the fact that he could not himself be found did  not
    suggest that he did.

110.  At  the  moment,  the  appellant  is  living  in  NASS  accommodation.
    Despite this, she met the father of her child  at  a  church  function.
    There was, he submitted, no evidence to suggest that the trafficker had
    attempted to make contact with the appellant in the United Kingdom.  He
    suggested that the risk  to  the  appellant  from  the  trafficker  was
    minimal.

111.   However,  Mr  Tufan  submitted,  on  return  it  is  clear  from  the
    background evidence that  there  are  numerous  organisations  who  are
    available in Nigeria to assist trafficking victims.  He referred us  to
    page 7 of the Danish Immigration  Service  "Protection  of  Victims  of
    Trafficking in Nigeria" report  written  as  a  result  of  the  Danish
    Immigration Services Fact-finding Mission to  Lagos,  Benin  City,  and
    Abuja, Nigeria between 9th  and  26th  September,  2007,  published  in
    Copenhagen, April 2008.

112.  We pointed out to the representatives that the Tribunal were  in  some
    difficulties with regard to the bundles.  Unfortunately the appellant's
    bundle had been paginated in  a  quite  unnecessarily  complicated  and
    unclear way, such that it was extremely difficult to find any documents
    to which we had been referred by  the  representatives.   Additionally,
    other documents which were said to have been handed in appeared  to  be
    missing.

113.  Counsel suggested that if we were to grant  a  brief  adjournment  she
    would be able to provide a further clean copy  of  a  bundle  from  her
    chambers.  We granted a brief adjournment but on resuming  the  hearing
    it appeared that such a bundle was not available.

114.  Mr Tufan asked us to note page 7 of  the  Danish  Immigration  Service
    Report which referred to a number of non-governmental organisations who
    assist victims of trafficking in Nigeria, the most  prominent  of  whom
    are GPI (Girls Power Initiative) COSUDOW (Committee for the Support  of
    the  Dignity  of  Women),  IRRRAG  (International  Reproductive  Rights
    Research Action Group,  WOCON (Women's Consortium of Nigeria),  WOTCLEF
    (Women's Trafficking and Child  Labour  Extradition  Foundation),  AWEG
    (African Women's Empowerment Guild, IDIA Resistance  and  the  Catholic
    Secretariat of Nigeria/CARITAS, Nigeria.  The organisation, COSUDOW  is
    headed by the Reverend Sister Florence.  Mr Tufan asked us to note that
    Mr Tommaso De Cataldo, Chief of Mission of IOM in Abuja considered that
    COSUDOW and NAPTIP were two of the key institutions in Nigeria fighting
    trafficking and assisting victims of trafficking.

115.  Mr Tufan asked us to note that COSUDOW is referred to at  page  45  of
    his bundle.  It  was  established  in  1999  as  a  counter-trafficking
    project and its aims are prevention, protection and  rehabilitation/re-
    integration.

116.  He pointed out that the organisation seeks to prevent  trafficking  by
    educating different sectors of the public on the evils of  trafficking.
    It offers re-integration including family tracing and  counselling,  it
    offers rehabilitation assistance, including protection and  prosecution
    and also monitors returnees and follows up on their progress.  Returnee
    victims of HIV/AIDs are counselled  and  supported.   The  organisation
    collaborates with the  Anti-Human  Trafficking  Unit  of  the  Nigerian
    Police and since its inception some 72 trafficking  victims  have  been
    rehabilitated in one form or another.

117.  The Danish Report spoke of the  Reverend  Sister  Florence  explaining
    that  COSUDOW  was  part  of  an  umbrella  organisation  of  NGOs  and
    governmental bodies addressing the problem of trafficking.

118.  NAPTIP is a Federal Government Agency created by legislation  in  2003
    which started functioning in 2004 and is responsible for investigation,
    prosecution and protection.  The Danish Report also  spoke  of  WOTCLEF
    and  other  NGOs  also   offering   such   services   as   counselling,
    rehabilitation  and  integration.   Mr  Tufan  suggested  that  it  was
    established  precisely  to  assist  people  such  as  this   appellant.
    According to 2.2.2 of the Danish Report, NAPTIP not only has government
    funding, but also funding  from  UNICEF,  UNODC/United  Nations  Inter-
    Regional  Crime  and  Justice  Research  Institute   (UNICRI),   USAID,
    American Bar Association - Africa, ILO and the  Canadian  International
    Development Agency.  The governments of Italy, France, Norway  and  the
    Netherlands also provide funding along with IOM  and  an  Italian  non-
    governmental organisation.  Funding of NAPTIP  by  the  government  was
    said to have increased during the last years and the fact that  it  now
    owns its own headquarters  building  in  Abuja  implies,  suggests  the
    report that the financial situation for NAPTIP has improved, as  NAPTIP
    no longer pays rent and the continuity and stability of the agency  has
    been secured.

119.  Mr Tufan then drew our attention to the report on  the  Convention  on
    the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, dated 5th
    October, 2006 in relation to Nigeria which,  at  article  6.2  explains
    that there is an Office of the Special Assistant to  the  President  on
    Human Trafficking and Child Labour which  compliments  the  agency  for
    enforcement and monitoring of trafficking of persons, "National  Agency
    for Prohibition of Trafficking In Persons  (NAPTIP)"  and  its  mandate
    execution.  Nigeria is said to have entered into a number of bi-lateral
    agreements with  countries  on  trafficking  in  persons  and  to  have
    ratified and domesticated the UN Convention on Trans-National Organised
    Crime as  well  as  its  Protocols  to  prevent,  suppress  and  punish
    trafficking in persons, especially women and  children.   The  Protocol
    against illegal smuggling of migrants has also been ratified.

120.  NAPTIP is said to have produced a national policy on  counselling  and
    rehabilitation and its implementation strategy which  has  led  to,  "a
    more efficient counselling and rehabilitation services for  victims  of
    trafficking".  It currently manages shelter  facilities  in  Lagos  and
    Benin, although, Mr Tufan added, since the publication  of  the  report
    more shelters have now been provided.  Seven transit shelters were said
    to have been established in Canno, Edo, Akwa  Ibom,  Abuja,  Enugu  and
    Sokoto and Lagos States for the purposes of rehabilitation  of  victims
    of trafficking.

121.  Paragraph 5.2 of the  Danish  Immigration  Service  Report  refers  to
    NAPTIP having access and working towards  the  establishment  of  seven
    shelters in Abuja, Lagos, Canno,  Edo,  Enugu,  Sokoto  and  Akwa  Ibom
    states which were said to have first aid capacities and  also  visiting
    doctors and referral capacity  to  hospital.   Seven  shelters  are  in
    operation.  The largest in Lagos has a capacity of 120, but the  others
    each have a capacity of 50.  The Lagos shelter can be increased to  200
    beds if necessary and since 2004 some 631 victims  were  said  to  have
    been passed through the shelter, of which 562 were women.   53  victims
    were said to be currently in the shelter.

122.  Mr Tufan asked us to particularly note that at page 43 of the  report,
    Ms Olateru-Olagbegi, speaking on behalf of WOCON, emphasised, "that the
    problem is not the victims are not offered protection by NAPTIP  if  in
    need, but that some victims actually leave their  shelter  before  they
    can be certain to be out of any danger."  Mr Tufan submitted that  that
    clearly  demonstrates  that  protection  is  offered  by  the  Nigerian
    Government, but if people choose to leave the shelter before  they  can
    be certain to be out of any danger then  the  Nigerian  Government  can
    hardly be blamed for it.

123.  WOCAN, the Woman's Consortium of Nigeria, is another NGO operating  in
    Nigeria.  It was explained by the Reverend Sister Florence  of  COSUDOW
    that  COSUDOW  is  part  of  an  umbrella  organisation  of  NGOs   and
    governmental bodies that address the problem  of  trafficking  and  the
    different groups that make up the  co-operation  carry  out  activities
    together, with each contributing  their  strength  to  finding  lasting
    solutions to the problem of human trafficking.

124.  Commenting on the evidence of Ms Olateru-Olagbegi, Mr Tufan  submitted
    that her reports were like those referred to by Collins  J  in  Slimani
    (Content of Adjudicator Determination) Algeria *  [2001]  UKIAT  00009.
    It is not entirely objective in its approach  and  has  fixed  opinions
    about the situation in Nigeria.  The Expert was, he  submitted,  acting
    as an advocate rather than an expert.  The witness is involved with  an
    NGO and makes damning comments in relation to government  agency.   She
    is not objective.  He referred us to the most recent  statement  of  Ms
    Olateru-Olagbegi and the copy of  a  Nigerian  Newspaper  Report  which
    appeared to be dated 30th September 2009 relating to the lady  who  was
    suffering from having burns inflicted upon her  by  her  elder  brother
    over her refusal to be sent overseas.  This was, he suggested, the only
    instance of reprisals and it is not clear  from  the  report  that  the
    victim was in fact a  victim  of  trafficking.   It  appears  that  her
    attacker was her brother.  He suggested that there had  been  no  other
    reports at all of reprisals by traffickers  against  their  victims  in
    Nigeria.

125.  Mr Tufan urged us to find that there was a sufficiency  of  protection
    within Nigeria for this appellant.  He submitted that it was clear that
    the Nigerian Government were not only willing but  were  also  able  to
    offer effective protection to victims of trafficking.  According to the
    Reverend Sister Florence, (page 19 of the  Danish  Immigration  Service
    Report) she emphasised that the Anti-Human Trafficking Police  Unit  in
    Benin City is not infected by corruption in Nigeria and the  Anti-Human
    Trafficking Police Unit is a special police  force  not  influenced  by
    corruption that prevails in  the  Nigerian  Police  Forces.   Mr  Tufan
    submitted  that  the  justice  system  is  clearly  functioning  as  is
    evidenced by the fact that there have been prosecutions.  Between  2004
    and 2007, NAPTIP  processed  approximately  1,000  trafficked  persons.
    Since 2004, some 320 traffickers have been arrested on a national scale
    by NAPTIP and this does not include  arrests  by  the  Nigerian  Police
    Force and Nigerian Immigration Service.  During  the  same  period,  62
    cases were filed  in  the  courts  and  twelve  traffickers  have  been
    convicted.  Punishments range from one to seven years imprisonment and,
    at the time of  the  publication  of  the  Danish  Immigration  Service
    Report, some 52 cases were still pending.  This is clear evidence of  a
    functioning justice system, Mr Tufan submitted.

126.  As to whether the appellant would be admitted  to  a  NAPTIP  shelter,
    the evidence given by the  expert  was  that  she  did  not  think  the
    appellant would be accepted.  In response, the evidence  now  submitted
    clearly shows that the appellant would be admitted.  The author of  the
    e-mailed evidence is unequivocal.  She says  that  a  returning  victim
    with a young baby will be admitted to a NAPTIP  shelter  without  delay
    and that both returning victim and baby would be met  at  the  airport.
    The shelters have resident nurses and clinics and have a medical doctor
    on call at the shelters.  All the  shelters  have  social  workers  and
    nurses  who  have  undergone  a  series  of  training   in   areas   of
    psychological and psycho-therapy and are ready to counsel and treat any
    victim suffering with Post Traumatic Stress Disorder.

127.  He submitted that there clearly was a  sufficiency  of  protection  in
    Benin City, but she could, in any event, relocate elsewhere in  Nigeria
    if she felt the need to.  There was no evidence that it would be unduly
    harsh to expect the appellant to do so.

128.  The Presenting Officer suggested that there  was,  in  any  event,  no
    evidence that the appellant's trafficker would be able to  locate  her.
    Before she came to the United Kingdom she was able to make a living for
    herself by selling water.  While she has been in the United Kingdom she
    has undertaken basic computer courses and basis English  courses.   She
    would be in a better position to be able to take care  of  herself  now
    than she was before she came to the United Kingdom.

129.  Referring to his e-mail correspondence with Mrs  L  N  Oguejiofor,  Mr
    Tufan drew our  attention  to  the  suggestion  that  NAPTIP  works  in
    collaboration with other agencies and temporary fostering is  available
    should the need arise.

130.  He then told us he relied on what Lord Menzies said at page 14 of  his
    bundle in the decision of FO  [2008]  CSOH  80  at  paragraph  14.   We
    pointed out to Mr Tufan that that decision dealt very much with a  case
    on its own facts and, in any event, the objective evidence  before  the
    court had not been identified.  He drew our attention to the  decisions
    in Unar [2008] EWHC 2385(Admin), to JO (Internal Relocation -  no  risk
    of re-trafficking) Nigeria [2004] UKIAT 00251, to AI  (Nigeria)  [2007]
    EWCA Civ 707 and to FB (Lone women - PSG -  internal  relocation  -  AA
    (Uganda) considered) Sierra Leone [2003] UKIAT 00090.

131.  Mr Tufan then asked us to note that  from  the  medical  evidence  the
    appellant was not a suicide risk.  On return to Nigeria  the  appellant
    will be assisted by NAPTIP and clearly there is  support  available  to
    the appellant.

132.  When the medical evidence is taken into account, the  effect  on  this
    appellant of return  to  Nigeria  would  clearly  not  reach  the  high
    threshold identified by their Lordships in N v Secretary of  State  for
    the Home Department  [2005]  UKHL  31  and  there  was,  therefore,  no
    question  of  Article  3  being  engaged.   Insofar  as  Article  8  is
    concerned, the appellant's family life will of course continue  because
    she would be removed with  her  baby.   He  asked  us  to  dismiss  the
    appellant's appeal.

133.  Counsel advised us that she wished to rely on her written  submission,
    comprising her 23 page "skeleton" argument.  She  referred  us  to  the
    medical evidence before us including the reports of Dr  Roxanne  Agnew-
    Davies.  It is clear from Dr Agnew-Davies' report  that  the  appellant
    suffers from PTSD and that her removal from the United Kingdom would be
    detrimental to the appellant's health.  It is  clear  from  the  report
    (see paragraph 3.05.13) that  the  appellant  presents  as  a  risk  to
    herself (by thoughts of suicide or self harm) and that her  ratings  of
    anxiety and arousal related systems place her within the  severe  range
    of the Beck Anxiety Inventory.  It is clear from the  report  that  the
    appellant does still express considerable anxiety  at  the  thought  of
    returning and being found by her trafficker.

134.  The doctor expresses the opinion that the appellant is suffering  from
    a complex and severe form  of  PTSD.  At  paragraph  4.2.2  the  doctor
    suggests that the appellant does not present more than a slight risk of
    suicide, but at paragraph 4.2.4 it is clear that  the  author  believes
    that  the  appellant  is  extremely  vulnerable  from  a  psychological
    perspective.  She suggests that cognitive behaviour therapy might be an
    appropriate intervention.

135.  The most recent report of Dr  Agnew-Davies  is  at  page  166  of  the
    bundle and is dated 15th September 2008.   There the  author  expresses
    the view that the appellant needs specialist trauma focused therapy  to
    be able to recover and it is highly  likely  that  the  appellant  will
    continue  to  suffer  clinically  significant  prolonged  psychological
    problems until  this  occurs.   It  appears  that  there  has  been  no
    improvement in the appellant's mental health between the dates  of  the
    two reports and indeed there is evidence  to  suggest  a  deterioration
    because there has been  a  substantial  increase  in  her  symptoms  of
    anxiety or arousal.

136.  Counsel reminded us of the evidence of Ms Johnson and  the  fact  that
    she confirmed a deterioration in the appellant's mental  health  and  a
    change in the living conditions of the appellant which had  caused  her
    distress.  Currently the appellant is being  supported  by  workers  at
    POPPY and a support plan is in place.

137.  Counsel asked us to remember that the appellant had been found  to  be
    credible and has had a consistent diagnosis of PTSD.

Hearing on 13th January, 2009

138.  Counsel referred us to the impressive  qualifications  of  Dr  Roxanne
    Agnew-Davies and reminded us of the summary of conclusions  reached  by
    the doctor at paragraph 1.04 of her report and the impact of  parenting
    on the appellant at paragraph 4.3.1.

139.  Referring us in some detail and at length to the background  evidence,
    Counsel suggested that at pages 224 onwards in her bundle a  number  of
    documents refer to the widespread corruption throughout  Nigeria.   The
    Freedom  House  Report,  "Freedom  in  the  World  -  Nigeria   (2008)"
    identifies Nigeria as being ranked 147th most corrupt country out of  a
    total of 180 countries.  The document, "Rural Poverty Portal"  at  page
    237, identifies widespread poverty in Nigeria and suggests that  it  is
    especially  severe  in  rural   areas   where   social   services   and
    infrastructure are limited or non-existent.  The report said:-

         "Women and households headed  by  women  are  frequently  the  most
         chronically poor within rural communities.  Women have lower social
         status than men and  consequently  less  access  to  schooling  and
         training, particularly in childcare and health practices."


140.   Referring  to  the  UNHCR  Report  "Concluding  Observations  of  the
    Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against  Women:  Nigeria
    (advanced unedited version)" (CEDAW Report), Counsel drew our attention
    particularly to the areas of concern highlighted by  the  report.   She
    emphasised that the report is independent.

141.  Counsel pointed out that the appellant's expert, Ms  Olateru-Olagbegi,
    was a member of the research team  responsible  for  the  UESCO  Policy
    Paper: "Human Trafficking in Nigeria: Root causes and recommendations."
      She  also  relied  on  the  Amnesty  International  Report:  "Amnesty
    International Report 2008: Nigeria published on 28th May, 2008" and  in
    particular asked us  to  note  that  violence  against  women  remained
    pervasive including domestic violence, rape and other  sexual  violence
    by state officials and private individuals.  She suggested  that  those
    responsible for serious human rights abuses in Nigeria were seldom held
    to account and relied on the Human Rights Watch Report:  "World  Report
    2008:Nigeria"published on 31st January, 2008 which suggested that  even
    law enforcement agencies subvert the rule of  law.   Counsel  suggested
    that Nigeria  does  not  fully  comply  with  the  Trafficking  Victims
    Protection Act's minimum standards as is  evidenced  by  the  US  State
    Department  Report  "Trafficking  in  Persons  Report  2008:   Nigeria"
    published on 4th June, 2008.   The report spoke of  inadequate  funding
    for NAPTIP shelters, some of which were said to be not well  maintained
    and offered limited rehabilitation care and no reintegration  services.



142.  The Integrated Regional Network News Report "Nigeria:  Trafficking  of
    Girls Abuse Worsening" published on 7th July, 2007, reports the head of
    the Kano  office  of  NAPTIP  as  suggesting  that,  "The  business  of
    recruiting teenage girls as domestic help  in  rich  and  middle  class
    homes is booming despite our  best  efforts  to  put  a  stop  to  it."
    Counsel suggested that trafficking is increasing and the government  is
    simply powerless to put a stop to the trade.

143.  Counsel addressed us at considerable length and in  some  detail  when
    making her submissions to us.  She suggested in her "skeleton argument"
    that the issues for the Tribunal are:-

         "-       whether there is a sufficiency of protection available  to
         the appellant on her return to her home area and if not;


         -  whether internal relocation would be unduly harsh?"


       The  answer  to  these  two  questions  will  determine  whether  the
    appellant is a refugee.  Additionally the appellant relies on  Articles
    3 and 8.  The skeleton argument relies on the same background  material
    to which Counsel drew our attention during her lengthy submissions.

144.  In terms of any assessment of the appellant's claim under  Article  8,
    the skeleton argument suggested that the first four questions posed  by
    Lord Bingham in Razgar, R (on the Application of) v. Secretary of State
    for the Home Department [2004] UKHL have been  satisfied  and  that  in
    assessing the fifth question, the Tribunal is directed to  address  the
    "severity and consequences" of removal under Huang v Secretary of State
    for the Home Department [2007] UKHL 11, [2007] 2 AC 167.  The  Tribunal
    were reminded of the opinion of Sedley LJ  in  granting  permission  to
    appeal and, in particular,  his view on the "moral case"  which  should
    be taken into account in any assessment under Article 8,  in  terms  of
    the impact of the appellant's proposed removal on her private  life  in
    the UK, having been sexually exploited in this country  by  a  criminal
    who ought  not  to  have  been  allowed  in,  and  the  impact  on  the
    appellant's physical and moral integrity of the proportionality of  her
    removal.  The skeleton argument suggests that the  expert  country  and
    medical evidence should be fully taken account of when assessing  this.



145.  Account should also be taken of the fact that the appellant was  found
    credible some four years ago and, despite this, she has since that time
    been subjected to an uncertain immigration status which  has  adversely
    affected upon her mental health as is evidenced by the  medical  report
    and this must  be  taken  into  account  in  conducting  the  balancing
    exercise in considering the interests of the appellant and her son vis-
    �-vis the interest of the state.

The Law
146.  The test for evaluating whether sufficiency of  protection  exists  in
    the appellant's home state  is  that  set  out  at  paragraph  339O  of
    Statement of Changes in Immigration Rules, HC 395, as  amended.   These
    provide as follows:

            "Internal relocation

           339O (i) The Secretary of State will not make:
                 (a) a grant of asylum if in part of the country of origin a
                 person would not have a well founded fear of being
                 persecuted, and the person can reasonably be expected to
                 stay in that part of the country;
                 or
                 (b) a grant of humanitarian protection if in part of the
                 country of return a person would not face a real risk of
                 suffering serious harm, and the person can reasonably be
                 expected to stay in that part of the country.
           (ii) In examining whether a part of the country of origin or
           country of return meets the requirements in (i) the Secretary of
           State, when making his decision on whether to grant asylum or
           humanitarian protection, will have regard to the general
           circumstances prevailing in that part of the country and to the
           personal circumstances of the person.
           (iii) (i) applies notwithstanding technical obstacles to return
                 to the country of origin or country of return."
147.   In Horvath v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2001] AC
    489. As Lord Hope said at p. 499 g-h:
       "the obligation to afford refugee status arises only if the person's
       own state is unable or  unwilling  to  discharge  its  own  duty  to
       protect its own nationals. I think that it follows that, in order to
       satisfy the fear test in a non state agent case, the  applicant  for
       refugee status  must  show  that  the  persecution  which  he  fears
       consists of acts of violence or  ill  treatment  against  which  the
       state is unable or unwilling to provide  protection.  The  applicant
       may have a well founded fear of threats to his life due to famine or
       civil war or of isolated acts of violence or  ill  treatment  for  a
       Convention reason which may be  perpetrated  against  him.  But  the
       risk, however severe, and the fear, however  well  founded,  do  not
       entitle him to the status of a refugee."
148.  Similarly, the level of protection in the home state is not such that
    it is expected to be absolute guaranteed immunity. As Lord Clyde said
    in Horvath at p. 510 f:
       "that would be beyond any realistic practical expectation."
149.  Lord Clyde adopted, at p. 511 a-b, as a useful description of what is
    intended, the formulation set out by Stuart Smith LJ at paragraph 22:
       "In my judgement there must be in force in the country in question a
       criminal  law  which  makes  violent  attacks  by  the   prosecutors
       punishable by sentences commensurate with the gravity of the crimes.
       The victims as a class must not be exempt  from  protection  of  the
       law. There must be a reasonable willingness by the  law  enforcement
       agencies that is to say the police and courts to  detect,  prosecute
       and punish the offender."
150.  As to the test for internal relocation, Lord Bingham in Januzi v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2006] 2 AC 426 at paragraph
    21 said
       "The decision maker, taking account of  all  relevant  circumstances
       pertaining to the claimant and his country of  origin,  must  decide
       whether it is reasonable to  expect  the  claimant  to  relocate  or
       whether it would be unduly harsh to expect  him  to  do  so......All
       must depend on fair assessment of the relevant facts."
151.  Lord Hope, at para 47 said:
      "The question where the issue of internal relocation  is  raised  can,
       then,  be  defined  quite  simply.  As   Linden   JA   put   it   in
       Thirunavukkarasu v Canada (Minister of Employment  and  Immigration)
       (1993) 109 DLR (4th) 682, 687, it is  whether  it  would  be  unduly
       harsh to expect a claimant who is being persecuted for a  Convention
       reason in one part of his country to move to  a  less  hostile  part
       before seeking refugee status abroad. The words "unduly  harsh"  set
       the  standard  that  must  be  met  for  this  to  be  regarded   as
       unreasonable. If the claimant can  live  a  relatively  normal  life
       there judged by  the  standards  that  prevail  in  his  country  of
       nationality generally, and if he can reach  the  less  hostile  part
       without  undue  hardship  or  undue  difficulty,  it  will  not   be
       unreasonable to expect him to move there."

The background material

152.  Both advocates referred us to extensive passages from  the  report  of
    the Danish Immigration Service report: The  Protection  of  victims  of
    trafficking in Nigeria: a fact finding mission to Lagos Benin City  and
    Abuja, 9-26 September 2007 (April 2008).   The report  records  in  its
    background paragraphs that the extent of trafficking  from  Nigeria  is
    difficult to estimate, but the problem  is  a  major  concern  for  the
    authorities and a number of the NGOs in the country. The Government  of
    Nigeria has recognised  the  problem  and  since  2003  the  legal  and
    institutional foundation for combating trafficking and support  victims
    of  trafficking  has  been  in  place  in   Nigeria.    The   principal
    organisation created by the Nigerian State to combat the problem is the
    National Agency for the Prohibition of Traffic  in  Persons  and  other
    related matters, universally referred to by its acronym, NAPTIP.    The
    vast majority of female victims of trafficking are from  Edo  State  in
    the south-western part of Nigeria. A number of Nigerian NGOs are  based
    in Benin City - the capital of Edo  State  -  and  are  addressing  the
    problem of trafficking.  NAPTIP has a  regional  office  in  the  city,
    (p.5).

153.  Mr Turfan drew our attention to the following passages  in  which  the
    page references refer to the internal pagination of the document:



         "A number of NGOs are assisting victims of trafficking in  Nigeria.
         Among  the  most  prominent  of  those  are   GPI   [Girls'   Power
         Initiative], COSUDOW [Committee for the Support of the  Dignity  of
         Women], IRRRAG [International Reproductive Rights  Research  Action
         Group], WOCON  [Women's  Consortium  of  Nigeria],  WOTCLEF  [Women
         Trafficking  and  Child  Labour  Eradication   Foundation]],   AWEG
         [African Women's  Empowerment  Guild],  Idia  Renaissance  and  the
         Catholic Secretariat of Nigeria/Caritas Nigeria", (pp. 7 and 58-9).



         "Regarding  the  NGO  COSUDOW,  which  is  headed  by  Rev.  Sister
         Florence,  Tommaso  De  Cataldo,  Chief  of  Mission,  IOM,  Abuja,
         considered that this NGO and NAPTIP are two of the key institutions
         in  Nigeria  fighting  trafficking   and   assisting   victims   of
         trafficking. COSUDOW is a  well-established  institution  that  has
         been present in Nigeria for a number of years and will continue  to
         be so for years to come. The catholic  orientation  of  COSUDOW  is
         also  beneficial,  as  many  victims  will  feel  confidence  in  a
         religious NGO. De Cataldo (IOM) added  that  COSUDOW  is  a  strong
         organisation and Rev. Sister Florence is fully aware of the  entire
         and intricate problem of trafficking", (p. 8).

         "Rev. Sister Florence (COSUDOW) explained that COSUDOW is  part  of
         an umbrella organisation  of  NGOs  and  governmental  bodies  that
         address the problem of trafficking. This umbrella is a  cooperation
         of Bonded Labour in Nederland (BLinN),  Government  and  NGOs.  The
         different groups that make up the cooperation carry out  activities
         together with each contributing their strength to  finding  lasting
         solution to the problem of human trafficking.  COSUDOW  is  also  a
         member of the NGO Coalition in Benin City combating trafficking  in
         human beings, as well as a member of a national  organization  that
         works to  combat  trafficking,  especially  child  trafficking  and
         abuse. The name of the organization is Network of  Non-Governmental
         Organisations Against Child-Trafficking, Labour and Abuse (NACTAL).




         Veronica K. Umaru, National Coordinator, Women Trafficking &  Child
         Labour Eradication  Foundation  (WOTCLEF),  Abuja,  explained  that
         NAPTIP  is  the   federal   government   agency   responsible   for
         investigation, prosecution  and  protection;  however  WOTCLEF  and
         other  NGOs  also  offer  other  services  such   as   counselling,
         rehabilitation and integration", (p. 9).

         "2.2.1 The legal framework
         De Cataldo (IOM) explained that the  Federal  Republic  of  Nigeria
         enacted the Trafficking in Persons  (Prohibition)  Law  Enforcement
         Administration Act, 2003 [hereafter the Law] (amended in 2005), and
         established  NAPTIP  in  2003.  This  Act  is  the  fulfillment  of
         international obligations under the Protocol to  Prevent,  Suppress
         and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially  Women  and  Children
         supplementing the United Nations Convention  against  Transnational
         Organized Crime (Palermo Convention).  The  Law  seeks  to  address
         trafficking in persons with its associated problems by  creating  a
         specific multi-disciplinary crime-fighting agency to address them",
         (p. 10).

         "The Act makes provision for the humane treatment, protection,  and
         non-discriminatory practices towards victims of trafficking.  These
         include access to rehabilitation facilities, temporary stay without
         valid documents and medical attention. (Sections 36-37). Trafficked
         victims even have rights to institute civil actions  against  their
         traffickers irrespective of their immigration status" (Section 38).



         "NAPTIP is in charge of [amongst other things]

           "Taking charge, supervising, controlling  and  coordinating  the
           rehabilitation  of  trafficking  victims  and  participating  in
           proceedings relating to trafficking in persons."


         To assist the Agency in the exercise of its powers  and  functions,
         the Act also establishes in Sections  8  and  9  respectively,  the
         following units with their specific duties  [amongst  which  is]  a
         Counselling and Rehabilitation Unit", (pp. 12-3)

         "2.2.2 Funding for NAPTIP's activities
         Lily N. Oguejiofor, Director, Counselling & Rehabilitation,  NAPTIP
         Abuja Headquarters,  explained  that  besides  government  funding,
         other  sources  for  funding  NAPTIP's   activities   are   UNICEF,
         UNODC/United  Nations  Interregional  Crime  and  Justice  Research
         Institute (UNICRI), USAID, American Bar Association - Africa  (ABA-
         Africa), ILO and  the  Canadian  International  Development  Agency
         (CIDA).  The  governments  of  Italy,  France,   Norway   and   the
         Netherlands also provide funding  for  NAPTIP.  Finally,  IOM,  the
         Italian NGO TAMPEP Onlus and Terre des Hommes  are  also  providing
         funding.


         Oguejiofor (NAPTIP Abuja Headquarters) added that funding of NAPTIP
         by the Government has increased during the last years", (p. 14).

         "A.O. Abiodun, Barrister, Head, NAPTIP Benin Zonal Office explained
         that the Benin Zonal Office  was  the  first  zonal  office  to  be
         established by NAPTIP. The U.S. Department of State  reported  that
         UNICEF continues to support additional  funding  for  NAPTIP  zonal
         offices", (p. 15).



         "Legal and Prosecution Department

         Barrister Abiodun (NAPTIP Benin Zonal Office)  explained  that  the
         Legal and Prosecution Department has concluded  six  cases.  NAPTIP
         got judgement in its favour in most of the cases.  Five  cases  are
         pending and are at various stages of hearing at the High Court.

         Counselling and Rehabilitation Department

         Barrister Abiodun (NAPTIP Benin Zonal Office)  explained  that  the
         Counselling and Rehabilitation Department had received 299  victims
         of trafficking since 2004. 58  of  those  have  been  rehabilitated
         while  241  victims  are  still  awaiting  rehabilitation.  It  was
         stressed that NAPTIP would  greatly  appreciate  it  if  funds  and
         equipments  were  made  available  for  the  reintegration  of  the
         remaining 241 victims", (p. 16)."

         "...Ndgauba   (NAPTIP   Abuja   Headquarters)    emphasized    that
         intimidation by ju-ju is  the  main  reason  why  many  victims  of
         trafficking are not ready  to  cooperate  with  NAPTIP  and  others
         against their traffickers.

         Rev. Ejeh and  Agbogun  (Catholic  Secretariat  of  Nigeria/Caritas
         Nigeria) explained that victims of trafficking  are  frightened  by
         the oath of secrecy that they have taken at the shrine and  because
         of the debt to the trafficker. However, the traffickers  are  aware
         that the victims rarely return to Nigeria by their own will and the
         trafficker will most likely not  claim  the  debt  by  the  use  of
         threats of violence.  However,  if  a  victim  returns  voluntarily
         before the debt has been paid the trafficker  may  claim  the  debt
         from the family of the victim. Because of this there is a high risk
         that the victim will re-traffic in order for the family to pay  the
         debt", (p. 23).


         "3.2.1 Victims' debt to traffickers
         Ndaguba (NAPTIP Abuja Headquarters) informed that usually the  debt
         of the victim or her family to the agent is not a fixed amount  and
         the total sum is not determined when the trafficking arrangement is
         agreed upon between the two parties. The victim may end  up  having
         to pay up to 50,000 or 60,000 Euros to her agent.  Ndaguba  (NAPTIP
         Abuja Headquarters) explained that the  agent's  real  expenses  in
         each case of trafficking may be considerable  lower  and  it  could
         amount to 2,000 or 3,000 Euros. However, more debt is  continuously
         added when the victim is abroad. Adding to the original debt serves
         to keep the victim under the  control  of  the  agent  because  the
         victim is always under the obligation to pay her debt to the  agent
         until the oath is revoked.

         Ndaguba (NAPTIP Abuja Headquarters)  added  that  should  a  victim
         escape or disappear before the debt has  been  paid  and  the  oath
         revoked, it is possible that a ju-ju priest, or an agent would  try
         to collect the debt at the home of  the  victim's  family.  It  was
         emphasized that up to 90 % of the families affected would not  call
         on the police or go to court, but they will do their utmost to  pay
         the debt even though this kind of debt is  illegal.  Some  families
         may even sell their land and property in order to repay  the  debt.
         There are also cases in which families have disowned their daughter
         because she is perceived to have brought the debt  on  the  family.
         However, there are no known cases where  such  families  have  been
         killed or exposed their  daughter  to  serious  physical  violence.
         Should NAPTIP be aware of such cases, the agency would  do  all  it
         can to assist the victim and her family in order to  reconcile  and
         reunite the family, and to avoid re-recruitment taking place",  (p.
         24).

         "Jane Osagie (IRRRAG) stated that traffickers  in  Nigeria  have  a
         network in Nigeria that can be used to collect the  remaining  debt
         or persecute the victims or their families. The debt  could  be  as
         high as 50,000 to 65,000 Euros.

         Rev. Sister Florence  (COSUDOW)  explained  that  some  victims  of
         trafficking might be released after the debt has been paid but this
         is not very common. Instead, many are re-sold to another  Madam  or
         trafficker. Some of these may even establish themselves  as  Madams
         abroad, should they succeed in being granted a residence permit  in
         a foreign country, or they may become traffickers in Nigeria.

         Rev. Sister Florence (COSUDOW) stated that whether the debt to  the
         trafficker has been paid or  not  is  much  more  relevant  to  the
         victim's security situation than if the victim has  given  evidence
         in court case. However, even if the debt has  not  been  paid,  the
         victim will always be able  to  seek  and  obtain  protection  from
         reprisals by traffickers in Nigeria", (p. 25)."

         "Morka (NAPTIP Lagos Zonal  Office)  added  that  NAPTIP's  witness
         protection programme exists throughout the country and  it  can  be
         brought into use whenever it is necessary.  Witness  protection  is
         included in the Nigerian law on trafficking. However,  even  though
         the trolley men's or trafficker's network in Nigeria is strong  the
         local traffickers are insignificant, and they  cannot  successfully
         persecute their victims.

         Regarding witness protection, Ndaguba (NAPTIP  Abuja  Headquarters)
         explained that no  one,  not  even  in  European  countries,  could
         guarantee a witness 100  percent  protection  against  intimidation
         such as ju-ju, which was described as  psychological  intimidation.
         Even  though  NAPTIP  has  a  witness  protection  programme,  this
         programme cannot guarantee protection against  the  traumas,  which
         some victims suffer because of the oath of secrecy they have sworn,
         and their strong sense of obligation to the bidding of an agent  or
         a Madam.

         However, Ndaguba (NAPTIP Abuja Headquarters)  emphasized  that  all
         victims,  including  victims  that  have  testified  against  their
         traffickers or victims that are still indebted to their traffickers
         or Madams, would enjoy protection by NAPTIP against  physical  harm
         from traffickers if they  wish.  NAPTIP  had  never  heard  of  any
         incidents in which agents of trafficking had killed  or  persecuted
         witnesses", (p. 42).


         "5.2 Shelters, reintegration and rehabilitation facilities

         5.2.1 NAPTIP shelters
         According to De Cataldo (IOM) NAPTIP  has  access  and  is  working
         toward the establishment of seven shelters in Abuja,  Lagos,  Kano,
         Edo, Enugu, Sokoto and Akwa Ibom states. The active  shelters  have
         first aid capacity, a visiting medical doctor and referral capacity
         to hospitals.

         Oguejiofor (NAPTIP Abuja Headquarters) stated that NAPTIP has seven
         shelters in operation in Nigeria. The shelters are located in:

             State/City     :  Capacity

             Lagos     : 120
             Abuja     : 50
             Uyo       : 50
             Kano      : 50
             Sokoto    : 50
             Benin City     : 50
             Enugu     : 50

         Morka (NAPTIP Lagos Zonal Office)  explained  that  NAPTIP's  Zonal
         Office in Lagos runs a shelter for victims of trafficking including
         a medical clinic. The shelter has a capacity of 120 beds  and  this
         number can be increased to 200 beds, if necessary. Since 2004,  631
         victims have passed through the shelter,  out  of  which  562  were
         women. 53 victims are currently in the shelter", (p. 42).

         "According to Morka (NAPTIP Lagos Zonal Office),  the  security  in
         the shelter is extremely good as both the police and State Security
         Service (SSS) are based close to it. It was added that some of  the
         returned victims had been accommodated in the  shelter  for  up  to
         three  months.  All  victims  in  the  shelter  are  staying  there
         voluntarily.

         Barrister Abiodun (NAPTIP Benin Zonal Office)  explained  that  the
         present NAPTIP shelter in Benin  City  is  not  permanent,  as  the
         tenancy of the shelter  will  come  to  an  end  by  2008.  It  was
         emphasized that there is a need  for  the  Zone  to  have  its  own
         shelter.

         Ndaguba (NAPTIP Abuja Headquarters) explained that NAPTIP's shelter
         in Abuja can accommodate approximately 50  victims  of  trafficking
         and at the moment of writing this  report  30  victims  have  their
         residence in the Abuja shelter.

         It was emphasized by Olateru-Olagbegi (WOCON) that the  problem  is
         not that victims are not offered protection by NAPTIP  if  in  need
         but that some victims actually leave their shelter before they  can
         be certain to be out of any danger. Many victims simply do not wish
         to stay but wish to go home or  they  believe  that  staying  at  a
         NAPTIP shelter, i.e. a shelter, which  is  run  by  a  governmental
         agency, might imply that they will  be  harassed.  Olateru-Olagbegi
         (WOCON) emphasized that harassment or any other violations  of  the
         victims' rights does not take place in  NAPTIP's  shelters  but  of
         course NAPTIP would like to get information about  the  traffickers
         from  the  victims  in  order  to  investigate  and  prosecute  the
         traffickers", (p. 43).


         "5.2.2 NGO shelters
         Mrs. Umaru (WOTCLEF)  informed  that  WOTCLEF  has  a  shelter  for
         victims of trafficking  and  the  NGO  has  in  the  past  received
         financial  support  from  different   partners   including   UNICEF
         ILO/PATWA and the World Bank", (p. 43).

         "Olateru-Olagbegi (WOCON) explained that WOCON does  not  have  its
         own shelter, and victims of trafficking that are considered  to  be
         in need of protection are referred to NAPTIP's shelter in Lagos  by
         WOCON. This shelter is the only shelter for victims of  trafficking
         in Lagos.

         De Cataldo (IOM) explained  that  COSUDOW  recently  opened  a  new
         shelter in Benin City and that the Italian Catholic  church  funded
         its establishment.

         Rev. Sister Florence (COSUDOW) informed that COSUDOW runs a shelter
         in Benin City and that victims can seek protection  there.  So  far
         COSUDOW have been able to accommodate the needs for assistance  and
         protection to all the victims who have requested this.

         COSUDOW's shelter can accommodate 18 women. There is  also  a  room
         for any physically challenged person  who  might  come  back.  Rev.
         Sister Florence  (COSUDOW)  noted  that  the  shelter  was  single-
         handedly built by the Catholic Bishop's  Conference  of  Italy  and
         furnished by Missio, Aachen, Germany and the  Religious  Foundation
         against Trafficking in Women in Den Bosch, the Netherlands. Caritas
         Italiana donated the fund for the purchase of the land  upon  which
         the shelter is built. It was added that there is a  convent  within
         the shelter.

         In contrast to  Rev.  Sister  Florence  (COSUDOW)  Olateru-Olagbegi
         (WOCON) did not consider that COSUDOW's shelter in  Benin  City  is
         capable to protect victims of trafficking in  need  of  protection.
         Olateru-Olagbegi (WOCON) explained that the  shelter  was  not  yet
         functioning, as it had not been completed as of July 2007 when  she
         last visited  COSUDOW  in  Benin  City.  However,  Olateru-Olagbegi
         (WOCON) considered that COSUDOW is in a better position  to  run  a
         shelter than NAPTIP would.  COSUDOWs  Reverend  Sisters'  religious
         orientation give the victims a sentiment that they will be assisted
         and eventually be freed from their secret  oath,  and  the  victims
         will almost automatically have  more  confidence  in  the  Reverend
         Sisters than in government employees at a NAPTIP  shelter  or  even
         some NGOs.

         Rev. Ejeh and  Agbogun  (Catholic  Secretariat  of  Nigeria/Caritas
         Nigeria) informed that the Catholic Secretariat of Nigeria does not
         have its own shelter in Lagos but they can  refer  victims  to  the
         shelter of NAPTIP and the  majority  of  victims  are  referred  to
         NAPTIP's   shelter.   However,   the   Catholic   Secretariat    of
         Nigeria/Caritas Nigeria offers the victims vocational  training  in
         order for them to be able to seek employment.

         Roland Chigozie (Idia Renaissance) explained that Idia  Renaissance
         refers victims of trafficking  who  approach  the  organisation  to
         NAPTIP's  shelter  in  Benin  City,  but  Idia  Renaissance   offer
         counselling and vocational training in its own centre. So far, Idia
         Renaissance  has  rehabilitated   over   240   victims   of   human
         trafficking. This year (2007) Idia Renaissance has rehabilitated 30
         girls and women referred by NAPTIP and five victims  are  currently
         been rehabilitated; the centre currently houses two of them because
         their  families  have  rejected  them.  Idia  Renaissance  and  IOM
         formerly ran this shelter jointly", (pp. 44-5).


         "5.2.3 Reintegration and rehabilitation
         Oguejiofor (NAPTIP Abuja Headquarters) explained  that  aside  from
         psychological fear and fear of physical  violence  from  agents,  a
         third form of fear can be found with some victims. This fear has to
         do with the uncertain  socio-economic  situation  and  the  concern
         about how to create a livelihood.

         Roland Chigozie (Idia  Renaissance)  recommended  that  destination
         countries can assist the Nigerian government agencies  like  NAPTIP
         and NGOs involved in the rehabilitation of  victims  to  be  better
         equipped to handle victim's rehabilitation and  that  the  European
         countries can also be involved in  rehabilitation  and  empowerment
         before the victim is  returned  to  Nigeria.  Most  victims  expect
         economic empowerment as a precondition for returning to Nigeria.

         Rev. Ejeh and  Agbogun  (Catholic  Secretariat  of  Nigeria/Caritas
         Nigeria) recommended receiving countries in  Europe  to  offer  the
         victims vocational training in order to motivate them  to  stay  in
         Nigeria once returned. If this is  not  done,  the  former  victims
         might try to be re-trafficked and return to Europe.

         Rev. Ejeh and  Agbogun  (Catholic  Secretariat  of  Nigeria/Caritas
         Nigeria) considered that  victims  of  trafficking  would  be  much
         better off if they returned to Nigeria rather than staying  abroad.
         However, he warned that if planeloads of victims were  returned  to
         Nigeria it would  have  a  completely  devastating  effect  on  the
         possibility to absorb, i.e. receive, rehabilitate  and  reintegrate
         the victims into Nigerian society. Furthermore, he  explained  that
         it is of no use if European countries provide returned victims with
         a sum of money unless the victims  have  received  some  vocational
         training abroad or have  the  ability  to  administer  that  money.
         Usually the Catholic Secretariat of Nigeria/Caritas Nigeria assists
         victims in vocational training for a period of three to six months.



         Ndaguba (NAPTIP Abuja Headquarters) welcomed  that  many  receiving
         countries supply victims who are deported with some kind of package
         or assistance to enable them to cater  for  themselves  after  they
         have returned to Nigeria. Such measures  can  reduce  the  risk  of
         victims being re-trafficked. NAPTIP  has  entered  agreements  with
         Norway and other European countries via IOM. These  agreements  are
         all  regarding  rehabilitation  and  reintegration  of  victims  of
         trafficking who are returning to Nigeria voluntarily", (pp. 45-6)."

155.  Ms  Chandran  referred  us  to  a  substantial  volume  of  background
    material.  The report from Freedom House, Freedom in the World  2008  -
    Nigeria, 2 July 2008 included the following about corruption:

         "Corruption remains a serious problem, having bled Nigeria of  many
         billions of dollars in oil revenue. The government has taken  steps
         to improve transparency and reduce corruption, including the reform
         of procedures for contract procurements and bidding.  In  September
         2006, a top official announced that authorities had convicted  more
         than 1,000 people  of  economic  crimes  and  recovered  around  $5
         billion over the  past  two  years.  Seven  former  governors  were
         charged with corruption in 2007 on orders  from  the  Economic  and
         Financial Crimes Commission. Nigeria was  ranked  147  out  of  180
         countries surveyed in Transparency International's 2007  Corruption
         Perceptions Index."
169.  Our attention was drawn to the report found in Rural  poverty  portal:
    Rural poverty in Nigeria (7 March 2007) and the passage which reads:
         "Who are Nigeria's rural poor people?
         Women and households  headed  by  women  are  frequently  the  most
         chronically poor within rural communities. Women have lower  social
         status than men and  consequently  less  access  to  schooling  and
         training, particularly in childcare and health practices. Yet women
         play significant roles in  rural  economic  activities.  While  the
         number of men migrating from rural areas in  search  of  employment
         has increased over the  last  decades,  the  number  of  households
         headed by women has risen substantially. Women struggle to cope  as
         the burden of work, at home and  in  the  fields,  falls  on  their
         shoulders. Malnutrition is a frequent problem in these  households.
         "
156.  Ms Chandran relied heavily  on  the  contents  of  the  CEDAW  report:
    Concluding  observations  of  the  Committee  on  the  Elimination   of
    Discrimination against Women: Nigeria (18 July 2008):
         "4. The Committee commends the State party for its large delegation
         headed by the Minister for Women Affairs  and  Social  Development,
         which included representatives of  various  Government  ministries,
         departments and agencies, members of the National Assembly, as well
         as representatives from civil society.  The  Committee  appreciates
         the open and constructive dialogue  that  took  place  between  the
         delegation and members of the Committee.

         5. The Committee notes  with  appreciation  that  the  State  party
         ratified the Optional Protocol to the Convention in November 2004.

         11. Noting the rejection by the National Assembly of a  2005  draft
         bill  on  full  domestication  of  the  Convention,  the  Committee
         expresses its concern that the  Convention  has  yet  to  be  fully
         domesticated as part of national law despite  its  ratification  in
         1985  without  any  reservations.  As  expressed  in  its  previous
         concluding  observations  of  2004  (A/59/38,  paras.282-316),  the
         Committee  is  concerned  that  without  such  domestication,   the
         Convention is not a part of the national legal  framework  and  its
         provisions are not justiciable and enforceable in Nigerian courts.

         13. The Committee welcomes efforts undertaken by the State party in
         the area of legal reform,  such  as  the  publication  of  a  study
         compiling  all  national,  state  and  local  laws,  policies   and
         practices relating to the status of  women  and  children  and  the
         establishment of a  Committee  on  Reform  of  Discriminatory  Laws
         against Women. The Committee expresses serious concern, however, at
         discriminatory provisions in the  Constitution,  including  Section
         26(2), which does not  allow  a  Nigerian  woman  to  transmit  her
         nationality to her foreign spouse on the same basis as  a  Nigerian
         man.  The  Committee  also  expresses  serious  concern  at   other
         discriminatory laws at both the federal and state levels, including
         those that allow wife battery as chastisement as long  as  grievous
         harm is not inflicted (Section 55 of the  Penal  Code  of  Northern
         Nigeria), prohibit women from working at night in  certain  sectors
         of employment (Section 55 of Chapter 198 of the 1990 Labour Act  of
         Nigeria), and classify sexual assault against female victims  as  a
         misdemeanour (Section 360  of  the  Criminal  Code).  Further,  the
         Committee notes that a draft bill on "Abolition  of  All  Forms  of
         Discrimination against Women in Nigeria and Other Related  Matters"
         was not approved by the National Assembly.

         15. While welcoming the adoption by 18 states of the  Child  Rights
         Act, which sets the minimum  age  of  marriage  at  18  years,  the
         Committee notes with concern Section  29(4)  of  the  Constitution,
         which states that a woman is deemed to be of full age upon marriage
         thereby lending support to early marriages.

         17.  The  Committee  expresses  concern   at   contradictions   and
         inconsistencies created by the application of statutory,  customary
         and sharia laws in  the  State  party's  tripartite  legal  system,
         particularly in the areas of marriage and family law. It also notes
         with concern the  existence  of  discriminatory  provisions  within
         these sources of law with regard to marriage, divorce,  custody  of
         children  and  inheritance.  Recalling  its   previous   concluding
         observations of 2004, the Committee reiterates that the  tripartite
         legal system results in a lack of compliance  by  the  State  party
         with its obligations under the Convention and leads  to  continuing
         discrimination against women.

         19. The Committee is concerned about the persistence of patriarchal
         attitudes and deep-rooted stereotypes concerning women's roles  and
         responsibilities that discriminate  against  women  and  perpetuate
         their subordination within the family and society.  It  notes  that
         such discriminatory attitudes and  stereotypes  constitute  serious
         obstacles to women's  enjoyment  of  their  human  rights  and  the
         fulfilment of the rights enshrined in the Convention. The Committee
         is thus concerned by the lack of information in the  State  party's
         report on the measures taken and programmes or strategies in  place
         to  combat  and   address   such   discriminatory   attitudes   and
         stereotypes. The Committee also expresses serious concern about the
         persistence of entrenched harmful traditional  and  cultural  norms
         and practices, including widowhood rites and practices.

         Violence against women

         23. The Committee is concerned about the continuing  prevalence  of
         violence against women, including domestic violence. The  Committee
         is also concerned by the absence of a comprehensive national law on
         violence against women and notes that a number of draft bills, such
         as the 2006 bill on "Elimination of Violence in  Society"  and  the
         2003 bill on "Violence against women", remain  pending  before  the
         National Assembly. While acknowledging  the  efforts  made  by  the
         State party  to  address  the  issue,  including  awareness-raising
         measures, training programmes and the provision of support services
         to victims, the Committee remains concerned about the absence of  a
         comprehensive national strategy and programme to combat  all  forms
         of violence against women. The Committee also  notes  with  concern
         that the majority of services for victims, including shelters,  are
         provided by non-governmental organizations  with  limited  support,
         including financial support, from the State party.

         24.  The  Committee  urges  the  State  party  to  accord  priority
         attention to the adoption  of  comprehensive  measures  to  address
         violence against women and girls in  accordance  with  its  general
         recommendation 19 on violence against women. The Committee calls on
         the State party to enact comprehensive legislation on all forms  of
         violence against women, including domestic  violence,  as  soon  as
         possible. Such legislation should ensure that all forms of violence
         against women constitute a criminal offence, that women  and  girls
         who are victims of violence  have  access  to  immediate  means  of
         redress and protection, and that perpetrators  are  prosecuted  and
         punished.  The  Committee  recommends  the  expansion  of  training
         activities and programmes for parliamentarians, the  judiciary  and
         public officials, particularly law enforcement  personnel  and  for
         health-service providers, so as to ensure that they are  sensitized
         to all forms of violence against women  and  can  provide  adequate
         support to victims. It further recommends the expansion  of  public
         awareness-raising campaigns on all forms of violence against women.
         The Committee  also  recommends  the  establishment  of  additional
         counselling and other support services  for  victims  of  violence,
         including shelters, and requests the State  party  to  enhance  its
         cooperation with, and support  for  non-governmental  organizations
         working in the  area  of  violence  against  women.  The  Committee
         requests the State party to provide information in its next  report
         on the laws and programmes in place to deal with  violence  against
         women and on the impact of such  measures,  as  well  as  data  and
         trends on the prevalence of various forms of violence.

         Trafficking

         25. While acknowledging the measures taken by the  State  party  to
         combat trafficking in women and children, including the adoption of
         the  Trafficking  in  Persons  (Prohibition)  Law  Enforcement  and
         Administration Act of 2003, as amended in 2005,  the  establishment
         of the National  Agency  for  the  Prohibition  of  Trafficking  in
         Persons, and the various cooperation agreements reached with  other
         countries, the Committee is concerned by the continuing  prevalence
         and extent of this problem.

         26. The  Committee  urges  the  State  party  to  ensure  the  full
         implementation of the  Trafficking  in  Persons  (Prohibition)  Law
         Enforcement and Administration Act, including the  prosecution  and
         punishment of offenders. The Committee also urges the  State  party
         to give priority attention to  the  protection,  including  witness
         protection, counselling and rehabilitation of  victims,  especially
         girl children. The Committee calls on the State  party  to  enhance
         measures aimed at the prevention of trafficking, including economic
         measures to reduce the vulnerability of women and girls, as well as
         awareness-raising  and  information  campaigns,   particularly   in
         communities most at risk. The Committee also  calls  on  the  State
         party  to   intensify   international,   regional   and   bilateral
         cooperation with other countries of origin, transit and destination
         of trafficked women and girls.

         28. In line with its previous recommendation, the  Committee  calls
         on the State party to take measures, with benchmarks  and  concrete
         timetables, to increase the number of women in political and public
         life, at all levels and in all  areas,  in  light  of  its  general
         recommendation 23 on women in political and public  life.  It  also
         recommends  that  the  State  party  introduce  temporary   special
         measures, in  accordance  with  article  4,  paragraph  1,  of  the
         Convention and general recommendation 25, to strengthen its efforts
         to promote women to positions  of  leadership.  To  that  end,  the
         Committee urges the State party to  increase  the  availability  of
         training and capacity-building  programmes  for  women  wishing  to
         enter or already in public office and  to  enhance  its  awareness-
         raising campaigns on the importance  of  women's  participation  in
         political and public life.

         Employment

         29. Recalling its previous concluding  observations  of  2004,  the
         Committee notes with concern the persisting wage  gap  between  men
         and  women,  women's  higher   unemployment   rate,   and   women's
         concentration  in  certain  sectors,  namely  agriculture,   animal
         husbandry, and service. The Committee also  notes  that  women  are
         predominantly employed in the informal sector  resulting  in  their
         exclusion from formal social  security  programmes.  The  Committee
         expresses  concern  about   the   persistence   of   discriminatory
         legislation, administrative regulations and practices in the labour
         market. Specific reference is made in this regard to provisions  of
         the Labour Act, which prohibit the employment  of  women  in  night
         work and in work underground, the Factories  Act,  which  does  not
         recognize the specific health and reproductive needs of women,  the
         Nigerian Police  Regulations,  which  prohibit  the  enlistment  of
         married women and require women officers to request  permission  to
         marry  in  writing.  The  Committee   also   notes   with   concern
         discriminatory practices in the private sector, particularly in the
         banking sector, with respect to maternity and marital  status.  The
         Committee further notes the prevalence of sexual harassment in  the
         workplace and the absence of legislation and  measures  to  address
         this.

         31. While commending the State party  for  the  measures  taken  to
         strengthen  the  national  health  system,  including  the   recent
         approval by the National Assembly of the National Health  Bill,  as
         well as the adoption of policies and programmes to address  various
         health challenges, the Committee reiterates its serious concern  at
         the  precarious  situation  of  women's  health,  as  well  as  the
         insufficient  number   and   inadequate   health-care   facilities,
         particularly   in   rural   areas.   The   Committee   notes   that
         responsibility for the provision of health  services  is  currently
         divided  across  the  three  tiers  of   government,   with   local
         governments responsible for  the  primary  health-care  system.  It
         notes with concern that primary health-care services and facilities
         are often inadequate in quality, number and funding. The  Committee
         also expresses concern about the high rates of malaria and HIV/AIDS
         affecting women and girls in the country.

         33. The Committee is especially concerned at the very high maternal
         mortality rate, the second highest in the world, and  regrets  that
         there has been no progress in reducing the maternal mortality  rate
         since the consideration of the State party's  combined  fourth  and
         fifth periodic report in 2004. The Committee also notes the various
         contributing factors, such as unsafe abortions and inadequate post-
         abortion care, early and child marriages, early  pregnancies,  high
         fertility rates and inadequate family planning  services,  the  low
         rates of contraceptive usage  leading  to  unwanted  and  unplanned
         pregnancies and the lack of  sex  education,  especially  in  rural
         areas. The Committee expresses concern about the lack of access  by
         women and girls to adequate health-care  services,  including  pre-
         natal and post-natal care, obstetric services and  family  planning
         information, particularly in rural areas.

         Economic empowerment

         35.  While  taking  note  of  the   State   party's   comprehensive
         development and poverty reduction  strategies  implemented  at  the
         national, state and local levels, as well as initiatives to address
         women's economic empowerment, such as the Women's Fund for Economic
         Empowerment and  the  Business  Development  Fund  for  Women,  the
         Committee  is  concerned  that  widespread  poverty  among   women,
         particularly rural women and women head of households, as  well  as
         poor  socio-economic  conditions  are  among  the  causes  of   the
         violation of women's human rights and discrimination against women.
         It notes with concern that discriminatory practices with regard  to
         land ownership, administration of property and  inheritance,  limit
         women's access to economic resources, as well as  credit  and  loan
         facilities.  The  Committee  is  especially  concerned  about   the
         situation of rural women, particularly in view of their  precarious
         living conditions and lack  of  access  to  justice,  health  care,
         education, credit facilities, economic opportunities and  community
         services.

         38. The Committee  requests  the  State  party  to  pay  particular
         attention to the needs  of  internally-displaced  women,  including
         women with disabilities, through the adoption of a national  policy
         on displacement in line with Security Council resolutions 1325  and
         1820, and the formulation and  implementation  of  gender-sensitive
         plans and programmes for social  re-integration,  capacity-building
         and training of internally-displaced persons.  It  also  recommends
         that the Inter-Ministerial Task Force on  Gender  and  Peacekeeping
         pay particular attention to the situation  of  internally-displaced
         women. The Committee also requests the State party  to  ensure  the
         protection of internally-displaced women from  violence  and  their
         access to immediate means of redress."

157.  Ms Chandran relied upon the UNESCO Policy Paper: Human Trafficking  in
    Nigeria: Root Causes and Recommendations (Paris 2006) found at  Tab  B,
    p. 89.  The Research Team included  the  appellant's  expert,  Ms  Bisi
    Olateru Olagbegi.  The policy paper was  based  on  a  UNESCO  research
    study on "Human Trafficking, especially of Women and Children  in  West
    Africa (Benin, Togo, Nigeria)"  coordinated  by  Ms  Olateru  Olagbegi,
    Executive  Director  of  WOCON.   We  were  invited  to  consider   the
    following:

         "About 92% of Nigerians trafficked to Europe for prostitution  come
         from Edo State of Nigeria. Initially, most came  from  Benin  City,
         the capital of Edo State, and from cities in Delta State, (p.23)."

158.  In addition, Ms Chandran relied upon pages 40-41 of the report  and  a
    passage headed Weak Legal Framework:

         "Human trafficking has flourished due to the lacklustre attitude of
         law enforcement and a weak legal framework which mainly focuses  on
         trafficking for sexual  exploitation.  Generally,  law  enforcement
         agents are ill equipped and lack the technical know-how and  gender
         sensitivity to handle cases. Trafficked persons often  allege  that
         some Nigerian officials collude with traffickers by assisting  them
         with forged documents and then  facilitate  their  movement  across
         borders and through ports.60 Law  enforcement  agents  are  usually
         reluctant to investigate violent crimes, especially  those  against
         women  and  children  who  are  unable  to   pay   the   costs   of
         investigations  or  bribe   the   investigating   officers.   Thus,
         perpetrators of rape, sexual assault, domestic violence  and  human
         trafficking largely  go  unpunished  in  Nigeria.  As  for  foreign
         trafficked persons, they are often treated  as  illegal  immigrants
         and  deported  without  thorough  investigation.  As  a  result,  a
         combination of corrupt officials, complicit authorities,  and  weak
         laws combine to guarantee impunity for traffickers while increasing
         the  plight  of   trafficked   persons.61   Many   non-governmental
         organizations and women's right organizations continue  to  protest
         against  the  government's  inability   to   prosecute   well-known
         traffickers: the conviction of traffickers is quite rare, and  even
         if convicted they are typically released within a short  period  of
         time."

159.  She referred to the Amnesty  International  report:  Human  Rights  in
    Federal Republic of Nigeria (28 May  2008)  and  the  passage  entitled
    Violence against Women (Tab B, p. 155 at 175):

         "In January, the Federal Minister of Women's Affairs expressed  the
         government's intention to promote gender equality as  well  as  the
         welfare  and  rights  of  Nigerian  women  and  children.  However,
         violence  against  women  remained  pervasive,  including  domestic
         violence, rape and other sexual violence  by  state  officials  and
         private individuals. The underlying factors included the entrenched
         culture of impunity for human rights violations  committed  by  the
         police and security forces, and the authorities' consistent failure
         to exercise due  diligence  in  preventing  and  addressing  sexual
         violence by both state and non-state  actors.  In  May  a  bill  to
         implement the UN Convention on the  Elimination  of  All  Forms  of
         Discrimination  against  Women  failed  to  pass  in  the  National
         Assembly. Nigeria ratified  the  Convention  in  1985.The  Domestic
         Violence and Other Related Matters Bill was  passed  by  the  Lagos
         House of Assembly. At federal level,  a  bill  addressing  domestic
         violence failed to become law.  The Nigeria Law Reforms  Commission
         proposed in August that rape should carry a 15-year jail term."

160.  Counsel directed us to the Human  Rights  Watch:  World  Report  2008:
    Nigeria (31 January 2008) and, in particular, these passages:


         "Widespread  government  corruption,  political  and  intercommunal
         violence, police torture and other abuses continue to deny ordinary
         Nigerians their basic human rights. During 2007 Nigerian government
         actors  including  the  police,  military,  and  elected  officials
         committed serious and persistent abuses against  Nigerian  citizens
         with near-complete impunity. Hopes for  improvement  in  the  human
         rights situation were dashed when the April 2007  presidential  and
         parliamentary  elections  were  marred  by  fraud,  violence,   and
         intimidation so pervasive as  to  destroy  all  confidence  in  the
         results.
         The violence and fraud surrounding elections  reflected  entrenched
         patterns of corruption  and  human  rights  abuse  that  have  long
         pervaded Nigeria's political system. The country  has  earned  well
         over US$223 billion in oil revenues since the end of military  rule
         in 1999, but millions of  Nigerians  still  lack  access  to  basic
         health and education services because so much of the money has been
         lost to corruption and mismanagement.

          Rule of Law and Impunity

         Politically powerful individuals and members of Nigeria's  security
         forces who stand accused of serious human rights abuses  and  other
         crimes are seldom held to account.

         Law enforcement agencies have  also  subverted  the  rule  of  law.
         Police openly and routinely torture criminal suspects  and  others,
         and have killed more than 8,000 Nigerians in the past eight  years;
         the police carried out 785 largely unexplained killings of  alleged
         "armed robbers" during the current  inspector  general's  first  90
         days in office in 2007."

161.  Ms Chandran relied upon  the  US  State  Department  of  State  report
    Trafficking in Persons Report 2008: Nigeria ('the TIP report') (4  June
    2008) to which she referred in full, (Tab B, pp. 163-5):

         "NIGERIA (Tier 2)
         Nigeria is a source, transit, and destination country for women and
         children trafficked for the purposes of forced labor and commercial
         sexual exploitation. Within Nigeria, women and girls are  primarily
         trafficked for domestic servitude and sexual exploitation, and boys
         are trafficked for forced begging by religious teachers, as well as
         forced  labor  in  street  vending,  agriculture,   mining,   stone
         quarries, and domestic servitude.  Transnationally,  women,  girls,
         and boys are trafficked between Nigeria and other West and  Central
         African countries, primarily Gabon,  Cameroon,  Benin,  Niger,  The
         Gambia and Ghana, for the same purposes listed above.  Benin  is  a
         primary source country for boys and  girls  trafficked  for  forced
         labor in Nigeria's granite quarries. Nigerian women and  girls  are
         also trafficked to North Africa, Saudi  Arabia,  and  Europe,  most
         notably to Italy, Spain, the Netherlands, Belgium, Austria, Norway,
         and Greece. Nigeria's Edo state is a primary source area for  woman
         and girls trafficked to Italy for  sexual  exploitation.  In  2004,
         Nigeria's National Agency for the  Prohibition  of  Trafficking  in
         Persons (NAPTIP) reported that 46 percent of  Nigerian  victims  of
         transnational trafficking are children, with the majority  of  them
         being girls  trafficked  for  commercial  sexual  exploitation.  An
         increasing trend, reported on widely in the last year by the United
         Kingdom (U.K.) and the international press, is the  trafficking  of
         African boys and girls from Lagos  to  the  U.K.'s  urban  centers,
         including London, Birmingham and Manchester, for domestic servitude
         and forced labor in restaurants and shops. Some of the victims  are
         Nigerian, while others are trafficked from other African  countries
         through Lagos.


         The Government of Nigeria does not fully comply  with  the  minimum
         standards for the elimination of trafficking; however, it is making
         significant efforts to do so. Nigeria continued  to  demonstrate  a
         solid commitment to eradicating trafficking. Although  NAPTIP  made
         solid efforts to investigate and prosecute trafficking  cases,  the
         relative  number  of  convicted  traffickers  remained  low.  While
         Nigeria assisted an increased number of  victims,  the  quality  of
         care provided was compromised by inadequate funding to shelters.


         Recommendations for Nigeria:  Increase  efforts  to  prosecute  and
         convict  trafficking  offenders;  allocate   increased   funds   to
         collecting evidence for trafficking prosecutions and to victim care
         at NAPTIP's shelters; increase  trafficking  training  for  judges;
         offer expanded legal alternatives to the removal of foreign victims
         to countries where they face danger  or  retribution;  and  improve
         trafficking and crime data collection mechanisms.


         Prosecution


         The Government of Nigeria continued to combat  trafficking  through
         modest law  enforcement  efforts  during  the  last  year.  Nigeria
         prohibits all forms of trafficking through its 2003 Trafficking  in
         Persons Law Enforcement and Administration Act, which  was  amended
         in 2005 to increase penalties for traffickers, and its  2003  Child
         Rights Act. Prescribed penalties of five  years'  imprisonment  for
         labor  trafficking,  10  years'  imprisonment  for  trafficking  of
         children for forced begging or  hawking,  and  a  maximum  of  life
         imprisonment for sex trafficking  are  sufficiently  stringent  and
         commensurate with penalties prescribed for other grave crimes, such
         as rape. During the last year, NAPTIP  reported  investigating  114
         trafficking cases, 62 of which were prosecuted. Of  the  62  cases,
         seven resulted in convictions and  51  are  still  pending  in  the
         court. Sentences imposed on convicted trafficking offenders  ranged
         from one to 10 years'  imprisonment.  This  law  enforcement  data,
         however, primarily reflects cases handled by NAPTIP's  headquarters
         in Abuja. Trafficking data collected at  the  Agency's  five  other
         zonal  offices  are  not  systematically  collected   by   NAPTIP's
         headquarters.  Judicial  effectiveness  in  punishing   trafficking
         crimes is hampered by a lack of funding for thorough investigations
         and a lack of awareness of trafficking among judges, many  of  whom
         conflate  trafficking  with  smuggling.  Over  the   year,   NAPTIP
         cooperated with law enforcement counterparts in Spain, Ireland, the
         Netherlands, the United Kingdom, Italy, France, Norway, and Belgium
         to break up an international ring comprised of over 20 traffickers.
         During the year, the government extradited a man  wanted  to  stand
         trial for trafficking a 14-year-old Nigerian  girl  to  the  United
         States. NAPTIP also collaborated  with  other  African  governments
         during the year on trafficking cases, most notably those of  Benin,
         Togo, and Cameroon.


         The government trained 750 police, immigration, customs, and border
         security officials about trafficking during the  reporting  period.
         NAPTIP also provided anti-trafficking training to Nigerian  embassy
         and consulate authorities posted in source countries. In  addition,
         Nigeria contributed training materials and instructors to a  donor-
         funded law enforcement ant trafficking training program.


         Protection


         The  Nigerian  government  continued  steady  efforts  to   protect
         trafficking victims during  the  last  year.  NAPTIP  continued  to
         operate seven shelters throughout the country -  in  Lagos,  Abuja,
         Kano,  Sokoto,  Enugu,  Uyo,  and  Benin  City.  However,  due   to
         inadequate funding, some shelters  were  not  well-maintained,  and
         they offered  limited  rehabilitation  care  and  no  reintegration
         services. Despite a documented significant trafficking  problem  in
         Nigeria, NAPTIP shelters were not well used. In January  2008,  for
         example, the Lagos shelter, with a capacity for 120 victims, housed
         only 15 victims. The government refers victims to NGOs on an ad hoc
         basis, but employs no formal, systematic procedures  for  referring
         victims to service providers. NAPTIP has agreements with  hospitals
         and clinics, however, to provide care  to  victims  with  HIV/AIDS.
         NAPTIP reported rescuing 800 victims, and providing  assistance  to
         695. During the year Nigerian and Beninese authorities  implemented
         the terms  of  their  joint  ant  trafficking  plan  of  action  by
         repatriating 47 Beninese  children  found  trafficked  to  some  of
         Nigeria's stone quarries during the year. NAPTIP also  collaborated
         with Togolese officials to repatriate two  victims  back  to  Togo.
         NAPTIP provided trainers and other personnel to  assist  a  foreign
         donor to train 34 government counselors on  strategies  for  caring
         for trafficking victims. NAPTIP encourages victims  to  participate
         in investigations and prosecutions of trafficking crimes, as victim
         testimony is usually required  to  prosecute  traffickers.  Because
         cases take so long to go to  trial,  however,  victims  have  often
         returned to their home communities by the time their  testimony  is
         needed in court. Frequently, they are unwilling or unable to return
         to the court to testify. Victims also often refuse to  testify  due
         to  fear  of  retribution.  Nigeria  provides   a   limited   legal
         alternative to the removal of foreign victims  to  countries  where
         they face hardship  or  retribution  -  short-term  residency  that
         cannot be  extended.  The  government  places  foreign  victims  in
         shelters under guard until they are repatriated.


         Although  there  were  no  reports   of   victims   inappropriately
         incarcerated, fined, or penalized for unlawful acts committed as  a
         result of being trafficked, police do not always follow  procedures
         to  identify  trafficking  victims  among  females   arrested   for
         prostitution.


         The government is hesitant to conduct raids on brothels and typical
         raid tactics are not sensitive to trafficking victims.


         Prevention


         The Government of Nigeria took some steps to raise awareness  about
         trafficking  during   the   reporting   period.   NAPTIP's   public
         enlightenment division erected billboards and posters carrying anti-
         trafficking public awareness messages  and  hosted  antitrafficking
         forums in villages.  The  government  also  aired  anti-trafficking
         public service announcements.


         Recent reforms tightening immigration laws related to the  issuance
         of passports are expected  to  yield  a  decrease  in  trafficking.
         Nigerian troops receive anti-trafficking awareness training through
         a donor funded program before being  deployed  abroad  as  part  of
         peacekeeping missions for ACOTA. A national anti-trafficking forum,
         established by NAPTIP in 2003, met regularly in each state as  well
         as in the six regional zones. The government did not, however, take
         steps to reduce the demand for commercial sex acts within Nigeria."

162.  Our attention was also drawn to the  Integrated  Regional  Information
    Network News (IRIN): Nigeria: Trafficking for girls, abuse worsening (7
    July 2008):

         "KANO, 7 July 2008 (IRIN) - The trafficking of girls from  villages
         to cities in Nigeria is increasing and the state  is  powerless  to
         stop the trade, officials told IRIN.

         "The business of recruiting teenage girls as domestic help in  rich
         and middle-class homes is booming despite our efforts to put a stop
         to it", Bello Ahmed, head of the Kano office of the National Agency
         for the Prohibition of Traffic in Persons (NAPTIP), told IRIN.

         Girls aged 12-17 are regularly trafficked from villages and brought
         to the city to work as maids for an average monthly wage  of  1,500
         naira (US$13) which they usually send back to their parents who are
         caring for several of their siblings, according to Ahmed.


         "Apart from being denied access to education, these  girls  are  in
         many cases raped and beaten by their employers and this is  why  we
         keep a dormitory to rehabilitate them", Ahmed said.

         Powerless

         Although NAPTIP has managed to stop the practice of  teenage  girls
         being  ferried  in  trucks  from  villages  to  the  cities   "like
         chickens", Ahmed admitted his agency had failed to stop the trade.


         "The more the law enforcement agencies perfect their strategies  at
         stopping the  business,  the  more  the  perpetrators  become  more
         sophisticated in running their trade", he said.


         Lack of legislation  to  prosecute  the  traffickers  makes  NAPTIP
         unable to take legal action against traffickers even when they  are
         arrested, according to Ahmed."

163.  In the  report  of  the  Global  Alliance  against  Traffic  in  Women
    (GAATW): Collateral Damage: The Impact of Anti-Trafficking Measures  on
    Human Rights around the World (2007), we  find  a  section  on  Nigeria
    written by Victoria  Nwogu  which  includes  the  following,  cited  by
    reference to its internal pagination:

         "Nigerian women are trafficked  to  Europe  predominantly  to  earn
         money for  others  from  commercial  sex,  especially  in  Belgium,
         France, Italy, the Netherlands and Spain. The UNICEF  has  reported
         that 80 per cent of young women engaged in sex work  in  Italy  are
         Nigerians (UNICEF, 2002).South Africa and  the  United  States  are
         also destination countries, while the United  Kingdom  and  Ireland
         are countries of transit as well as destination for Nigerian women.
         [142]


         In Nigeria, human trafficking is often  conflated  with  sex  work.
         This misconception became obvious in a particular incident  in  the
         1990s involving the massive deportation from  Italy  of  trafficked
         women and girls who mostly came from Nigeria's  Edo  State  in  the
         south. Most of the women and girls had been trafficked  for  sexual
         purposes. The reaction of the public to these deportations and  the
         subsequent sensational media coverage  of  the  incidents  were  to
         assume erroneously that all cases of trafficking were for  purposes
         of sex work, and, worse still, to stereotype victims of trafficking
         as women from Edo State only. Trafficking for labour  exploitation,
         internal trafficking and trafficking of persons into  Nigeria  have
         not so far received commensurate attention.

         The equation  of  human  trafficking  with  sex  work  has  further
         worsened  the  abuse   suffered   by   trafficked   persons,   who,
         irrespective of the form of labour  they  are  trafficked  for,  on
         arrival back in Nigeria, are considered sex workers. This  is  best
         appreciated in the case of the deportation of Nigerian  girls  from
         Europe. An Anti-Slavery International report (Pearson,  2002,  169)
         referred to the Nigerian situation  thus:  "The  procedures  facing
         deported  nationals  in  Nigeria  violate  basic  human  rights  by
         discriminating against  and  stigmatising  women  as  sex  workers,
         forcing them to undergo STD tests and preventing them from  leaving
         the country legally again. [144]

         The deficiencies in  the  NAPTIPAct  regarding  the  protection  of
         victims  and  witnesses  have  made  it  difficult  to  secure  the
         testimonies of victims and witnesses for use  in  prosecutions,  as
         they fear reprisals from traffickers. In its  first  two  years  of
         existence,  only  two  cases  were   successfully   prosecuted   to
         conviction under the law,  despite  the  thousands  of  trafficking
         transactions taking place  in  Nigeria.  To  the  extent  that  the
         NAPTIPAct lacks effective victim or witness protection, it has  not
         complied with the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights'Recommended
         Principles and Guidelines on Human  Rights  and  Human  Trafficking
         (Guidelines 6 and 9). [149]

         Since the NAPTIPAct was adopted, there have been eleven  successful
         prosecutions of traffickers and thirty-two cases pending in  court.
         The kinds of trafficking involved ranged from outright sale,  child
         domestic work, forced prostitution and other forms. [150.]


         Impact of Anti-Trafficking Initiatives on Trafficked Persons

         Most assistance programmes in Nigeria are based on the 'rescue  and
         rehabilitation' model. Though  these  programmes  are  designed  to
         benefit trafficked persons, the individuals managing them  seem  to
         have little understanding of the issues. Recovery work  most  often
         focuses on repatriated victims and children who have  been  rescued
         through raids on labour camps or who have been deported as  illegal
         immigrants engaged  in  sex  work  abroad.  Many  NGOs  which  help
         trafficked persons  in  the  recovery  process  round  up  returnee
         victims and run vocational courses without assessing their interest
         or aptitude for that specific skill. Victims have no involvement in
         making decisions about the courses or their contents, nor are there
         systematic efforts to find out if they benefited from  the  courses
         afterwards or if these should be modified to  be  more  useful.  An
         example of a rehabilitation project that  has  proved  to  be  less
         successful (though not significantly less successful than a lot  of
         others) was the ALNIMA Project in Edo State, instituted in 2003  by
         the European Network for HIV/STI Prevention  and  Health  Promotion
         Among Migrant Sex Workers (TAMPEP - a  European  network  of  NGOs,
         based in Italy). The  project,  which  lasted  for  one  year,  was
         evaluated as recording only 40 per cent  success  because  of  poor
         planning, lack of consultation and improper assessment of the needs
         of  the  beneficiaries.  Eighty  per  cent  of  the   beneficiaries
         reportedly walked out on the  rehabilitation  programme  and  found
         their way back to Italy. Many of them had been working  voluntarily
         in the sex industry and  were  resentful  at  being  'rescued'  and
         deported against their wishes, as it resulted in the deprivation of
         their  livelihood.44 The  'rehabilitation'  mentality   is   also
         reflected in the NAPTIP Act, which, for  instance,  uses  the  term
         broadly and permits detention45 of trafficked persons  "where  the
         circumstances so justify". Some of the actions construed by the Act
         as rehabilitation include:  counselling,  skills  acquisition,  and
         family tracing and reunion. The real issue here and throughout this
         study  is  whether  NGOs  and  government  agencies  often   assume
         Nigerians to have been  trafficked  when  they  have  not  been  or
         whether these people were in fact trafficked, but were so  keen  to
         go on earning a living that they felt propelled back to Europe  and
         other destinations where they were previously exploited.

         The process of return/repatriation of trafficked persons is fraught
         with abuses of their human rights. Most of the deported persons are
         not  treated  as  victims  of  trafficking,  but  are  regarded  as
         criminals and illegal aliens by law enforcement agents both in  the
         countries from which they are deported and in Nigeria.  There  have
         been reports of Nigerian women being subjected to various forms  of
         physical  abuse  and  humiliation  while  in  the  custody  of  law
         enforcement  agents   (UNODC/UNICRI,   2004,   35).   International
         standards require that return and  repatriation  procedures  should
         ensure the security of victims and their  subsequent  reintegration
         (UN High Commissioner for Human Rights' Recommended Principles  and
         Guidelines, Guideline 6.8). Usually Nigerians who have been  making
         money from commercial sex in Europe are  repatriated  on  chartered
         aircraft, escorted by security agents and sometimes  still  wearing
         the same clothes they had on when  trying  to  earn  money  on  the
         streets. There are also reports  that,  contrary  to  human  rights
         principles, the repatriated trafficked persons are not permitted to
         return with their money or properties, thus violating Article 17 of
         the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, which states that No one
         shall be arbitrarily deprived of his property, and  Article  15  of
         the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All
         Migrant Workers and Members of their Families. They  are  also  not
         allowed to remain in the country long enough to obtain  money  they
         are owed (for example, as  unpaid  earnings),  let  alone  to  seek
         compensation or damages. In  fact,  trafficked  persons  should  be
         allowed to stay in the host country for  the  period  necessary  to
         undertake penal proceedings against  the  traffickers  and  make  a
         civil law case for recovery of unpaid wages and other compensation.
         [216-217]


164.  The report of the Danish Immigration Service  report:  The  Protection
    of victims of trafficking in Nigeria: a fact finding mission  to  Lagos
    Benin City and Abuja, 9-26 September 2007 (April 2008) to which we have
    earlier  referred  was  also  referred  to  by  Ms  Chandran  in  these
    additional passages from the report:


      About corruption:


         "Rev. Ejeh and Agbogun  (Catholic  Secretariat  of  Nigeria/Caritas
         Nigeria) considered that  the  NPF  has  the  capacity  to  protect
         victims from traffickers. However, as the NPF is  known  to  suffer
         from prevalent corruption, there is no guarantee that  the  victims
         will be protected.[p.18]


         Olateru-Olagbegi (WOCON) confirmed that the Anti-Human  Trafficking
         Units of NIS and NPF are not flawed by corruption as  the  NPF  is,
         and the two Anti-Human Trafficking Units  are  better  trained  and
         informed about the trafficking issue which  means  that  they  show
         empathy in their approach to the victims of  trafficking.  However,
         many ordinary police officers in the NPF are  often  unaware  about
         the problem of trafficking and they  do  not  understand  questions
         related to this issue."[p.18]


      About risk of reprisals against victims of trafficking:



         "Rev. Sister Florence (COSUDOW) had no information as to whether  a
         victim of trafficking had been severely  persecuted  or  killed  by
         traffickers  in  Nigeria.  It  was  added  that  the   trafficker's
         objective is to get his money back, and that is  why  the  involved
         family and the trafficker very  often  will  see  to  it  that  the
         returned victim will be re-trafficked.  Re-trafficking  is  a  very
         common phenomenon.

         In contrast to Rev. Sister Florence (COSUDOW), Jane Osagie (IRRRAG)
         considered that returned victims of trafficking are  vulnerable  as
         they face serious dangers in Nigeria.  Traffickers  will  persecute
         the returnees if they are still indebted to these  traffickers  and
         the victims are frightened, as they strongly believe that they  are
         obliged by the oath that they  took  before  leaving  Nigeria.  The
         victims fear for the consequences if they  do  not  or  cannot  pay
         their debt, and at  the  same  time,  many  victims  are  seriously
         traumatized from their experiences abroad.

         Jane Osagie (IRRRAG) explained that she did not  have  any  precise
         information on the level of maltreatment of  returning  victims  by
         traffickers. On the other hand, there are reports  confirming  that
         traffickers expose their victims to various forms of intimidation.

         When asked about the scope of persecution and reprisals on  victims
         of trafficking that have not paid their debt upon their  return  to
         Nigeria, Jane Osagie (IRRRAG) explained that NAPTIP  would  be  the
         source  of  such  information.  IRRRAG  does  not   have   adequate
         information of the scale of persecution by traffickers.

         Morka (NAPTIP Lagos Zonal Office) stated that since  2003,  threats
         of reprisal from traffickers have never resulted in the loss of the
         life of victims."[p.26]


         De Cataldo (IOM) stated that retribution against the victim or  the
         family cannot be excluded, and Section 50  (j)  of  the  Government
         Notices Nos. 156 and 209 of 2003 and 2005  (Harmonized  Trafficking
         in Persons (Prohibition) Law Enforcement and  Administrative  Acts,
         2003 and 2005 addresses the problem:

           "a  trafficked  person  and  his  family  are   protected   from
           intimidation, threats, and reprisals from traffickers and  their
           associates including reprisals from persons of authority""[p.27]


         "5 Protection and support mechanisms
         The delegation asked IOM if is possible to cooperate with NAPTIP on
         victim assistance. De Cataldo (IOM) responded positively, and noted
         that cooperation with NAPTIP at an  early  stage  is  essential  to
         ensure the welfare of the victim and aid in  the  investigation  of
         Nigerian trafficking rings in Europe, due to the complexity of such
         investigations  when  it  comes  to  identify  the   structure   of
         trafficking rings and their modus operandi. De Cataldo (IOM)  noted
         that attention should be  given  to  ethnic/tribal  aspects,  which
         might play a role in the  functioning  of  trafficking  rings.  The
         cooperation with NAPTIP can be useful, as law enforcement  agencies
         in Europe might  not  have  sufficient  background  information  on
         Nigerian  specific  trafficking  rings.  The  exchange  of  liaison
         officers between Nigeria and EU countries can be considered a  best
         practice to implement.

         The delegation noted that some  European  countries  have  a  small
         number of Nigerian asylum requests associated with  trafficking  in
         persons and queried the security risks that might be associated  in
         cooperation with law enforcement  agencies  or  the  potential  for
         other risks for a trafficked persons upon  return  to  Nigeria.  De
         Cataldo (IOM) noted that the repatriation process  must  include  a
         security risk assessment,  and  that  such  assessments  should  be
         conducted in cooperation with NAPTIP. IOM has  positive  experience
         on this in  the  context  of  repatriation  operations  from  third
         countries.

         De Cataldo (IOM), generally noted that each case should be assessed
         in an effort to confirm all the facts, especially when  the  asylum
         seeker appears to be confused as to  the  specific  nature  of  the
         threats/persecution that she/he fears.

         Regarding a security risk assessment conducted in cooperation  with
         NAPTIP,  Oguejiofor  (NAPTIP  Abuja  Headquarters)  confirmed  that
         NAPTIP has the capacity to conduct security risk assessment on  the
         basis of threat to the life of  victims  and  to  the  families  or
         relatives of the victims.

         Ndaguba (NAPTIP Abuja Headquarters) added that NAPTIP conducts risk
         assessments of victims in order to assist in the best way  and  any
         victim can stay in the shelter of NAPTIP for as long as  is  needed
         and the victim can even be transferred to another  shelter  in  the
         country." [p.34]

         "Fapohunda (LRC) explained that NAPTIP does it  utmost  to  perform
         its duties and the agency is trying  to  be  efficient  and  it  is
         definitely more efficient that most  other  state  institutions  in
         Nigeria. NAPTIP lacks resources and even though  some  donors  have
         supplied assistance to NAPTIP, this has not  been  followed  up  by
         sufficient government funds. The lack of resources  means  that  it
         can be difficult for NAPTIP to provide protection for  all  victims
         of trafficking. However, Fapohunda (LRC) considered that NAPTIP  is
         genuine in its fight against trafficking.

         When asked why it can be difficult for NAPTIP to provide protection
         for all victims of trafficking even if such victims  are  returning
         on a case-by-case basis and  not  in  planeloads,  Fapohunda  (LRC)
         explained that his comment was not based on  any  consideration  of
         returns either on an individual scale or large  scale,  but  on  an
         appreciation on what is the reality on the ground. The  reality  of
         the Nigerian criminal justice system is that it offers little or no
         protection for victims of crime. There is presently a  bill  before
         the parliament on this matter but this is not priority. Also it was
         Fapohunda's  (LRC)  view  that   quite   apart   from   legislative
         limitations, the resources allocated  to  the  NPF  and  NAPTIP  is
         neither sufficient or adequate to  offer  the  kind  of  protection
         (even on an individual basis) that will, at the  very  least,  meet
         minimum international standards. Nigeria has not  invested  in  its
         justice  system;  the  casualty  of  this  lack  of  investment  is
         essentially poor justice institutions. Fapohunda (LRC)  added  that
         NAPTIP is a government body within the Federal Ministry of Justice.



         Olateru-Olagbegi (WOCON) considered that  NAPTIP  is  committed  to
         assisting victims of trafficking but it lacks  personnel,  and  its
         staff lack training.

         Olateru-Olagbegi (WOCON) expressed doubt as to  whether  NAPTIP  is
         capable of protecting victims against traffickers, as NAPTIP  might
         lack the resources and the technical know-how to  protect  victims.
         On the other hand,  Olateru-Olagbegi  (WOCON)  had  no  doubt  that
         NAPTIP has the will to try to do its outmost to protect victims  in
         need of protection." [p.35]

         "Morka (NAPTIP Lagos Zonal Office) stated that none of the  victims
         who have been  through  the  NAPTIP  shelter  in  Lagos  have  been
         subjects of persecution by their traffickers and this is why it  is
         so important that NAPTIP is notified about returns of victims  from
         abroad. It was explained that the normal time spent in the  shelter
         is about two weeks. However,  if  the  victim  is  in  need  of  an
         extended period of time in the shelter this will be granted.

         Morka (NAPTIP Lagos Zonal Office) stressed that  NAPTIP  can  offer
         protection to victims who give evidence against traffickers for  as
         long as the criminal case is pending in the court system or for  as
         long as is needed. In one case a witness stayed in NAPTIP's shelter
         for nine months. NAPTIP informs the local police about the case  in
         order to monitor the victim who testifies against the  trafficker."
         [p.37]


         "5.1.1 NAPTIP's protection capacity
         Ndaguba (NAPTIP Abuja Headquarters) stated that NAPTIP is  able  to
         offer victims full protection against physical  violence  from  the
         agents of trafficking and this includes victims who have  testified
         against traffickers abroad or in Nigeria or are indebted  to  their
         agents or Madams.


         Babandede (NAPTIP Abuja Headquarters) also emphasized  that  NAPTIP
         has the capacity  to  support  and  protect  returning  victims  of
         trafficking who have expressed fear of retaliation, acts of revenge
         or persecution by agents.


         De  Cataldo  (IOM)  stated  that  it  is  important  to  note  that
         protection requires the victim to cooperate  with  the  authorities
         and seek protection as the case may be. Upon receiving threats  the
         victims should inform the appropriate authorities.

         Concluding, De Cataldo (IOM) noted  that  NAPTIP  and  the  Nigeria
         Immigration Service are an expression of the efforts  that  Nigeria
         is making to "turning around the table". [pp.38-39]

         "Olateru-Olagbegi  (WOCON)  warned   that   there   is   too   much
         generalisation regarding the ability of for instance NAPTIP and its
         capacity to protect victims of trafficking and its ability to offer
         re-integration support for those victims.  Therefore,  it  is  very
         important that all cases of trafficking are handled on  a  case-to-
         case basis and that the victims are offered a  temporary  residence
         permit in their host country.

         Finally, Olateru-Olagbegi  (WOCON)  stated  that  WOCON  can  offer
         victims  some  help  such  as  legal  and  general   human   rights
         counselling as well as provide  some  immediate  basic  needs,  but
         WOCON does not  have  the  capacity  to  offer  protection  against
         traffickers if this is needed.  In  such  cases  WOCON  refers  the
         victim to NAPTIP.

         It was added by Olateru-Olagbegi (WOCON) that  this  referral  from
         WOCON to NAPTIP take place in the hope  that  NAPTIP  will  do  its
         utmost to protect and investigate these cases.  However,  it  is  a
         problem that NAPTIP's own investigators  are  not  always  able  to
         ensure that traffickers are prosecuted and she pointed to the  fact
         that there are too many unresolved cases of trafficking in Nigeria,
         which means that one can never be certain that a trafficker will be
         prosecuted. It was added that NAPTIP must improve  its  results  if
         this will work as a deterrent for other traffickers." [p.40]

         "Roland Chigozie (Idia Renaissance) explained that Idia Renaissance
         refers victims of trafficking  who  approach  the  organisation  to
         NAPTIP's  shelter  in  Benin  City,  but  Idia  Renaissance   offer
         counselling and vocational training in its own centre. So far, Idia
         Renaissance  has  rehabilitated   over   240   victims   of   human
         trafficking. This year (2007) Idia Renaissance has rehabilitated 30
         girls and women referred by NAPTIP and five victims  are  currently
         being rehabilitated;  the  centre  currently  houses  two  of  them
         because their families have rejected them. Idia Renaissance and IOM
         formerly ran this shelter jointly."[p45]


165.  Ms Chandran also relied heavily on the contents of the Home Office  UK
    Border Agency-Danish Immigration Service: Report of the Joint  British-
    Danish Fact-Finding Mission to Lagos and Abuja, Nigeria; 9-27 September
    2007 and 5-12 January 2008, (29 October 2008):


         "1.17 According to UNIFEM, there are basically four  scenarios  for
         women who relocate within Nigeria in order  to  avoid  FGM,  forced
         marriage or domestic violence:


            .  She  can  approach  the  local  church/mosque  or  religious
            establishment and seek assistance from the leadership.
            . She can approach friends or relatives who are willing to hide
         her.
            . She can  approach  NGOs  working  on  women's  human  rights.
            (However, these NGOs may only be known to women in those  urban
            settlements,  towns  or  cities  where  the  organisations  are
            active).
            . She can take to the street. This is a frequent  scenario  for
            young women or women who do not have the capacity or the  means
            to do otherwise. Some of these may end up in  brothels  or  are
            vulnerable to being trafficked.


         1.18  UNIFEM  added  that  attractive  young,  single   women,   in
         particular,  are  very  vulnerable   to   abuse,   harassment   and
         trafficking when relocating to another area without economic  means
         or family networks. Regarding internal relocation, UNIFEM explained
         that the vast majority of women seeking protection against domestic
         violence, forced marriage or  FGM,  including  women  who  wish  to
         protect their daughters against FGM, have  the  tendency  to  first
         relocate to a safe place not far from their  home  area.  They  may
         even relocate several  times  within  their  familiar  locality  if
         necessary.


         1.19 BAOBAB stated that  from  a  legal  point  of  view,  internal
         relocation is an option for any woman in Nigeria because  there  is
         full freedom of movement in the country. However, this first step -
         even to take a bus - can be difficult as  women  are  dependent  on
         their relatives, family or husbands, and may not have the money  to
         allow them to relocate. As a consequence of this, a woman will need
         relatives in her new location who are ready to accommodate her.  It
         was emphasized that it  is  technically  possible  for  victims  of
         domestic violence, FGM or forced marriage to relocate  in  Nigeria,
         but economically it is not easy. Even language might pose a problem
         for women who relocate to areas where members of their  own  ethnic
         group do not live.


         1.20 It was emphasized by BAOBAB that a woman can  obtain  physical
         protection by relocating to another area in Nigeria. Women who  are
         economically independent, in particular, would stand a much  better
         chance of sustaining themselves than  women  who  are  not.  BAOBAB
         added that it is difficult to separate  the  question  of  physical
         protection  from   the   social,   cultural   and/or   humanitarian
         constraints involved in relocating. However, even  women  who  have
         access  to  economic  means  could  face  difficulties  in  finding
         accommodation or a  job  as  they  are  often  stigmatised.  BAOBAB
         further added that young women and/or single women, in  particular,
         who have relocated within Nigeria, are vulnerable  to  unscrupulous
         men that may target these women. Some of them might even end up  as
         commercial sex workers.


         1.23 According to representatives of a UN organisation, many  women
         relocate to escape domestic violence, forced marriage or FGM,  even
         within their local or state area. However, women prefer  to  go  to
         friends or  relatives,  rather  than  to  a  shelter.  The  general
         perception amongst Nigerians is that shelters hide  battered  women
         and women with many problems who have no relatives to turn to. Many
         women, even victims of violence  themselves,  do  not  want  to  be
         associated with such women. Moreover, women relocating  from  their
         homes are seen as violators of  their  own  culture  and  may  feel
         ashamed as a result. However, when there are no other  alternatives
         women will seek protection in a shelter.


         1.25 WACOL explained that it only knew of one  shelter  in  Nigeria
         run by the government. This shelter is located  in  Abuja  and  the
         Federal  Ministry  of  Women's  Affairs  and   Social   Development
         administer it. However, WACOL had  no  further  knowledge  of  this
         shelter, as it had never referred any woman to it. In  addition  to
         the governmental shelter in Abuja, there is also a NGO shelter that
         is run by the NGO Daughters of  Abraham.  This  shelter  is  mainly
         reserved for victims of trafficking and prostitutes.


         1.36 The Federal Ministry of Women's Affairs and Social Development
         stated that the shelter of the Ministry was commissioned on 17  May
         2007. The shelter opened and  was  fully  operational  in  November
         2007. The shelter is situated in an undisclosed location  in  Abuja
         in order to protect the women in the shelter against  any  kind  of
         hostility from their  perpetrators.  The  shelter  can  accommodate
         approximately 7 women at the same time. However this  capacity  can
         be extended if the need arises. Security staff is employed  at  the
         shelter.
         1.37 The Ministry stated that since the opening of the  shelter  in
         November 2007, it has accommodated one  woman  and  four  children.
         However, this should be seen in the light  of  the  fact  that  the
         shelter is fairly new. Furthermore, to  most  women  a  stay  in  a
         shelter is often seen as the last resort  irrespective  of  whether
         the shelter is run by a NGO or by the government.


         1.40 It was emphasized that women NGOs throughout Nigeria can refer
         any woman who needs shelter to the shelter in Abuja. Women can stay
         in the shelter for up to four or five months. During this time  the
         women receive counselling from a department  in  the  Ministry  and
         attempts will  be  made  to  mediate  between  the  women  and  the
         perpetrators. If reconciliation is not possible, the  Ministry  can
         offer the women legal assistance  in  taking  their  cases  to  the
         courts. There is not yet a budget  in  place  to  offer  vocational
         training or education to the women who are staying in the shelter.


         1.71 UNIFEM considered the existence of the so-called Gender  Desks
         in some police stations as mentioned by some NGOs consulted by  the
         delegation as a very positive step in assisting victims of domestic
         violence, FGM and forced marriage. However, the Gender  Desks  only
         exist in three police stations in Enugu State (being just  one  out
         of 36 states in Nigeria) and concentrated  in  the  state  capital,
         contradicting  the  statement  by  WRAPA  that   desks   had   been
         established in Abuja and Lagos (see para 1.67).


         1.72 BAOBAB added that enforcement agencies are not  sensitised  to
         take women's issues seriously. However, some police  stations  have
         established Gender Desks and they cooperate  with  women  NGOs.  In
         some cases, the police will even refer  women  to  BAOBAB.  It  was
         added that even though the police and other government  bodies  and
         social services do not lack the resources to assist female  victims
         of domestic violence, forced marriage and FGM, they  often  do  not
         have the will to assist. In addition, there is a lack of  political
         will to address women's issues. This is due to a  general  negative
         perception of women; gender stereotyping and the view that violence
         against women is often considered to be a private matter.


         1.74 Finally, BAOBAB stressed that a violent husband should not  be
         considered as a 'husband' but  as  a  'perpetrator'.  However,  law
         enforcement agencies only rarely assist, and only Ebonyi State  has
         passed a law against domestic  violence.  Accordingly,  the  police
         often do nothing to assist the woman as they regard it  more  as  a
         'private  affair'.  WACOL  was   aware   that   churches   provides
         counselling to women,  because  some  have  come  to  WACOL  either
         recommended by the church or after the church could not handle  the
         case. However, WACOL was not aware that churches provide protection
         but  women  do  actually  go  to  churches  for  assistance.  WRAPA
         confirmed that mosques and churches provide a temporary safe  haven
         for women in need and many women do seek sanctuary in churches  and
         mosques.  Often  these  institutions  will  try  to  reconcile  the
         parties, but in those cases where the leaders consider that this is
         no longer an option, they will refer the women to NGOs  like  WRAPA
         for further assistance.


         1.76 Most women have strong confidence in their  religious  leaders
         who have  an  enormous  influence  in  local  communities,  but  in
         Nigeria, as in most parts of Africa, religious beliefs run deep and
         the fear of the supernatural is absolute. As  a  result,  religious
         leaders wield absolute power  and  command  unquestioning  devotion
         from their adherents. There are reported examples of  such  leaders
         having abused women who sought refuge in their care.


         Social and humanitarian constraints


         1.79 Representatives of a UN organisation explained that there  are
         a number of  social  and  humanitarian  constraints  on  women  who
         consider relocating in Nigeria. These constraints include:


             . Lack of information on the part of the women themselves.
             . Level of empowerment.
             . Fear of leaving their own environment  and  to  be  seen  as
             defiant of their own cultural norms and practices.
             . Lack of accommodation and job opportunities. Fear  of  losing
              their own social network.
             . Poverty.


         1.80 WACOL believed that, in general, it would be difficult  for  a
         girl or a woman to relocate in Nigeria without  relations  who  can
         assist her. WACOL considered that if an underage girl does not want
         to enter into a marriage, and she is ready to relocate elsewhere in
         Nigeria in order to escape the marriage, it is a precondition  that
         she has a family member or relative in the  new  location  that  is
         ready to support her. Furthermore, regarding forced marriage it was
         emphasized that internal relocation might be  much  more  difficult
         for  a  daughter/woman  of  an  influential  family  than   for   a
         daughter/woman of an ordinary  family.  A  daughter/woman  from  an
         influential family might find it more difficult to find a  location
         in the country where she would not be recognised and maybe returned
         to her family or husband.


         1.83 UNIFEM considered that, in practical terms, if a woman chooses
         to relocate  she  could  face  a  number  of  economic  and  social
         constraints depending on her situation. The woman  would  be  in  a
         more favourable situation if she has an economic foundation of  her
         own in the form of savings, which can sustain her until she can get
         a job. There is no social  security  system  in  Nigeria  that  can
         support a woman without any means of existence.


         1.84 It would also be easier for a woman to relocate if she  has  a
         relative or a friend in the new location who would  be  willing  to
         support her in the  initial  phase.  Married  women  may  have  two
         families to choose from when it comes to  whom  they  turn  to  for
         protection and safety. If the  woman  has  no  one  to  receive  or
         accommodate her she might end up living in the street. According to
         Sections 405-409  of  the  Penal  Code  (Northern  States)  Federal
         Provisions Act 1960,  she  might  then  even  be  arrested  in  the
         northern part of the country as a 'vagabond'. The question  of  the
         economic and social constraints facing a woman who has  decided  to
         relocate very much depends on the specific situation of the woman.


         1.85 UNIFEM explained that in general there is a strong  desire  to
         maintain the unity of the family and this means that families, NGOs
         and religious leaders will try hard to reconcile the wife  and  the
         violent husband. For a wife  to  leave  her  family,  even  if  her
         husband is violent, is almost considered a taboo.


         1.86 BAOBAB explained that if the woman has family or relatives  in
         the new location, they may listen to her and try  to  support  her,
         but they may not  be  in  a  position  to  help  her  to  secure  a
         sustainable living. Culturally, the woman will often be expected to
         return and stay with her husband. It  was  added  that  traditional
         Nigerian culture expects women to be subservient to their  husbands
         even when the women are living with a violent husband.


         1.88 BAOBAB explained that social welfare structures in Nigeria are
         not well equipped to perform their statutory and social  functions.
         Accordingly women who have relocated will find that  there  are  no
         shelters to protect them, no jobs, no access to justice,  and  they
         may find it difficult  to  be  accommodated.  In  addition,  gender
         stereotyping labels single women as "unattached"  and  they  easily
         become vulnerable. Finally, laws are very often not implemented  or
         enforced."

166.  We noted from The Danish Immigration  Service  report:  Protection  of
    victims of trafficking in Nigeria a fact finding mission to Lagos Benin
    City and Abuja, 9-26 September 2007 (April 2008):

         "UNODC reported in 2006 that, "In all countries [Benin, Nigeria and
         Togo] there are numerous5  NGOs  involved  in  the  area  of  human
         trafficking. A small  number  of  NGOs  seem  to  have  established
         themselves as well-known, reliable and serious NGOs in each of  the
         three countries involved in the study. They tend to work well  with
         each other. There remains some competition with respect to funding,
         but it appears that many NGOs seem to have carved out  their  niche
         within which they work well with other  organizations.  It  is  not
         clear from this  analysis  whether  the  cooperation  exists  on  a
         structural rather than on an incidental level."


         "It is these same NGOs, which tend to coordinate  their  activities
         with government ministries and agencies. The  working  relationship
         between NGOs and government ministries varies  depending  upon  the
         ministries and their functions.  As  can  be  seen  from  the  data
         provided by the NGOs in Nigeria and Togo, the working  relationship
         tends to be closest with the ministries providing social  services.
         These include the Ministries of Education, Social Affairs,  Women's
         and Children's Affairs. NGOs in Nigeria also appear to have a  good
         working relationship with the  police  and  NAPTIP."  [p  17]  [Our
         emphasis]



         "In UNDOC's 2006 report Measures to  Combat  Trafficking  in  Human
         Beings in Benin, Nigeria and Togo,  UNODC  commented  that  Nigeria
         enacted the Trafficking in Persons  (Prohibition)  Law  Enforcement
         and Administration Act, in August 2003 commonly referred to as  the
         Act. Prior to the passage of the Act, Nigeria depended on  laws  in
         the penal or the criminal code to deal  with  offences  related  to
         trafficking in humans. Trafficking  cases  were  dealt  with  under
         provisions of the law applicable to the offences of slave  trading,
         forced prostitution, abduction, sexual exploitation, deprivation of
         liberty, and forced labour. The  most  important  elements  of  the
         Trafficking  in   Persons   (Prohibition)   Law   Enforcement   and
         Administration Act, 2003 are briefly outlined below.

         The law defines the act of trafficking as:

             "All acts involved in the recruitment,  transportation  within
             or across Nigerian borders, purchases, sale, transfer, receipt
             or harbouring of a person, involving  the  use  of  deception,
             coercion or debt bondage for the purpose of placing or holding
             the  person  whether  for  or  not  in  involuntary  servitude
             (domestic, sexual or reproductive) in forced or bonded  labour
             or in slavery-like conditions".

         Twenty-six different sections of the Act define offences related to
         human trafficking. Sections 11-28 define the specific  offences  of
         exporting and  importing  minors  for  prostitution  purposes;  the
         procurement of minors (with or without their  consent)  for  forced
         seduction/prostitution; procuring minors or causing or  encouraging
         the seduction or prostitution of minors within or outside  Nigeria;
         procuring any person for prostitution/pornography, drug trafficking
         or armed conflict;  organizing  foreign  travel  for  prostitution;
         unlawful  detention  of  any  person   with   intent   to   defile;
         procuring/defiling  of  minors  by  means  of  threats,  fraud   or
         administering  of   hard   drugs;   kidnapping   of   minors   from
         guardianship;  kidnapping/abduction   of   persons   for   culpable
         homicide; buying and selling of persons for any  purpose;  unlawful
         forced labour; trafficking in slaves and slave-dealing.

         Even when the offences  are  committed  abroad  by  Nigerians,  the
         offenders are liable to punishment  and  forfeiture  of  assets  in
         Nigeria upon their repatriation or return for "bringing  the  image
         of Nigeria to disrepute" in  spite  of  having  served  an  earlier
         punishment for the original  offence  abroad  (Section  25).  Alien
         offenders resident in Nigeria  are  punishable  under  the  Act  by
         imprisonment and subsequent deportation (Section 26).  Attempts  to
         commit any of the substantive offences are punishable under the Act
         (Section 27), and corporate bodies and their management  staff  are
         also punishable under the Act for attempts or commission of any  of
         the offences created by the Act (Section 28).

         In terms of punishment, the  Act  makes  provisions  for  sanctions
         ranging from heavy monetary fines,  imprisonment  with  or  without
         option of fines, forfeiture of assets, forfeiture  of  passport  by
         convicted offenders (Section 34), deportation or  repatriation  and
         liability for compensation to victims in  civil  proceedings.  Jail
         terms range from 12 months (for attempts)  to  two  years  to  life
         imprisonment depending on the degree of seriousness of the offence,
         while fines range from N50,000.00 (US$ 379)  and  N200,000.00  (US$
         1,517) for individual traffickers or managerial staff of  corporate
         bodies.

         Protection of victims of trafficking in Nigeria 12

         The Act makes provision for the humane treatment,  protection,  and
         non-discriminatory practices towards victims of trafficking.  These
         include access to rehabilitation facilities, temporary stay without
         valid documents and medical attention. (Sections 36-37). Trafficked
         victims even have rights to institute civil actions  against  their
         traffickers irrespective of their immigration status (Section 38).


         Additionally,  the  law  creates  an  agency   charged   with   the
         responsibility of enforcing, administering  and  managing  the  law
         prohibiting human trafficking and other  related  matters."[pp11  &
         12]
         "At the national level, the National Assembly in May 2003 passed  a
         national Act on trafficking that provides for the setting up  of  a
         special agency, recognises that trafficked girls  are  victims  and
         seeks to attach same level of seriousness  to  the  prosecution  of
         traffickers  of  persons,  as  is  presently  the  case  with  drug
         traffickers. Its implementation modalities have commenced with  the
         opening up of offices of the agency in states  of  the  federation.
         The Edo State office of the agency led the  prosecution  and  first
         ever conviction  of  a  trafficker  in  the  State  recently.  [our
         emphasis]

        The impact of the efforts made by government  and  non-governmental
        agencies and organisations so far are enormous [our  emphasis]  and
        include:

     1. . Heightened awareness of the problem. Prior  to  the  research  by
        IRRRAG and WOCON documenting the incidence of trafficking in  girls
        in 1999, though the indicators were visible,  not  many  recognised
        that children and women were being trafficked both  internally  and
        externally. Since then however especially  with  the  emergence  of
        more NGOs addressing the issues including those of the wives of the
        Vice  President  and  Governor  of  Edo  State,  interventions   of
        international  governmental  and  non-governmental  agencies   like
        UNODC, UNICEF and IOM, many urban dwellers are  now  aware  of  the
        difference between migration and trafficking and the resistance  to
        the wiles of the traffickers has led them to move  to  rural  areas
        for recruitment of new victims.

     1. .  Legal  reform  arising  from  the  efforts  of  anti-trafficking
        organisations include a national Act on trafficking, state laws  on
        it  and  establishment  of  a  federal  agency  to  implement   the
        provisions of the act.

     2. . Increased prosecution of traffickers although mostly unsuccessful
        due to the non-cooperation of victims and corruption can  still  be
        cited  as  an  impact  of  anti-trafficking  efforts.  Daily,   the
        traffickers change tactics and routes just to beat the law.

     3. .  School  curriculum  adaptation  to  make  for  the  teaching  of
        information and skills to address the susceptibility of  girls  and
        children. The IOM in collaboration with Edo  State  government  has
        tested this curriculum.

     4. . Reintegration and rehabilitation of victims. Many returned  girls
        and others considered to be vulnerable to trafficking have received
        counselling, skills training and micro finance  support  to  become
        self-employed and fully reintegrated into the society.

     5. . Research and publications on the issue  are  more  available  now
        than in the past as a result of the involvement of many groups.

     6. . Creation of networks and coalitions at local, state and  national
        levels are a direct effect of the work done so far." [pp13 & 14]

Our Assessment of the Evidence

166.  We accept that Miss Olateru-Olagbegi is  expert  in  issues  of  human
    trafficking in Nigeria.

167.  Estimates for the number of women  and  children  trafficked  annually
    across international borders vary, but the United Nations suggests that
    it is a figure close  to  4,000,000.   It  is  very  clearly  a  highly
    lucrative business undertaken by organised criminal gangs with networks
    crossing  trans-national  borders.  Despite  international  efforts  to
    combat it, the background evidence suggests that trafficking is on  the
    increase.

168.  For the purposes of her report,  Miss  Olateru-Olagbegi  was  provided
    with copies of the appellant's

    -      screening interview record;
    -      Statement of Evidence Form and record of interview with
        appellant;
    -      the Home Office, Immigration and Nationality Directorate Asylum
        Case Work Directorate 69
    -      the Reasons for Refusal Letter dated 13th April, 2005 written by
        the respondent;
    -      the appellant's own statement of 4th April, 2005;
    -      a copy of a letter dated 20th May, 2005 from Eve's Housing for
        Women;
    -      a copy for the letter of 6th June, 2005, from Dr Capuzzo; and
    -      a copy for the appellant's medical record from Oakington
        Detention Centre.

169.  In her report, Miss Olateru-Olagbegi explains that she was asked to
    give her opinion on the following questions:

         "1.      Whether the appellant [P] is a trafficked victim.
         2.       What  is  the  influence  of  juju/black  magic  to  human
             trafficking transactions in Nigeria?
         3.       Whether [P] should  have  sought  the  protection  of  the
             Nigerian authorities before seeking international protection?
         4.        Whether  [P]  is  likely  to  face  reprisals  from   her
             trafficker and gang in Nigeria and UK?
         5.       Whether [P] will face further  abuse  and  persecution  or
             risk of being re-trafficked were she to  be  returned  to  her
             home country, Nigeria?"

170.  It is not necessary for us  to  refer  to  the  expert's  response  in
    respect of the first question  in  deciding  this  appellant's  appeal,
    because it has now been accepted that the  appellant  is  a  victim  of
    human trafficking.  However, Miss Olateru-Olagbegi does helpfully  "set
    the scene" by referring to background evidence.   She  makes  it  clear
    that trafficking of women and girls for  sexual  purposes  is  rife  in
    Nigeria, with the  sourcing  of  victims  for  trafficking  to  Europe,
    especially Italy, predominantly coming from Edo State of Nigeria, where
    the appellant originated from.  In 1999,  the  Italian  Ambassador  (we
    have assumed, because it is not clear from the witness's evidence, that
    he was the Italian Ambassador to Nigeria) acknowledged that there  were
    over 10,000 Nigerian girls working in prostitution  in  Italy.   Whilst
    Miss  Olateru-Olagbegi  does  not  suggest  that   all   these   10,000
    prostitutes were, necessarily, the victims of trafficking, she goes  on
    to  add  that  Nigerian   prostitutes   or   sex   workers   constitute
    approximately 60% of the entire population of prostitutes in Italy.

171.  Whilst Miss Olateru-Olagbegi's response to the second question  is  of
    little assistance to us in assessing the risk to this appellant,  given
    that the appellant does not claim to  have  been  subjected  to  voodoo
    ceremonies and that voodoo appears not to have played any part  in  her
    trafficking, she does shed light on its influence on human  trafficking
    transactions in Nigeria.  She explains  that  whilst  culturally,  most
    Nigerians claim to belong to the  authorised  religions,  such  as  the
    Islamic or Christian religions, most of them still have strong  beliefs
    in the traditional religions and patronise  traditional  "religionists"
    who  use  "juju"  regularly.  She  explained  that  human   trafficking
    transactions involving trafficking to  European  countries,  especially
    for sex workers, are "solidified" by the use of secret oaths and visits
    to traditional  shrines  to  "instil  fears  of  serious  reprisals  on
    victims" in the  event  that  they  divulge  the  identities  of  their
    traffickers. As such, juju plays an important part in much  trafficking
    because of the psychological fear of some  terrible  mishap,  sometimes
    involving death of the victim, which is installed in the victims by its
    use. It seemed to us that where an appellant alleges that  some  voodoo
    practice or oath  was  employed  by  their  traffickers,  it  would  be
    necessary for the Tribunal to carefully examine such allegations and to
    consider  the  psychological  effect  that  voodoo  may  have  on   the
    appellant.

172.   Again,  we  found  Miss  Olateru-Olagbegi's  response  to  the  third
    question very helpful inasmuch as she explained that where  the  victim
    of trafficking is from a suburban environment  with  a  poor  level  of
    education it is likely that the victim will have  little  knowledge  of
    their rights and to be less able to enforce their rights within Nigeria
    as perhaps their counterpart within the United Kingdom might be able to
    do.  She suggested that "the average Nigeria citizen" shies  away  from
    involving the police or authorities in their personal affairs. By  "the
    average Nigerian citizen", we take her to mean that  she  is  excluding
    those who come from well educated and wealthy backgrounds. That is  not
    to say necessarily that those who are wealthy  or  well  educated  will
    show more willingness to involve the police  or  authorities  in  their
    affairs, simply that individuals in those categories are likely  to  be
    less reluctant to involve the police or authorities.  The witness  made
    it clear that this "timidity" of seeking to help the police  is  likely
    to be compounded by the fear of reprisals from the trafficker or  those
    involved within the trafficking gang.  Miss Olateru-Olagbegi  suggested
    that there are so many unresolved criminal acts in  Nigeria,  that  the
    public does not  ordinarily  have  confidence  in  the  police  or  the
    Nigerian authorities.  We accept that in a  country  such  as  Nigeria,
    which is vast by comparison with the United Kingdom and where  so  many
    demands are made on its police force which is  constrained  by  funding
    limitations, that lack of confidence by the general population with the
    police force would be considerably higher  than  it  is,  for  example,
    within the United Kingdom.  The witness also explained that  this  fear
    may not be unconnected with the effects on the Nigerian psyche  of  the
    many years of military dictatorship in the  past,  where  authority  is
    more associated with guns and force.  It is  essential,  in  our  view,
    when considering trafficking cases, that it should  be  borne  in  mind
    that a victim who has lived all their  life  in  a  rural  or  suburban
    environment with a limited education is less likely to seek the help of
    the Nigerian authorities.  It must be  borne  in  mind  also  that  the
    police force within Nigeria has in the past been notorious for  corrupt
    practices.

173.  In her reply to the fourth question,  Miss  Olateru-Olagbegi  explains
    that because human trafficking transactions are highly  lucrative,  the
    money to be earned by traffickers motivates them to go to  any  lengths
    to ensure that they maximise their profits and recover  whatever  funds
    they feel are owed to them by their victims. Consequently,  traffickers
    and members of their criminal gangs will seek to go  after  both  their
    victims and their family members if the victims renege  on  their  debt
    bondage or manage to escape their traffickers.  The  witness  suggested
    that in the past victims have attested to incidents of  reprisals  both
    against the trafficked individuals and also members of their families.

174.  So far as the risk of further abuse and persecution  or  the  risk  of
    being re-trafficked is concerned, the witness believed that because  of
    media sensational reporting from Europe  countries,  especially  Italy,
    among the  Nigerian  population,  human  trafficking  is  equated  with
    prostitution. To the uninformed Nigerian public, deportee  victims  are
    often regarded as sex workers who are likely to be infected with HIV or
    AIDS, regardless of  the  type  of  labour  which  led  to  them  being
    trafficked initially.  Miss Olateru-Olagbegi  explained  that  Nigerian
    society has a low regard for prostitution and stigmatises HIV and  AIDS
    victims, subjecting them to psychological abuse. It must be  recognised
    too that in the absence of social services to "cushion" the effects  of
    the trauma suffered by trafficked victims  and  to  provide  for  their
    upkeep and assist with their reintegration into  society,  exposure  to
    such an environment on return to Nigeria is likely  only  to  aggravate
    the victims' situations.

175.  Following the first adjourned  hearing  before  us  on  6th  November,
    2008, Mr Tufan wrote by e-mail to Mrs L N Oguejiofor of  NAPTIP  asking
    that she provide information, in the following terms.

         "Would a returning victim with a young baby be admitted to a NAPTIP
         centre?  I should add that it has been suggested that NAPTIP  would
         not admit such a victim as NAPTIP  centres  do  not  have  adequate
         relevant facilities.  Please comment.


         Would a returning victim of trafficking with a baby be met  at  the
         airport?


         Do NAPTIP centres have counselling and or  medical  facilities  for
         victims who suffer from post traumatic stress disorder?"

176.  Mrs L N Oguejiofor's reply is as follows:

         "(i)     Yes, a victim with a young baby  will  be  admitted  to  a
             NAPTIP shelter without delay. It is erroneous to suggest  that
             the Agency would not admit such a victim in her [sic] shelters
             presently, Abuja shelter has a 50 bed capacity, but it is also
             worthy of note to point out that  the  Agency  also  works  in
             collaboration with the Federal Ministry of Women's Affairs  if
             the need for temporary fostering arises.


         (ii)     Yes, a returning victim with a baby will  be  met  at  the
             airport. The agency has been receiving victims  from  airports
             if it is necessary.


         (iii)    Yes, NAPTIP shelters have resident Nurses and Clinics  and
             works in collaboration with both private and public Hospitals.
             We also have a Medical Doctor on call at the shelters.


         (iv)     Yes, NAPTIP shelters have social workers  and  Nurses  who
             have undergone series of training in areas of  psychology  and
             psychotherapy and are ready to counsel and  treat  any  victim
             who is suffering with post traumatic stress disorder."

177.  Miss Olateru-Olagbegi is a lady dedicated to improving the  facilities
    for trafficked women  in  Nigeria.   Her  criticisms  of  the  Nigerian
    government and the authorities have, undoubtedly,  had  the  effect  of
    accelerating improvements generally for trafficked victims,  but  as  a
    campaigner, we believe that her evidence was not as  objectively  based
    as it might otherwise have been.   In  her  reports  and  in  her  oral
    evidence, Miss Olateru-Olagbegi maintained  that  the  Nigerian  police
    simply have a systematic inability to arrest people  traffickers.   She
    told us that the ordinary policeman on the street would not be aware of
    trafficking laws in Nigeria and was generally ill-equipped.   She  said
    that when it comes to crime, the police are generally inefficient  and,
    in giving her evidence to us, suggested that the police simply "do  not
    know how to tackle crime".

178.  She suggested that there has been no effective implementation  of  the
    laws and strategies against trafficking, partly because of inability to
    arrest those involved;  partly  because  the  victims  are  offered  no
    effective protection to prevent re-trafficking; and because  there  are
    no effective measures to prevent those from  being  trafficked  in  the
    first place.

179.  However, we have found that this evidence is at odds with  the  weight
    of background evidence before us.  We have earlier quoted from  page  7
    of  the  Danish  Immigration  Service  Fact  Finding  Mission   Report:
    Protection of Victims of Trafficking in Nigeria, which  indicates  that
    NGOs appear to have a good working relationship  with  the  police  and
    with NAPTIP; and, according to the GIP's website, the  legal  framework
    to combat and assist victims of trafficking was  said  to  be  a  great
    improvement on the situation  that  prevailed  before  2003,  when  the
    Trafficking of Persons (Prohibition) Law Enforcement and Administration
    Act was enacted in Nigeria.

180.  In Edo State itself, a law amending sections of the Criminal  Code  on
    Trafficking in Persons was passed in 2000.  The impact of  the  efforts
    made by the  Nigerian  government  and  non-governmental  agencies  and
    organisations was described so far as "enormous" and, according to  the
    Reverend Ejeh Agbogun, of the Catholic Secretariat of Nigeria, the Anti-
     Human Trafficking Unit of the Nigeria police force is much less marred
    by corruption than the rest of the force.  The Anti- Human  Trafficking
    Unit was said to be responsible for most cases that are  prosecuted  at
    the Court of First Instance.

181.  Corruption is certainly a  problem  within  Nigeria,  but  we  do  not
    believe it correct to say,  as  Miss  Olateru-Olagbegi  did,  that  the
    Nigerian police simply have an inability to arrest  traffickers.   That
    is not, in our view, supported by the background evidence.   Similarly,
    we believe that the background evidence suggests NAPTIP itself  is  not
    plagued by corruption.  Miss  Olateru-Olagbegi  was  quoted  as  having
    confirmed that:

         "The Anti-Human Trafficking Units of NIS and NPF are not flawed  by
         corruption as the NPF is and the two Anti-Human  Trafficking  Units
         are better trained and informed about the trafficking  issue  which
         means that they show empathy in their approach to  the  victims  of
         trafficking."

182.  The justice system in Nigeria, as it affects trafficking,  is  clearly
    functioning;  the  background  evidence  shows  that  there  have  been
    prosecutions of people  traffickers.  Between  2004  and  2007,  NAPTIP
    processed approximately 1,000 trafficked victims and, since 2004,  some
    320 traffickers have been arrested nationally by NAPTIP.  This does not
    include arrests by the  Nigerian  police  force  and  by  the  Nigerian
    immigration service.  During the same period, 62 cases  were  filed  in
    the courts and twelve  traffickers  have  been  convicted.   Punishment
    ranges from between one and seven years.  We are satisfied  that  there
    is clear evidence of a functioning justice system within Nigeria.

183.  As to the availability of shelters for victims  of  trafficking,  Miss
    Olateru-Olagbegi agreed that there were seven  shelters,  but  suggests
    that not all of them were operational ones.   She  suggested  that  the
    only shelters were in  Lagos,  Benin  and  Abuja.    According  to  the
    evidence of Mrs L N Oguejiofor, however, a returning trafficking victim
    with a young baby will be admitted to  a  NAPTIP  shelter  and  without
    delay.  She confirmed also that a returning trafficking victim  with  a
    baby would be met at the airport on return  and  that  NAPTIP  shelters
    have resident nurses and clinics.  They also have  the  facility  of  a
    medical doctor on call.  The NAPTIP shelters have  social  workers  and
    nurses who  have  undergone  psychological  triaging  and  training  in
    psychotherapy and who are  ready  to  counsel  and  treat  any  victims
    suffering  with  post  traumatic  stress  disorder.   Since  Mrs  L   N
    Oguejiofor is Director of Counselling and Rehabilitation at NAPTIP,  we
    believe that we should accord her evidence as to the facilities offered
    by NAPTIP, more weight than we do to  the  evidence  of  Miss  Olateru-
    Olagbegi.

184.  Miss Olateru-Olagbegi suggested that shelter  inmates  are  restricted
    in their movements and cannot leave the shelters.  She  suggested  that
    the shelters were  like  boarding  schools.  She  also  suggested  that
    victims were only permitted to stay for a maximum of between two  weeks
    and one month and that NAPTIP shelters  offered  more  in  the  way  of
    "protected custody" for inmates.  We do not believe that this  evidence
    is supported by  the  background  evidence  before  us;  indeed  it  is
    actually contradicted by the background evidence.

185.  According to the Reverend Sister Florence of COSUDOW,  the  Anti-Human
    Trafficking police unit of Benin City is not affected by corruption.

186.  According to the Danish Immigration Service Report, NAPTIP is able  to
    offer victims full protection against physical violence from agents  of
    trafficking,  which  includes  victims  who  have   testified   against
    traffickers abroad or in Nigeria, who are indebted to their  agents  or
    "madams". The Director of Investigation and Monitoring at NAPTIP  Abuja
    headquarters said  that  NAPTIP  is  monitoring  victims  and  provides
    shelter and counselling to those who are in need of  it.   However,  as
    the report made clear, NAPTIP can only offer protection  to  those  who
    are ready to  accept  it.   The  same  Director  of  Investigation  and
    Monitoring suggested that  NAPTIP  has  the  capacity  to  support  and
    protect returning victims of trafficking who  have  expressed  fear  of
    retaliation, acts of revenge or persecution.

187.  A spokesman for IMO suggested that Nigeria has  established  a  system
    capable of responding to the crime of trafficking and  its  implication
    for the welfare and security of victims and emphasised that  protection
    requires the victim to cooperate  with  the  authorities  and  to  seek
    protection.

188.  Miss Olateru-Olagbegi suggested that  the  NAPTIP  shelters  will  not
    offer this applicant protection now that she has a baby. She  suggested
    that the shelters do not have the facilities to care for babies, but as
    we have pointed out above, this evidence is  directly  contradicted  by
    that of Mrs L N Oguejiofor, whose evidence we prefer for the reasons we
    have given.

189.  Miss  Olateru-Olagbegi  is  herself  quoted  as  suggesting  that  the
    problem is not that victims are not offered protection by NAPTIP if  in
    need, but rather that the victims leave their shelters before they  can
    be certain to be out of danger.

190. The WOTCLEF shelter for the victims of trafficking  offers  support  in
    terms of skilled training, such as  leatherworking,  sewing  and  other
    handicrafts.  It also advises victims  on  the  opportunity  for  micro
    credits and small scale loans that exist, either via NGOs or from local
    banks.  WOTCLEF also provides for the education of minors and  even  up
    to university level in some cases.  As for the suggestion that shelters
    are run like an institution and that inmates are  restricted  in  their
    movement and cannot leave, the background evidence before  us  suggests
    that when the Danish Immigration Delegation visited the WOTCLEF shelter
    in Abuja, they found it "to be very much like a home, well equipped and
    with a very positive and peaceful atmosphere".  It  was  said  that  on
    average the victims stay for up to six months, but some  may  stay  for
    even longer.  COSUDOW runs a shelter in Benin City  and,  according  to
    Danish Immigration Service report, has been  able  to  accommodate  the
    need for assistance and protection of all victims  who  have  requested
    it.

Ability and Willingness of the Nigerian Authorities to offer  Protection  to
Victims of Trafficking

191.  Our consideration of the background materials clearly demonstrates  to
    us that in general the government of Nigeria is both able  and  willing
    to discharge its own duty to protect  its  own  nationals  from  people
    traffickers. In particular:

    (a)    The Danish Information Service Report: The Protection of Victims
         of Trafficking in Nigeria: a Fact Finding Mission to  Lagos,  Benin
         City and Abuja, 9/26 September 2007 (April 2008)  points  out  that
         the  government  of  Nigeria  have  recognised   the   problem   of
         traffickers and, since 2003, the legal and institutional foundation
         for combating  trafficking  and,  equally  important,  support  for
         victims of trafficking, have been in place in Nigeria.


    (b)    The National Agency for the Prohibition of  Traffic  in  Persons
         and other related matters (NAPTIP) is  the  principal  organisation
         created by the  Nigerian  government  to  combat  trafficking.  The
         Trafficking in Persons (Prohibition) Law Enforcement Administration
         Act, 2003 established NAPTIP and was enacted as a direct result  of
         Nigeria wishing to fulfil its international obligations  under  the
         Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish  Trafficking  in  Persons,
         Especially Women and Children.


    (c)    NAPTIP's own Legal and Prosecution Department were said  in  the
         April 2008 report, to have concluded six  cases  and  another  five
         were said to be  pending.  58  victims  of  trafficking  have  been
         rehabilitated, while another 24  were  waiting  rehabilitation.  We
         accept that with more funds, NAPTIP could do more to help  victims,
         but the same could be said of any government agency with  a  finite
         budget.


    (d)    The US State Department Report suggests that whilst  Nigeria  is
         not complying with minimum standards,  it  is  "making  significant
         efforts" to do so and  has  "demonstrated  a  solid  commitment  to
         eradicating trafficking".  It also spoke  of  NAPTIP  making  solid
         efforts to investigate and prosecute  trafficking  cases,  although
         the numbers  of  convicted  traffickers  remained  low.  There  are
         clearly several reasons for that, but not, on the  evidence  before
         us, any lack of governmental effort or desire.


Risk to Victims of Trafficking in being Re-trafficked on Return to Nigeria

192.  It must be born in mind, however, that a claimant  may  still  have  a
    well-founded fear of persecution if she  can  show  that  the  Nigerian
    authorities know or ought to know of circumstances  particular  to  her
    case giving  rise  to  his  fear,  but  are  unlikely  to  provide  the
    additional protection her particular circumstances reasonably  require.
    To that end:


      a) A very careful examination of the circumstances in which the victim
         was first trafficked must be undertaken and careful findings  made.
         If a victim has been told that she is required to earn a particular
         sum of money ("target earnings") for the trafficker or gang, before
         being free of any obligation to the trafficker or  gang,  then,  if
         the victim should escape before earning the target sums, there  may
         well be a risk to the victim that on return to Nigeria she  may  be
         re-trafficked if found.  The extent of the risk of the  trafficking
         will very much depend on the circumstances in which the victim  was
         originally trafficked.


    (b)    It must always be remembered that within Nigeria there are gangs
         of people traffickers operating who generate enormous sums of money
         from their activities.  The evidence seems to us to be  clear  that
         where a victim escapes  the  clutches  of  her  traffickers  before
         earning the target earnings, then the traffickers are  very  likely
         to go to extreme lengths in order to locate the victim  or  members
         of the victim's family, to seek reprisals.


    (c)    In the absence of evidence that a  trafficked  victim  has  been
         trafficked by an individual, it should be borne in mind that it  is
         likely that the  trafficking  will  have  been  carried  out  by  a
         collection of individuals, many of whom may not have  had  personal
         contact with  the  victim.  Within  trafficking  gangs,  individual
         members perform different roles.  One  might,  for  example,  be  a
         photographer who takes the photograph  which  is  used  within  the
         victim's passport, whether or not the passport is  a  genuine  one.
         One gang member may, for example, be a forger who  is  involved  in
         the preparation of false passports or other documents  for  use  by
         the victim; one might be a corrupt police  official,  or  a  border
         guard, whose role is to assist in facilitating the victim's passage
         in some way.  Gang members may  perform  any  number  of  different
         roles but it is essential to bear in mind that if a victim has been
         trafficked by a  gang  of  traffickers,  as  opposed  to  a  single
         trafficker, then the risk of  re-trafficking  may  be  greater  for
         someone who escapes before earning the target earnings set  by  the
         trafficker,  because the individual gang members will have expected
         to receive a share of  the  target  sum  and  will,  therefore,  be
         anxious  to  ensure  that  they  do  receive  that  share  or  seek
         retribution if they do not.

Our Conclusions in relation to the Appellant

193.  We do not underestimate the effect  of  being  trafficked  for  sexual
    exploitation on this appellant; she has  suffered  the  most  appalling
    experience at the hands of Mr Osagie.  We have a considerable volume of
    medical and health care evidence concerning the appellant before us  in
    this appeal, all of which we have very carefully considered.   We  have
    also carefully noted Miss Olateru-Olagbegi's evidence set out carefully
    by her in the answers in her report.

194.  Miss Olateru-Olagbegi's response to the second  question  in  relation
    to the influence of juju and black magic is of limited assistance to us
    in assessing the risk to this appellant, given that she does not  claim
    to have been  subjected  to  voodoo  ceremonies.   There  is  certainly
    evidence in the medical reports which suggests that the  appellant  may
    have "voodoo marks" on her (the  "pigmented  lesions"  which  Dr  Lacey
    found to be consistent with tattooing).  However, she has  not  claimed
    herself to have taken part in any voodoo or black magic ritual.

195.  So far as  whether  or  not  the  appellant  should  have  sought  the
    protection of the Nigerian  authorities  before  seeking  international
    protection is concerned, it seemed to us that the appellant  was  duped
    by Mr Osagie  at the time of  her  departure;  it  was  not  until  she
    arrived in the United Kingdom that she became aware that she  had  been
    duped. It did not appear to us,  therefore,  that  it  was  necessarily
    appropriate for the expert to be asked  whether  the  appellant  should
    have sought the protection of the Nigerian authorities  before  seeking
    international protection, although we do of course find  Miss  Olateru-
    Olagbegi's response helpful, inasmuch as she explains that  the  public
    does not ordinarily have confidence in the  police  or  authorities  in
    Nigeria and that this attitude may not be unconnected with the  effects
    on the Nigerian psyche of many years of military dictatorship.

196.  As we have indicated earlier, it is important to  distinguish  between
    human  smuggling,  where  the  trafficked  individual  is   a   willing
    participant and human trafficking, where those who are  trafficked  are
    trafficked for the purpose of exploitation, often against their will.

197.  In considering whether  or  not  this  appellant  is  likely  to  face
    reprisals from her trafficker, it is important to bear in mind that the
    appellant was not trafficked  by  members  of  a  gang.   There  is  no
    evidence that Mr Osagie was himself a member of a gang in  Nigeria,  or
    that he employed  gang  members  when  the  appellant  was  duped  into
    travelling to the United Kingdom.  Indeed, there is no evidence that Mr
    Osagie  was  involved  with  any  third  party  in  Nigeria;  his  only
    associates, who were known by the appellant  as  "Mark"  and  "Philip",
    appear to have been employed only in the United Kingdom.  The appellant
    travelled willingly to the United Kingdom in  total  ignorance  of  the
    true purpose of her journey  arranged  by  Mr  Osagie.   This  is  not,
    therefore, a situation where the appellant is at risk from unidentified
    members of a trafficking gang of the type identified by  Miss  Olateru-
    Olagbegi in her further addendum to her expert report,  as  opposed  to
    identified gang members.

198.  The appellant spent what must have been a most appalling three  months
    as a prisoner in a house owned or rented by Mr Osagie,  where  she  was
    repeatedly raped by him and by the two  men  she  knew  as  "Mark"  and
    "Philip".  She was told that she would initially be  required  to  earn
    �20,000 in  the  United  Kingdom  before  she  would  be  free  of  her
    obligations to Mr  Osagie.  This  sum  was  subsequently  increased  to
    �50,000.

199.  Whilst there is no evidence before us that either "Mark"  of  "Philip"
    were involved with Mr Osagie in Nigeria, for the purposes of  assessing
    the risk to this appellant on her return to Nigeria,  we  have  assumed
    that they are either Nigerian citizens, or that they have  the  ability
    to travel freely to and from Nigeria.  We have, therefore, assessed the
    risk to this appellant not only from Mr Osagie, but also from  his  two
    associates in the  United  Kingdom,  Mark  and  Philip.   There  is  no
    evidence before us that Mr Osagie has any other associates.

200.  It has been suggested on behalf of the appellant that were she  to  be
    returned to Benin  she  would  be  at  risk  from  Mr  Osagie  and  his
    "network".  We do not accept that.  The overwhelming evidence before us
    suggests that if  the  appellant  requires  it,  she  will  be  offered
    protection and if she is willing to cooperate, attempts will be made to
    track  down  and  prosecute  her  trafficker.  There  are  medical  and
    counselling facilities available in the shelters  from  trained  social
    workers and nurses who are clearly very familiar with dealing with  the
    victims of trafficking suffering from post- traumatic stress  disorder.
    We believe that in the event that the  appellant  or  her  baby  should
    require any medical facilities, these will be provided, either  by  the
    medical doctor on call at the shelter or by her  being  transferred  to
    the nearest hospital.

201.  On her return to Nigeria, the appellant could, if she wished,  be  met
    at the airport and be taken to a  NAPTIP  shelter  where  she  will  be
    provided with the care and protection she needs, together with  medical
    faculties and counselling suitable  for  her  and  her  baby.   If  she
    chooses to cooperate, we believe that  the  Nigerian  authorities  will
    also attempt to track down and prosecute her trafficker.  The  evidence
    clearly shows that she will be permitted to remain in the  shelter  for
    as long as is necessary to secure her protection  and  that  facilities
    are in place to offer her training to enable her to earn a living.  The
    appellant existed previously, living with her aunt and  selling  water.
    There would appear to be no reason at all  why,  if  the  appellant  so
    chooses, she could not return to selling water.

202.  In case we are wrong in our finding that the appellant  would  not  be
    at real risk of serious harm or, if need be, be able to place  reliance
    on State protection, we have  gone  on  to  consider  the  question  of
    internal relocation.

203.  In considering the issue of internal protection,  we  have  considered
    paragraph 339O of the Immigration Rules and  the  guidance  offered  in
    Januzi [2006] UKHL 5, AH (Sudan) [2008] UKHL 49 and, more recently,  in
    AB (Jamaica) [2008] EWCA  Civ.  784.   A  person  is  not  entitled  to
    protection of the Convention if there is  a  part  of  her  country  of
    origin where she would not have a well-founded fear of being persecuted
    and if she can reasonably be expected to  stay  in  that  part  of  the
    country.  In reaching a decision, regard must be  had  to  the  general
    circumstances prevailing in  that  part  of  the  country  and  to  the
    individual's   personal   circumstances,    including    medical    and
    psychological needs and, in the case of this appellant, the  fact  that
    she would be returning with a  young  child.   We  bear  in  mind  that
    Nigeria is a huge country by comparison with  the  United  Kingdom  and
    that there are a total of seven NAPTIP shelters.

204.  We do not accept that the appellant will not be able to find  suitable
    accommodation for herself and her small child.  Nor do we  accept  that
    she would, effectively, be destitute.  The evidence before us  suggests
    that if the appellant chooses to access the help and  assistance  which
    would  be  available  to  her  on  her  return,  she  will  be  offered
    counselling and rehabilitation advice and training and,  if  necessary,
    take advantage of the NAPTIP witness protection programme, which exists
    throughout the country.  We can see no reason, if she chooses to do so,
    why the appellant could not, with the help and assistance of NAPTIP  if
    necessary, relocate elsewhere in Nigeria where  facilities  similar  to
    those offered in Benin would be available to  her  and  she  would,  in
    time, be given help in rehabilitation. We do not believe that it  would
    be unduly harsh or unreasonable to expect her to do so.

205.  We turn now to the appellant's Article 8 appeal.

206.  Article 8 provides:-

         "(1)     Everyone has the right to  respect  for  his  private  and
             family life, his home and his correspondence.


         (2)      There shall be no interference by a public authority  with
             the exercise of his right except such as is in accordance with
             the law and is  necessary  in  a  democratic  society  in  the
             interest of national security, public safety or  the  economic
             well-being of the country, for the prevention of  disorder  or
             crime, or the protection of  health  or  morals,  or  for  the
             protection of the rights and freedoms of others."

207.  In deciding whether or  not  the  appellant's  removal  is  likely  to
    breach her Article 8 rights, the questions to be asked were set out  in
    paragraph 17 of Razgar v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2004] UKHL 27 by Lord Bingham:

         "(a)     Will the proposed removal  be  interference  by  a  public
             authority with  the  appellant's  right  to  respect  for  her
             private or family life?

         (b)      If so, will such interference have  consequences  of  such
             gravity as potentially to engage the operation of Article 8?

         (c)      If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?

         (d)      If so, is such  interference  necessary  in  a  democratic
             society in the interests of national security,  public  safety
             or the economic well-being of the country, for the  prevention
             of disorder or crime, for the protection of health or  morals,
             or for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others?

         (e)       If  so,  is  such  interference  proportionate   to   the
             legitimate public end sought to be achieved?"

208.  Each of those questions needs to be  answered.   The  House  of  Lords
    confirmed in Secretary of State for the Home  Department  v  Huang  and
    Others [2007] UKHL 11 that the Tribunal has authority to reach its  own
    independent decision on proportionality.  Once Article 8 is found to be
    engaged the question is  whether  the  interference  complained  of  is
    proportionate to the legitimate aim to be  achieved.   If  family  life
    cannot reasonably be expected to be enjoyed elsewhere the  question  is
    whether, taking into account all the considerations weighing in  favour
    of refusal, the refusal of leave prejudices  the  family  life  of  the
    appellant sufficiently seriously to amount to a breach.  In considering
    this, account must be taken of the severity and consequent interference
    caused.

209.  We are satisfied that the appellant  has  established  a  private  and
    family life in the United Kingdom.  Her family life is enjoyed with her
    daughter.  We were given no evidence at all that the  appellant  enjoys
    any relationship with her daughter's father.  Since it is proposed that
    the appellant's daughter will be removed with her, it is clear that the
    appellant's proposed removal would not  be  an  interference  with  her
    family life.  However, as the European Court of Human  Rights  said  in
    Bensaid v UK [2001] 33 EHRR:

         "Private life  is  a  broad  term  not  susceptible  to  exhaustive
         definition ...  Article 8 protects a right to identity and personal
         development, and the right to establish  relationships  with  other
         human beings and the outside world."

210.  We accept that the appellant has a private life in the United  Kingdom
    and were the appellant to be removed, there would be an interference.

211.   We  next  have  to  consider  whether  the  interference  would  have
    consequences of such gravity as potentially to engage the operation  of
    Article 8.  The appellant has been in the United Kingdom now  for  over
    four years.  During  that  time  she  has  undergone  various  training
    courses and has become dependent on support and  help  from  the  POPPY
    Project and their carers.

212.  As Sedley LJ said in AG (Eritrea) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home
    Department [2007] EWCA Civ 801,

         "While an interference with private or family life must be real  if
         it is to engage Article 8(1),  the  threshold  of  engagement  (the
         'minimum level') is not a specially high one."

    We are satisfied that such interference would have consequences of such
    gravity as to engage the operation of Article 8.

213.  We next ask whether such interference is in accordance with  the  law.
    We are satisfied that the interference is in accordance with  the  law.
    The appellant is an illegal entrant.  It has not  been  argued  on  the
    appellant's behalf that the interference is anything other than lawful.



214.  We then come to question (d).   We  find  that  the  decision  of  the
    respondent is necessary in order to maintain immigration control.   The
    issue  before  us,  therefore,  is   whether   such   interference   is
    proportionate to the legitimate public end sought to be achieved.   The
    onus lies on the respondent to show that the interference  or  lack  of
    respect is "necessary in a democratic society" for one  of  the  stated
    interests.

215.  We have found, having analysed the background evidence before us  with
    great care, that this appellant would not be at risk in her  home  area
    of Benin City were she to be returned to Nigeria.  We have  found  that
    she  would  be  afforded  effective  protection  against  the  risk  of
    suffering harm  at  the  hands  of  her  trafficker  or  at  being  re-
    trafficked.

216.  As we  have  indicated  earlier,  we  accept  that  the  appellant  is
    suffering from a complex and  severe  form  of  Post  Traumatic  Stress
    Disorder and also suffers Major Depressive Disorder.  We are satisfied,
    however that the appellant will be able to access all necessary medical
    care, counselling and treatment for her Post Traumatic Stress  Disorder
    and, should she choose to accept it, reintegration  and  rehabilitation
    facilities. We have concluded, on the  evidence  before  us,  that  the
    appellant's removal would be proportionate.

217.  For all the reasons above we find that IJ  Grant  did  not  materially
    err in law. The appellant's asylum appeal is dismissed,  the  appellant
    humanitarian protection appeal is dismissed and the  appellant's  human
    rights appeal is also dismissed.

218.  In paragraph 8 of our  determination,  we  set  out  the  judgment  of
    Sedley LJ when granting permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal. He
    pointed out that a Senior  Immigration  Judge  had  directed  that  the
    reconsideration hearing should be before two Immigration Judges, one of
    whom was a Senior or Designated Immigration Judge. The  reconsideration
    was in  fact  conducted  by  a  single  Immigration  Judge.  Sedley  LJ
    considered  that  the  constitution  of   the   Tribunal   called   her
    investigation and that it was arguable in light of the direction for  a
    two-judge panel that the second stage reconsideration before  a  single
    judge was a nullity. Permission was given  to  expand  the  grounds  of
    appeal.

219.  This point (or its repercussions) was not raised or argued before  us.
    The proceedings of the Tribunal find a statutory basis in Schedule 4 of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 although  the  day-to-
    day conduct of business is provided  for  in  practice  directions  and
    judicial management. It is for the Tribunal in  its  broader  sense  to
    determine the  constitution  of  the  Tribunal  that  is  to  hear  any
    particular appeal. Neither party has  a  right  to  call  for  a  panel
    consisting of a particular Immigration Judge or a particular number  of
    judges. Neither side, for example, may call for a panel  consisting  of
    three legally qualified  Immigration  Judges  to  determine  an  appeal
    thereby determining any onward appeal route.

220.  There may be logistical difficulties facing  a  hearing  centre  on  a
    given day which render it impractical to have a  panel  hearing.  If  a
    listing direction has been made of which the parties become  aware,  we
    do not consider that it cannot be altered where circumstances  dictate.
    Even if, as may have occurred here, the direction was  overlooked  when
    the sitting was arranged, we do  not  consider  that  the  parties  may
    require the hearing be adjourned in order to accommodate the direction.
     Nor would we expect  an  Immigration  Judge  to  adjourn  the  hearing
    automatically and without good reason if he becomes aware  of  a  prior
    direction, given the costs this will entail  to  the  parties  and  the
    expense to the taxpayer.

221.  The model of a single Immigration Judge deciding an  appeal  at  first
    instance  but  having  his  appeal  determined  by  a  panel   normally
    consisting of two or three disappeared with the Single Tier.  There are
    anomalies in the Single  Tier,  most  notably  where,  for  example,  a
    deportation  appeal  decided  by  a  panel  is  often   determined   on
    reconsideration by a single Senior Immigration Judge.  Nevertheless, we
    are not satisfied that the hearing before Immigration Judge Grant was a
    nullity in the sense that the Tribunal's determination, being that of a
    single Immigration Judge, had no legal effect whatever.

Decision

                 The appellant's asylum appeal is dismissed.

            The appellant humanitarian protection appeal is dismissed.

                 The appellant's human rights appeal is dismissed.


Senior Immigration Judge Chalkley

                                  SCHEDULE

UNESCO  Policy  Paper:  Human  Trafficking  in  Nigeria:  Root  Causes   and
Recommendations (Paris 2006)

Rural poverty portal: Rural poverty in Nigeria (7 March 2007)

Global Alliance against Traffic in Women  (GAATW):  Collateral  Damage:  The
Impact of Anti-Trafficking Measures on Human Rights around the World (2007)

Human Rights Watch: World Report 2008: Nigeria (31 January 2008)

The Danish Immigration Service report: Protection of victims of  trafficking
in Nigeria a fact finding mission  to  Lagos  Benin  City  and  Abuja,  9-26
September 2007 (April 2008)

Amnesty International report: Human Rights in Federal  Republic  of  Nigeria
(28 May 2008)

US State Department of State report  Trafficking  in  Persons  Report  2008:
Nigeria ('the TIP report') (4 June 2008)

Freedom House, Freedom in the World 2008 - Nigeria, (2 July 2008)

Integrated Regional Information Network News  (IRIN):  Nigeria:  Trafficking
for girls, abuse worsening (7 July 2008)

CEDAW report: Concluding observations of the Committee  on  the  Elimination
of Discrimination against Women: Nigeria (18 July 2008)

Home Office UK Border  Agency-Danish  Immigration  Service:  Report  of  the
Joint British-Danish Fact-Finding Mission to Lagos and Abuja, Nigeria;  9-27
September 2007 and 5-12 January 2008, (29 October 2008)

Country of Origin Information Service Report (COIS):   Nigeria  (5  December
2008)











