
MM (Allowed appeal: further refusal) Pakistan [2008] UKAIT 00040

                       ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at:  Manchester                                    Date of Hearing: 7
December 2007


                                   Before:


 Mr C M G Ockelton, Deputy President of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
                    Designated Immigration Judge McClure

                                   Between

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, ISLAMABAD
                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the Appellant:           Mr. G. Brown, instructed by Rochdale Law
Centre
For the Respondent:          Mr. K. Wood, Home Office Presenting Officer

An executive officer is generally speaking  obliged  to  act  in  accordance
with a decision  of  the  Tribunal  allowing  an  appeal.   That  principle,
however, does not prevent the application being refused again  on  different
grounds from those given  the  first  time,  especially  where  the  earlier
determination cannot  be  regarded  as  having  adequately  dealt  with  the
evidence and facts underlying the new ground.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, a citizen of Pakistan,  having  won  a  previous  appeal
    against the refusal of entry  clearance  as  a  visitor,  sought  entry
    clearance from the respondent in  line  with  the  Immigration  Judge's
    decision.  The respondent again refused to grant entry  clearance.  The
    appellant appealed, and an Immigration Judge dismissed his appeal.  The
    appellant sought and obtained an order for reconsideration.   Thus  the
    matter comes before us.

 2. The appellant's original application was made in  June  2005.   It  was
    refused on 30 June 2005 for a considerable number of reasons,  set  out
    in the notice  of  decision.   The  Entry  Clearance  Officer  was  not
    satisfied that the appellant was genuinely seeking entry as  a  visitor
    for the limited period as stated by him, that he intended to leave  the
    United Kingdom at the end of the visit, that he did not intend to  take
    employment, that he would be  maintained  and  accommodated  adequately
    without recourse to public funds, or that he could meet the cost of his
    return or onward journey.  Those formal reasons, derived from  para  41
    of the Statement of Changes in Immigration Rules HC 395 were  supported
    by specific reasons.  Those  specific  reasons  were  that  there  were
    forged or counterfeit entries in the appellant's passport, as  set  out
    in some detail in  the  notice  of  refusal,  that  the  appellant  had
    provided no evidence that he had a relative in the United  Kingdom  and
    that this was in truth a family visit, that the appellant had failed to
    provide any evidence of the family circumstances in Pakistan  which  he
    described, that the appellant had produced no evidence  of  funds,  and
    that the appellant had shown no evidence of any  reason  to  return  to
    Pakistan.  The appellant appealed against that refusal and  the  matter
    came before an Immigration Judge, to whom we will refer as  "the  first
    Immigration Judge".  Following a hearing in Manchester on 21 March 2006
    the Immigration Judge issued a determination allowing  the  appellant's
    appeal.

 3. We have read that determination.  We have to say, with regret, that  it
    appears to us to indicate a most casual and unprofessional approach  to
    the task before the first Immigration Judge.

 4. In setting out the issues in the case, the Immigration Judge  chose  to
    mention  only  that  the  appellant's  visa  was  refused  because  the
    respondent was not satisfied that the appellant would leave the  United
    Kingdom at the end of the period of his visit.  There was no  reference
    at that stage  to  the  other  reasons  for  the  refusal,  or  to  the
    allegations about the passport, or to the lack  of  evidence  on  other
    matters, or to the evident difficulty that  if  the  appellant  had  no
    relative in the United Kingdom, he had no right of appeal.   The  first
    Immigration Judge went on to say that he had before  him  bundles  from
    both the appellant and the respondent:  he  gave  no  hint  as  to  the
    contents of those bundles, which is a matter of  some  concern  in  the
    light of what he said later in his  very  short  determination.   After
    setting out the law in the most cursory fashion, the Immigration  Judge
    continued as follows:

      "My Findings

       10. I have given careful consideration to all the  documents  before
           me and to the evidence and submissions, which are set out in the
           record of proceedings.


       11. I find that the Appellant is a genuine family visitor.  I  heard
           evidence from the Sponsor ...  who  told  me  that  he  was  the
           brother of the Appellant.  He said that he  was  sure  that  the
           Appellant would return to Pakistan at  the  end  of  his  visit.
           When the Appellant had been to  the  UK  before,  he  had  never
           worked and had always returned within the limits  of  his  visa.
           He confirmed that his written statement was true.   He  believed
           that the Appellant had not placed any counterfeit stamps in  his
           passport.  If he had been attempting to deceive authorities,  he
           said that he would have paid an agent to bring him  to  the  UK.
           The Appellant had a good Immigration history and had visited the
           UK on 3 other occasions but had always returned to Pakistan.   I
           find that although the Presenting Officer did not have a file of
           papers, he was wrong to  argue  that  the  ECO  must  have  felt
           justified in the reason for Refusal.  There was no interview  in
           this and no evidence placed before me  concerning  the  comments
           about the passport.  I have no reason to doubt that  the  stamps
           in the passport are genuine or that the Appellant will return to
           Pakistan.  He has been here on many  occasions  and  has  always
           returned.


                                  DECISION


       12. On the totality of the evidence  before  me,  I  find  that  the
           Appellant has discharged the burden of proof and  reasons  given
           by the Respondent do not justify  the  refusal.   Therefore  the
           Respondent's Decision is not in accordance with the law and  the
           applicable immigration rules.


       13. I allow the appeal."

 5. It appears that the first Immigration Judge accepted  unreservedly  the
    credibility of the sponsor, who appeared before him and  said  that  he
    was the appellant's brother.  Even so, the Immigration  Judge  made  no
    reference at all to the lack of evidence on other matters as  mentioned
    in the notice of decision.  It looks very much, from his summary of the
    issues at the beginning of the determination and the  conclusions  that
    we have set out, as though the first Immigration Judge did not read the
    notice of decision in full.  He makes no reference either to any  issue
    of jurisdiction: although we accept that the matter may be regarded  as
    having been silently dealt with in the first Immigration Judge's simple
    statement that the person before him said that he was  the  appellant's
    brother.

 6. It is very striking that the first Immigration Judge apparently gave no
    real consideration to the allegation about the passport.  First,  there
    is something of a mystery about what was  before  him.   He  refers  to
    having a bundle from the respondent,  but  to  the  Presenting  Officer
    before  him  apparently  having  less  than  adequate  documents.   The
    Immigration Judge does say  that  there  was  no  evidence  before  him
    concerning "the comments about the passport": but  there  were  serious
    and detailed allegations and  it  is  difficult  to  know  whether  the
    Immigration Judge meant that he was not treating them  as  evidence  or
    whether he simply meant that there was no further evidence.  It must be
    simply wrong for him to say "I have no reason to doubt that the  stamps
    in the passport are  genuine".   Reasons  were  clearly  given  by  the
    allegations in the notice of refusal.   They  are  reasons  nonetheless
    even  if  the  Immigration  Judge  decided  that  they  had  not   been
    established or they should not figure largely in his  consideration  of
    the case as a whole.  But it is difficult also  to  see  how  he  could
    evaluate the accuracy of the allegations solely on the  basis  of  oral
    evidence by the sponsor that the sponsor "believed that  the  appellant
    had not placed any counterfeit stamps in his passport".  The  sponsor's
    belief about the appellant was not, and could not  be,  evidence  about
    the passport itself.

 7. It is a matter of very considerable concern that the Immigration  Judge
    appears to have approached his task in a way that failed  to  give  any
    proper value to the concerns of the Entry Clearance  Officer  that  had
    been put so clearly in the notice of refusal.  It is further of concern
    that he chose to allow the appeal without any reference to  the  issues
    of finance that had been raised in the notice of refusal and  on  which
    there was evidence before him.

 8. Nevertheless, there was no application for reconsideration of the first
    Immigration Judge's decision, and, on inquiry, the Presenting Officer's
    Unit informed the appellant's representative that entry clearance would
    be issued.

 9. When the appellant sought entry clearance in accordance with the  first
    Immigration Judge's determination, he  received  a  further  notice  of
    refusal.  On this occasion the  refusal  was  specifically  under  para
    320(21) of HC 395, which provides that an application is normally to be
    refused if (whether or not the applicant's knowledge) a false  document
    has been submitted in support of an application.  We set out  here  the
    allegation about the passport, which is the same as that made about  it
    previously:

        "You have submitted Pakistan passport number ... as proof  of  your
        travel history.  However, close examination of  this  passport  has
        determined that there is a counterfeit UK Immigration  entry  stamp
        on page 11 of the passport.  This stamp has been  compared  to  two
        examples of genuine stamps, as well has having been examined  by  a
        dedicated forgery officer and has been found  not  to  be  genuine.
        The  forgery  officer  has  also  determined  that   the   Pakistan
        Immigration exit stamp on page 11 has been tampered with,  and  has
        had the date  changed  by  use  of  chemicals.   There  is  also  a
        chemically altered Pakistan Immigration entry stamp on page  16  of
        the passport.  In view of the above, I find that any statements you
        have made or  documentation  you  have  submitted  is  no  rendered
        unreliable and casts serious doubts on your intention as a  claimed
        family visitor to the United Kingdom.  I am therefore not satisfied
        that you meet all the  requirements  for  entry  as  a  visitor  as
        defined by paragraph 41 of HC 395."

10. The appeal to  the  Tribunal  against  that  decision  came  before  an
    Immigration Judge to whom we shall refer  as  "the  second  Immigration
    Judge".  He had before him the first Immigration Judge's  determination
    and the detailed forgery reports, with attached photographs, from  June
    2005.  The grounds  of  appeal  to  him  were  simply  that  the  Entry
    Clearance  Officer  was  bound  by  the   first   Immigration   Judge's
    determination and  was  not  entitled  to  refuse  to  issue  an  entry
    clearance for reasons that had already been the subject of  a  judicial
    determination  in  the  appellant's  favour.   Reference  was  made  to
    Devaseelan [2002] UKIAT 00702 and to published  instructions  to  Entry
    Clearance Officers indicating that they should honour the  terms  of  a
    judicial determination adverse to them.  The second  Immigration  Judge
    reminded himself that Devaseelan merely  indicates  that  on  a  second
    appeal in certain circumstances  an  earlier  determination  is  to  be
    treated as a starting point.  He  decided  that,  despite  the  earlier
    determination, he had jurisdiction to hear the appeal.  He pointed  out
    that it was difficult to know what  the  first  Immigration  Judge  had
    taken into account in making the findings that he appeared to have made
    on the passport.  He noted there was different evidence before him, and
    that the ground for refusal was different in  that  it  mentioned  para
    320.  He noted that despite the fact that the  appellant  had  retained
    his passport, he had done nothing to counter the allegations,  now  (if
    not previously)  clearly  supported  by  evidence.   He  dismissed  the
    appeal.

11. The grounds for reconsideration, on the basis of which  the  order  for
    reconsideration was made, were that the second  Immigration  Judge  had
    failed to have  sufficient  regard  to  what  were  described  as  "the
    credibility findings" made by the first  Immigration  Judge,  that  the
    second Immigration Judge had failed to take into account that,  as  set
    out in RP [2006] UKAIT 00086, a party  asserting  that  a  document  is
    forged has the burden of proof on that issue, and in that context  that
    the second Immigration Judge had failed to note that the  passport  had
    apparently passed investigation when used by the appellant on a  number
    of occasions  for  entry  into  the  United  Kingdom.   The  order  for
    reconsideration observed that the evidence of forgery  was  contentious
    and that it was "arguable that the Immigration Judge  was  perverse  to
    accept it".

12. We heard submissions from Mr. Brown  and  from  Mr.  Wood.   Mr.  Brown
    relied on the grounds, which he expanded  briefly.  Mr.  Wood  accepted
    that if the Immigration Judge had acted with perversity, a new  hearing
    might be necessary, at which he would seek to adduce further  evidence.



13. This is a case in which there is a formal and  specific  allegation  of
    forged or counterfeit stamps in the appellant's passport.  There can be
    little doubt that the second Immigration Judge erred in law in  failing
    to appreciate that in such a case the burden of proof on that issue lay
    on the respondent.  The error does not, however, of itself  render  his
    decision perverse.  In every other respect his decision appears  to  us
    to be a careful and proper evaluation of the matters before him.

14. The principal question was whether  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  was
    entitled to refuse for the second time the appellant's  application  in
    the circumstances of this case.  On the one  hand,  there  had  been  a
    determination in the  appellant's  favour  which  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer  had  not  sought  to  query  by   way   of   application   for
    reconsideration.  On the other hand, the determination made  no  proper
    or specific findings on the assertions about the passport.  There is no
    doubt  that  the  inadequacies  of  the   first   Immigration   Judge's
    determination put the Entry Clearance Officer in a difficult  position.
    No doubt he was aware of  the  instructions  to  him  that  a  judicial
    determination should be honoured.  On  the  other  hand,  the  judicial
    determination before him did not properly resolve the issues about  the
    passport.  If he granted entry clearance, he  would  be  endorsing  (by
    inserting a visa in) a passport about which he had real concerns, which
    had been expressed in detail, and which had neither been met in any way
    by the appellant nor analysed by the Immigration Judge.


15. There is no issue estoppel in  immigration  law,  but  it  must  be  in
    general right to say that Entry Clearance Officers are not entitled  to
    ignore the effects of a judicial decision.  If  the  first  Immigration
    Judge's decision had been  a  proper,  professional  and  comprehensive
    assessment of the matters before him, there could have  been  no  doubt
    that the Entry Clearance Officer was bound to honour it.  On the  other
    hand, the fact that the first Immigration Judge's determination did not
    have those characteristics makes it less easy to understand why, if the
    Entry Clearance Officer did not wish to honour  it,  he  did  not  seek
    reconsideration of it.  We would not wish to be in a position of giving
    what would amount to formal approval of the determination of the  first
    Immigration Judge, because of the concerns that we have about  it.   On
    the other hand, we would not wish to give any approval to a practice of
    not honouring unchallenged judicial decisions.

16. There are two features of the course of the present case that assist in
    resolving this difficult  question.   The  first  is  that  the  second
    refusal was formally on a  different  basis  from  that  of  the  first
    refusal.  It is true that the  facts  relating  to  the  allegation  of
    forgery are the same: but they are now the basis  of  a  refusal  under
    para 320, rather than part of a substantive refusal under para 41.   It
    is true also that the substantive elements of para 41 are  the  subject
    of reference in the second refusal, but the substantive requirements of
    para 41 are treated in an entirely different way in the second refusal.
     To that extent it is  clear  that  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  has
    accepted the burden of the first Immigration Judge's  determination  on
    the issues that were specifically before that Immigration  Judge:  that
    is to say, substantive compliance with the  requirements  of  para  41.
    Paragraph 320 of HC 395 makes it clear that an Entry Clearance  Officer
    is entitled to refuse an application for the reasons set  out  in  that
    paragraph, even if an applicant meets all the substantive  requirements
    of the Rules.  It follows that  an  Entry  Clearance  Officer  must  be
    formally entitled to do what the Entry Clearance Officer  did  in  this
    case: there may be a refusal under para 320 even if the Entry Clearance
    Officer is bound by a judicial decision to accept that the  substantive
    requirements of the Immigration Rules have been met.

17. Secondly, it may be that matters going to the genuineness of  passports
    and the entries in  them  ought  to  have  a  special  status.  In  the
    circumstances we need reach no specific conclusion on this, but it does
    appear to us that it is of the greatest importance that no decision  of
    an Immigration Judge should have to be taken as endorsing the  validity
    of a challenged immigration document unless it is clear that the issues
    have indeed been properly resolved in the judgement.   A  determination
    on such matters has effect almost as a judgment in rem: it  is  capable
    of going well beyond such issues  as  the  individual  intention  of  a
    person making a particular application or his finances at that time.
18. We conclude that in the circumstances of this case the Entry  Clearance
    Officer, even if bound by the Immigration Judge's determination on  the
    earlier refusal under the substantive  requirements  of  para  41,  was
    entitled to issue a new refusal under para 320.  It  follows  that  the
    Immigration Judge was right to reject the appellant's grounds of appeal
    and to determine the appeal before him  based  on  the  new  notice  of
    refusal.

19. As we have said, he made an error in law  in  his  attribution  to  the
    appellant  of  the  burden  of  proof  on  all  issues,  ignoring   the
    respondent's burden of proving the forgery. The Immigration Judge heard
    oral evidence from the sponsor, as  summarised  in  his  determination.
    Other than the notices of decision and the  forgery  reports,  however,
    there is no evidence relating to the  allegations  about  the  passport
    save that contained in the  record  of  the  appellant's  interview  as
    follows:

      "Q:   We have evidence that the UK immigration officer's  entry  stamp
             on page 11 of ppt is forged.  The Pakistan exit  stamp  on  the
             same date has been chemically altered and there  is  chemically
             altered entry stamp on  page  16.   All  three  of  stamps  are
             forgeries.  Do you have anything to say?
      A:    They are not forged.
      Q:    I am afraid that we have proof that  these  stamps  are  forged.
             As such your application will be refused again.
      A:    [no reply]
      ...
      Q:    Anything to add?
       A:     I  just  want  to  say  that  someone  else  has  given  wrong
             information about me."

    The passport was produced at the hearing before us, and we examined it.
     It is right to say that the detailed allegations made in  the  forgery
    reports (which we do not need to set out in this  determination)  refer
    to matters which are neither evident to the untrained eye  nor  obvious
    to a person of little experience in examining passports.  But,  despite
    the fact that the appellant has  had  every  opportunity  to  have  his
    passport examined by other  experts,  he  has  not  done  so.   He  has
    confined himself to asserting simply that the entries are  not  forged,
    and that somebody is  making  untrue  statements  about  him.   In  the
    circumstances, bearing in mind that the  burden  of  proof  is  on  the
    respondent and the standard to  be  applied  is  the  high  one  to  be
    associated with such assertions, it appears to us nevertheless that the
    respondent's case is made out.  It is supported  by  detailed  evidence
    which there is no reason to doubt and which has not been the subject of
    any real challenge.

20. Paragraph 320(21) allows the Entry Clearance Officer a discretion.  The
    appellant  has  not  specifically  raised  the  question  whether   the
    discretion should have been exercised differently.  He has preferred to
    insist simply on his  right  to  have  the  first  Immigration  Judge's
    determination honoured despite the  new  reason  for  refusal  and  the
    detailed allegations of forgery.  In the circumstances we see no reason
    to say that the Entry Clearance Officer's discretion should  have  been
    exercised differently.
21. For the reasons we have given we conclude that the  second  Immigration
    Judge did not materially err in law in dealing with the  appeal  before
    him substantively rather  that  treating  it  on  the  basis  that  all
    relevant issues had been resolved  by  the  first  Immigration  Judge's
    determination.  He did err in law in his application of the  burden  of
    proof.  We find that the evidence establishes,  to  a  high  degree  of
    probability, that the appellant's passport contains  entries  that  are
    forged  or  altered:  that  para  320(21)  therefore  applied  to   the
    appellant's case: and that there is no basis for saying that the  Entry
    Clearance Officer's discretion should have been exercised  differently.
    We therefore substitute  a  determination  dismissing  the  appellant's
    appeal.










                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT
                                                             Date:
