
MD (HC 395: 'two years') Jamaica [2008] UKAIT 00041

                       ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at:  Field House                                   Date of Hearing: 8
April 2008
                                   Determination delivered orally at hearing


                                   Before:


 Mr C M G Ockelton, Deputy President of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
                      Senior Immigration Judge Freeman

                                   Between

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the Appellant:           Mr. L. Ukonu, instructed by Chase Christopher
Roberts & Co
For the Respondent:          Mr. J. Gulvin, Home Office Presenting Officer

The requirement in para 289A and other paragraphs of HC 395  that  a  person
have been granted two years' leave is met  by  a  grant  of  more  than  two
years.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Jamaica.  She applied to the Secretary of
    State for leave to remain in  the  United  Kingdom  indefinitely  as  a
    victim of domestic violence.  Her application was refused.  A notice of
    that decision was sent to her on 3 August 2007.  She  appealed  to  the
    Tribunal and an Immigration Judge dismissed her appeal.  She sought and
    obtained an order for reconsideration.  Thus the  matter  comes  before
    us.

 2. The appellant married her husband on 1 July 2000.  He also is a citizen
    of Jamaica, and they were married in Jamaica.   Her  husband,  however,
    whom we shall for simplicity's sake refer  to  as  the  sponsor,  is  a
    member of Her Majesty's Forces and is agreed to be, for the purposes of
    the Immigration Act, a member of the "home forces".

 3. After the marriage the appellant and the sponsor  were  in  the  United
    Kingdom from September 2001.  The  appellant's  presence  here  was  in
    virtue of a visa granted to her as the dependent of  a  member  of  the
    Armed Forces and valid until 10 September 2006.  The appellant returned
    to Jamaica to continue her career in the Jamaican  Police  Force  until
    about January 2003, when she arrived here again.  By then  her  husband
    was serving in Iraq, but he returned and it is said that following  his
    return there were a number of incidents of domestic violence.  It is as
    a result of those incidents that the present application was made.   It
    was refused formally on the basis as set out in the notice  of  refusal
    that "The Secretary of State is satisfied that you were not admitted to
    the United Kingdom or given an extension of stay  for  a  period  of  2
    years as the spouse of a person  present  and  settled  in  the  United
    Kingdom; therefore you do not  meet  the  requirements  of  Immigration
    Rules relating to victims of  domestic  violence  at  Paragraph  289A".
    That is a reference to the  relevant  provision  of  the  Statement  of
    Changes in Immigration Rules, HC 395.

 4. We will set out that paragraph in full:

        "The requirements to be met by  a  person  who  is  the  victim  of
        domestic violence and who is seeking indefinite leave to remain  in
        the United Kingdom are that the applicant:
           i) was admitted to the United Kingdom or given an  extension  of
              stay for a period of 2 years as the spouse or  civil  partner
              of a person present and settled here; or
          ii) was admitted to the United Kingdom of given an  extension  of
              stay for a period of 2 years as  the  unmarried  or  same-sex
              partner of a person present and settled here; or
         iii) the relationship with their spouse, civil partner,  unmarried
              partner or same-sex partner, as appropriate,  was  subsisting
              at the beginning of the relevant period of leave or extension
              of stay referred to in (i) or (ii) above: and
          iv) is able to produce such evidence as may be  required  by  the
              Secretary of State to establish  that  the  relationship  was
              caused to permanently break  down  before  the  end  of  that
              period as a result of domestic violence."

 5. The Immigration Judge dealt with two issues specifically in relation to
    the Rules.  It appears that there may be three issues to be dealt  with
    and, de bene esse, we have heard submissions on all of them.


 6. The first, and the matter on  which  reconsideration  specifically  and
    solely was ordered, is the question  whether  the  sponsor  was  to  be
    regarded as a person present and settled in the  United  Kingdom.   The
    Immigration Judge agreed with the submissions made  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State before her, that the sponsor  was  not  present  and
    settled in the United Kingdom.  The  grounds  for  reconsideration  are
    largely devoted to that issue.   As  it  appears  to  us,  the  law  is
    contained partly in ss 8 and 33 of the Immigration Act 1971 and  partly
    in para 6 of the Immigration Rules.   In s 8(4) there is the  following
    provision:

      "The provisions of this Act relating to  those  who  are  not  British
        citizens, other than the provisions relating to deportation,  shall
        also not apply to any person so long as either -
          a) he is subject, as a member of the home forces, to service  law;
             or
          b) being a member of a Commonwealth force or  of  a  force  raised
             under the law of any associated state, colony  protectorate  or
             protected state, is undergoing or about to undergo training  in
             the United Kingdom with any body, contingent or  detachment  of
             the home forces; or
          c) he is serving or posted for service in the United Kingdom as  a
             member of a visiting force or of any force raised as  aforesaid
             or as a member of  an  international  headquarters  or  defence
             organisation designated for the  time  being  by  an  Order  in
             Council under section 1 of the International  Headquarters  and
             Defence Organisations Act 1964."

    As we have said, the sponsor's position is that he is a member  of  the
    home forces and therefore falls within subs (4)(a).   Subsection  5  of
    the same section provides for some restrictions on the applicability of
    exemptions granted by  s  8,  but  it  is  clear  that  it  imposes  no
    restriction on those within s 8(4)(a).

 7. In s 33 appears the definition of "settled" for  the  purposes  of  the
    1971 Act.  For those purposes "settled" is defined in  accordance  with
    subs (2A) in the following terms:

        "Subject to section  8(5)  above,  references  to  a  person  being
        settled  in  the  United  Kingdom  are  references  to  his   being
        ordinarily  resident  there  without  being   subject   under   the
        immigration laws to any restriction on the period for which he  may
        remain."

      We think that it is clear that a person to whom  subs  8(5)  does  not
    apply, but to whom s 8(4)(a) does apply is a person  who  is  "settled"
    within the meaning of s 33(2)(a) of the Immigration Act  1971.   He  is
    not subject under the Immigration Acts to any restriction for which  he
    may stay.

 8. That, however, is not the end of the matter, because the  provision  in
    para 289A of the Immigration Rules is not a provision  that  is  itself
    within the Immigration Act 1971, to which the definition  to  which  we
    have referred applies.  For the purposes of the Immigration  Rules  the
    definition of "settled" is in para 6 and is as follows:

      "'settled in the United Kingdom' means that the person concerned:
            a) is free from any restriction on the period for which he  may
               remain save that a person entitled  to  an  exemption  under
               Section 8 of the Immigration Act 1971 (otherwise than  as  a
               member of the home forces) is not to be regarded as  settled
               in the United Kingdom except in so far as Section  8(5A)  so
               provides; and
               b) is either:
                  i) ordinarily resident  in  the  United  Kingdom  without
                     having  entered  or  remained   in   breach   of   the
                     immigration laws; or
                 ii) despite having entered or remained in  breach  of  the
                     immigration laws, has subsequently entered lawfully or
                     has been granted leave to remain and is  ordinarily  a
                     resident."

 9. Again it is to be noted that members of the home  forces  are  excepted
    from the exception and it follows, as  in  the  1971  Act  so  for  the
    purposes of the Rules, the sponsor is, and has at  all  relevant  times
    been settled in the United Kingdom because he  is  ordinarily  resident
    here and free from any restriction on  the  period  for  which  he  may
    remain here: free, that is, from any restriction under the  Immigration
    Acts or other provisions of immigration law. So far  as  concerns  that
    issue therefore we are satisfied that the Immigration  Judge  erred  in
    concluding that the sponsor was not settled in the United Kingdom.

10. The second issue was raised by Mr. Gulvin before us today.  It was  not
    specifically raised, so far as we understand the matter, either in  the
    notice of refusal, although reference is made to it, or at the  hearing
    before the Immigration Judge.  The issue is whether the  appellant  can
    be regarded as a person who was admitted for a period of two years.  As
    we have said, her last arrival was in January 2003 by virtue of a  visa
    that was valid until 2006.  The effect of her visa was that on her last
    arrival in the United Kingdom she was to be treated as a person who had
    been granted before her arrival, leave beginning with her  arrival  and
    ending on the expiry of her visa, that is to say in 2006.  That is  the
    effect of the relevant provisions of the Immigration  (Leave  to  Enter
    and Remain) Order 2000 (SI 2000/1161).   She  therefore  had  leave  to
    enter for a period exceeding two years rather  than  a  period  of  two
    years exactly.

11. As we pointed out in the course of Mr. Gulvin's submissions,  a  period
    of three years, or indeed of five years, includes a number  of  periods
    of two years.  There is no doubt in our mind that the reference to  two
    years in para 289A is designed to exclude those have been  admitted  or
    given and extension of leave for a period of less than two  years.   We
    find it very difficult to say that a person who is granted leave for  a
    period longer than two years is to be regarded  as  excluded  for  that
    reason from the provisions of 289A, and we interpret the  reference  to
    periods of two years in that paragraph as meaning periods of  at  least
    two years.

12. The third issue is that the appellant is required  by  para  289A(iv)to
    show that the relationship was caused "to permanently break down ... as
    a result of domestic violence".  The Immigration Judge  heard  evidence
    from the appellant, and her conclusion at para 36 of her  determination
    was this:

      "By way only as observation and to cover  the  points  raised  by  the
        representatives I find that the appellant has been a person subject
        to domestic violence.  I found her testimony regarding the same  to
        be entirely credible and I found that the  various  correspondences
        referred to  in  the  evidence,  to  be  significant  corroborative
        evidence of domestic violence.  As to whether the marriage  has  in
        fact broken down I got  the  sense  from  [the  appellant's]  frank
        evidence that she is still very undecided  about  her  relationship
        but thought that in the future there  may  be  some  chances  of  a
        reconciliation.  I did not get the impression from her evidence  or
        statement that she wishes to see an end to  her  marriage  at  this
        stage.  This however is all very academic as I concluded  that  the
        IDIs on domestic violence and paragraph  289A  of  the  Immigration
        Rules were not applicable to the appellant's case and therefore the
        appeal could not succeed."

13. As pointed out in the hearing, the Immigration Judge's  view  that  the
    marriage had not, at the date of the hearing before  her  broken  down,
    would have been sufficient in any event  to  cause  the  appeal  to  be
    dismissed in so far as it relied on the Immigration Rules. That finding
    is not challenged in the grounds for reconsideration.  In  response  to
    that difficulty Mr. Ukonu, who appears for  the  appellant  before  us,
    suggested that it was raised specifically in the grounds of  appeal  to
    the Tribunal.  Unfortunately that is not correct.  It was not raised in
    the grounds of appeal  before  the  Tribunal.   On  the  contrary,  the
    grounds of appeal to the Tribunal assert that  "the  appellant's  still
    married" to the sponsor and that "she is still  a  dependant"  on  him.
    Those are citations from the manuscript grounds which are  supplemented
    by typed grounds, but neither the  manuscript  nor  the  typed  grounds
    refer to an allegation that the marriage has permanently  broken  down.
    Mr. Ukonu then referred to the  skeleton  argument  that  he  presented
    before the Immigration Judge, and referred in particular to a paragraph
    which reads as follows:

        "The appellant contends that the principal issues for this tribunal
        to decide are:
           ...
            2. Whether on the weight  of  the  evidence  of  incident's  of
               domestic violence the H/O ought to have exercised discretion
               differently?"


      We are entirely unpersuaded that that is a reference to a  claim  that
    the marriage has broken down permanently.

14. Mr. Ukono also suggested to us that the  Immigration  Judge  could  not
    consistently find that a person was a victim of domestic  violence  and
    was still party to a marriage which had not broken down.  We regret  to
    say that we are unable to accept that  submission  either.   It  is  an
    unfortunate fact that many victims of domestic violence  persist  in  a
    violent relationship rather than allowing it to be  treated  as  having
    broken down.

15.  We  therefore  find  no  irrationality  in  the  Immigration   Judge's
    conclusion; nor do we find that this issue was properly raised or dealt
    with in grounds of appeal.  In the circumstances we see no  reason  for
    interfering with the Immigration Judge's  conclusion  on  the  evidence
    before her that the marriage had not broken down.   For  those  reasons
    that the error of law which we  identify  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
    treatment of the question whether the  sponsor  was,  at  the  relevant
    time, settled in the United Kingdom is one which was  not  material  to
    her  determination.   Her  determination  dismissing  the  appeal  must
    accordingly stand.










                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT
                                                             Date:
