
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
                                            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


 SL (Unmarried mother with mixed race child) Azerbaijan CG [2013] UKUT 00046
                                    (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 27 January 2012 and 16 April 2012          |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FREEMAN
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between

                             S L (1st appellant)
                             D L (2nd appellant)

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

   1.   Azerbaijan is a country with high levels of corruption and there  is
      clear evidence that political dissent is not tolerated.
   2.   There is nothing to  indicate  that  the  State  would  in  any  way
      penalise unmarried mothers (approximately 10% of mothers) or those who
      have mixed race children. There are in place some  support  mechanisms
      for single parents.
   3.   In order to access benefits,  accommodation  or  work,  a  residence
      permit (a propiska) is required. There is  nothing  to  indicate  that
      Azerbaijanis who have lost their propiska would be unable to obtain  a
      replacement. Children  have  access  to  education.    There  is  some
      evidence that  Government officials  may  require blat - a  system  of
      favours,  from those who need to obtain housing or other benefits  but
      there is nothing to  suggest that  that system is universal and  would
      mean that those who refused to offer  blat  would  be  shut  out  from
      accommodation, schooling or other benefits.
   4.   Although the Azerbaijani Government has  ratified  most  Conventions
      relating to human rights and the compliance with the norms therein  is
      improving, the reality is that the improvement is from a low  starting
      point. Many NGOs dealing with human rights exist in Baku and there  is
      also an Ombudsman to whom complaints can be made.
   5.   Although in the early 1990's there was discrimination against  those
      of Russian ethnicity   the situation for them was normalised by  1996.
      Ethnic Russians make up approximately 8% of the population.  Prejudice
      may still exist but 80% of Ethnic Russians are in work - only slightly
      fewer than those in work in the population as a whole (83.7%).
   6.   There is some discrimination against Christians but there is freedom
      for Christians to practice their religion.
   7.   Azerbaijani society, particularly in rural areas, is traditional and
      attitudes to women are conservative - nevertheless  approximately  10%
      of mothers are unmarried.   Family support  networks  (krisha)  are  a
      strong feature of family life and benefit family members, for instance
      when obtaining work.
   8.   Although  the  concept  of  family  honour  among  more  traditional
      families in Azerbaijan (namus) exists there  is  nothing  to  indicate
      that there is a real risk of honour killings or other ill-treatment of
      those who are considered by members of their families to have  brought
      dishonour on the family. Nor is there any indication that there  would
      not be a sufficiency of protection for those women.
   9.   Azerbaijan is a traditional society and those who  do  not  fit  in,
      such  as  those  of  mixed  race  may  well  face  discrimination  and
      prejudice.  Armenians and Lezghins are  particularly  likely  to  face
      discrimination.
  10. There is nothing to indicate that a  single  parent  without  parental
      support or her child would face treatment which would either amount to
      persecution or cross the threshold of Article 3 ill treatment.



Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr J Collins, of Counsel instructed by Messrs
Montagues
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   Ms SL is the mother of the second appellant.  In this determination  we
    refer to the first appellant as "the appellant".  They are citizens  of
    Azerbaijan.  They appeal against decisions of the  Secretary  of  State
    made on 6 August 2009 to remove and to refuse  asylum.   Their  appeals
    were heard  by  Immigration  Judge  Malins  on  25  November  2009  and
    dismissed.  Applications for reconsideration were then made.  An  order
    for reconsideration was made by Senior Immigration Judge Jordan  on  11
    January 2010 and on 24 March 2010 His Honour Judge Pearl, sitting as  a
    Judge of the Upper Tribunal, found that there was a material  error  of
    law in the determination of Immigration Judge Malins ("the judge").  In
    his decision he indicated that this appeal should come before the Upper
    Tribunal as a possible country guidance case.

2.   The appellant arrived in Britain on 22 October 2004  and  travelled  to
    Antigua on 27 December 2004.  She returned  on  9  January  2005.   Her
    leave to enter expired on 21 April 2005.  The appellant overstayed.  In
    2007 she gave birth to D, the second appellant.   Her  application  for
    asylum was made on 13 July 2009.

3.   The basis of the appellant's claim was that  she  feared  returning  to
    Azerbaijan because her family had told her that she would be killed and
    that her son would face discrimination because he was of mixed  race  -
    her son's father was "black".  She  was  of  Russian  ethnicity  and  a
    Christian.

4.     The judge appeared to find that the appellant was credible in so  far
    as what she said her family had said to her but did not accept that the
    appellant would face persecution on return.  She  did  not  accept  the
    conclusions in a report by Mr Robert Chenciner which was before her.

5.   Senior Immigration Judge Jordan ordered reconsideration  on  the  basis
    that the judge had not  provided  adequate  reasons  for  rejecting  Mr
    Chenciner's evidence.  That indeed was the reason that His Honour Judge
    Pearl found a material error of  law  in  the  determination.   In  his
    decision, which is at annex 2 hereto, he  referred  to  Mr  Chenciner's
    report which had stated:-

         "... The main risk  appears  to  me  to  be  from  the  appellant's
         traditional family in the form of a punishment to the appellant and
         her son for besmirching family honour according to  adat  customary
         law.  In her case she risks severe beating or being put to death."


    In his decision His Honour Judge  Pearl  indicated  that  it  might  be
    appropriate for this appeal to be used as a country  guidance  case  as
    this appeal  was  "the  first  of  its  kind"  and  that  it  would  be
    appropriate to hear evidence from Mr Robert Chenciner. The  appeal  was
    then listed as a country guidance case before us.  Before  the  hearing
    Mr Chenciner  prepared a second report  and he gave  oral  evidence  at
    the hearing.




6.   The first report of Mr Chenciner is dated 30 September 2009.  That  was
    the report before the judge and  before  His  Honour  Judge  Pearl.   A
    second report was prepared for the hearing before us on 27 January.  At
    the end of the first day of hearing and after we had heard  submissions
    from both representatives  Mr Collins indicated that he wished to  make
    further written submissions.  These were received at the  beginning  of
    February but with them  was  included  a  document  from  Mr  Chenciner
    entitled "Further submissions re asylum appeal of  Mrs  S  L"  and  are
    referred to herein as the third report.




Evidence: First and second reports of Mr Robert Chenciner.

7.   Mr Chenciner is well  known  for  his  reports  on  conditions  in  the
    countries of the Caucasus to which he has travelled  over  many  years.
    He was, however, last in Azerbaijan in 2003.  In paragraph 1.2  of  his
    first  report,  he  gave  his   gloss   on   the   appellant's   family
    circumstances, stating that after her father had been  killed  in  1991
    her mother had remarried an ethnic Azeri Muslim and converted to  Islam
    with the appellant's upbringing changing from Christian to Muslim "with
    strict regulation of her as a daughter".  He noted, however,  that  she
    continued to attend a Lutheran church until she  had  left  Azerbaijan.
    He said that the appellant had two brothers, the  eldest,  S,  being  a
    strict Muslim, and the youngest, O, being a Christian (he had  in  fact
    transposed their names).  He noted that the  appellant  said  that  her
    step-father worked in "offshore oil gas industry  metal  construction",
    her eldest brother worked in the  fish  industry  and  her  younger  in
    furniture construction.  Her mother had worked as a nursery teacher.

8.   Having referred to the appellant's relationship  with  D's  father,  he
    then described the appearance of  the  various  ethnic  groups  in  the
    Caucasus.

9.   In paragraph 2.1.1 he stated that in Azerbaijan, as in other  Caucasian
    countries, marriage was important as re-affirming order in society  and
    clan structures.  Initial negotiations were controlled by  parents  and
    if the prospective bride or groom wished to refuse marriage, that  must
    be  done  early  on  in  the  negotiations.   Wedding  festivities  are
    expensive and the status and future of both families were linked  to  a
    good marriage.  He went on to say:-

         "Traditional  Azeri  families  reflect  a  macho  male  patriarchal
         society and if a daughter were to upset the rules of  conduct,  the
         social consequences for both families is shame  and  disgrace  with
         possible violent reprisals according  to  customary  law  based  on
         avenging family honour."

10.  He added:-

         "With  regard  to  the  appellant,  her  step-father  and   Islamic
         religious half-brother, following her widowed  mother's  remarriage
         and conversion to Islam, would view having a child outside  wedlock
         as a family  insult,  especially  if  that  child  were  noticeably
         different i.e. black.  It is a disgrace against the  family  honour
         and a denial of the important societal process of marriage in union
         with another suitable Azeri family.  The result is that they  would
         want to take violent continual revenge on her, even  after  divorce
         for dishonouring their name and  losing  the  family  a  structural
         kinship opportunity as well as a possible substantial sum of  money
         in dowry.  Her mere presence in Azerbaijan  with  her  child  would
         likely be seen as a constant reminder of their perceived  dishonour
         and they would do whatever was necessary to remove her, to beat her
         and punish her, or to prevent her working or  otherwise  leading  a
         normal life - and even kill her."

     Having referred to a book  which  he  called  a  "Caucasian  Romeo  and
    Juliet" published in 1937 which set out the tragic  consequences  of  a
    mixed love match he then referred to the planned murder of Sardar Bibi,
    a British born ethnic Pakistani, in January 2003, who was killed by her
    cousin because she persuaded her  father  to  allow  a  love  match  as
    opposed to an arranged marriage.

11.  He said:-

         "In terms of local customary law having an illegitimate black child
         would be a festering and public source of disgrace to  the  family.
         Accordingly by traditional unwritten rules,  her  stepfather  would
         kill her with impunity unless she fled away from the community."

     He then referred to an Institute for War and  Peace  Reporting  article
    written in August 2006 (Social taboos are slowly being lifted on  women
    marrying men from other countries. 9  August  2006  Samira  Ahmedbeili,
    CRS Non 352, IWPR) and said that there was a  long  way  to  go  before
    international marriages were accepted in Azerbaijan.

12.  He referred to a 2001 "comment from Azerbaijan which stated that  Azeri
    women found themselves  under  tight  societal  restrictions  regarding
    dating, marriage and divorce".  Young people and especially young women
    are expected to live at home and with their parents until  they  marry.
    The restrictions on young women are strongly reinforced by  the  social
    fear of what older men and women would think and say about that.

13.  He referred to a report entitled "Women's issues, update 22  June  2004
    Fact Sheet Azerbaijan at a glance" which stated that divorce was  legal
    in Azerbaijan but society would not let people  divorce  if  they  kept
    living together even if the  marriage  was  pretty  much  finished  and
    moreover that Baku-ites  estimated  that  about  60%  of  young  people
    married  for  love  while  40%  found  themselves  in  family  arranged
    marriages.  The percentage of arranged  marriages  was  higher  in  the
    outlying areas of the country.

14.  He added:-

         "Comments on traditional life in rural Azerbaijan - as  opposed  to
         Baku the relatively cosmopolitan capital where she  lives  -  would
         apparently apply to her and her child not being accepted, were  she
         to relocate."

15.  He then referred to the harassment the appellant  would  be  likely  to
    suffer saying that she might be insulted if she went shopping with  her
    child with terms such as "prostitute" and that she would face  societal
    discrimination.

16.  He referred to the blat favour system  which  would  mean  that  as  an
    unprotected woman the appellant would frequently be expected  to  grant
    sexual favours in return for state co-operation at a local  level.   He
    referred to a report which said that about  30%  of  women  experienced
    sexual harassment at work, 55% of  all  women  had  experienced  sexual
    harassment and in 15% of the cases the perpetrator was the stepfather.

17.  He then referred to the adat or  customary  law  stating  that  it  was
    likely to be followed  by  her  traditional  Islamic  half-brother  and
    stepfather. As she had not followed her mother in converting to  Islam,
    she had had a child out of wedlock and was not married and that as  her
    son was "recognisably half black" which would mean that,  even  if  she
    married an Azeri, it would not disguise her son's ethnicity. He went on
    to say:

           "She has accordingly besmirched her stepfather's [large]  family
           and clan honour.  Accordingly by  traditional  unwritten  rules,
           [adat] his family or in-laws or other linked agents would punish
           her or kill her with impunity unless  she  fled  away  from  the
           community e.g. Azerbaijan".

18.  He stated that in Azerbaijan there had been a return to  a  traditional
    customary law against a background of government corruption  and  often
    impotence.

19.  He explained that adat had originally arisen in isolated  regions  such
    as mountains, steppes or desert where there were "endogamous  societies
    and lawlessness".  As it had become more developed it had been  adopted
    as a parallel law system especially in areas where there  was  a  power
    vacuum caused by conflicts and wars, generally in villages and agrarian
    societies.  With urbanisation it had evolved in the towns.

20.  He then referred  to  Georgia  accepting  Russian  "protection"  before
    stating that before their conquest of the Caucasus in 1859 the Russians
    had defeated the charismatic Imam Shamyl from  Dagestan  who  had  been
    unable to impose Sharia law over customary law.

21.  He stated that adat was based  on  honour  and  applied  to  a  defined
    kinship group - the "sib" which is smaller than a clan but larger  than
    a family.  The legal framework of adat was based on "an eye for an eye"
    and was usually interpreted as material compensation  for  damage  "for
    example a cow, but can also result in killings".

22.  He then referred to blood feuds which could arise from:

           "an untoward advance to a woman, disgrace  of  family  honour  by
          (for example a  scandalous  broken  wedding  agreement,  or  bride
          kidnapping, usually by a suitor who could  not  afford  the  bride
          price or  because  he  was  from   a  different  and  unacceptable
          religion or ethnicity much of which may apply here"


    before going on to say that a rare positive aspect of the Soviet regime
    was the abolition  of the blood feud in the  Caucasus.

23.  Mr Chenciner then returned  to  the  position  of  ethnic  Russians  in
    Azerbaijan stating that  before  1991  they  had  held  most  sensitive
    civilian jobs.   However,  thereafter  there  was  an  exit  of  ethnic
    Russians from Azerbaijan until 1996, when that exit stopped and life in
    the Republic had returned back to normal.  He stated however that "Over
    the past ten years the number of  Russians  living  in  Azerbaijan  has
    fallen to 141,700 or 1.8% of the population from  a  figure  which  was
    thought to be approximately 5.3%  of  the  population  in  1989.   Most
    ethnic Russians live in Baku.  It is said on government estimates  they
    made up 8% of the population of 2  million.   He  indicated  that  many
    young  ethnic  Russians  would,  on  graduation  from  high  school  or
    university  leave  for  Russia  where  there  were  greater  employment
    opportunities.

24.  He referred to anti-Russian prejudice and the fact that Russian was  no
    longer the main language and said that  Azerbaijanis  were  justifiably
    anti-Russian.

25.  He also stated that:-

         "As with anti-Armenian racism in  Azerbaijan  where  virtually  all
         Armenians have left there are no  reports  of  anti-African  racism
         because there are  virtually  no  black  people  there.   The  only
         reports of black  people  in  Azerbaijan  are  foreigners  who  are
         temporary residents - a few students in the  State  Oil  Institute,
         perhaps a few other students, and a few diplomats.   One  man  from
         the Sudan was  murdered  in  a  mass  shooting  in  the  State  Oil
         Institute on 30 April 2009."

26.  He went on to refer to anti-Arab prejudice.

27.  He gave details of the propiska registration and relocation system  and
    stated:-

         "If you are moving address, then your local authority  is  required
         to see your previous residence permit [sic] ...  If Miss L were now
         to live without  propiska  she  would  be  constantly  stopped  and
         detained by police.  Criminalised and outlawed, she would be denied
         accommodation,  care  or  education  for   her   son,   employment,
         healthcare and police protection such as it is.


         She stated in a  reply  question  2.6  that  she  had  an  internal
         passport but lost it.  If she returned to  her  local  registration
         office, called by the Russian name ovir, she would be given a  copy
         after explaining how it was lost  and  paying  charges  and  likely
         bribes.  If you don't have an internal passport  you  can't  get  a
         propiska stamp on it.  To get an internal passport you need to give
         basic information: married/divorced;  name  of  husband;  name  and
         ethnicities of parents.   The  catch  22  is  used  by  Azerbaijani
         authorities to prevent Azeri  refugees  from  Armenia  and  Nagorno
         Karabakh and others from the Caucasus [such as Chechens]  -  unless
         they pay bribes - from registering or getting some legal status  as
         an IDP or forced migrant."

28.  He added:-

         "Miss L would likely meet with no cooperation from the  Azerbaijani
         authorities, who were not even giving propiskas to Azeri  refugees.
         The only exceptions are made to wealthy businessmen  known  to  the
         authorities who pay large bribes to officials.   This  criminalises
         the businessmen and can be used for control and  extortion  by  the
         authorities."

29.  He commented that given that the appellant was a Lutheran Christian  it
    would be a contributory factor in  that  "Police  would  likely  ignore
    requests from a Protestant Christian if she asked for protection from a
    family blood feud or honour killing".  Having set out  details  of  the
    persecution  of  Baptists  in  Azerbaijan   and   other   converts   to
    Christianity he referred to the position of Muslims in  Azerbaijan  who
    were repressed during the Soviet period and said that this had  created
    deep prejudice against Orthodox Christians  who  although  discouraged,
    were allowed to worship.

30.  With regard to employment which was controlled by the state he stated:-



        "a denial of employment is another form of State discrimination  in
        Azerbaijan, usually used  against  perceived  oppositionists.  Most
        employment in Azerbaijan is linked to state  enterprises  or  local
        government.  This would likely affect the appellant as a  Christian
        ethnic Russian who cannot speak Azeri."


31.  He referred to meeting a Scottish lawyer who told  him  that  virtually
    all employment in Azerbaijan was controlled by government agencies with
    the exception of specialists employed by  international  oil  companies
    and associated businesses.

32.  He commented that  it  was  plausible  the  appellant's  son  would  be
    bullied at nursery and school because he is black  and  his  mother  is
    Russian and unmarried.  He stated that this was similar to the bullying
    of part-Armenian children.

33.  In section 4 of the report he summarised the  appellant's  position  as
    follows:-

         "To repeat the main risk appears to me to be from  the  appellant's
         traditional family in the form of a punishment to the appellant and
         her son for besmirching family honour according to  adat  customary
         law.  In her case she risks severe beating or being put  to  death.
         If she returned without her young son, i.e. if she  abandoned  him,
         then there would be a lower level of risk  to  her.   The  risk  is
         increased because the corrupt police would be unwilling  or  unable
         to protect her or her son for a combination of reasons: her Russian
         ethnicity, her Lutheran religion, her son being  black,  their  not
         being able to speak  Azeri.   She  is  at  further  risk  from  the
         traditionally minded police and public as a woman on her own with a
         noticeably illegitimate child and a climate  of  sexual  harassment
         and in a society where domestic violence is  considered  a  private
         family matter.  The child is at risk of psychological abuse and  of
         further physical bullying in school in a corrupt  education  system
         and, in the street, because of his colour and the rarity  of  black
         people in Azerbaijan.  While she lived at home she  had  protection
         from her step-father, an ethnic Azeri, which has  now  disappeared.
         She and her child do not speak Azeri, so if  returned,  because  of
         the compulsory Azeri language laws, she would be unable  to  get  a
         state-linked job,  where  the  state  is  the  main  employer,  and
         education would be in Azeri."

34.  Attached to his  report  were  appendices  dealing  with  human  rights
    setbacks in Azerbaijan, police corruption, prison conditions, the  blat
    system and lack of peace prospects for Nagorno-Karabakh.

35.  He then  commented  on  anti-Armenian  racism  in  Azerbaijan  and  the
    position of Azeri Internally displaced persons (IDPs)  who  were  being
    expelled from Nagorno-Karabakh and Armenia.

36.  With regard  to  the  political  system  he  referred  to  the  virtual
    dictatorship of President Aliyev.

37.  Shortly before the hearing Mr Chenciner had produced an updated  report
    endorsing his previous report. In a section  which  referred  to  black
    visitors he stated there were very  few  black  people  in  Azerbaijan,
    there  were  virtually  no  black  visitors  and  no  black   permanent
    residents.

38.   He referred to the position of a black footballer for whom a  football
    club had been unable to obtain a work permit, before noting that  there
    were a number of Azerbaijani basketball players who appeared to be Afro-
    American.

Oral evidence of Mr Chenciner on 27 January 2012.
39.  In his oral evidence, Mr  Chenciner  referred  to  a  report  from  the
    European Commission against Racism and  Intolerance  (ECRI)  which  had
    stated that, in Azerbaijan, progress had  been  made  in  a  number  of
    fields.  He stated that he accepted there had been some improvement but
    stated that progress related to things to which the  government  agreed
    but had not necessarily implemented.  He  stated  that  there  remained
    virtually institutionalised racism against Armenians which  meant  that
    other forms of racism were likely to thrive.

40.  He was referred to the position of the Ombudsman and said that  matters
    that were referred to him were merely referred back to the police.   He
    then went on to say that  the  Lezghins  considered  themselves  second
    class citizens and did not complain about discrimination against  them.
    However, they came from a remote area.

41.  Mr Chenciner added that the authorities took the view that  if  matters
    which were problematical were not recorded,  they  could  pretend  that
    there was no racism and would therefore be able to get foreign aid.  He
    accepted, however, that Azerbaijan had substantial  oil  revenues,  but
    stated that these  were  often  siphoned  off  by  the  family  of  the
    President.

42.  He referred to the inability of  the  appellant  to  move  to  an  area
    outside Baku stating that in other areas there was  great  pressure  on
    facilities.  Ethnic Azeris would obtain preference in any event.

43.  He emphasised that in order to obtain work  blat,  that  is  a  favour,
    would be required by the person giving the appellant work.  He referred
    also to krisha protection - the protection which a woman would normally
    have as part of a family.

44.  He said that the Azerbaijani State Statistical Committee's  report  has
    stated in  2009  11.5%  of  live  births  have  been  born  outside  an
    officially registered marriage.

45.  He was referred to the letter from the Foreign and Commonwealth  Office
    dated 14 January 2011 which stated that:-

         "RE: "Is there any evidence that single mothers with a  mixed  race
         child (Caucasian/black) would  suffer  societal  discrimination  or
         that the mixed parentage child would?


         In general it should  be  noted  that  Azerbaijan  acceded  to  the
         Convention on  the  Elimination  of  All  Forms  of  Discrimination
         against  Women  in  July  1995  and  Articles  25  and  26  of  the
         Azerbaijani constitution declares all people as equals.
         The advice from  our  Embassy  in  Baku  is  that  it  is  socially
         acceptable for Azerbaijani's to marry a non-ethnic Azeri,  but  the
         majority of these marriages are to  Turkish,  Russian,  British  or
         other Muslim Middle Eastern Nationalities. Marriages to  Black  and
         Chinese minorities are less common as there are very few black  and
         ethnic minorities  in Azerbaijan, and therefore children  of  mixed
         race are rare."


46.  He stated that it was difficult to form any  idea  of  the  climate  of
    racism in Azerbaijan as there were so few  "blacks"  there  but  taking
    into account the position of the Armenians, the few  Yazidi  Kurds  and
    other ethnic groups the situation was not good.  He emphasised that  it
    would be difficult for the appellant to move to a remote  area  as  she
    would have to de-register and then re-register.  Moreover, outside Baku
    society was more traditional and  many  ethnic  Azeris,  from  Nagorno-
    Karabakh and Armenia would be  higher  up  the  queue.  He  added  that
    Turkish spouses were certainly welcome and that many Russians had  been
    in Azerbaijan for some time - mixed marriages had  been  encouraged  in
    Soviet times.  He emphasised that children born  outside  wedlock  were
    uncommon in Azerbaijan and said that other children and teachers  would
    ostracise a black child and that  teachers  would  encourage  that.  He
    accepted that there were Chinese in the Caucasus  but  said  that  they
    would mostly live in their own barracks and indeed  those  working  for
    BP, in the oil industry, would live in their own compounds.

47.  He was referred to the Freedom House report which indicated  the  steps
    which the appellant could take to obtain help  but  he  said  that  the
    appellant would have difficulty in approaching the authorities for help
    because of corruption and that the authorities would  not  help  anyone
    without some return.  Complaints of  misbehaviour  by  the  authorities
    would be ignored.

48.  He was referred to evidence from NGOs  including  those  in  the  human
    rights sector.  He said that they would listen  to  the  appellant  but
    they would be unable to give her any effective  help  and  indeed  they
    mainly assisted Azeris.  Their mandate was to assist  Azeris,  refugees
    and internally displaced persons.

49.  He was referred to the ECRI report  but  said  that  he  believed  that
    there would be some censorship by the ECRI - they  would  not  want  to
    compromise themselves.  Although groups  such  as  the  Roma  or  other
    minorities were not recognised as having particular needs, the  reality
    was that the prejudice against Armenians led  to  a  climate  of  state
    sponsored racism.

50.  Russians, he stated, would have difficulty in education  because  Azeri
    was the state language, although Russian  was  still  the  language  of
    commerce in Baku.

51.  It was put to him that  the  appellant's  stepfather  had  allowed  the
    appellant to travel to Turkey  by  herself  and  indeed  to  travel  to
    England.  He stated that he would probably not like her travelling  but
    if she had not converted it might not be an issue.  He indicated that a
    lot of young women from the Caucasus would travel to Istanbul to shop.

3rd  report of Mr Robert Chenciner
52.  In this report Mr Chenciner stated that he had  been  asked  to  submit
    references about the existence of a traditional patriarchal society  in
    Azerbaijan.  Having stated that access in Azerbaijan for ethnographical
    fieldwork was limited because it was a police  state,  he  referred  to
    fieldwork which had taken place since 1991, after the collapse  of  the
    USSR,  which  referred  to  the  survival  of  traditional  patriarchal
    society.  He stated that that fieldwork supported his reports.

53.  He first referred to a footnote in a paper of 2002 by a  Fatima  Zafiri
    on the importance of honour  "namu"  in  Azerbaijan,   with  regard  to
    women's misbehaviour, especially sexual misbehaviour which was  thought
    to bring  shame  and  dishonour  not  only  on  her  but  on  her  male
    protectors.  He stated that that had  been  noted  in  other  writings,
    including that of a Farideh Heyat whose report, published in  2006  had
    referred to the notion of namus regarding women's sexual conduct  being
    "still strong in seemingly cosmopolitan Baku".

54.  He referred to a report from a Nayereh Tohidi, whose fieldwork in  1991
    had been published in 1996 and indicated that Azeri  men  "held  on  to
    anything  associated  with   sexuality   and  namoos  (honour)   as  an
    essential part of their national identity, a Soviet  legacy".  He  then
    referred to a report by Dr Tamara Dragadze regarding her  fieldwork  in
    Azerbaijan in 1988-1991.   He  stated  that  her  report  had  examined
    whether or not a resurgent Islam had been responsible  for  traditional
    disadvantages of women and that she  had  concluded  that  it  had.  Dr
    Tamara Dragadze, had emphasised "further education discrimination" from
    early arranged marriages.

55.  A United Nations  Population  Fund  Report  referred  to  a  number  of
    patriarchal traditions, cultural assumptions about gender roles  having
    emerged and then referred to the conclusions of the  Azerbaijan  Gender
    Information Centre which had stated that in almost all party programmes
    women were regarded primarily as mothers and guardians of tradition.

56.  Section 3 of Mr Chenciner's further report referred to  recent  reports
    of "honour killings" involving Azeris "in Baku,  in  country  parts  of
    Azerbaijan, Russia and Germany".  He only referred to one  incident  in
    Baku which took place on 2 November 2010 when a Baku resident, aged 28,
    had "knifed" his sister.  Mr Chenciner stated that  the  man  had  been
    immediately arrested and had confessed that he had committed the murder
    because of "honour".

57.  There was a report of an 82  year  old  mother  and  her  54  year  old
    daughter being killed in Serirabad about 170 kms south  west  of  Baku.
    It was stated that the police  were  investigating  the  cause  because
    there were no apparent witnesses.

58.  In the Jalilabad region of Azerbaijan a man had  killed  his  daughter,
    stabbed her husband and four other  members  of  her  family  during  a
    domestic quarrel in September 2011.

59.  Mr Chenciner stated that an "honour killing" had been  reported  in  St
    Petersburg and that an unnamed immigrant from Azerbaijan  living  there
    had been charged in April 2009 for hiring  two  other  Azerbaijanis  to
    kill his 21 year old daughter for wearing a miniskirt.   An  Azeri  had
    also been sentenced in a court in Klebe in Germany as an accomplice  to
    a Kurdish father who,  in March 2009,  had murdered  his  20  year  old
    daughter, because she had lost her virginity,  in an  "honour  killing"
    in spite of earlier attempts by German social workers to  protect  her.
    The girl's brother had apparently lured her with an Azeri friend  to  a
    lonely country road near the Dutch border before killing her.

60.  He then referred to asylum being granted to  an  Azeri  gay  artist  in
    France  in  2011  who  feared  an  "honour  killing"  because  he   was
    homosexual.

61.  Finally, he referred to complaints  from  Azerbaijani  officials  about
    the ECRI reports in which an Azerbaijani official had called reports of
    intolerance as absurd.

62.  He said  that  he  would  describe  the  appellant's  stepfather  as  a
    societal  Islamic  man  -  he  reached  this  conclusion  because   the
    appellant's stepfather worked in the oil industry and he said  that  it
    was probable that he would have liked the appellant to convert but  was
    used in the Soviet Union "to dealing with things as they are".

63.  He stated that adat would have  nothing  to  do  with  Islam  as  such.
    Russians who had lived in Azerbaijan would get "Caucasianised".

64.  He was referred to his comment in his report that in  Dagestan  he  had
    learned that around about 1993 a girl had been murdered by  her  father
    for talking to a boy.  He stated that the society was a "clan  society"
    and that the grapevine would be very active.  He said that everybody in
    Baku would ask about you wherever you went.

65.  With regard to the appellant finding work, he stated  that  blat  would
    be likely to be required.  He accepted the medium  of  schooling  under
    the Soviet Union had been Russian and that Azeri had only been  adopted
    as the language for education in 2001.


Other background evidence.

66.  We have considered the reports of Mr  Chenciner  and  the    background
    documentary evidence before us which comprise, inter  alia,  the  State
    Department reports for 2009 and 2010, the Freedom House report "Freedom
    in the World, Azerbaijan" 2010, the Freedom  House  report  "Nation  in
    transit" 2011,  the  US  State  Department  report  on  trafficking  in
    Persons, 2011, the ECRI report of May 2011, the UN report on the rights
    of the Child March 2011 and the evidence from the  British  Embassy  in
    Baku. A full list of the background documentation we have considered is
    at Annex 2 of this  determination.   We  will  address  Mr  Chenciner's
    evidence below but it will assist if we first summarise our  evaluation
    of the other background evidence.

67.   Having  considered  the  State  Department  reports  we  accept   that
    Azerbaijan has a "democratic deficit" and that there  are  restrictions
    on  freedom  of  speech,  prison  conditions  are  poor  and  there  is
    considerable corruption. We, however, note that the 2010 report  refers
    to the major local human rights NGOs as being the Association  for  the
    Protection   of  Women's  Rights,  and  a  number   of   human   rights
    organisations.

68. The section in that report on women refers to  rape  being  illegal  and
    carrying a maximum 15 years sentence and refers to cases of rape  being
    brought against 15 persons as well  as  other  cases  of  gender  based
    violence being brought.  However, there  are  no  government  sponsored
    programmes for  victims of rape or domestic violence. The report states
    that:

           "Women nominally enjoy the same legal rights  as  men;  however,
           societal discrimination was a problem. Traditional social  norms
           and  lagging  economic  development  in  the  country's   region
           continued to restrict women's roles in the  economy,  and  there
           were reports that women had difficulty  exercising  their  legal
           rights   due   to    gender    discrimination.     Women    were
           underrepresented in  high-level  jobs,  including  top  business
           positions. A local NGO reported that women's  salaries  were  on
           average 70 percent  of men's salaries."

    What we consider to be telling is that  the  State  Department  reports
    makes no reference to the  "adat"  system  nor  to  any  incidences  of
    "honour  killings".


69. We reach a similar conclusion  when  reading  the  US  State  Department
    report on Trafficking in Persons, 2011. There are clearly  attempts  by
    the Government of Azerbaijan to stop  the  exploitation  of  women  and
    provide some support for those who have been trafficked.   The  reality
    of course is that this appellant  has  not  been  trafficked  and  that
    report is not relevant to her situation. We note that  the  EU  working
    paper on the European Neighbourhood Policy refers to 50 NGOs addressing
    women's issues, the rights of children  to  free  education,  which  is
    compulsory up to the age of  17,  and  minimum  free  health  care  for
    children although the US State Department Report of 2010 refers to  the
    standard of education and health care for children as being low.    The
    Data Base of gender focal points in Azerbaijan  refers  to  64  women's
    organisations including a number concerned with the protection of women
    from violence.   The 2007 report on the implementation of that  policy,
    refers to the establishing of women's counselling  centres  and  states
    that freedom to practise religion is largely secured.

70. The Freedom House "Nation in Transit 2011: Azerbaijan" report refers  to
    the ruling elite strengthening their authoritarian grip on the  country
    in 2010. It refers to the judiciary as being inefficient and rife  with
    corruption  although  judicial  independence  was  guaranteed  by   the
    legislation. It refers to effective stifling of debate in the media. It
    contains nothing on the  position  of  women  in  Azerbaijani  society.
    Other documents provided again made no reference to the place of  women
    in Azerbaijani society. The Amnesty International  report  "the  Spring
    that never blossomed" of  November  2011  refers  to  the  stifling  of
    political dissent. The documentary evidence before us also contained  a
    number of UN reports submitted by the  Azerbaijani  government  on  the
    implementation of the Convention on the Rights of the  Child  in  March
    2011. The ECRI report of May 2011 refers to measures to combat  racism,
    particularly regarding the position of minorities and the role  of  the
    Ombudsman in dealing with cases of racism and discrimination.  Detailed
    reports dealing with the implementation of the aims of  the  Convention
    on the rights of the Child, set out the  various  steps  taken  by  the
    Azerbaijani authorities to implement those provisions and records  some
    success in educational provision. A report   from  the  Office  of  the
    United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) "Committee on
    the rights of the child reviews report of Azerbaijan" dated 17  January
    2012, indicated that  the Committee Member  acting  as  Rapporteur  for
    Azerbaijan, Sanphasit Koompraphant, had congratulated Azerbaijan on its
    new legislation  on  child  protection   and  social  care   but   "had
    regretted the absence of a  competent national mechanism  to  supervise
    and coordinate  government   agencies  on  the  implementation  of  the
    Convention".  The report  also  comments  that  forced  early  marriage
    deprived some children of their rights.

71.   The European Commission  against  Racism  and  Intolerance  report  on
    Azerbaijan dated May 2011, referred to progress being made since  their
    previous report in 2007 and stated that the role of the  Ombudsman  was
    becoming increasingly well known. The school curriculum now catered for
    minorities, including teaching in   Azerbaijani, Russian and  Georgian.
    The report referred to improvements in access to health  care  for  the
    entire population.  It did refer to discrimination  against  people  of
    Armenian origin which had led to some of them facing discrimination  in
    finding work,  and  to  landlords  who  were  reluctant  to  let  their
    properties  to  Chechens.  A  reference  was  made  to  abuse  by   law
    enforcement officials in their dealings with minorities.

72.  We  have  considered  the  report  by  Nayereh  Tohidi  on   the   "The
    Intersection of Gender,  Ethnicity and Islam in Azerbaijan". We  accept
    that it refers to discrimination against women (although we  noted  the
    comment that "nevertheless men do help with domestic  chores")  and  we
    accept that there is discrimination in the work place.



Submissions made by Mr. Tufan on 27 January.

73.  In summing up, Mr Tufan relied on a skeleton  argument  which  referred
    to a number of EU and UN initiatives in Azerbaijan and stated there was
    clear evidence of increased tourism in Azerbaijan, particularly  around
    Baku.  He referred to the partnership and cooperation agreement between
    the EU and Azerbaijan signed in 1996 and ratified by Britain  in  1998.
    That plan referred to economic and political cooperation between the EU
    and Azerbaijan and he referred to part of the  agreement  referring  to
    continued access to high quality education for all.   There  were  also
    plans to enhance agricultural and rural development.

74.   Mr  Tufan  referred  to  Azerbaijan  taking  part  in   the   European
    Neighbourhood Policy with the European Union which set  objectives  for
    partnership with neighbouring countries based on the strong  commitment
    to shared values and political, economic, and institutional reforms.

75.  With regards to the treatment of  women  in  Azerbaijan,  the  skeleton
    argument referred to the Treaty for the Rights of Women (known  as  the
    Convention on the Elimination of All Forms  of  Discrimination  against
    Women) to which Azerbaijan was  a  party.   Under  Article  18  of  the
    Convention, Azerbaijan had submitted a report regarding  the  treatment
    of women.

76.  He referred to a UN Report covering  the  period  1996  to  2004  which
    referred to the definition  of  discrimination  against  women  in  the
    Azerbaijani constitution and the  legal  protections  given  to  female
    employees.  He emphasised that it  appeared  that  Azerbaijan  had  now
    signed virtually all international conventions  designed  to  eliminate
    all forms of discrimination against women and to grant  them  universal
    rights and freedoms.  He referred to  Article  6  of  the  law  of  the
    Republic of Azerbaijan which stated that all children had equal  rights
    and referred to the US State Department  Report  which  sets  out  that
    education is compulsory, free and universal until the age of  18.   The
    State Department Report had stated that:-

         "The law requires the government to protect the rights of  children
         with regard to education and healthcare.  In  practice,  government
         programmes provide a low standard of education and  healthcare  for
         children."

77.  He pointed out that Azerbaijan had signed  the  UN  Convention  on  the
    rights of the child in July 1992 and later  ratified  the  Convention's
    optional Protocols.

78.  With regard to the  treatment  of  ethnic  Russians  in  Azerbaijan  he
    pointed out that there was  evidence  that  Russians  served  in  state
    bodies, in central administration as heads of administration, directors
    of city and district  police  bodies  and  that  although  the  Russian
    population in Azerbaijan was declining as Russian migrants  moved  back
    to Russia, 80%, according to the 1999  census  of  economically  active
    Russians, were employed compared to 83.7%  of  the  total  economically
    active population as evidence that Russians were coming to  terms  with
    their minority status.

79.  He referred to  the  European  Commission  Report  against  Racism  and
    Intolerance (ECRI report) of May 2011 and stated that that  showed  the
    authorities continued to support cultural activities of national/ethnic
    minorities and provide the general school curriculum in three languages
    (Azerbaijani, Russian and Georgian).  At primary school level,  several
    minority languages were also taught.  There were a  number  of  locally
    distributed newspapers published in minority languages and some  bodies
    and provisions existed for the  purpose  of  ensuring  that  the  media
    showed respect for diversity in their work.

80.  He went on to refer to the UN Report on the Convention  of  the  Rights
    of the Child dated  March  2011  which  showed  that  there  were  many
    cultures and nationalities living in Azerbaijan.   Nine  languages  had
    been taught at elementary school  level,  especially  those  of  ethnic
    minorities.  He stated that  the  European  Commission  Report  against
    Racism and Intolerance of May 2011 stated that out of 19,000 to  20,000
    offences registered each year in recent years, no  complaint  had  been
    lodged by a victim alleging that he or she had suffered  discrimination
    or racism.  Racist violence did not  appear  to  be  a  problem  within
    Azerbaijan.

81.  The skeleton argument stated that it remained the Secretary of  State's
    position that the  question  of  whether  a  single  woman  of  Russian
    ethnicity with a child born outside wedlock who  is  mixed  race  might
    endure some difficulty or hardship would  depend  on  a  case  by  case
    analysis.  Generally  speaking,  the  treatment  received  by  such  an
    individual and her child would not amount to  treatment  in  breach  of
    Article 3 or persecution.

82.  In his  further  submissions,  he  emphasised  there  was  no  evidence
    whatsoever that the appellant's stepfather would operate any system  of
    adat - he pointed  out  the  fact  that  the  appellant  had  not  been
    compelled to convert.  Moreover Baku had a population of  approximately
    1.5 million and there was no reason therefore why the appellant  should
    come to the attention of her family should she return.

Submissions made by Mr Collins on 27th January

83.  In his submissions Mr Collins emphasised that the judge had  found  the
    appellant to be credible, with a caveat which he said could only be  to
    the effect that the appellant was not credible in her  claim  that  she
    was entitled to international protection as a refugee.

84.  He referred to the appellant's comment at  interview  that  her  family
    considered that she had committed a shameful act,  that  she  had  been
    threatened and that she would be found and killed.   In  her  statement
    she had said that she feared revenge on the basis of "cultural laws and
    traditions" which was clearly a reference to adat.

85.  It was his submission that the appellant would not have  a  sufficiency
    of protection in her home area and that moreover  internal  flight  was
    not open to her. He criticised the fact that  the  respondent  had  not
    produced her own expert witness.

86.  Finally, in his written submissions he emphasised that  the  rights  of
    both appellants under Article 8 of the ECHR  had  not  been  vigorously
    argued before the judge and that at the date of the  decision  in  this
    case Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and  Immigration  Act  2009
    was not in force.  At the date of the  hearing  before  the  judge  the
    ramifications of Section 55 were not  as  clear  as  had  since  become
    apparent.  Although he referred to the judgment of the Court of  Appeal
    in AG (India) v SSHD [2011]  EWCA  Civ  1191  which  indicated  that  a
    Tribunal could make their own assessment of the rights of a child under
    Section 55 of the 2009 Act, he asked us to follow the guidance of Blake
    J in T (Section 55 BCIA 2009 - entry  clearance)  Jamaica  [2011]  UKUT
    00483.  In that it was indicated that, where there had been no  hearing
    of the substance of an appeal at all, and no findings of any kind, then
    the scheme of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act  2007  did  not
    assign the functions of primary fact finding to the Upper Tribunal.  Mr
    Tufan did not demur and we have therefore not made any finding  on  the
    rights of the appellant and D under Article 8 of the ECHR.

Submissions made by Mr Collins on 16th April.

87.  In his further submissions, Mr Collins first  addressed  the  issue  of
    internal relocation before referring back to the respondent's bundle of
    background evidence.  He referred to documents which  referred  to  the
    discriminatory treatment of all minorities and stated  how  unusual  it
    was for any single woman to live by herself let alone with a child born
    out of wedlock "and further let alone a  black/mixed  race  child"  and
    therefore he stated it  could  not  be  reasonably  expected  that  the
    appellant could live away from the family home.

88.  Referring to the fact that the judge had said that  the  appellant  had
    said that her family would find her and would kill her he asserted that
    the judge had accepted that that was what the  appellant  believed  and
    said that therefore the threat must be a real  one  and  therefore  the
    appellant, he argued, should not be expected to live in the same city.

89.  In his written submissions he went on to refer to a report from  Thomas
    Hammarberg which indicated that the situation regarding human rights in
    Azerbaijan was "far from satisfactory".  He referred then  to  a  Human
    Rights Watch Report dated 22 January 2012 which stated that Baku had  a
    long way to go to meet its international  obligations.   He  quoted  at
    length about the position of women  who  are  raped,  emphasising  that
    there were no laws on spouse abuse and no government sponsored  support
    for victims of rape.

90.  He went on to say that while  he  accepted  that  there  were  a  large
    number of NGOs operating within Azerbaijan, located in Baku, one report
    had quoted an NGO official as stating that:

         "We have all the laws  in  the  world  protecting  women's  rights,
         mostly passed by the Soviets.  But that  does  not  mean  that  all
         Azeri women live in good conditions.  He emphasised there  were  no
         government sponsored programmes for victims of violence."

91.  He then referred further to  a  claim  that  the  judiciary  "does  not
    provide a genuine mechanism to remedy violations of human, property  or
    civic rights ... the system is also rife  with  corruption  and  deeply
    inefficient" (agreed  objective  bundle  2  pages  5  to  18).   Having
    referred to an OHCHR Report, he argued that  it  was  clear  that  some
    progress in human rights had been made but that had started from a very
    low base.

92.  He referred to the ECRI report which he emphasised also indicated  that
    progress on human rights started from a low base  before  referring  to
    the second report of Mr Chenciner and  arguing  that  that  showed  the
    seriousness of  the  problems  which  the  appellant  would  face.   He
    emphasised that  the  appellant  would  face  real  problems  obtaining
    employment and housing in Baku without any patronage or "krisha".

93.  He stated it was clear that the respondent had accepted  that  being  a
    single mother of itself "may be considered scandalous by  some  outside
    Baku" and stated that the situation in Baku would be little different.

Submissions made by Mr Tufan on 16th  April

94.  In reply Mr Tufan  first  commented  on  the  fact  that  Mr  Chenciner
    referred to his third report as "further submissions" and  stated  that
    it was clear that Mr Chenciner was not acting as an unbiased expert but
    as an advocate who was producing evidence in support of the  appellant.
    He referred to Section 10 of the Practice Directions dated 10  February
    relating to expert evidence.  He asked us to note that the reference to
    adat in Mr Chenciner's original reports no longer featured in his third
    report.  He referred to the historic nature of much of the research  on
    which Mr Chenciner relied and stated that his argument that information
    did not emanate from Azerbaijan because  it  was  a  police  state  was
    unrealistic given the large number of NGOs there and indeed the  amount
    of research that had been undertaken.

95.  Having referred to the  specific  instances  of  "honour  killings"  to
    which Mr Chenciner referred, he asked us to conclude that Mr  Chenciner
    was not an expert on Azerbaijan, as he had not visited that country for
    many years.

Legal framework
96.   In considering this appeal we note the legal framework established  by
    the  Refugee  or   Person   in   Need   of   International   Protection
    (Qualification) Regulations SI2006/2525 (the "Protection  Regulations")
    and the Statement of Changes in Immigration Rules CM6918 (the  "amended
    Immigration Rules").  Together, these implement  EU  Council  Directive
    2004/83/EC on minimum standards for the qualification status  of  third
    country nationals or stateless persons or refugees or  as  persons  who
    otherwise need international protection.

97.  The  burden  lies  on  the  appellant  to  show  that,  on  return  to
    Azerbaijan, there is a real risk that she would face persecution for  a
    Refugee Convention reason or treatment contrary  to  her  rights  under
    Article 3 of the ECHR.




Discussion and conclusions

98.   In  considering  all  the  above  reports,  other  than  those  of  Mr
    Chenciner, the outstanding feature is that there  is  nothing  in  them
    which indicates  any "honour  killings"   or  ill  treatment  of  women
    because they have broken any code of "honour" or any religious  taboos.
    The reports indicate that, despite high levels of corruption, steps are
    being taken to meet the obligations set out in the various  Conventions
    dealing with human rights to which Azerbaijan  is  a  party.  Political
    dissent is not tolerated; but for those like the appellant, who are non-
    political Azerbaijanis,  are  not  of  Armenian  origin,  and  are  not
    internally displaced persons there has been an  improvement  in  living
    standards, although from a low level and protection  of  their  rights.
    Although we would conclude that women do not have equal rights of  men,
    there is nothing to indicate that crimes against women  go  unpunished.
    There are organisations monitoring the welfare of women.

99.  Clearly, the reports of Mr Chenciner and his oral evidence put  forward
    a different perspective on what would happen to  women,  who  like  the
    appellant have had children outside marriage who are of mixed  race  on
    return. We have set out the content of his reports above.  In his first
    two reports (but not in the third) he emphasises the  factors of   adat
    and religious beliefs which could lead to such women   coming  to  harm
    from their families.  In the third he refers to  namus.   We  found  it
    particularly telling that, in his first two reports, the only instances
    he could give of "honour killings" related to the killing of a daughter
    by her father in Dagestan in 1993; and to the  killing  of  a  girl  in
    Britain ten years later.  He produced  no  examples  whatsoever  of  an
    "honour killing" in Azerbaijan in either rural areas or in Baku. It was
    only in the third report that he mentioned the killing of a girl by her
    brother in Baku - the sole instance of an "honour" killing there.  What
    is also relevant is that the brother was immediately arrested and there
    was nothing to indicate that he was able to act with  impunity.   While
    it was Mr Chenciner's contention that because Azerbaijan  is  a  police
    state instances of "honour killings" would  not  be  reported  that  is
    clearly wrong when  this  killing  was  reported  and  we  consider  it
    relevant that there would appear to be scope for reporting due to there
    being a very large number of NGOs in Baku, information from which is in
    the reports before us.

100. We note the other instances of killings to which Mr Chenciner  referred
    in that report.  One was in St Petersburg and another in  Germany.   Mr
    Chenciner referred to two other reports in Azerbaijan. One concerned  a
    killing in the Sabirabad region of Azerbaijan 170 km south west of Baku
    of an elderly mother and her daughter: there was  nothing  to  indicate
    that it was an "honour killing" and we consider that Mr Chenciner erred
    in implying that this was an  "honour  killing"  when  he  stated  that
    "there is no time limit on honour killings" as  it  was  reported  that
    police were still investigating this incident  because  there  were  no
    witnesses. The other concerned a killing in Slar village  in  Jalilabad
    region in Azerbaijan where a man had killed  his  daughter,  son-in-law
    and four other members of her family "on  a  domestic  quarrel".  Again
    there is nothing to indicate that that was an  "honour  killing".   The
    reference to the gay Azerbaijani receiving asylum in France because  of
    his fear of being killed by his brother in an "honour killing" is  also
    not of assistance in our consideration of this appellant's claim.

101.  We  would  also  point  out  that   Mr   Chenciner's   references   to
    ethnographical field work, some of which took place 20 years ago do not
    really assist us in considering women such as this appellant who  could
    return to Baku, as it appears to relate to men  in  rural  communities,
    and we consider that it may well have lost its relevance over time.  We
    accept that there is discrimination,  certainly  in  rural  Azerbaijan,
    against women who are considered as inferior to men; but that  is  very
    different from  evidence that there is a real risk  of  a  woman  whose
    behaviour is seen as affecting the honour of her  family  being  killed
    (or otherwise seriously harmed)  by  members  of  it.  The  article  on
    "Veiled women in Azerbaijan" by Yuliya Gureyeva  to which Mr  Chenciner
    refers does clearly set  out  the  position  of  women  in  Azerbaijan,
    particularly from an Islamic perspective, but there is nothing in  that
    article to lead us to conclude that there  is  a  real  risk  of  being
    killed (or seriously harmed), for a woman  who   offends  her  family's
    sense of honour. Ms Cornell's  article on "The Politicization of  Islam
    in Azerbaijan"  assists as it talks of  traditional  family  structures
    but it refers to matters such as the curfew for local young  girls  and
    the importance of female chastity: it does not set out   any  sanctions
    which girls who transgress the namus code might face.  The  absence  of
    any reference to "honour killings" in that  article  is,  we  consider,
    relevant to an assessment of the position of those  girls  who  do  not
    comply with their family's concept of how to behave.  We also note that
    there is evidence that there are a large number of  single  mothers  in
    Baku, although how many of those women are divorced and how many of the
    children are illegitimate is not clear from the evidence before us.  Mr
    Chenciner stated that approximately 11% of live births are to women who
    are not married but that does not indicate how many of these women  are
    in stable relationships.  The article on single mothers  in  Azerbaijan
    does indicate that there are some benefits which are handed out by  the
    State, albeit small, when no payment is obtained from the father.


102. In his first report Mr Chenciner refers to the importance  of  marriage
    in establishing the status of the family and  therefore  the  pressures
    put on women to  marry  into  families  chosen  by  their  own  family.
    However, the statistics to which Mr Chenciner refers state  that  about
    40% of young people in Azerbaijan marry for love and although he states
    that a family might kill a girl who did  not  follow  their  choice  of
    husband there is no evidence cited in support to say that that  is  the
    case. He refers to the importance of family honour  and  reprisals  for
    the disgrace of a family member but we note that he also indicated that
    one effect of Azerbaijan having been a member of the Soviet  Union  was
    that blood feuds were abolished.

103.  He refers to the krisha system which is the help given by  the  family
    in obtaining work or other benefits - that we accept. He also refers to
    the system of blat:  a system of favours, possibly sexual, that may  be
    expected by some  officials  or  employers  to  obtain  work  or  other
    benefits, which we again accept.  We also accept that sexual harassment
    may go unchecked. However, there is nothing to indicate that the system
    of blat is used in such a way as to mean that those who refuse to  give
    such favours will face ill treatment which would amount to  persecution
    or treatment contrary to the woman's rights  under  Article  3  of  the
    ECHR.  Similarity,  there  is  nothing  to  indicate  that  the  sexual
    harassment which might be experienced would cross the high threshold so
    as to amount to treatment contrary to the rights  of  the  woman  under
    Article 3 of the ECHR.

104.  It is the claim of Mr Chenciner that as this appellant is  a  Lutheran
    Christian she would not receive protection from the  police.  There  is
    simply nothing to back up that assertion. Moreover, Mr Chenciner claims
    that as an ethnic Russian the appellant would face discrimination.   He
    also claimed that discrimination would be  faced  by  Russians  and  by
    those who were not Muslims. While we accept that  ethnic  Russians  may
    face some discrimination that discrimination certainly does not  amount
    to persecution or cross the threshold of Article 3 ill treatment. While
    we accept that many ethnic Russians have left Azerbaijan in  the  past,
    that appears to be because  they  had  greater  work  opportunities  in
    Russia itself, and it appears that the outflow of ethnic  Russians  has
    now lessened and is  now  largely  because  of  work  opportunities  in
    Russia.  We note that Russian  remains  the  language  of  commerce  in
    Azerbaijan and that it is still a language which is taught in  schools.
    We cannot conclude that those of Russian ethnicity in Azerbaijan  would
    face persecution because of their ethnicity.

105.  Mr Chenciner refers to the propiska system  of  registration  and  the
    difficulties there  would  be  in  internal  relocation,  in  that  the
    individual who would wish to move would be required to de-register  and
    re-register. However, despite  his  reference  to  that  requiring  the
    payment of a bribe there is nothing to indicate that de-registering and
    re-registering would not be possible  provided,  of  course,  that  the
    individual was able to prove that they were a citizen of Azerbaijan who
    had lived there legally in the past - we accept that  the  position  of
    Lezghins or Azeris might well face difficulties  in   registration  and
    obtaining documents that would entitle them to residence.


106. The central  contentions  in  Mr  Chenciner's  reports  were  that  the
    religious beliefs and the cultural ethos among parts of the  population
    would mean a single unmarried woman who had  had  a  mixed  race  child
    might be at risk from members of her family. He referred to the concept
    of namus. He also asserted that  Muslim  families  might  also  enforce
    their moral code by harming such women. The reality, however,  is  that
    the background documentation which we have considered does not back  up
    that assertion.  While Mr Chenciner  states  that  there  is  prejudice
    against orthodox Christians because of the oppression of Muslims in the
    past and that the police would be unlikely to  give  protection  to   a
    woman who feared an honour killing because she is not a  Muslim,  there
    seems nothing to substantiate his assertions in that regard.

107. Our overall conclusion must be that although an unmarried  mother  with
    a mixed race child in Azerbaijan might face discrimination  or  be  the
    victim of gossip, there is  nothing  to  indicate  that  there  is  any
    reasonable likelihood that they would face persecution from either  the
    State or their families or other agents of persecution  for  a  Refugee
    Convention reason nor that they would face treatment contrary to  their
    rights under Article 3 of the ECHR or that the State would not  provide
    a sufficiency of protection for them.

Conclusions
108. Having considered all the evidence before us we conclude:
     1. Azerbaijan is a country with high levels of corruption and there is
        clear evidence that political dissent is not tolerated.
     2. There is nothing to indicate  that  the  State  would  in  any  way
        penalise unmarried mothers (approximately 10% of mothers) or  those
        who have mixed race children.  There  are  in  place  some  support
        mechanisms for single parents.
     3. In order to access benefits,  accommodation  or  work  a  residence
        permit (a propiska) is required. There is nothing to indicate  that
        Azerbaijanis who have lost their propiska would be unable to obtain
        a replacement. Children have access to education.   There  is  some
        evidence that  Government officials  may  require blat -  a  system
        of favours - from  those  who  need  to  obtain  housing  or  other
        benefits but there is  nothing  to  suggest  that  that  system  is
        universal and would mean that those who refused to offer blat would
        be shut out from accommodation, schooling or other benefits.
     4. Although the Azerbaijani Government has ratified  most  Conventions
        relating to  human rights and the compliance with the norms therein
        is improving, the reality is that the improvement  is  from  a  low
        starting point. Many NGOs dealing with human rights exist  in  Baku
        and there is also an Ombudsman to whom  complaints can be made.
     5. Although in the early 1990s there was discrimination against  those
        of Russian ethnicity the situation for  them  normalised  by  1996.
        Ethnic  Russian  make  up  approximately  8%  of  the   population.
        Prejudice may still exist but 80% of Ethnic Russians are in work  -
        only slightly fewer that those in work in the population as a whole
        (83.7%).
     6. There is  some  discrimination  against  Christians  but  there  is
        freedom for Christians to practice their religion.
     7. Azerbaijani society, particularly in rural  areas,  is  traditional
        and  attitudes   to   women   are   conservative   -   nevertheless
        approximately  10%  of  mothers  are  unmarried.    Family  support
        networks (krisha) are a strong feature of family life  and  benefit
        family members, for instance when obtaining work.
     8. Although the  concept  of  family  honour  among  more  traditional
        families in Azerbaijan  (namus) exists there is nothing to indicate
        that there is a real risk of honour killings or other ill-treatment
        of those who  are considered by members of their families  to  have
        brought dishonour on the family. Nor is there any  indication  that
        there would not be a sufficiency of protection for those women.
     9. Azerbaijan is a traditional society and those who do  not  fit  in,
        such as those of  mixed  race  may  well  face  discrimination  and
        prejudice. Armenians and Lezghins are particularity likely to  face
        discrimination.
    10. There is nothing to indicate that a single parent without  parental
        support or her child would face treatment which would either amount
        to persecution or cross the threshold of Article 3 ill treatment.


Consideration of the appellant's  claim.

 109.    We have set out above our consideration of the background  evidence
    relating to the position of single mothers with mixed race children  in
    Azerbaijan.  We now place the appellant's claim in the context of those
    findings.

110.  We would first comment, however, that it is the preferred practice  to
    base country guidance cases on appeals in which there have  been  clear
    findings of fact by the judge in the First-tier.   In  this  case,  the
    judge's conclusions are ambiguous as it is not clear whether or not the
    judge accepted that the appellant  was  credible  when  she  said  that
    members of her family had threatened to kill her or whether she  merely
    found credible the appellant's story of her family background  and  her
    history since she came to Britain.  The central issue,  of  course,  is
    whether or not the appellant would suffer persecution for a  Convention
    reason if she returned.

111.  In effect,  His  Honour  Judge  Pearl  found  that,  in  reaching  her
    findings of fact, the judge had not taken into account the evidence  in
    Mr Chenciner's report  -  evidence  which  should  be  considered  when
    assessing whether or not the appellant's fears  are  well-founded.   We
    have analysed that evidence above and set out our  general  conclusions
    in paragraphs 106 above.  However, as it is not entirely clear what the
    findings of the judge were we have to reach findings on relevant  parts
    of the appellant's evidence ourselves.

112. Before we do so, however, there are a number of matters central to  the
    appeal which we consider that we can determine  in  short  form  before
    setting out in greater detail the task before us. Firstly,  the  judge,
    having noted the evidence of Mr Chenciner regarding the  colouring  and
    features of various peoples in the Caucasus found  that  the  appellant
    looked of Russian descent and  that  D's  colouring  was  more  "coffee
    coloured" than "black" and therefore, but for the fact  that  his  hair
    was curly, he might  not  look  so  different  from  those  of  Turkish
    ethnicity.  We have seen photographs of D.  We can only  conclude  that
    he looks exactly what he is -  a  mixed  race  child  of  European  and
    African parentage.

113. Secondly, the issue of whether or not the  appellant  was  entitled  to
    asylum because of her particular social group has been  raised.   Again
    we consider that the appellant's social group  -  an  unmarried  mother
    with a mixed race child - is a  social  group  such  that,  should  she
    suffer persecution because  of  her  membership  of  that  group,  that
    persecution would be for a Convention reason.

114. Thirdly, it was not argued before  us  that  the  appellant's  fear  of
    persecution was a fear of persecution  by  the  state.   Rather  it  is
    argued that her fear of persecution  is  from  actors  of  persecution,
    namely her family from whom, at its highest, she claims that she  might
    suffer death or physical harm, or that she would suffer  discrimination
    from the general public at such a level as would amount to  persecution
    or treatment contrary to her rights under Article 3 of the ECHR.

115. We have set out in annex  1  what  the  appellant  had  stated  in  the
    screening interview, at interview and in her statement and the evidence
    she had given to the judge as recorded in the determination.

116. It is arguable that what the judge accepted was  only  the  appellant's
    history in Britain and the details given of her family  in  Azerbaijan,
    and that it is not clear whether or not she  accepted  the  appellant's
    assertion that she had been told by her family  that  she  had  brought
    dishonour upon them and that she would be killed  on  return.   Clearly
    the judge considered that the appellant's reason  for  claiming  asylum
    was because she  was  concerned  about  her  son  if  she  returned  to
    Azerbaijan, and in particular wanted to regularise her position here so
    that her son would have access to education in this country.   However,
    although it is not an altogether satisfactory  factual  basis  for  our
    decision, we  consider  it  appropriate  to  accept  that  the  judge's
    findings of fact included  accepting  the  appellant's  report  of  the
    comments that had been made by her family as to what  would  happen  to
    her on return.  The judge clearly did not  accept  that  the  appellant
    would be killed on return.

117.  It is a very considerable leap between accepting that the  appellant's
    family had said that she would be killed if she returned and concluding
    that there is a real risk that   this  is  what  would  happen  to  the
    appellant on return.

118. Although we have  set  out  our  general  conclusions  above,  we  must
    consider  the  particular  circumstances  of  this  appellant  when  we
    consider whether there is any risk that is personal to her and her son.
    We  have  first  considered  whether  or  not  there  is  a  reasonable
    likelihood of  the  appellant's  stepfather  or  other  family  members
    harming her. We have considered  the  cultural  and  religious  factors
    which might have bearing on their attitudes and actions.

119.  We note that her stepfather had worked, it appears,  in  the  offshore
    oil gas industry in metal construction   and  that  her  mother  was  a
    teacher.  One of her brothers works in  fishing  and  the  other  makes
    furniture. They live in Baku, a  city  described  by  Mr  Chenciner  as
    having some sophistication.  These are not uneducated  peasants  living
    in a remote area of the countryside where we would expect to  find  the
    most traditional attitudes.  While it is claimed that  the  appellant's
    stepfather and her brother are devout  Muslims  the  reality  is  that,
    although her  mother  converted,  the  appellant  was  able  to  go  on
    attending the Lutheran Church and was not forced to  convert  to  Islam
    nor was her elder brother. The appellant has  not  indicated  that  any
    pressure was put on her to change her religion.  She was able  to  work
    outside the home and had a succession of jobs in Baku and there  is  no
    indication that any pressure  was  placed  on  her  to  enter  into  an
    arranged marriage.  Indeed, she was allowed to travel to  England,  un-
    chaperoned, and had travelled outside Azerbaijan in the past.

120.  Taking all these  factors  into  consideration  there  is  nothing  to
    indicate that her family were so strict in their attitude  towards  her
    that they would consider that the only way they could   maintain  their
    sense of honour would be to harm the appellant. We consider that it  is
    telling that Mr Chenciner referred to the appellant's step father as  a
    "societal" Muslim and stated that, having lived through the Soviet  era
    he would be likely to "take things as they are".

121. We note that the appellant herself stated that  she  thought  that  her
    mother would "come round" when she saw  D  and  we  consider  that  the
    appellant's delay in claiming asylum, and indeed the way in  which  she
    appeared to place weight on  her  concerns  about  her  child  and  her
    child's education, indicates that  she  herself  might  well  not  have
    believed that her family would harm her on return.

122. However, it is the appellant's  claim  that  because  of  the  cultural
    factors which are prevalent in Azerbaijan, her family would  harm  her.
    It is  not  argued  that  there  are  any  other  potential  actors  of
    persecution.  Mr Chenciner has talked of the system of adat - the issue
    of family honour or indeed "honour killings".  The issue therefore  for
    us is to consider whether  those  factors  would  be  so  strong  that,
    despite the factors which we have set out above, the appellant's father
    or other members of her family would still decide that  she  should  be
    harmed. We consider that  there  is  nothing  that  would  lead  us  to
    conclude that the particular facts of this  appellant  and  her  family
    would mean that, exceptionally, the appellant's family would  harm  her
    on return.

123. We would repeat that there is nothing in  the  background  evidence  to
    indicate that "namus", or the religious beliefs of her  step-father  or
    brother would mean that she would be at risk of serious harm from them.
    We would again emphasise that there being, perhaps, one instance of  an
    "honour killing" in Baku is an  insufficient  basis  for  finding  that
    there is a real risk that this appellant  would  face  harm.  The  only
    evidence that she would be at risk comes  from  the  assertions  of  Mr
    Chenciner and we consider that he  is  not  an  entirely  dispassionate
    expert in this case. We would add that we consider that in  any  event,
    in Baku there are functioning police and courts, and that  these  would
    be able to provide protection to the standard set out  by  Stuart-Smith
    LJ in his judgment in Horvath [2000]  UKHL 37.

124.  Rather than the  appellant  facing  persecution  from  her  family  we
    consider that their responses would go no further than perhaps shunning
    her and refusing support.

125. Nevertheless  we  accept  that  women  in  Azerbaijan  are  treated  as
    inferior to men and there is, for example, discrimination in  the  work
    place. We accept that family support is important, under the concept of
    krisha, and we accept that it would probably not be available for  this
    appellant, given that we also accept that it is likely her family would
    not wish to have anything to do with her.  They would  clearly  not  be
    welcoming.  The appellant would therefore, in effect, be on her own, if
    she returned to Baku.  It is, however, a city  of  between  1.5  and  2
    million people, and so she would not be forced to live near her family.
     She would, having had the necessary identity card, be  entitled  to  a
    propiska or residence permit to enable her to live in Baku.  As to  her
    son, we believe that D also would be  entitled  to  live  there.   They
    would not be separated.

126. The next issue we have considered  is  whether  or  not  the  appellant
    would face discrimination in Baku which would amount to persecution  or
    treatment contrary to her rights under  Article  3  of  the  ECHR.   We
    accept that  there  is  discrimination  in  Baku,  and  that  there  is
    underlying  racism  (although  discrimination  appears  to  be  largely
    directed against Armenians or  Lezghins).   The  reality  is  that  the
    appellant's son might well be the only child in Baku of  mixed  African
    and Russian descent.  We consider that it is likely that, as stated  in
    the letter from the Foreign  and  Commonwealth  Office,  the  appellant
    would be the victim of gossip and that she might  well  be  shunned  by
    neighbours or those whom she passed in the street.

127.  Mr Chenciner considered that because she would not have access to  the
    krisha system, the appellant would have difficulty in obtaining a  job.
    We note that the appellant has, in the past, worked  in  a  restaurant,
    and as a receptionist in Baku.  She has clearly learnt  English  whilst
    she has been in Britain and, although we accept Mr Chenciner's  comment
    that there are many highly qualified  Azerbaijanis,  we  consider  that
    there is no evidence that she would be shut out of the  workplace.  The
    evidence does not indicate that she would not be able to  get  work  in
    Baku: particularly because she has, of  course,  worked  there  in  the
    past.

128. We also accept that corruption is commonplace, and a system of  favours
    may operate when looking for housing or  work.   We  do  not,  however,
    consider that for the appellant having  to  negotiate  through  such  a
    system or  to  face  such  discrimination  amounts  to  persecution  or
    treatment contrary to her rights under Article  3  of  the  ECHR.   The
    reality is that there are programmes to assist  unmarried  mothers  and
    there is health care which would be open to her.

129. There is no evidence other than the assertions of Mr Chenciner and  the
    appellant, that D would face  discrimination,  such  as  to  amount  to
    persecution.  We accept that the fact that he is  illegitimate  and  of
    mixed African/European descent would at best mean that he  would  stand
    out from the rest of the population, and at  worst  that  he  would  be
    shunned; but we do not believe that  the  treatment  he  would  receive
    would cross  the  high  threshold  of  persecution  or  Article  3  ill
    treatment.  We note the terms of the various  reports  that  deal  with
    education and the rights of the child and the  rights  of  a  child  to
    education.  Although  there  might  well  be   discrimination   against
    unmarried mothers, or those with mixed race children, there is  nothing
    in the papers to indicate  that  there  would  not  be  mechanisms  for
    ensuring that the appellant's rights in respect of  education  for  her
    son were met.

130. Taking all these factors into account, the submissions of Mr Tufan  and
    Mr Collins and the background evidence before us as well as the various
    reports of Mr Chenciner, we have concluded  that  there  was  not,  for
    someone in the position of the appellant, that is an  unmarried  mother
    with a mixed race child, a real risk that she would face persecution or
    treatment contrary to her rights under Article 3 of the ECHR on  return
    to Baku.

131. We consider Mr Collins was correct to  state  that  the  issue  of  the
    Article 8 rights of both appellants was not  before  us.   It  was  not
    argued before the judge, and it has never been argued  on  appeal  that
    she should have dealt with those rights. Mr Collins is quite  right  to
    emphasise that at the date of decision Section 55 had not been  enacted
    and  the  ramifications  of  that  Section,   and   indeed   consequent
    developments in case law, are such that those issues must be considered
    before the appellants are removed and that it would be inappropriate in
    this case for us to act as primary decision makers.

132. As we have found that the  appellant  would  not  face  persecution  in
    Baku, the issue of internal relocation is not relevant  in  this  case.
    There is nothing to indicate that the appellant might  be  entitled  to
    humanitarian protection, nor was this argued before us.


Decision

133. For the reasons set out above, although a material  error  of  law  was
    found in the judge's decision, on remaking it we reach the same result,
    and dismiss this appeal on asylum, humanitarian  protection  and  human
    rights grounds (Article 3).



Signed                                  Date
Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy














       ANNEX 1.
   Evidence of  the appellant and the findings of and conclusions  of  Judge
    Malins.

 1.     At the screening interview the appellant stated that  she  had  come
    to Britain on holiday but had met her son's father, who was black.  She
    was in love with him, believed that they would get married and she  did
    all that he said.  He was violent and they were now separated.

2.   Asked if she  could  briefly  explain  why  she  could  not  return  to
    Azerbaijan, she stated:-

         "My parents would not accept my child because he is black.  When  I
         was at school a child was being discriminate [sic] because  of  the
         colour of his skin and I do not want that to happen to my child.  I
         can hide but I cannot hide my child for the rest of  his  life  and
         the culture and mentality of the people is different.  About  three
         or four months ago, in Azerbaijan, there were a few black  students
         who got shot and killed."

3.   On 27 July 2009 she was interviewed in detail.  She said that  she  had
    a mother and two brothers in Baku in Azerbaijan.  Whenever she tried to
    phone her mother, her mother would put the phone down  on  her  because
    she had had a child by a black man and her family thought that they had
    been disgraced by this.  Her mother had said that she did  not  need  a
    daughter like the appellant and the family had turned  their  backs  on
    her.  She said that she had been warned by her mother not to return  as
    the family were not interested in having any contact with her and  that
    she would be found wherever she was in Azerbaijan.

4.   Asked who would find her, she said that her whole  family  would:  "Our
    blood relations.  You know we are Muslims.  I am not a  Muslim  but  we
    live in an area where we are surrounded by Muslims."

5.   Asked if she had been threatened, she replied "Yes" and asked what  her
    family said they would do to her she replied that they had said:-

         "We will find you and we will kill you.  It is not nice to say what
         they are saying and they say your  brothers  will  find  you,  your
         relations will find you.  You brought  shame  on  our  family.   We
         can't look people in the eye.  You've disgraced us."

6.   Much of the rest of the interview  related  to  the  behaviour  of  the
    second appellant's father and what the appellant was doing in Britain.

7.   She was then asked if she was afraid of being  persecuted  because  her
    son was of mixed race and she replied:-

         "Correct.


         I remember when I was still at school in  our  neighbourhood  there
         was one black boy.  Everybody bullied him, verbally, assaulted him,
         laughed at him.  They said -  look  at  you,  you're  black,  we're
         white, where did you come from?  A year  before  I  graduated  from
         school I stopped seeing him around, he was  taken  to  a  different
         country.  He wasn't there anymore."

     Asked about her religion she said:-

         "We are Christians.


         Our faith is the Christian faith but the customs follow Azerbaijani
         customs, Muslim traditions  they  are  surrounded  by  Azeris  they
         follow Azeri customs,  way  of  life  but  my  family  are  of  the
         Christian faith."

7.   She said that she had left school at 15 or  16  and  had  worked  in  a
    kitchen and then at the airport and in  a  restaurant.   She  had  also
    worked as a receptionist.

8.   Again asked about her family she said:-

         "They knew I had a boyfriend, but they didn't know he was black.  I
         knew they wouldn't be happy that I got involved with a  black  man.
         I thought that when I married him, they would accept it.  I thought
         I would be living here in London and nobody would be able  to  harm
         me."

9.   It was only after she had sent a photograph of her son  to  her  mother
    and they found out that she was  not  married  that  they  had  started
    threatening her.  They had then turned their backs on her.

10.  The interviewer then asked if her family had threatened to kill her  if
    she returned to Azerbaijan and she replied "yes".

11.  She stated that her mother had married a Muslim man -  her  father  had
    died when she was 7.  Her eldest brother did something  with  fish  and
    the second worked in the furniture business.  Her  mother  had  been  a
    nursery teacher.  Her stepfather worked on "metal constructions in  the
    sea".  The extended family which she  had  was  on  her  mother's  side
    rather than on her step-father's.  She stated that she had applied  for
    asylum because all her friends had told her that she would not be  able
    to hide herself and her child and that  she  should  give  herself  the
    chance to become legal here - she was worried because  she  would  soon
    need schooling for her child.

12.  Before the appeal the appellant  prepared  a  statement  in  which  she
    stated that her eldest brother,  S,  was  a  Christian  and  her  other
    brother, O, was a Muslim with very strict views.  She had had a typical
    Christian upbringing  before  her  father  died  but  when  her  mother
    remarried their lives had changed to "in  effect  Islamic  upbringing".
    She said that she had been  restricted  from  doing  things  that  were
    perceived as non-Islamic.

13.  She said that she and her son's father had decided to stay  in  Britain
    because they were aware of the overt racism in Azerbaijan.

14.  She went  on  to  say  that  she  believed  that  if  she  returned  to
    Azerbaijan that would expose her to some risks as D was of mixed  race.
    Her family had told her that she should not return home.  She had  sent
    photographs and her brother had  called  her  a  stain  on  the  family
    history and said that it was a matter of honour.   She  said  that  she
    missed her mother tremendously and that she did not wish to put herself
    and her son in danger if she  returned  to  Azerbaijan.   She  did  not
    believe that the police would offer her protection.

15.  She referred to comments in the refusal letter which  had  stated  that
    bullying was not persecution.  She said that she could not accept  that
    as the treatment she would receive from other adults would be far  more
    serious and that  "persecution  potentially  leads  to  murder  and  is
    systematic and wilful harm to me and my son".

16.  She referred to the treatment of Armenians  in  Azerbaijan  and  stated
    that persecution came from an early age  as  at  school  education  was
    biased against the Armenians.  A young black boy would face worse.

17.  Referring to a comment in the  letter  of  refusal  which  stated  that
    racial minorities face sporadic racism she  stated  that  she  accepted
    that and that:-

         "I have even had threats made to me by my family."


    She stated that she had committed a sin that was punishable in the eyes
    of her family.  She also feared attacks from the  white  community  and
    that her son  would  face  a  lifetime  of  racial  discrimination  and
    violence.  He would face active discrimination which she stated was the
    consequence of persecution.

18.  In the determination the judge, having referred to what  the  appellant
    had said at interview and in her statement and noted what was stated in
    the letter of refusal set out her credibility findings in paragraph 9:-

         "9.  My Findings: Credibility


              I found the appellant to be a credible witness, subject to the
             caveat explained below.  I accept the appellant's  account  of
             her actual personal situation, given in her witness  statement
             dated 24th November 2009, her replies at interview and at  the
             appeal hearing.


              However, the core  of  the  appellant's  asylum  claim  is  to
             extrapolate from the fact that she has a mixed race child, the
             claim that there is a real risk that the treatment  she  would
             receive  in  Azerbaijan  on  account  of  her  status  as  the
             unmarried mother of a mixed race child - would be sufficiently
             serious, to amount to persecution or a breach of Article 3  of
             the ECHR or raise the need  for  humanitarian  protection.   I
             examine this claim carefully below: my conclusions  will  lead
             to a separate conclusion as to whether or not, I  am  able  to
             find this crucial part of the appellant's evidence, credible."



19.  She then went on to refer to the issues in the appeal  noting  that  in
    his submissions to her Mr Collins had  stated  there  were  three  main
    issues:-

         "Internal relocation; the objective  evidence  on  persecution  and
         sufficiency of protection."

20.  Having noted the comments of the expert witness, Mr  Robert  Chenciner,
    and his comments relating to anti-black prejudice  in  Azerbaijan,  she
    stated that Mr Chenciner had quoted no examples of Azerbaijani  revenge
    killings or lesser sanctions against people in a  similar  position  to
    that of either appellant but had referred to a murder of a British born
    ethnic Pakistani in 2003 and had then referred  to  "her  Muslim  step-
    family honour system according to customary law".

21.  Having considered country guidance and  background  documentation,  she
    went on, in paragraph 15, to note that the appellant had described  the
    discrimination which a child at her school who was black  had  suffered
    and said that in her view, the appellant's comments were that  she  had
    to apply for asylum to enable her and her child to become legal because
    she would need schooling for him and therefore could not hide here  any
    longer indicated the principal reason why the appellant wished to claim
    asylum here. In paragraph 16 she said:

                "16. Conclusions: Credibility
             The final  cumulative  conclusion which I am compelled to  make
             following  on  from  the  previous  paragraph,  is  that    the
             appellant  is not credible  in her claim that  she is  entitled
             to International Protection  as a refugee, nor  to  succeed  in
             her other appeals:  I find that she has  failed  to  reach  the
             requisite (albeit lower standard) of proof in the evidence both
             objective and  subjective. This finding  answers  the  question
             left outstanding at the end of paragraph 9 above."


     The judge therefore found that the appellant  did  not  have  a  well-
    founded fear of persecution or treatment contrary to her  rights  under
    Article 3 of the ECHR.













ANNEX 2

Decision of His Honour Judge Pearl dated 24 March 2010


       1. Having heard submissions from both Mr Collins and Mr Tufon, I have
          decided that this is a case where there has been an error  of  law
          by the Immigration Judge.
       2. She accepts that the thrust of the Appellant's account as credible
          (Para 9) subject to certain caveats.
       3. She deals with the expert evidence of Dr. Chenciner   in  a  brief
          comment  at para.18: "What is said in  this  in  relation  to  the
          Appellant's situation falls far short of being able to make up for
          the deficiencies in the remainder of the appellant's claim."
       4. The report at page 20  states  as  follows:  "...  the  main  risk
          appears to me to be from the Appellant's traditional family in the
          form of a punishment to the appellant and her son for  besmirching
          family honour according to adat customary law.  In  her  case  she
          risks severe beating or being put to death".
       5. This  observation  by  Dr.  Chenciner  is  not  addressed  in  the
          determination of the IJ, and therefore there is a clear  error  of
          law, based on inadequate reasons for the conclusions arrived at by
          the IJ.
       6. As this is possibly the first case of its kind, the matter  should
          be referred to the Country Convenor, for  him  or  her  to  decide
          whether the case should be heard before more than one Judge of the
          Upper Tribunal.
       7. The matter should be listed to be heard in the Upper Tribunal, and
          Sheikh and  Co  should  be  asked  for  dates  of  Dr  Chenciner's
          availability, as it will be essential for him to be present and to
          give evidence.




















Annex 3.

Index of Documents considered

|1  |The Intersection of Gender, Ethnicity and Islam |1997             |
|   |in Azerbaijan, Nayereh Tohidi                   |                 |
|2  |Veiled women in Azerbaijan: Gender, Islam and   |2003             |
|   |Modernity, Yuliya Gureyeva                      |                 |
|3  |UN Committee on the Elimination of              |March 2005       |
|   |Discrimination Against Women Consideration of   |                 |
|   |Reports Submitted by State's Parties under      |                 |
|   |Article 18, of the Convention on  the           |                 |
|   |Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination      |                 |
|   |Against Women                                   |                 |
|4  |EU Commission Working Paper: European           |2 March 2005     |
|   |Neighbourhood Policy                            |                 |
|5  |The Politicisation of Islam in Azerbaijan,      |October 2006     |
|   |Svante E Cornell (Silk Road Paper)              |                 |
|6  |European Commission Against Racism and          |15 December 2006 |
|   |Intolerance Report                              |                 |
|7  |EU Commission Working Paper: European           |2007             |
|   |Neighbourhood Policy Implementation Report      |                 |
|8  |UN Committee on the Elimination of              |February 2007    |
|   |Discrimination Against Women Consideration of   |                 |
|   |Reports Submitted by State's Parties under      |                 |
|   |Article 18, The Convention, the Elimination of  |                 |
|   |All Forms of Discrimination Against Women and   |                 |
|   |concluding comments                             |                 |
|9  |Database of Gender Focal Points in Azerbaijan   |October 2007     |
|10 |First Report of Robert Chenciner                |30 September 2009|
|11 |US State Department Report: Human Rights in     |11 March 2010    |
|   |Azerbaijan                                      |                 |
|12 |European Commission Progress Report Azerbaijan  |12 May 2010      |
|   |(Taking stock of European neighbourhood policy) |                 |
|13 |US State Department background note             |14 June  2010    |
|14 |Report by Thomas Hammerby Commissioner for Human|29 June 2010     |
|   |Rights of the Council of Europe                 |                 |
|15 |Foreign & Commonwealth Office Country of Origin |12 January 2011  |
|   |Information Service                             |                 |
|16 |Initial Report Submitted by the Republic of     |30 March 2011    |
|   |Azerbaijan under Article 12 of the Optional     |                 |
|   |Protocol for the Convention of the Rights of the|                 |
|   |Child - the Sale of Children, Child Prostitution|                 |
|   |and Child Pornography                           |                 |
|17 |US State Department Report  2010                |April 2011       |
|18 |European Commission Against Racism and          |30 May 2011      |
|   |Intolerance on Azerbaijan                       |                 |
|19 |Freedom House Report.  Freedom in the World     |27 June 2011     |
|   |Azerbaijan                                      |                 |
|20 |US State Department Report Trafficking in       |June 2011        |
|   |Persons Report                                  |                 |
|21 |US State Department Background Note Azerbaijan  |17 June 2011     |
|22 |Council of Europe Observation on Human Rights   |28 September 2011|
|   |Situation in Azerbaijan                         |                 |
|23 |Report of the Office of the High Commissioner   |17 January 2012  |
|   |for Human Rights "Committee on the Rights of the|                 |
|   |Child Reviews Report on Azerbaijan"             |                 |
|24 |Human Rights Watch: Azerbaijan                  |22 January 2012  |
|25 |Second Report of Robert Chenciner               |25 January 2012  |
|26 |Third Report of Robert Chenciner                |1 February 2012  |







