
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

   Khatel and others (s85A; effect of continuing application) [2013] UKUT
                                 00044 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at  Field House                         |Determination Promulgated   |
|On 15 January 2013                            |                            |
|                                              |............................|
|                                              |...........                 |


                                   Before

                   THE PRESIDENT, THE HON MR JUSTICE BLAKE
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between
                               PRAKASH KHATEL
                             MOSTAQIUM AL ISLAM
                              NARAYAN ADHIKARI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                               MR PRASAD RAJU
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
Zane Malik Instructed by Malik Law Chambers Solicitors for Khatel, Adhikari
and Raju

Zane Malik and Mr S Khan Instructed by Farani Taylor Solicitors for Al
Islam

For the Secretary of State:      Mr Daniel Hayes, Senior Presenting Officer


(1)  An application for further leave to  remain  is  to  be  treated  as  a
continuing application, starting with the date when it was  first  submitted
and ending on the date when it is decided: AQ (Pakistan) v SSHD [2011]  EWCA
Civ 833.

(2)  It follows that an appellant is not precluded by section 85(5)  of  the
Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as amended)  from  relying  in
an appeal upon evidence that was notified to the Secretary of  State  before
the date of her decision.

(3)  Where, in an application for leave as a Post-Study  Work  Migrant,  the
obtaining of the academic award needed  to  gain  the  requisite  points  is
notified to the Secretary of State after the date when the  application  was
first submitted but before a  decision  is  made  on  the  application,  the
requirement of Table 10,  that  the  qualification  is  obtained  within  12
months of making the application, is satisfied because the application is  a
continuing one until a decision upon it has been made.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. These four appeals are being heard together because they raise a common
    issue about  the  interpretation  of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  law
    relating to an application for post-graduate work experience as a  Tier
    1 Post Study Work Migrant within the  meaning  of  Appendix  A  to  the
    Immigration Rules.

 2. We shall refer to each of the original applicants as  a  claimant.   In
    the appeals of Adikari, Khatel and Al Islam their  appeals  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge were unsuccessful and they are the appellants
    for the Upper Tribunal.  The appeal of Raju succeeded before the First-
    tier Tribunal and the Home Office is the appellant before us.

 3. Each appeal contains the following common  features:-

          i) The claimant was given leave to enter for a short  postgraduate
             course in the United Kingdom.


         ii) Such leave was due to expire in the early part of 2012.


        iii) The application for leave to remain was made before the  expiry
             of the leave granted to each claimant and before 6  April  2012
             when, subject to transitional provisions, the Tier 1 Post Study
             Work Migrant scheme was removed from the  points  based  system
             ("PBS").


         iv) At the time of each application the academic part of the course
             was  completed  and  each  applicant  was  expected  by   their
             institution of study to  be  awarded  a  qualification  by  the
             awarding institution.


          v)  Such predictions were well-founded and awards were made by the
             awarding institution on various dates in the summer of 2012.


         vi) The application was refused by the UKBA in the autumn  of  2012
             after the qualification had been awarded.


        vii) The  basis  of  the  refusal  was  that  at  the  time  of  the
             application the award or the qualification had not been made.


The Terms of Appendix A


 4. Paragraph 245FD of the Immigration Rules  provided  for  the  grant  of
    leave to remain for applicants who had a certain number of points under
    Appendix A, B and C.  Before its  eventual  removal  from  the  scheme,
    Appendix A, entitled attributes for Tier 1 (Post-Study Work),  Migrants
    set out the requirements.  Table 10 set  out  how  points  were  to  be
    acquired. It dealt with points for the award of qualifications.  It  is
    reproduced as follows:



       |Qualifications                                                       |Points|
|The applicant has been awarded:                                      |20    |
|a UK recognised Bachelor or postgraduate degree, or                  |      |
|a UK postgraduate certificate in education or Professional Graduate  |      |
|Diploma of Education or                                              |      |
|a Higher National Diploma ('HND') from a Scottish institution.       |      |
|The applicant studied for his award at a UK institution that is a UK |20    |
|recognised or listed body, or which holds a sponsor licence under    |      |
|Tier 4 of the Points Based System,                                   |      |
|                                                                     |      |
|If the applicant is claiming pints for having been awarded a Higher  |      |
|National Diploma from a Scottish Institution, he studied for that    |      |
|diploma at a Scottish publicly funded  institution of further or high|      |
|education, or a Scottish bona fide private education institution     |      |
|which maintains satisfactory records of enrolment and attendance.    |      |
|The Scottish institution must:                                       |      |
|be on the list of Education and Training Providers list on the       |      |
|Department of Business, Innovation and skills website, or            |      |
|hold a Sponsor licence under Tier 4 of the Points based System.      |      |
|                                                                     |      |
|                                                                     |      |
|The applicant's periods of UK study and/or research towards his      |20    |
|eligible award were undertaken whilst he had entry clearance, leave  |      |
|to enter or leave to remain in the UK that was not subject to a      |      |
|restriction preventing him from undertaking a course of study and/ or|      |
|research.                                                            |      |
|The applicant made the application for entry clearance or leave to   |15    |
|remain as a Tier 1 (Post-Study Work) Migrant within 12 months of     |      |
|obtaining the relevant qualification or within 12 months of          |      |
|completing a United Kingdom Foundation Programme Office affiliated   |      |
|Foundation Programme as a postgraduate doctor or dentist.            |      |
|The applicant is applying for leave to remain and has, or was last   |75    |
|granted leave as a Participant in the International Graduates Scheme |      |
|(or its predecessor, the Science and Engineering Graduates Scheme) or|      |
|as a Participant in the Fresh Talent: Working in Scotland Scheme.    |      |




       Paragraph 70.  A qualification will have been deemed  to  have  been
       'obtained' on the date on which the applicant was first notified  in
       writing, by the awarding institution,  that  the  qualification  had
       been awarded.

 5. In the cases of Khatel, Adhikari and Al Islam, the judges of the First-
    tier Tribunal each  concluded  that  the  claimant  did  not  meet  the
    requirements of the rules because at the time of the application he had
    not been awarded  the  post  graduate  qualification  by  the  awarding
    institution.

 6. In reaching that conclusion regard was had to the jurisprudence of  the
    Asylum and Immigration Tribunal notably Kan (PSW degree award required)
    India [2009] UKAIT 22 and NO (PSW award needed by date of  application)
    Nigeria [2009] UKAIT 54.

 7. In the case of Raju Judge Parkes had regard  to  the  decision  of  the
    Court of Appeal in AQ (Pakistan) v SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ 833.   He  also
    noted the decision in Ali (section 120-PBS) Pakistan  [2012]  UKUT  368
    (IAC). Ali was a decision of the Upper Tribunal following AQ (Pakistan)
    where Upper Tribunal Judge Allen had  regard  to  section  85A  of  the
    Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as amended ("NIAA").

AS (Afghanistan)

 8. In order to examine the potential  importance  of  what  the  Court  of
    Appeal said in AQ (Pakistan) it is necessary to recite some legislation
    and case law that led to it.

 9. Section 120 of the NIAA provides for service of notice on a person with
    respect to whom an immigration decision has  been  taken  or  is  being
    taken


        "(2) The Secretary of State or an Immigration Officer may by notice
             in writing require the person to state -
            a) his reasons for wishing to enter or  remain  in  the  United
               Kingdom,
            b) any grounds on which he should  be  permitted  to  enter  or
               remain in the United Kingdom and
            c) any grounds on which  he  should  not  be  removed  from  or
               required to leave the United Kingdom."


10. The problem that has arisen from time to time is whether, following  an
    immigration decision initially made upon an application  for  leave  to
    remain a section 120 notice is served, a person is entitled to raise  a
    wholly new claim for leave to remain; in the  event  of  that  modified
    claim being made, is he entitled to an appeal against it?

11. In the case of AS (Afghanistan) v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2009] EWCA Civ 1076, a judgment delivered on the 20 October
    2009, the majority of the Court of Appeal (Lord Justice Moore-Bick  and
    Lord Justice Sullivan) concluded that in general terms a  person  could
    raise a wholly different application and require it to be determined by
    the Tribunal in accordance with the  statutory  scheme.   Lady  Justice
    Arden dissented from this conclusion and did so mainly by reference  to
    section 3C of the Immigration Act 1971 as amended.

12. The statutory scheme at the time included section 85  of  the  NIAA  as
    follows:


        "Matters to be considered.


          1) An appeal under section  82(1)  against  a  decision  shall  be
             treated by [the  Tribunal]  including  an  appeal  against  any
             decision in respect of which  the  appellant  has  a  right  of
             appeal under section 82 (1).


          2) If an appellant under section 82(1)  makes  a  statement  under
             section 120, [The Tribunal] shall consider any matter raised in
             the statement which constitutes a ground of appeal  of  a  kind
             listed in section 84(1) against the decision appealed against.


          3) Subsection (2) applies to a statement made  under  section  120
             whether the statement was made before or after the  appeal  was
             commenced.


          4) On an appeal under section 82(1), 83(2)  or  83A(2)  against  a
             decision the Tribunal may consider evidence  about  any  matter
             which it thinks relevant to  the  substance  of  the  decision,
             including evidence which concerns a matter  arising  after  the
             date of the decision..."


13. The  scheme also included section 3C  Immigration Act 1971:


        "Continuation of Leave Pending Variation Decision


          1. This section applies if -
            a) A person who has limited leave to enter  or  remain  in  the
               United  Kingdom  applies  to  the  Secretary  of  State  for
               variation of the leave,
            b) the application for  variation  is  made  before  the  leave
               expires, and
            c) The leave expires  without  the  application  for  variation
               having been decided.


          2. The leave is extended by virtue  of  this  section  during  any
             period when -
            a)  The  application  for  variation  is  neither  decided  nor
               withdrawn,
            b) An appeal under section 82(1) of the Nationality Asylum  and
                Immigration Act, 2002 could be brought against the decision
               on the application for   variation ... or
            c) An appeal under that section is ... pending...


          3. ...(omitted)


          4. A person may not make an application for variation of his leave
             to enter or remain in the United Kingdom while  that  leave  is
             extended by virtue of this section.


          5.  Subsection  (4)  does  not  prevent  the  variation   of   the
             application mentioned in subsection (1)(a)."


14. Earlier in 2009, the Court of Appeal  in  the  case  of  JH  (Zimbabwe)
    [2009] EWCA Civ 78 had concluded that a wide meaning was to be given to
    the concept of variation of an application as opposed to making a fresh
    application to vary leave that has been extended  by  section  3C.   At
    [35] to [45]  Lord  Justice  Richards  explains  the  reasons  for  the
    conclusion.  Variation will include a further  application  made  on  a
    different prescribed form with  payment  of  the  relevant  fee  for  a
    different purpose as well as applications made for the same purpose but
    with different details.  Lord Justice Richards said  at  paragraph 35:-




        "..... Thus, there can be only one application for variation of the
        original leave, and there can be  only  one  decision  (and,  where
        applicable, one appeal) The possibility  of  a  series  of  further
        applications leading to an indefinite  extension  of  the  original
        leave is excluded.  However, by subsection (5) it  is  possible  to
        vary the one permitted application.  If it is varied, any  decision
        (and any further appeal) will relate to the application as  varied.
        But once a decision has been made no variation to  the  application
        is possible since there is nothing left to vary."


15. It is also relevant to note that a wide application to section  3C  was
    given by the Court of Appeal in QI (Pakistan) v  SSHD [2011]  EWCA  Civ
    614, 18 April 2011. In both JH Zimbabwe and QI (Pakistan) the Court  of
    Appeal disapproved decisions of the AIT giving a narrow meaning to  the
    leave and the appellate jurisdiction to challenge  refusals  of  varied
    applications and decisions.

The decision in AQ (Pakistan)


16. We then reach the decision of AQ (Pakistan) v SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ  833
    which features prominently in the argument in the appeals before us and
    that  we  consider  is  an  authority  of  central  importance  to  the
    resolution of the issues.

17. It was an appeal against a decision of the Upper  Tribunal  Immigration
    and Asylum Chamber dismissing the appeal of  the  appellant  against  a
    decision of the Secretary of State to refuse to vary leave to remain in
    the United Kingdom pursuant to Rule 245Z (Post Study work).

18. Lord Justice Pill stated the issues succinctly at paragraph  4  of  his
    judgment:


        ".... Can the points entitlement  arising  from  a  Masters  degree
        count towards the minimum  if  the  degree  is  awarded  after  the
        Secretary of State's  decision  but  before  the  decision  of  the
        Tribunal?"


    The appellant sought to apply the broad interpretation of  Section  120
    given by the Court of Appeal in  AS  (Afghanistan)  to  an  application
    under the points based system.



19. Lord Justice Pill noted the following:
          1. It is accepted on behalf of the appellant that  the  consistent
             practice of the Tribunal, in the absence of AS, was to  require
             the accumulation of points to be established at the date of the
             application for an extension (KAN  (Post-Work  Study  -  degree
             award required) India [2009] UKAIT 00022, NO (Post-Study Work -
             award needed by  date  of  application)  Nigeria  [2009]  UKAIT
             00054). NA and Others (Tier 1  Post-Study  Work  Funds)  [2009]
             UKAIT 00025) was cited  in  detail  by  the  Tribunal.  It  was
             accepted that evidence of means (not an issue  in  the  present
             case) could be given on appeal but only  if  it  related  to  a
             period of time immediately prior to the date of the application
             to the Secretary of State. Evidence of means for  a  period  of
             time wholly or partly subsequent to the date of application was
             not enough.
          1. In EA (section 85(4) explained) Nigeria [2007] UKAIT 00013, the
             Tribunal  had  held  that  it  was  necessary  to   demonstrate
             compliance with the requirements of the  Immigration  Rules  at
             the date of the application. In that  case,  the  Secretary  of
             State had not taken account of  information  available  at  the
             date of the hearing but bearing upon  facts  available  at  the
             date of decision. What an applicant may do under section 85(4),
             it was accepted, is to demonstrate that the application to  the
             Secretary of State would be  successful  at  the  date  of  the
             hearing, provided  the  evidence  related  to  events  at  that
             earlier time.
20. His Lordship then summarised the decision of the  majority  in  AS  and
    continued as follows:-
          1. For the Secretary of State, Mr Payne  accepts  that,  following
             AS, the relevant date for the assessment  of  evidence  is  the
             date of the Secretary of State's decision and not, as may  have
             appeared from earlier  Tribunal  decisions,  the  date  of  the
             application to her. The application is  treated  as  continuing
             until the date of decision. It is  further  accepted  that  the
             response to an OSW may in some circumstances include additional
             support for the original application as well as  fresh  grounds
             of  application.  Moreover,  the  purpose  of   the   statutory
             procedure, as stated by the majority in  AS,  is  accepted  and
             asserted.  (our emphasis)
          1. Moore-Bick LJ confirmed, at paragraph 78, that sections  85(2),
             96(2) and 120 of  the  2002  Act  "demonstrate  that  they  are
             intended to form constituent  parts  of  a  coherent  procedure
             designed to avoid a multiplicity of applications and  appeals."
             Sullivan LJ made a similar  statement  at  paragraph  103.  The
             underlying  legislative  policy  was  "to  prevent   successive
             applications."
          ........
          1. For the Secretary of State, it is submitted  that  AS  was  not
             concerned with evidence of events subsequent to  the  Secretary
             of State's decision. I agree with that submission and with  the
             reasoning in MS I have cited.


21. After further references to AS the judgment of Pill  LJ   continues  as
    follows:


               " . . .
          1. The Secretary  of  State  maintains  the  submission  that  the
             Immigration Rules require criteria to exist at the time of  her
             decision under appeal and compliance is to be judged as of that
             date. Admission before the Tribunal of further evidence of  the
             situation at that date did not alter the principle,  which  was
             not affected by the decision in AS. The appellant did not  have
             his degree at the date of that decision  and  could  not  rely,
             before the Tribunal, on its subsequent award.
             ........
          1. Compliance with the requirements after the date of decision  is
             not relevant to the "substance of the decision" as  defined  by
             section 85(4), it  is  submitted.  By  contrast,  post-decision
             evidence may be allowed to demonstrate  that  the  requirements
             were satisfied at the date of decision, subject to  the  change
             of the law by the addition of section 85A to the 2002 Act  with
             effect from 23 May 2011. Section 85A  of  the  2002  Act,  with
             effect from 23 May  2011,  amended  section  85(5)  to  provide
             further exceptions to the provisions of section 85(4).  It  has
             no application in the present appeal, whether or  not  remitted
             to the  Upper  Tribunal.  I  see  no  need  to  embark  upon  a
             consideration of the effect of section 85A.
          1. Mr Payne submits that to permit evidence of  subsequent  events
             to challenge the decision of the Secretary of State would be to
             allow successive applications which it is the object of the OSW
             procedure to prevent. It would  convert  the  statutory  appeal
             system into a statutory application  system  considering  fresh
             matters raised in a section 120 Notice.
              .....
        Conclusions
          1. In my judgment, the decision of the Tribunal in this  case  was
             correct. A Tribunal's task is to "look back at the position  as
             at the date of application [now decision]"  as  stated  by  the
             Tribunal in the  present  case  at  paragraph  14  or,  as  the
             Tribunal put it in MS, at paragraph 49,  in  cases  where  "the
             rule in question specifies a fixed historic time-line".
          1. Section 85(2), put by the appellant at the heart of  his  case,
             concludes by referring to the availability of grounds of appeal
             "against the decision appealed against." I agree with Mr  Payne
             that the focus is on the decision of the Secretary of State. In
             my judgment, the "decision" is  clearly  the  decision  of  the
             Secretary of State. In the present context, fresh  matters  may
             be raised but are relevant only in so  far  as  they  challenge
             that decision. As Sedley LJ recognised in Pankina, at paragraph
             39, there will be cases under the Rules  which  depend  on  the
             situation existing at the time  of  the  Secretary  of  State's
             decision. In my judgment, Rule 245Z is one of those cases.  The
             points to be accumulated must be accumulated at the time of the
             Secretary of State's decision. That includes, as is  agreed,  a
             requirement that the relevant degree has been awarded."


22. Lord Justice Sullivan gave a brief  concurring  judgment;  he  said  at
    [41]:-


             "I also agree.   In  AS  the  Court  was  not  concerned  with
             decisions made by  the  Respondent  under  the  "Points-based"
             system of determining applications for leave  to  remain.   In
             such  cases  there  is  a  "fixed  historic  time-line".   The
             effective operation of a  points  based  system  requires  the
             points to have been accumulated at the date of  the  Secretary
             of State's decision."

23. It will thus be seen that the appellant failed in AQ (Pakistan) in  his
    submission  that  section  120  and  section  84(5)  permitted  him  to
    introduce a points based system application after the decision  of  the
    Secretary of State.

24. However, for present purposes two themes running through the  reasoning
    are important.  First  as  Lord  Justice  Pill  put  it  at  [22]  "the
    application is treated as continuing until the date of  the  decision".
    Secondly the previous learning of Tribunal was  revised  in  a  points-
    based system case where  there  was  a  fixed  historic  time  line  to
    identify the final period when the material could  be  adduced  as  the
    date of the decision rather than the date of the application.

25. Although the reasoning of both  Lord  Justice  Pill  and  Lord  Justice
    Sullivan appears to have been based substantially on the concession  of
    Mr Payne in the light of AS, this is not a case  where  the  Court  are
    simply acknowledging the concession without more.   Both  judges  reach
    their own conclusions on the issue and those conclusions are binding on
    us unless varied  by  subsequent  statutory  regime  or  overturned  on
    further appeal.


Submissions before us

26. In the skeleton submitted before the hearing by Mr Hayes  he  indicates
    that the relevant statutory change was precisely  section  85A  of  the
    2002 Act introduced as from the 23 May 2011 with  which  the  Court  of
    Appeal expressly did not engage.

27.  It is now time to turn to that section.  It is in the following terms.


        "Matters to be considered: new evidence: exceptions


        (1)  This section sets out the exceptions mentioned in section 85
             (5)


          2) Exception 1(not material)


          3) Exception 2 applies to an appeal under section 82(1) if-
            a. the appeal is against  a  immigration  decision  of  a  kind
               specified in section 82(2)(a) or (d),
            b. the immigration decision concerned an application of a  kind
               identified  in  immigration  rules  as   requiring   to   be
               considered under a "Points Based System", and
            c. the appeal relies wholly  or partly on grounds specified  in
               section 84(1)(a)(e) or (f).


          4) Where Exception 2 applies the Tribunal may consider evidence
             adduced by the appellant only if it -
            a.  was submitted in support of, and at the time of making, the
               application to which the immigration decision related: ... "



28. Mr Hayes who has  prepared  a  thoughtful  skeleton  and  a  bundle  of
    authorities at extremely short notice and  to  whom  we  are  extremely
    indebted for his submissions and who also has extensive  experience  of
    the problem, submits that the conclusions in AQ now  have  to  be  read
    subject to section 85A which operates as a  further  exception  to  the
    general power in section 85 (4)  for the Tribunal to  receive  evidence
    that is not before the Secretary of State because it  included  matters
    that arose after the date of the application.

29. He submits that Exception 2 applies because this appeal is  against  an
    immigration decision specified  in  section  82(2)(d)  NIAA,  namely  a
    decision to refuse to vary leave by way  of  the  granting  of  further
    leave to remain, and the decision concerns an application identified in
    the Rules as required to be considered under a points based system.

30. He continues that if Exception 2  applies  the  Tribunal  may  consider
    evidence adduced by the appellant only if it was "submitted in  support
    of and at the time of making the application" to which the  immigration
    decision related.

31. He concludes that in each case the  application  was  made  before  the
    awarding body awarded the post graduate qualification.  The information
    that the post-graduate qualification had been awarded  came  after  the
    application  but  before  the  decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State.
    Therefore it is excluded from being  considered  by  the  Tribunal  and
    accordingly these claimants could not succeed  in  their  appeals.  The
    rules required them to have supplied the information at the time of the
    application and the law  prevented  the  Tribunal  from  receiving  any
    further information that was not contained in the application.

32. Mr Hayes further relies in support of  his  submission  upon  a  recent
    decision of the Upper Tribunal in Ali  (see above at [7]) where at [20]
    the Upper Tribunal said this:-

             ".... There is a clear statutory framework which  specifically
             precludes  the  consideration  of  post-application   evidence
             adduced by the appellant in particular categories of case,  of
             which this is one.  The fact that the case  concerns  a  claim
             that the appellant satisfied a different  requirement  of  the
             PBS, rather than attempting to rely  on  further  evidence  in
             support of an application that had already been  made,  as  in
             Shahzad [[2012]  UKUT  81  (IAC)]  is  a  distinction  without
             substance.  Both situations come within the exception set  out
             in section 85A(4)(a).  In cases governed by section 85A it  is
             clear that in respect of evidence adduced the material date is
             the date of application, not the date of  decision.   What  is
             said in AQ about the relevant date being the date of  decision
             not the date of application has to be seen as not applying  to
             cases governed by section 85A, with which the Court of  Appeal
             was not concerned (para 31 of its judgment)."


33. Before we consider Mr Malik's answers one final authority of the  Court
    of Appeal should be taken into consideration. That is the  decision  in
    the case of Alam and others v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 960. In this case  a
    claimant sought to rely on post decision evidence of her eligibility to
    remain at the time of  application  and  decision  that  had  not  been
    supplied in the original application. Section 85A had come  into  force
    shortly before the adjourned hearing  of  her  appeal.   The  Court  of
    Appeal concluded that the claimant was precluded from relying upon such
    material. Lord Justice Sullivan giving  the  principal  judgment  noted
    that the purpose of the statutory scheme was as follows at [14] :-


             "As enacted, section 85(4) was subject to  the  exceptions  in
             subsection (5), but those exceptions  did  not  apply  to  PBS
             appeals.  Thus, if a PBS application had been refused  by  the
             Secretary of State because the applicant had failed to produce
             a specified document or documents, the applicant could  remedy
             the  omission  on  appeal  to  the  Tribunal.   Some  63%   of
             successful PBS appeals  were  allowed  because  the  appellant
             produced new evidence, which had not been submitted  with  the
             application, at the hearing of the appeal before the Tribunal:
             see Baroness Browning's reply  to  Lord  Avebury's  Motion  to
             Regret the Order on 7th July  2011.   The  Government  believe
             that the ability to produce new evidence at the  appeal  stage
             threatened to undermine the operation of the PBS: ibid."


34. Mr Malik in his skeleton argument indicated that there were two issues
    for us to decide:


             i. Did section 85A apply to preclude reliance on material  that
             was not submitted when the application was  first  made  albeit
             that it was before the  decision  maker  at  the  time  of  the
             decision, and


             ii. Did the terms of the Immigration Rules and  Appendix  A  to
             the points based system require the material  to  be  submitted
             when the application was submitted?



35. His first submission was that section 85A had no application at all  to
    any of these appeals because in each case the Secretary  of  State  had
    made two decisions at the same time: to refuse leave to remain  and  to
    remove the claimant from the United Kingdom.  It is common ground  that
    there were two such decisions and the appeal is a single appeal against
    any decision made.  A separate legal point arises  in  respect  of  the
    second decision which will be considered after we have  determined  the
    first issue.  Mr Malik submits that 85A( 3)(a) only applies  where  the
    appeal is against "an immigration decision of  a  kind  specified"  and
    cannot apply when there are two such decisions.


36. We have no hesitation in rejecting that submission.  Just because there
    is a single appeal against two decisions and only one such decision  is
    a decision to refuse leave to remain specified in section 82(2)(d) does
    not mean that Exception 2 does not apply  to  an  appeal  against  such
    decisions.  Further, there is the obvious point that section 6  of  the
    Interpretation Act 1978 provides that, absent contrary intention in the
    statute, reference to the singular includes the plural.

37. There is more substance in Mr Malik's second submission which  is  that
    even if section 85A (3) applies in this  case,  the  Tribunal  was  not
    precluded from having regard to the evidence of  an  award  being  made
    after the application was  first  submitted  because  applications  are
    continuing applications and that the time  of  making  referred  to  in
    section 85A(4)(a) is not simply a start date of the application but the
    period of the making of the application at the start date until the end
    date of the application, ie the date of the decision, as the  Court  of
    Appeal has decided in AQ (Pakistan).

38. Before considering this submission further we will address  Mr  Malik's
    third submission.  He submitted that the judges  who  had  decided  the
    case adverse to his client were wrong to conclude that  "within  twelve
    months"  of  obtaining  the  relevant  qualification  meant  that   the
    qualification had to be obtained  within  the  period  of  time  twelve
    months before the application was first made.

39. He submitted that the meaning of "within" is   "around"  twelve  months
    whether the application or the award happened  first  as  long  as  the
    application and the award was not separated  by  a  gap  of  more  than
    twelve months.  In our judgment the natural reading of Table 10 is that
    an  applicant  must  show  he  "has  been  awarded"  (past  tense)  the
    qualification and that the application for  leave  to  remain  is  made
    before the expiry of twelve months from  the  date  of  the  award.  We
    accept that the language  of block 4 of Table  10  does  not  expressly
    state  that the award must come first, and it is possible that "within"
     could mean simply that the application and the award are not more than
     twelve months apart.

40. We note that paragraph 70 explains that the date of the  award  is  not
    the degree ceremony itself or the grant of a certificate but  the  date
    in which  the  applicant  was  notified  in  writing  by  the  awarding
    institution that the qualification had been awarded.  Although  it  was
    not central to any of the appeals before us, it is  possible  that  the
    awarding  institution  can  delegate  to  the  educational  institution
    communication of the fact that the qualification had been awarded  even
    though the actual degree was not conferred until later.

41. However, we conclude that the answer to the third  submission  was  not
    decisive of this appeal. If Mr Malik made good  his  second  submission
    that applications for  leave  to  remain  are  continuing  applications
    starting with  the  time  when  the  application  was  first  made  and
    continuing until such time as the Secretary of State determined it then
    whatever the proper reading of block 4 of Table 10 of Appendix  A  each
    of these claimants could comply with it.

42. Each can submit that they had obtained their qualifications  when  they
    did in the summer of 2012; they submitted the fact of such obtaining to
    the Secretary of State that supplemented the application which remained
    live and capable of being supplemented up to the dates of  the  adverse
    decisions at the various dates in the autumn 2012.   The  qualification
    had thus preceded the concluding time for making the application.

43. So everything depends on Mr Malik's second submission.  He can  support
    that submission by seven observations:


          i) The  most  important  is  Lord  Justice  Pill's  decision  that
             applications  for   variation    including   applications   for
             variation   of  points  based  system  claims  for  leave   are
             continuing applications starting when the application is  first
             lodged but remaining open until it is decided.


         ii) Both  Lord  Justice  Sullivan  and  Lord  Justice  Pill  in  AQ
             concluded that even when there is an historic timeline  in  PBS
             cases, that historic timeline is to be decided as at  the  date
             of decision rather than the date of application.


        iii) Lord Justice Sullivan in Alam had identified  the  mischief  to
             which section 85A was directed: reliance  by  the  Tribunal  on
             fresh evidence that was never placed before the decision maker;
             but in this case the material evidence was before the  decision
             maker at the time of the decision.


         iv) There is an inconsistency of approach in the  decision  itself;
             the Secretary of State did award each  claimant  twenty  points
             for the post graduate degree in the first block of Table 10 but
             not the 15 points  for  the  application  being  within  twelve
             months of obtaining the  qualification  in  block  4.   If  the
             Secretary of State's reliance on section 85A in  its  strictest
             sense was a good one then the qualification itself should  have
             been excluded from the award of points since it was not a piece
             of information provided in the application when  it  was  first
             made.


          v) Te Secretary of State's submission involves  reading  into  the
             words of section 85A the qualifying  words  'application  first
             made' rather than leaving 'application'  to  bear  its  natural
             meaning  which  as  Lord  Justice  Pill  has  explained  is   a
             continuing one .  There was no need to read  into  the  section
             such a word to make sense of the statutory purpose,  which  was
             concerned with material that the Secretary of State has not had
             a chance to consider prior to making a decision.


         vi)  It  would  be  inconsistent  with  principles   of   statutory
             construction to apply a permissive meaning to the strict  words
             in the absence of an unambiguous statement of intention by  the
             legislation.


        vii) It was always open to the Secretary of State to make a decision
             on the applications shortly after the 6  April  2012  when  the
             points based system  route  in  question  had  been  withdrawn.
             However  her  officials  had  specifically  waited  until   the
             awarding bodies had made their  awards  and  communicated  with
             them to clarify the date of the award.  There is little purpose
             in the Secretary of State inquiring and  receiving  information
             before the decision is made and  then  depriving  the  Tribunal
             from having access to that information or regard to it  on  the
             appeal.


44. Mr Hayes had no really coherent answer to these submissions.  His  core
    submission  prefigured  in  his  skeleton   argument   was   that   the
    observations in AQ (Pakistan) were not at  all  concerned  with  points
    based system applications where there was a relevant historic timeline.
    In our judgment, that was clearly wrong. Both  Lord  Justice  Pill  and
    Lord Justice Sullivan in the paragraph cited above  were  at  pains  to
    distinguish the AS conclusion (where there was no PBS historic timeline
    point) from the applications in AQ where there  were.   Both  indicated
    that the historic timeline applied at the date  of  the  decision,  not
    application with Lord Justice Pill  explaining  that  was  because  the
    application continued until the decision.

45. Second, Mr Hayes submitted that the supply of further information  fell
    outside  section  3C  and  therefore  outside  the  principles  of   JH
    (Zimbabwe).  We find that wholly unconvincing; manifestly this was  not
    a wholly fresh application for a wholly different purpose which was the
    striking feature of JH (Zimbabwe) but further information in  the  same
    application that was received before the decision was taken. There  was
    no attempt to vary the application after the date of  decision  in  the
    way that was deprecated both by the section and the authorities reliant
    upon it.

46. Third, Mr Hayes raised paragraph  34F of  the  Immigration  Rules  that
    states:

        "Any valid variation of a leave to remain application will be
        decided in accordance with the Immigration Rules at the date such
        variation is made".

47.  However,  we  conclude  that  that  provision  does  not  assist  him.
    Paragraph 34F appears to be linked to 34E  dealing  with  the  specific
    problem of variation of application which introduce a new  purpose  and
    paragraph 34G that decides when an application is made in such context.
    Here there was no such new purpose. Secondly  and  more  significantly,
    the rules in force at the date when the application was supplemented by
    the submission of the award criteria, and indeed at  the  date  of  the
    decisions of each of  these  applications,  included  the  introductory
    preamble to HC 1888 published on the 15 March 2012:

        "The other changes set out in the Statement shall take effect on  6
        April 2012. However, if an applicant has made  an  application  for
        entry clearance or leave before 6 April 2012  and  the  application
        has not been decided before  that  date,  it  will  be  decided  in
        accordance with the rules in force on 5 April 2012".




Conclusions

48. In this case there was a single application for a single  purpose  made
    before the 6 April 2012 but supplemented by data  supplied  before  the
    decision was made.

49. According to the Court of Appeal in AQ (Pakistan) the application is  a
    continuing one and therefore each applicant  provided  the  information
    required by Table 10 before the application ceased to be made.

50. The  information  from  the  awarding  body  was  supplied  within  the
    application broadly construed and within a period of 12 months  of  the
    award.

51. As the evidence was supplied before the application ceased to  be  made
    and was before the decision maker at the time of the  decision,  it  is
    both admissible for the purposes of section 85A(4)  and  satisfied  the
    requirement of block 4 of Table 10.

52. There is nothing in the decision of Ali that precludes  our  conclusion
    in this case. First, that case was reliant upon section 120 but that is
    not an issue in these cases. Second, the Tribunal in  Ali  appeared  to
    assume that section 85A operated to preclude material that had not been
    submitted when the application was first made without  considering  the
    concept of continuing application  supported  by  the  judgment  in  AQ
    (Pakistan).

53. It appears that we are the first judicial body to grapple with the true
    scope of section 85A.  We  fully  recognise  that  this  provision  was
    intended to restrict the material  that  could  be  considered  by  the
    Tribunal, but in fact the material informing what  its  stated  purpose
    is, accords with the present  decision  where  the  Tribunal  has  only
    considered material that was submitted to the Secretary  of  State  and
    considered by her before she made the decision.

54. Further, it would be wrong in principle to give the exclusionary rule a
    wider remit than either the purpose indicated by the promoting body was
    to be or the concept of continuing application as endorsed by the Court
    of Appeal.

55. We recognise that a number of previous decisions of the AIT and the  UT
    relating to the points based system have been overturned by  the  Court
    of Appeal where an over-restrictive approach has been applied.  We  are
    not endeavouring to apply an over-generous approach but simply to  give
    effect to the meaning of the words according to  normal  principles  of
    statutory construction and in the  light  of  the  conclusion  that  an
    application of this sort is a continuing application starting with  the
    date it was first submitted and terminating with the date upon which it
    is decided.

56. In our judgment, there  is  no  public  policy  in  favour  of  a  more
    restrictive approach.  After all the Secretary of  State  did  evaluate
    the material subsequently provided in the  application  and  did  award
    points to each of these claimants on the  basis  that  they  "had  been
    awarded" the qualification. It would be inconsistent  to  then  dispute
    that the qualification that had  been  awarded  had  not  been  awarded
    within the period of 12 months of the application.

57. Further there was the practice of the UKBA shortly before the  relevant
    scheme was abolished to occasionally invite the applicant to supplement
    the  application  by  material  not   originally   contained   in   the
    application.  There seems no point at all in  the  Secretary  of  State
    having the relevant information at the date of the decision and  giving
    it effect for one purpose but not another and then seeking  to  prevent
    the Tribunal from evaluating that  information  in  the  course  of  an
    appeal which still exists against points based system decisions.

58. Any other construction would mean that the dimensions of the last group
    of people to whom this aspect of the points based System was open would
    depend upon the comparatively arbitrary question of when their  courses
    concluded, leave to remain ended and when the qualifications came  into
    effect.

59. We fully recognise that the Secretary of  State  fairly  announced  the
    termination of the scheme 1 year in  advance  and  made  provision  for
    transitional cases.  But for the reasons that we  have  endeavoured  to
    set out we are persuaded that these were cases within the  transitional
    scheme and for the reasons already given we conclude  that  Mr  Malik's
    submission is right.

60. We therefore conclude that the decisions in the cases of the  claimants
    Khatel, Adhikari and Al Islam did contain a material error of law.   We
    remake the decisions and the consequence of our remaking  them  on  the
    information that was known to the Secretary of State at the time of the
    decisions is that such refusal was not in accordance with the rules and
    the claimants' appeals are accordingly allowed.

61. In the case of Raju the judge was correct to conclude that the case  of
    Ali was not decisive in displacing the decision of  AQ  (Pakistan)  and
    the judicial observations already  recorded.   There  was  no  material
    error of law made by the judge and  the  Secretary  of  State's  appeal
    against this decision is dismissed.

62. As a subordinate footnote to this appeal, we note that in the  case  of
    Khatel the appeals were dismissed on all grounds.  In the  other  three
    appeals each judge recognised that even if the decision to refuse leave
    to remain was a lawful one the decision to remove the claimant  at  the
    same time was not according to the jurisprudence of the Upper  Tribunal
    on that point most recently summarised in the decision of Adamally  and
    Jaferi (Section 47 Removal Decision: Tribunal Procedures)  [2012]  UKUT
    414 (IAC).  We appreciate the Secretary of State is seeking  to  appeal
    this decision but unless and until this  is  set  aside  it  means  the
    judges of the First-tier Tribunal should allow  removal  appeals  where
    there are simultaneous decisions to refuse leave to remain and remove.

63. We having raised the matter at the outset of these  appeals,  Mr  Hayes
    quite properly had no objection to us granting a late  application  for
    permission to appeal to Mr Malik to amend  his  grounds  of  appeal  in
    Khatel to include this submission.  Having now raised the matter  there
    was no objection by  Mr  Hayes  to  allowing  the  appeal  against  the
    decision to remove on this basis.

64. In the event for the reasons we have given for our  conclusion  now  in
    allowing the appeal on the refusal against  the  refusal  of  leave  to
    remain this further decision has no real purchase. However,  Mr  Khatel
    should not be in  a  different  position  from  the  other  appellants,
    whatever course these appeals may take in the future.

Disposal:


    There is an error of law in the decisions to dismiss the appeals  under
    the  Immigration  Rules  in   IA/20856/2012   (Khatel),   IA/20567/2012
    (Adhikari) and IA/21355/2012 (Al Islam) such that the decisions are set
    aside to be remade.
    We re-make the decision in these appeals by allowing them.


    There was no error of law in the decision to allow the appeal under the
    Immigration Rules in IA/21053/2012 (Raju) such that the decision be set
    aside. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.


    There is an error of law in the decision dismissing  the  appeal  under
    section 47 (the decision to remove) in IA/20856/2012 (Khatel) such that
    the decision is set aside to be re-made.


    We re-make the decision in that appeal by allowing it.




    Both members of the panel have contributed to this decision




    Signed


                  Mr Justice Blake


                  Chamber President


                  22 January 2013

