

Asylum and Immigration Tribunal

        KL (Article 8-Lekstaka-delay-near-misses) Serbia & Montenegro [2007]
                                 UKAIT 00044

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 11 December 2006                             |On 18 May 2007             |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       Senior Immigration Judge Storey
                               Mr G F Sandall
                                Mrs W Jordan

                                   Between



                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:         Mr S McLoughlin, from TRP Solicitors
For the Respondent:        Mr J Singh, Home Office Presenting Officer


   The judgment of Collins J in Lekstaka [2005] EWHC 745 (Admin) established
   that on Judicial Review of a refusal of the Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal
   of permission to appeal to it that claimant's case was arguable, but  did
   not decide the merits of that case  nor  establish  general  propositions
   applicable to other cases.
   As  now  clarified  by  AA  (Afghanistan)[2007]  EWCA  Civ  12   and   SB
   (Bangladesh) [2007] EWCA Civ 28, the loss of a right of appeal  (e.g.  by
   being denied a grant of ELR as a minor) does not amount to a particularly
   significant "disbenefit" unless there are  practical  disadvantages  that
   can be demonstrated in the individual case  (e.g.  being  prevented  from
   working or being denied needed assistance under the Children Act 1989).
   Although the reliance placed by TK (Immigration  Rules-policy-Article  8)
   Jamaica [2007] UKAIT 00025 on the "truly exceptional circumstances"  test
   has been shown by Huang [2007] UKHL 11 to be wrong, its guidance on "near-
   misses" remains valid.  Even  when  an  individual's  circumstances  fall
   squarely within the rationale of a relevant immigration  rule  or  policy
   and so accord with its spirit albeit not its letter, a  "near-miss"  does
   not  of  itself  mean  that   an   expulsion   decision   constitutes   a
   disproportionate interference with an appellant's right  to  respect  for
   private and/or family life.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The appellant is a national of Serbia and  Montenegro,  born  on  18  May
1983. He seeks reconsideration of a  determination  of  an  adjudicator,  Mr
R.D. Lewis, notified  on  18  May  2003  dismissing  his  appeal  against  a
decision giving directions  for  his  removal  and  refusing  to  grant  him
asylum. His application to the Immigration Appeal  Tribunal  for  permission
to appeal was refused (by Mr J Fox,  a  Vice  President)  but  succeeded  on
judicial review. Noting that "[t]his is what I imagine will be  one  of  the
last extant claims for judicial review  of  a  refusal  by  the  Immigration
Appeal Tribunal of  permission  to  appeal",  Collins  J  quashed  Mr  Fox's
refusal of permission to appeal and remitted the matter to the Tribunal  for
fresh consideration to be  given.   On  16  February  2006  the  Asylum  and
Immigration Tribunal made an order for reconsideration.

2. The decision refusing the appellant asylum was made  as  long  ago  as  6
November 2002 and the determination was promulgated on a  date  prior  to  9
June 2003.  Accordingly the  jurisdiction  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
Tribunal, who are required by transitional provisions made under the  Asylum
and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004 to treat the  appeal
as reconsideration, is not limited to error of law. However,  since  Collins
J in remitting the appeal on judicial review did  so  on  the  basis  of  an
arguable error of law, it is appropriate that we first address  whether  the
adjudicator's determination was legally flawed.

3. The appellant's immigration history is of some moment in  this  case.  He
left Kosovo in January/February 1999 and went to Macedonia  before  arriving
in the UK on 9 November 1999 and applying for asylum the same  day.  He  was
then 16. The respondent did not, however, consider his  asylum  claim  until
an interview which took place on 29  October  2002.  As  already  noted  the
eventual refusal decision was made on 6 November 2002.

4. The basis of the appellant's claim was that he had been  forced  to  flee
his home area in Gjakova,  Kosovo  as  a  result  of  the  Serbian  campaign
against ethnic Albanians. His parents decided he  should  leave  and  go  to
Macedonia. Subsequently he learnt that his father  and  paternal  uncle  had
been killed and their family home destroyed. The whereabouts of  his  mother
and siblings was unknown. When he came to the UK he  joined  his  uncle  and
aunt and his cousin. They had fled Kosovo earlier in the war, arriving  some
time in 1998; they had been recognised as refugees in May  1999.  Since  his
arrival they have treated him as their son. As a student  attending  college
he has formed a social network of friends. He now has a British girlfriend.

5. Despite some misgivings the adjudicator  accepted  that  the  appellant's
account was credible. In the light of  the  appellant's  withdrawal  at  the
hearing  of   his  asylum  grounds  of  appeal  and  the  statement  of  the
appellant's representative that the appellant  would rely  only  on  Article
8, the adjudicator went on to analyse the appellant's Article  8  claim.  He
found that the appellant's relationship with  his  uncle,  aunt  and  cousin
amounted to family life within the meaning of Article 8.   He  set  out  his
analysis of the appellant's claim at paragraph 36:

    "I find, however, that the respondent's action seeking  to  remove  the
    appellant is in accordance with the law and has the legitimate  aim  of
    the maintenance  of  immigration  controls.   I  have  also  considered
    whether removal by the respondent  is  proportionate  in  a  democratic
    society to the legitimate aim  to  be  achieved.   I  have  taken  into
    account the background evidence, which has been placed before me.   The
    appellant has lost his father and all contact with his mother.  He  has
    formed a family relationship with his uncle's family and had  developed
    bonds with his aunt and cousin. The appellant is now a young  adult  of
    20 years of age. He is fit and healthy and there is no evidence that he
    is suffering from any psychiatric disorder because of  the  experiences
    he has undergone.  The facilities available to him in Gjakova as  shown
    in the report, are adequate for a young adult male and there  are  many
    NGOs working in the area. He will not be left to manage on his own.  It
    is a sad fact of the troubles  in  Kosovo  that  many  young  men  find
    themselves in the position of the appellant but there is no reason  why
    he should not be able to resume an ordinary life there. Considering all
    these factors, I conclude that the decision to return is  proportionate
    to the legitimate aim to be achieved."

6. The application for permission  to  appeal  raised  three  main  grounds.
First it was submitted that the adjudicator had given  no  consideration  to
the fact that the respondent had delayed three years in reaching a  decision
on his asylum claim. Second, it was contended that the adjudicator  had  not
properly recognised that the appellant had no  family  left  in  Kosovo  and
would not be able to establish family life there. Third, it was argued  that
it was not reasonable to expect the appellant's uncle and  aunt  and  cousin
in the UK to follow him to Kosovo as they have been granted  refugee  status
and his uncle was severely disabled having been shot at by Serbian forces.

7. In amplifying these grounds, Mr McLoughlin stated that it  could  not  be
right in general terms, that by sitting on his hands the Secretary of  State
can make his case stronger.  As  time  passes,  the  appellant's  Article  8
rights should be seen as growing stronger, not  weaker.  He  argued  further
that the adjudicator had also failed to take into account the fact that  the
appellant's UK family had a refugee background  and  that  the  relationship
between the appellant  and  his  uncle  was  akin  to  father  and  son.  Mr
McLoughlin said it was also important that we  bear  in  mind  the  opinions
about the appellant's Article 8 claim expressed by Moses J (as he then  was)
and Collins J in the course of the judicial review proceedings.  The  latter
had noted as relevant  the European  Court  of  Human   Rights  judgment  in
Jakupovic v Austria [2004] 38 EHRR 27 in which  it  had  been  said  in  the
context of an Article 8 expulsion case that there would   have  to  be  very
weighty reasons to remove a minor to a war torn country. Collins J had  also
emphasised the fact that the appellant experienced a "near-miss" under  both
immigration rules and policy.

8. Moses J in his 4 March 2004 decision granting  permission  to  apply  for
judicial review stated:

    "4.  I do hope somebody can look at this particular case again and  the
    claimant can stay with the only family he  has.  He  is  only  20,  fit
    though he may be, and the idea of sending him back to  Kosovo  when  he
    had been in this country since the age of 16, certainly gives pause for
    further thought. I hope somebody can look at this case again before  it
    disappears without trace."

9. From the subsequent letter from the respondent dated  24  April  2004  it
would appear that these sentiments led the Secretary of State to review  the
appellant's case, but that it was decided to maintain the refusal.

10. In the judgment by Collins  J  on  18  April  [2005]  EWHC  745  (Admin)
(hereafter "the Lekstaka case") it was stated:

    "36. One must of course also bear in mind that to remove  the  claimant
    to Kosovo would not only interfere  with  his  family  life  which  the
    Adjudicator had found to exist - and which  clearly  did  exist  -  but
    would effectively bring it to an end.     There has been  a  suggestion
    that he could keep in touch and could visit as and when he was able, it
    not being suggested that it would be reasonable to expect the uncle and
    his family to relocate to Kosovo in  order  to  be  with  the  claimant
    there. In theory that, I suppose, is  possible.  In  reality  it  is  a
    forlorn hope, partly because it presupposes  that  the  claimant  would
    have the means to enable him to travel to visit for any length of time;
    and secondly that an accommodating Entry Clearance Officer would  grant
    him the necessary clearance to enable him to do  so,  because  the  ECO
    would have to be persuaded that he qualified within the  terms  of  the
    visit rules.   It would mean that  he  intended  to  return  after  the
    period of his visit and was able to maintain  himself  without  working
    during the period when he was to be a visitor to this country.  Whether
    he would succeed in so persuading the Entry Clearance Officer is as  it
    seems to me, a moot point. In any event, there  is  no  doubt  that  he
    would be in a very unhappy situation, were he to be returned to Kosovo.
    That of  course  is  not  in  itself  determinative.  There  are  many,
    undoubtedly, for whom return is a most unhappy state  of  affairs.  But
    there are not, I suspect, many  whose  family  life  is  such  as  this
    claimant's.


    37. If one looks back and wonders whether he would have qualified at an
    earlier stage, one finds, first of all that  had  he  been  a  son,  as
    opposed merely to being a nephew, he would, on the  face  of  it,  have
    been able to gain entry as such a dependant had he  applied  before  he
    reached the age of 18. Certainly it is difficult to conceive that there
    would have been any bar under  the  Rules.   He  certainly  would  have
    qualified. Equally had he been a son, a  dependant,  as  opposed  to  a
    nephew, and had the family not  been  granted  asylum,  he  would  have
    qualified to enter under the family policy. Furthermore, it was  policy
    to allow the family of refugees who were granted that  status  to  join
    them in this country and he would have qualified on that basis  too  as
    the dependent son, if he had applied to come before he reached the  age
    of 18.


    38. Mr Beard submits that it is not appropriate and not proper to  look
    back in that way and to ask what would have happened if  the  situation
    had been somewhat different.  But it seems to me that one  is  entitled
    to see whether, in all the circumstances, this case  falls  within  the
    spirit of the Rules or the policies, even if not within the letter.  It
    does in my view quite plainly fall within the  spirit  because,  albeit
    only a nephew, he has no other family - his father having  been  killed
    and his mother having disappeared - and he  has  been  treated  by  his
    uncle as if he were indeed the  son  of  the  family  and  that  in  my
    judgment is certainly capable of constituting an exceptional  state  of
    affairs.


    39. The Adjudicator does not in terms spell out the consequences of his
    findings. He does not go into the question of whether  the  matter  was
    exceptional  in  any  detail.  This  is  not  surprising  because   the
    exceptional test was not the test which the courts had  decided  on  at
    the date that the Adjudicator reached his  decision.   I  have  already
    indicated that I  have  some  concern  at  the  Adjudicator's  approach
    referring to many young men finding themselves in the true position  of
    this appellant and how his position and condition  was  perhaps  rather
    different from that which might apply in other cases.


    40. That, coupled with Mr Fox's reference to law [a reference to  Mr  J
    Fox,  a  Vice  President  prematurely  applying   an   error   of   law
    jurisdiction], does create concern that the  proper  approach  may  not
    have been adopted in this case. I am quite satisfied that  there  is  a
    real chance of success, looking at the overall  facts,  if  the  matter
    goes back to the Tribunal to review and  reconsider  the  situation  in
    this case."

11. Collins J was of course analysing the  appellant's  case  in  accordance
with the Court of Appeal's guidance in Huang  [2005]  EWCA  Civ  105.  Since
then (and after the hearing of this case) the House of Lords has  given  its
judgment in Huang [2007] UKHL 11. The latter makes clear, inter  alia,  that
the test of "truly exceptional circumstances" is not a  legal  test.  Whilst
we must bear this new guidance in mind when deciding this case, it seems  to
us that the essential question at the heart of this case  has  always  been,
and remains, whether the decision to remove amounted to  a  disproportionate
interference with the appellant's right  to  respect  for  his  private  and
family life.  Collins J's judgment was primarily  -and  properly-  concerned
with the factors that had to be  considered  when  assessing  the  issue  of
proportionality  in  this  case.  It  sees  the  following  as  factors   of
particular relevance : that  the appellant was effectively an  orphan;  that
he had come to the UK when he was a minor; that he had  become  a  de  facto
son of his uncle; that removal to Kosovo would effectively bring his  family
life to an end; that there was an essentially refugee character  to  his  UK
family; that the appellant, if he had been treated as a dependent  son  when
still a minor, would have been eligible to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom
both under the Immigration Rules and  under  relevant  policy;  and  further
that, by making no decision on the appellant's asylum appeal  until  he  had
turned eighteen, the respondent  had denied the appellant the benefit  of  a
grant of exceptional leave to remain which he would otherwise have had.

12. Mr McLoughlin urged us to regard the observations made by Collins  J  in
Lekstaka as demonstrating that the appellant's Article 8 claim was  entitled
to succeed on its merits, although they were only made in the context  of  a
judicial review decision finding that permission to appeal should have  been
granted. In this regard he emphasised that Lekstaka  had  since  been  cited
with approval in a number of merits decisions of the Asylum and  Immigration
Tribunal.

13. For the respondent Mr  Singh  accepted  that  the  adjudicator  had  not
addressed the delay issue, but this did  not,  he  submitted,  amount  to  a
material error of law. He further maintained that  the  Secretary  of  State
had not "sat on his hands" regarding this case;  a  considerable  amount  of
time had been taken up by the appellant  pursuing  legal  remedies.  To  the
extent that there was delay on the part of the respondent, that was in  part
attributable to a change in policy introduced on 12 February 2002  regarding
asylum applicants who reach  18  without  having  had  their  asylum  claims
resolved. The policy specified that such persons should  be  interviewed  as
adults.  It was a matter for the respondent, said Mr  Singh,  what  policies
he adopted in relation to unaccompanied minors who claimed asylum.    Whilst
he did not seek to argue that the adjudicator was wrong to find an  existent
family life between the appellant and his uncle (and uncle's family) in  the
UK, even though he was no longer a minor, Mr  Singh  said  it  was  properly
seen as relevant by the adjudicator, when  assessing  proportionality,  that
the appellant was a young adult with no health problems.   It  was  not  the
case that asylum seekers at the relevant time needed  ELR  in  order  to  be
able to work. When considering, as Collins J  seemed  to  think  had  to  be
done, whether it was reasonable to expect the appellant to  go  abroad,  and
apply for entry clearance if he wished to rejoin his  uncle's  family  as  a
dependent relative or seek to enter in some other capacity,  it  had  to  be
kept in mind that family life could be maintained by  occasional  visits  or
other forms of contact (telephone etc.) The aunt and uncle's refugee  status
related to the period when Milosevic and the Serbs were carrying  out  armed
attacks on ethnic Albanians in Kosovo.

Our assessment

14. The adjudicator accepted that the appellant had  established  a  private
and  family  life  in  the  United  Kingdom  on  the  basis  of  his   close
relationship since November 1999 with his uncle, aunt and cousin as well  as
his ties of friendship with others. That, as we understand  it,  is  not  in
dispute. In any  event,  in  view  of  the  close  emotional  and  financial
dependency of the appellant on his uncle and aunt  since  he  came  to  this
country aged 16, we consider that the  adjudicator  was  quite  entitled  to
find that his ties  with  them  went  further  than  normal  emotional  ties
between an uncle and aunt and their nephew, even though  he  had  become  an
adult by the time of the hearing: see Kugathas [2003] EWCA Civ 31.

15. Deciding the case as he was in May 2003, the  adjudicator  did  not  use
the language which has been adopted since by the House of  Lords  in  Razgar
[2004] UKHL 27 and by  the Court of Appeal case of Huang,  [2005]  EWCA  Civ
105.  However,  the  cases  the  adjudicator  cited,  Nhundu   and   Chiwera
01/TH/0613) and Mahmood [2001] Imm AR 229, reflect principles  which  remain
well established in the case law as  elaborated  in  Razgar  and  reaffirmed
(with one caveat) by the House  of  Lords  judgment  in  Huang  [2007]  UKHL
11.Hence we do not consider  that  the  adjudicator  can  be  said  to  have
applied wrong legal principles simply because he dealt with the  appellant's
case pre-Razgar. Nevertheless we of  course  have  to  consider  whether  he
erred in law by applying the guidance set out in Razgar  and   Huang  [2007]
UKHL 11 and other leading cases.  Several  other  cases  have  been  decided
since we heard this appeal, in particular  HB  (Ethiopia)  [2006]  EWCA  Civ
1713,  Rudi & anor v SSHD [2007] EWHC 60 (Admin),  AA  (Afghanistan)  [2007]
EWCA Civ 12,  SB (Bangladesh) [2007] EWCA  Civ  26  and  AG(Eritrea)  [2007]
EWCA  Civ  407.  We  considered  whether  to  invite  the  parties  to  make
submissions on Huang [2007] UKHL 11, AG (Eritrea)  and  these  other  recent
cases, particularly as SB and AA make specific reference to the judgment  of
Collins J in the Lekstaka case, but concluded that was unnecessary, in  view
of the conclusions we had already reached on the material before us.

16. It is not in dispute in this case, so far as we understand it, that  the
decision giving  directions  for  the  appellant's  removal  constituted  an
interference having grave  consequences  for  the  appellant  and  that  the
decision nevertheless pursued a legitimate aim and was  in  accordance  with
the law. In other words, this is a case which turned solely  on  the  proper
answer to be given to Lord Bingham's  question  5  in  Razgar,  relating  to
whether the interference was proportionate  to  the  legitimate  public  end
sought to be pursued.

17. We observe at the outset that we have to decide the Article 8  issue  as
to its merits on the law and the facts. We are not  concerned  with  whether
there is an arguable  error  of  law.  We  underline  this  because  of  the
emphasis Mr McLoughlin has sought to place on the judgments of Moses  J  and
Collins J in earlier proceedings. We accept that both judges did include  in
their judgments comments touching on the merits of the  appellant's  Article
8 claim and that, being  comments  made  by  judges  of  the  Administrative
Court, they deserve our careful consideration; but,  as  Collins  J  was  at
pains to state at several points, the Administrative Court findings  on  the
judicial review proceedings were in respect of arguability only.

18. We consider that the adjudicator materially erred in  law  although  not
in all the ways contended for  by  Mr  McLoughlin.  Particularly  given  the
frequent reliance placed on the  Lekstaka  case  in  other  appeals  raising
Article 8, it is of some importance that we pinpoint where  we  think  there
was error and where we think there was not.

 19. We shall deal first with ways in  which  we  do  not  accept  that  the
adjudicator erred. We do not find that he overlooked that the  appellant  if
removed to Kosovo would not be able  to  establish  family  life  there.  It
seems to us that he fully recognised this  but  did  not  consider  that  it
meant that the appellant would be unable to cope as a  result.  His  finding
was that the disruption of the appellant's UK family life would not  gravely
affect him because he was a fit and healthy young adult who  (by  virtue  of
what was shown by the background  evidence  about  facilities  in  his  home
area) "will not be left to manage on his own". He observed that "[it]  is  a
sad fact of the troubles in Kosovo that many young men  find  themselves  in
the position of the appellant ...". These  words  have  been  criticised  by
Collins J, but it is important not to read more  into  that  criticism  than
was intended. We do not think that Collins J meant  to  suggest  that  there
was anything wrong in the adjudicator attaching weight to the fact that  the
appellant was not a vulnerable individual at the date of hearing  by  virtue
of any psychological, health or other special problems. It seems to us  that
what concerned Collins J was that by this remark  the  adjudicator  appeared
to rely on a stereotype rather than to focus on the  appellant's  particular
circumstances. In that regard we agree: taken as an overall summary  of  the
impact on the appellant of his removal to  Kosovo,  these  words  failed  to
take sufficient account  of  specific  characteristics  of  the  appellant's
circumstances, the fact that he was effectively orphaned before arriving  in
the United Kingdom when aged 16 being  one  of  them;  and  certain  policy-
related aspects concerning how his appeal was handled by  the  Home  Office,
being another.

20. We do not see that the adjudicator anywhere sought to rely on  the  view
that the appellant's uncle and his uncle's family  could  accompany  him  to
Kosovo. Indeed it  seems  to  us  that  his  analysis  of  paragraph  36  is
predicated on the fact that the appellant's removal  would  disrupt  his  UK
family life relationships.

21. With one caveat (which we  shall  come  when  considering  "near-misses"
under immigration rules and policy),  we  reject  the  contention  that  the
adjudicator failed to take into account the fact  that  the  appellant's  UK
family had a refugee background. He specifically noted at paragraph 23  that
the aunt and her son "fled to the United Kingdom and  were  granted  refugee
status on 27 May 1999".   Nor do we see any error  in  the  adjudicator  not
attaching significant weight to the fact that the  appellant's  aunt  and/or
niece had been granted such status.  As Mr McLoughlin himself observed,  his
uncle and aunt had been recognised as refugees in May 1999, in light of  the
real threat they faced at that time from the Serbian regime. No other  basis
of fear has been identified. In such circumstances it  cannot  seriously  be
suggested that with the fall of Milosevic and the installation of  KFOR  and
UNMIK supervision in Kosovo in June 1999, that his uncle and aunt  continued
to have a fear of persecution.    Mr  McLoughlin  may  well  be  right  that
neither the uncle nor aunt have  been  subject  to  any  decision  to  apply
Refugee Convention cessation clauses to them, but that  is  not  the  point.
Purely focussing on the position of the uncle and  aunt  and  their  natural
son, there was no evidence that they continued to have a  well-founded  fear
of persecution or face a real risk of serious harm or ill-treatment.

22. We do not consider that the judgment of  the  European  Court  of  Human
Rights in Jakupovich v Austria [2004] 38 EHRR 37 had any  great  bearing  on
the facts of the appellant's case. Jakupovich concerned the  proportionality
of the removal of someone who was a minor.  It is true that this  case  also
highlights the relevance of conditions in the country of  return  where  the
latter has been ravaged by war:  in  Jakupovic  the  country  concerned  was
Bosnia.  However, the adjudicator plainly took account of the  situation  in
Kosovo and its recent history. He did not assume that the  country  was  now
entirely free of problems.

23. In the passage from the judgment of Collins J in the  Lekstaka  case  it
will be noted that he appeared at one point to set some store  by  the  fact
that the appellant would have dim prospects of succeeding in an  application
made from abroad for entry clearance to return  to  the  UK.  His  reasoning
appears to have been, not so much that the appellant would have  lacked  the
potential option of applying for entry clearance (e.g. as a  family  visitor
or as a student, or, if his circumstances were to  worsen,  as  a  dependant
relative of his uncle and aunt); rather it  was  because  of  the  practical
consideration that the appellant would not have the financial means. In  any
event, it has now been clarified by the Court of Appeal in SB, echoing  very
much the opinion of Brown LJ  in  Ekinci  [2003]  EWCA  Civ  765,  that  the
question of  good  or  bad  prospects  of  success  in  an  entry  clearance
application is not to be taken  into  account  as  part  of  the  Article  8
balancing exercise in expulsion cases. At  [21]-[27] Waller LJ stated:

    "21. On this second point, we consider that Ms Greaney was realistic to
    state, as she did in her skeleton argument, that "whether  or  not  the
    applicant would satisfy the requirements for entry clearance was not  a
    matter which the [Tribunal] ought to have taken into account". Although
    there are arguments (and first instance decisions)  which  support  the
    opposite view, that  statement  seems  to  be  right  as  a  matter  of
    principle, in terms of fairness and good practice, and in the light  of
    authority.


    22. So far  as  principle  is  concerned,  the  issue  of  whether  the
    applicant  satisfied  the  requirements  of  paragraph   246   of   the
    Immigration Rules would be for an entry clearance officer in Bangladesh
    to determine, if and when an application under that paragraph is  made.
    In the  absence  of  a  requirement  to  that  effect,  it  is  not  an
    appropriate issue for determination, when no such application has  been
    made, by a tribunal deciding a different question, at a different time,
    in a different country, and in different circumstances. It  would  also
    seem somewhat paradoxical if the stronger an appellant's perceived case
    for entry clearance under the Immigration Rules the more likely  he  or
    she is to be removed. Yet, subject to  the  first  point  mentioned  in
    paragraph [20] above, on the basis of the reasoning of the Tribunal  in
    this case, that would be the inevitable consequence.


    23. As to practicality, it would  be  unfortunate,  in  terms  of  time
    effort and expense, if a tribunal, when deciding whether  a  claim  for
    leave to remain was truly exceptional, had to  consider,  almost  as  a
    matter of course, how likely an appellant, if removed from  the  United
    Kingdom, would be to succeed on a subsequent putative  application  for
    entry clearance to come back to this country. Yet, as we see  it,  such
    an exercise would have to  be  carried  out  in  many,  possibly  most,
    appeals of the present type, if that issue  was  potentially  relevant.
    And, if such an exercise is carried out,  it  is  hard  to  see  how  a
    tribunal is to decide the weight or effect  of  such  a  factor  if  it
    decides that the prospects of success of such an application  to  enter
    are debatable or speculative.


    24. There is also a real risk of unfairness to an appellant if  such  a
    factor is taken into account. Thus, the views expressed  in  paragraphs
    [66] and [67] by the Tribunal in this case may turn out  to  be  wrong,
    either because an entry clearance officer takes a different view of the
    facts or the law, or because the Immigration Rules change,  or  because
    the facts change.


    25. There are decisions of this court which appear to us  to  establish
    that an appellant should not be able to resist removal  on  the  ground
    that he or she would have a very poor prospect of coming back  pursuant
    to an application for  entry  clearance.  We  have  in  mind  Ekinci  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2003]  EWCA  Civ  765,  at
    paragraphs [16] and [17], and Chikwamba v Secretary of  State  for  the
    Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ 1779, at paragraphs [42] to [46].  (See
    also Mahmood v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2001] 1  WLR
    840 at paragraphs [25] and [26], on a slightly different, but  similar,
    point). The "bizarre and unsatisfactory result" of an  appellant  being
    more likely to resist removal the weaker his future putative  case  for
    entry clearance was a strong factor in  the  reasoning  (see  paragraph
    [17] in Ekinci, quoted in paragraph [45] in Chikwamba). As mentioned in
    paragraph [37] above, the converse applies here.


    26. We accept that the question of whether an appellant's circumstances
    are truly exceptional in an Article 8 case can fairly  be  said  to  be
    affected by the perceived strength or  weakness  of  her  prospects  of
    getting back here if removed. That certainly appears to have been  part
    of the thinking of Jackson J in R v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department ex p Hashim (unreported, 21 January 2000) and Collins  J  in
    Lekstaka ... [2005] EWHC 745 (Admin).


    27. However, we consider that the arguments the other way are stronger.
    It is not as if  there  is  any  logical  or  practical  impediment  to
    excluding from a tribunal's consideration the prospects of a successful
    putative future entry clearance application, in a case such as this. It
    merely involves limiting the scope of the inquiry  as  to  whether  the
    appellant's circumstances are truly exceptional, and limiting it  in  a
    way which can fairly be said to be justified for the  reasons  we  have
    mentioned. In any event, there are the decisions of this court to which
    we have referred. In that connection, Hashim was  disapproved  on  this
    point in paragraph [26] of Mahmood, and the observation of  Collins  J,
    relied on by the Tribunal here, was something of a throw-away point (as
    discussed in paragraph [36] of his judgment), which does not appear  to
    us to have been essential to his decision". [emphasis added]

24. Indeed it may be thought that Collins J's observations  (and  there  are
other Tribunal cases  which  have  ventured  comments  of  a  similar  sort)
illustrate very well the reason why, as SB has confirmed, they  cannot  form
any operative part of the Article 8 balancing exercise: such  considerations
really depend far too  much  on  speculation  and  premature  evaluation  of
individual circumstances.

25. It is not to be thought, however, that SB  purports to say  that  it  is
wrong to take into account the existence of an option of applying for  entry
clearance. As Mahmood and Ekinci establish, if such an option  exists,  then
removal  will  not  be  disproportionate  unless   there   are   exceptional
circumstances which excuse a person from being required to pursue it and  in
this way take a place in the queue.  What  is  disapproved  in  SB  (echoing
Ekinci) is evaluating that option's prospects of success.

26. However, despite having rejected several of Mr McLoughlin's  contentions
and  having  discounted  as  a  factor  of  any  relevance  the  appellant's
prospects of applying from abroad for entry  clearance,  we  have  concluded
that he is right to identify two respects which taken together give rise  to
a material error of law. These relate to: (1) the adjudicator's  failure  to
take into account the fact of Home Office delay and the impact that  had  on
the appellant's immigration status; and (2)  his  related  failure  to  take
into account the significance of the fact that the Home  Office  had  chosen
not to consider the appellant's case at an earlier stage on the  basis  that
he was in fact a dependent son.

27. In relation to the issue of Home Office delay,  it  is  plain  that  the
adjudicator wholly failed to treat the factor of a delay of some 3 years  in
the processing of  the  appellant's  asylum  claim  as  a  relevant  factor.
Nevertheless since Mr Singh has urged us not to treat this error of  law  as
a material one, we need to examine it rather more closely.

Relevant principles of case law relating to delay

28. In analysing the significance of the delay factor in an  expulsion  case
such  as  this,  it  is  important  to  first  bear  in  mind   the   recent
clarification of the significance of delay  in  the  context  of  Article  8
given by the Court of  Appeal in  HB  (Ethiopia)   [2006]  EWCA  Civ   1713.
Buxton LJ sets out the relevant principles as follows:

   "The law in relation to delay: a summary


   24.    I draw the following conclusions from the authorities, binding  on
      us, discussed above.


     (i)  Delay in dealing with an application may, increasing the time that
          the claimant spends in  this  country,  increase  his  ability  to
          demonstrate family or private life  bringing  him  within  Article
          8(1).  That however is a question of fact, and to  be  treated  as
          such.


     (ii)     The application to an Article 8  case  of  immigration  policy
          will usually suffice without more  to  meet  the  requirements  of
          Article 8(2) [Razgar].  Cases where  the  demands  of  immigration
          policy are not conclusive will be truly exceptional [Huang].


     (iii)    Where delay  is  relied  on  as  a  reason  for  not  applying
          immigration policy, a distinction must be made between persons who
          have  some potential right under immigration policy to be in  this
          country (for instance, under marriage policy,  as  in   Shala  and
          Akaeke); and persons who have no such right.


     (iv)     In the former case, where it is sought  to  apply   burdensome
          procedural rules to the  consideration of the applicant's case, it
          may be inequitable in extreme cases, of national  disgrace  or  of
          the  system  having  broken  down  [Akaeke],  to   enforce   those
          procedural rules [Shala;  Akaeke].


     (v)  Where the applicant has no potential rights under the specifically
          immigration law, and therefore has to rely on   his  rights  under
          Article 8(1), delay in dealing with a previous  claim  for  asylum
          will be a relevant factor under Article 8(2),  but  it  must  have
          very substantial effects  if  it  is  to   influence  the  outcome
          [Strbac at paragraph  25].


     (vii)    And further, it is not clear that the court in Strbac  thought
          that the failure to  obtain  ELR  on  asylum  grounds  because  of
          failure to make a timely decision could  ever  be  relevant  to  a
          decision on the substance, as  opposed  to  the  procedure,  of  a
          subsequent Article 8 claim. Certainly, there is no reason in logic
          why that fact alone should affect the Article 8  claim.   On  this
          dilemma, see further paragraph 8 above.


     (viii)   Arguments based on the breakdown of immigration control or  of
          failure to apply the system properly are  likely  only  to  be  of
          relevance if the system in question is that which the Secretary of
          State seeks to rely on in the present  proceedings:  for  instance
          where a procedural rule of the system is  sought  to  be  enforced
          against the applicant [Akaeke].  The same arguments do not  follow
          where appeal is made in Article 8 proceedings to earlier  failures
          in operating the asylum system.


     (ix)     Decisions on proportionality made by tribunals should not,  in
          the absence of errors of  principle,  be  interfered  with  by  an
          appellate court [Akaeke]."

29. This guidance appears to us to remain  correct,  except  insofar  as  it
appears to rely on the test of "truly exceptional" as  being  a  legal  one:
see (ii). If, in  order  to  give  effect  to  Huang  [2007]  UKHL  11,  the
following words are added to the beginning of  the  last  sentence  of  (ii)
above, "There is an expectation that...", there can be no quarrel with it.

30. The significance of delay as a  factor  when  coupled  with  failure  to
grant a person limited leave to remain  under  a  policy  has  been  further
analysed by the Court of Appeal in the recent case of AA  (Afghanistan).  At
[21]- [25] Keene LJ stated:

    21. Mr Gill contends that the appellant has been denied  the  advantage
    of an in-country right of appeal on an application to vary leave and is
    in a more  precarious  position  as  a  result.  This  is  not  a  mere
    technicality. It means that the appellant would have had  legal  rights
    available to him which he has now lost. Moreover, there was some change
    in his circumstances, because there was evidence  put  before  the  AIT
    that in June 2005 he became engaged to a British national, and this new
    factor and any other changes could have been put forward during such an
    appeal process.


    22. I recognize the importance to  be  attached  to  the  loss  of  the
    potential  right  to  an  in-country  appeal  against  any  refusal  of
    variation of leave to remain. It is true that the chances  of  such  an
    appeal eventually meeting with success may have been slim:  on  this  I
    see the force of the points made by  Mr  Waite  about  the  substantive
    merits of such an appeal. Nonetheless, it is to be borne in  mind  that
    such an appeal process would have afforded the applicant the  advantage
    of an independent judicial consideration of those merits as they  stood
    at the time. That is a significant advantage  when  compared  with  the
    arguments which could be put forward on a judicial review of a decision
    by the Secretary of State that no new asylum or human rights claim  had
    been advanced. The appellant has lost that  advantage  because  of  the
    errors of law by the adjudicator and the AIT.


    23. He cannot, of course, now be restored to the position he would have
    been in, had he been granted discretionary leave to  remain  until  his
    18th birthday. Mr Waite is right to emphasise that. But the loss  which
    the appellant has suffered is a consideration which  the  Secretary  of
    State should consider in the exercise of his discretion as  to  whether
    the appellant should now be granted any further leave to remain and, if
    so, for how long.


    24. The same seems to me to be true of another disbenefit  suffered  by
    the appellant as a result of the errors of law. In written  submissions
    accepted by the court after the close of oral argument, the  intervener
    has made the point that if  the  appellant  had  enjoyed  discretionary
    leave to remain until his 18 birthday,  any  application  by  him  made
    before that leave expired to  extend  it  would  have  resulted  in  an
    automatic  extension  of  leave  until   the   application   (and   any
    consequential appeal) had  been  decided  or  withdrawn.  That  is  the
    consequence of section 3(C) of  the  Immigration  Act  1971.  Moreover,
    while lawfully in this country because of such an  automatic  extension
    of leave, he would have been entitled to work  and  to  obtain  various
    forms of assistance under the  Children  Act  1989.  Neither  of  those
    benefits is available to an overstayer.


    25. Legally the propositions seem to me to be sound.  Once  again,  the
    appellant cannot now obtain these benefits as of right: as is  said  on
    behalf of the Secretary of State, this court cannot put  the  appellant
    into the position in which he would have been, had discretionary  leave
    been granted. But, again, there can be no doubt that he has suffered  a
    disbenefit as a result of the legal errors made in this case, and  that
    is something which the Secretary  of  State  ought  now  to  take  into
    account. I accept that the conferring of the benefits relied on by  the
    intervener (and adopted on behalf of the appellant by Mr Gill) may  not
    be the purpose of a grant of discretionary leave -  in  that  Mr  Waite
    seems to be right. But such a grant  nonetheless  has  those  potential
    consequences and they cannot be ignored."


31. Whilst Carnwath LJ did not agree that the "purely procedural  advantage"
of being able to make a further appeal was  a  material  factor,  he  agreed
with Keene LJ that it could be, if there were practical advantages  accruing
to AA during his minority and the possibility of prolonging  them  after  he
had become an adult. He stated at [49]:

    "The further submissions of the Medical Foundation, as intervener, have
    provided examples of how the grant  of  exceptional  leave  would  have
    carried with it practical advantages during  the  claimant's  minority,
    and the possibility of prolonging them after he had  become  an  adult.
    The other members of the court are, I understand, satisfied that  these
    points are sufficient to raise at  least  an  arguable  case  that  the
    claimant has lost benefits of real substance,  and  that  the  loss  of
    those possible benefits is a matter which  could  be  material  to  the
    Secretary of State's  decision  whether  to  grant  exceptional  leave.
    Although I do not feel confident that we have been able to examine  the
    basis of those submissions in sufficient detail, I do  not  propose  to
    dissent from that conclusion."

32. At [60] Waller LJ agreeing with Keene LJ stated that "the loss  of  such
potential advantages (procedural or substantive) is a  factor  which  should
be taken into account by the Secretary of State".

33. In addition to HB (Ethiopia) and AA(Afghanistan)  there  has  also  been
recent guidance in SB (Bangladesh) dealing in part with the issue  of  delay
in the context of "near misses" under immigration rules or policies.  It  is
convenient, however, if we come  to  that  later  on.  How  does  the  above
guidance apply to the appellant's case?

34. We find it a little odd to begin with that Mr McLoughlin should  set  so
much store by the delay point, when it  was  effectively  abandoned  in  the
skeleton arguments prepared by the appellant's counsel who argued  the  case
at the judicial review hearing before Collins J, but,  since  his  arguments
are supported by case  law  principles,  we  cannot  reject  them  for  that
reason.

35. The crux of Mr McLoughlin's argument about delay is  that  if  the  Home
Office had got around to  processing  his  asylum  application  earlier  the
appellant would have been granted exceptional leave  the  remain,  at  least
until his 18th birthday, and that this would have enabled him  to  gain  the
benefit of having limited  leave  to  remain  and  to  take  employment.  In
support of this argument he drew our  attention  to  the  existence  at  the
relevant time of a Home Office policy to grant exceptional leave  to  remain
to minors until their 18th  birthday  unless  the  Secretary  of  State  was
satisfied that adequate reception and care facilities were available in  the
country of origin (since April 2003 this has continued but now in  the  form
of a policy  for  granting  Discretionary  Leave  to  Remain  (DL):  see  AA
(Afghanistan) [14]).

36. Qualifications need to be made to  the  scope  of  the  argument  raised
here. In the first place we would observe that  Mr  McLoughlin  has  rightly
not suggested that if this particular  appellant's  asylum  claim  had  been
processed earlier he would have been granted asylum. The appellant's  asylum
claim was always based on fear of Serbian repression. By the  time  he  made
his application for asylum  (9  November  1999)  the  Milosevic  regime  had
already fallen. The appellant's withdrawal before  the  adjudicator  of  his
asylum grounds  of  appeal  was  clear  recognition  of  this  (pre-arrival)
material change of circumstances in Kosovo.

37. Secondly, the fact that the appellant's asylum claim was  not  processed
for some three years was not, on the evidence, wholly due to simple  neglect
on the part of the Secretary of State. It is known that the  period  running
from when the appellant arrived (November 1999)  until  when  he  turned  18
(May 2001) coincided with one during which the Home  Office  was  having  to
deal  with  an  "unprecedented  rise  in  the  number  of   asylum   seeking
unaccompanied minors" (Rudi [71]). Further,  in  Ajanku  v  SSHD  EWHC  2515
Admin, a delay of 3 years 7 months on  a  claim  made  by  an  unaccompanied
minor in 1997 was held not to be so egregious as to be  in  itself  unlawful
especially as the decision  had  not  been  chased  (see  also  Ouseley  J's
reference to this case in Rudi [71]).

38. Thirdly,  so  far  as  any  suggestion  of  detriment  or  (to  use  the
phraseology of  HB (Ethiopia)  paragraph  22(v))  "substantial  effects"  is
concerned, the only effect identified by  Mr  McLoughlin  (beyond  the  mere
fact that the appellant would have had limited leave to remain until he  was
18) was the fact that he was thereby denied the right to work. Mr Singh  has
suggested that at the relevant time asylum  claimants  were  not  prohibited
from working, but was unable to confirm that. But whether or  not  that  was
the case, this appellant's Article 8 claim has throughout been based on  his
being a de facto son of an uncle and aunt who have been  supporting  him  so
he could pursue his education and studies.  He has never  asserted  that  he
wished to become economically independent of his uncle and aunt even  before
he reached eighteen. In addition, by virtue of the  good  care  he  received
from his  uncle  and  aunt,  the  appellant  was  plainly  not  in  need  of
assistance under the Children Act.

39. Even if the effects on this particular appellant's  situation  were  not
substantial, it remains necessary to attach some weight  to  the  fact  that
despite having  made  an  asylum  claim  in  1999,  the  Home  Office  never
considered him under its policy of  granting  ELR  to  unaccompanied  minors
which would (as Mr Singh conceded) have resulted in  him  been  granted  ELR
until his 18th birthday in May 2001. Furthermore, we  see  no  force  in  Mr
Singh's contention that the delay can be partly explained  by  a  change  of
Home Office policy in February 2002 resulting  in  no  interview  of  minors
until they turned 18. By that date the appellant had already turned  18  and
indeed was nearly 19.

40. We do not  see  that  anything  said  by  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  AA
(Afghanistan) establishes or seeks to establish that loss of  the  potential
right to an in-country appeal against any refusal of variation of  leave  to
remain should be regarded as a  factor  of  either  decisive  or  any  great
significance  except  in  cases  where  some   practical   disadvantage   or
disbenefit can be demonstrated (such as the loss  of  the  ability  to  take
work or receive assistance under the Children Act 1989).  Nevertheless  even
if the loss of the potential right to  an  in-country  appeal  is  the  only
factor arising in a particular case, that is still a relevant  consideration
to be weighed in the balance.

 41. The circumstances of the appellant in AA (Afghanistan) are not  on  all
fours with this appellant. By virtue of the fact that the appellant in  this
appeal lived with his  uncle's  family  and  whilst  a  minor  was  pursuing
education, there has been no suggestion that he wanted  to  work  and  there
was no need in his case to consider assistance under the Children Act  1989.
Hence, if the appellant were solely or primarily relying upon the factor  of
delay and/or the potential loss of an  in-country  right  of  appeal  on  an
application to vary leave, we  would  not  have  seen  the  failure  of  the
adjudicator to take it into account as amounting  to  a  material  error  of
law, especially since in his case neither the loss of  the  potential  right
to work or potential assistance under the Children Act was salient.

42. However, the issue of delay in  his  case  needs  to  be  considered  in
combination with others. This appellant,  unlike  AA,  arrived  here  having
effectively been orphaned and has since formed  close  family  ties  in  the
United Kingdom; and he was not considered as to whether he stood to  benefit
from  the  Home  Office  policy  of  granting   ELR   to   minors.   Another
distinguishing factor of particular significance in  this  case  relates  to
the appellant's "near-misses" under the Immigration  Rules  and  under  Home
Office policies.

43. When turning to examine the adjudicator's alleged  failure  to  consider
the appellant's situation under immigration rules and policies  which  could
have been applied to him analogously, we must  be  wary  of  spotting  fault
where there was none. To the extent that Mr McLoughlin sought to argue  that
the adjudicator overlooked the fact that the appellant's  relationship  with
his uncle was analogous to that of father and son, we do  not  accept  that.
The adjudicator noted that the appellant's aunt treated him as her  own  son
(see paragraph 20) and his finding that  family  life  existed  between  the
appellant and his uncle and aunt implicitly recognised this. Equally, it  is
perfectly clear that the  adjudicator  fully  took  into  account  that  the
appellant was sixteen when he came to the UK and had  effectively  lost  his
own family in Kosovo through the death of his father and  the  disappearance
of his mother: see paragraph 35. If there  is  fault  on  the  part  of  the
adjudicator it is not in  his  apprehension  of  the  facts  concerning  the
appellant's circumstances, but in his overlooking  of  the  relevant  policy
dimensions. We have already seen that he failed to consider a  policy  which
was directly applicable  to  the  appellant  (the  ELR  policy  relating  to
unaccompanied minors). Here  we  are  looking  at  his  alleged  failure  to
consider immigration rules and/or policies  which  analogously  impacted  on
the appellant.

Relevant principles of case law on "near-misses"

44. Before proceeding further it  will  be  helpful  to  set  out  the  main
propositions regarding near-misses that can be extracted from case  law.  It
is apparent from higher court decisions, SB in particular, that  there  have
been cases  that  have  been  taken  by  practitioners  to  assert  opposing
positions. In particular the case of R (Shkembi)  v  SSHD  [2005]  EWCA  Civ
1592 and that of Mongoto v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 751  have  been  contrasted.
In the former it was held in effect that a policy  which  did  not  strictly
apply could  supply  through  its  rationale  an  exceptional  case  for  an
immigration judge to consider on appeal. In  the  latter  it  was  held,  in
relation to the Family Exercise  policy,  that  where  there  was  a  lawful
policy to assist limited categories of entrants, it  would  be  quite  wrong
for the courts to build expectations approaching enforceable rights for  the
benefit of those to whom the policy  did  not  apply.  In  Rudi  Ouselely  J
appeared to align himself with the Mongoto approach, stating at [79]:

    "An Immigration Judge would have to approach the Family Exercise on the
    footing that the Claimant fell  outside  it  and  that  its  scope  was
    lawful. Much of the rationale could  apply  to  many  whose  lives  had
    developed over the prolonged periods for  which  they  remain  in  this
    country either without a decision or before  removal  action.  But  the
    approach in Mongoto to those who fall outside the scope of a particular
    policy to my mind precludes an Immigration Judge in effect expanding it
    to cover near misses or those to whom aspects of  the  rationale  could
    apply. I accept that there may be cases in which the  rationale  for  a
    policy may inform the judge of the significance of a particular  point;
    there may be lacunae, but that is very different from treating a policy
    as the basis for extension by analogy or comparison. That is  not  what
    Shkembi decided. There is not a near miss penumbra around every  policy
    providing scope for its extension in practice to that which it did  not
    cover, and this case  is  not  a  near  miss  but  wholly  outside  the
    Exercise. The  rationale  for  the  exercise  does  not  apply  to  the
    Claimant, although some of the points  made  about  its  purpose  could
    apply to any who have stayed for a while in this  country  after  their
    appeals on all grounds have been dismissed."

45. In SB Waller LJ stated:

    "30. In paragraph [64], the Tribunal  first  said  that,  applying  the
        approach of Collins J in Lekstaka,  the  fact  that  the  appellant
        "only just failed to qualify  for  admission"  was  a  fact  to  be
        counted in her favour. They were right to take that view. We  agree
        with the view expressed by Collins J in Lekstaka  in  paragraph  38
        that:
              "... one is entitled to see, whether in all the
              circumstances, this case falls within the spirit of the Rules
              or the policies, even if not within the letter."
    That seems to us to be the right approach. As Simon Brown LJ said in
    Ekinci at paragraph 16:
              "Even if strictly he fails to qualify so that the ECO would
              be prohibited from granting leave to enter, given the obvious
              Article 8 dimension to the case the ECO would refer the
              application to an Immigration Officer who undoubtedly has a
              discretion to admit someone outside the Rules. And if entry
              were to be refused at that stage, then indeed a s. 59 right
              of appeal would certainly arise in which, by virtue of s.
              65(3), (4) and (5) the adjudicator would have jurisdiction to
              consider the appellant's human rights."
    31. The ultimate test is, of course, that set out in paragraph 59 of
    the judgment of the Court given by Laws L.J. in Huang...":
46. It seems to us that the above cases are not in conflict.  (The  reliance
at [31] of SB  on  the  test  of  truly  exceptional  circumstances,  cannot
survive Huang [2007] UKHL 11,  but  we  do  not  see  that  this  makes  any
substantive difference to the guidance given by SB in any other respect:  we
are fortified in that view  by  what  Carnwath  LJ  states  at  [16]  of  AG
(Eritrea)).  None  of  them  is  authority  for  the  proposition  that  the
immigration rules or policies can be rewritten by judges. Integral  to  each
of them is the distinction between (1) cases in which the  rationale  for  a
rule or policy applies fully to the case in question although  the  rule  or
policy does not technically cover it; and (2) cases in which  the  rationale
for such a rule or policy does not apply or applies only loosely. Even if  a
case comes within (1) all three higher court  decisions  recognise  that  at
most a "near miss" is a factor which has to  be  taken  into  account.  Just
because a case comes within (1) does not mean that that a  decision  amounts
to a disproportionate interference with legitimate public ends. (If  we  are
wrong to consider that Ouseley J's reasoning can be  reconciled  with  Court
of Appeal authority, then, of course, the latter must prevail,  but  we  see
nothing said in SB or any  other  case  which  takes  matters  further  than
Ouseley J envisages in Rudi).

47. Whilst dealing with case law we should make clear  our  view  about  the
continuing value of  the recent reported  Tribunal  case  of  TK(Immigration
Rules-policy-Article 8) Jamaica [2007] UKAIT 00025.  Although  the  reliance
placed by the Tribunal in TK on the "truly exceptional  circumstances"  test
has since been shown by Huang [2007] UKHL 11 to be wrong,  its  guidance  on
"near-misses" remains valid. Even when an  individual's  circumstances  fall
squarely within the rationale of a relevant immigration rule or  policy  and
so accord with its "spirit" albeit not its "letter", a "near miss" does  not
of itself mean that an expulsion  decision  constitutes  a  disproportionate
interference with an appellant's right to  respect  for  private  or  family
life.

48. The  distinction drawn in paragraph  46  above  has  importance  in  the
appellant's case since the Immigration Rules give effect to the  purpose  of
family unity by providing, inter alia, for the admission for  settlement  of
children of parents who are  present  and  settled  in  the  United  Kingdom
(paragraphs 297-298 in particular) and  the  only  really  problematic  (see
below paragraph 48) requirement which the appellant  failed  to  meet  under
these provisions and under  policy, was  being  a  dependent  nephew  rather
than a dependent son. Yet on the facts it was  accepted  by  all,  including
the adjudicator, that the appellant enjoyed family life  analogous  to  that
of a natural son. We reiterate yet again: the uncle had become a  father  to
a boy who was effectively an orphan. That we take to be the reasoning  which
lay behind the comment by Waller LJ at [30] of SB:

    "We agree with the view expressed by Collins J in Lekstaka in paragraph
         38 that:
         "... one is entitled to see, whether in all the circumstances, this
         case falls within the spirit of the Rules or the policies, even if
         not within the letter."
    That seems to us to be the right approach."

49.  Given  that  we  see  the  factor  of  "near-misses"  to  be  of   some
significance in this case, it is important we be more precise as to  how  we
see the appellant stood to benefit from the Immigration Rules  and  policies
if they had been applied to his case analogously. We do not mean to  assert,
in relation to the Immigration Rules, that he would have  been  entitled  to
indefinite leave to remain under the Rules relating to children  on  arrival
(paragraph 297)  or  entitled  to  limited  leave  to  remain  under   Rules
relating to refugee children ( paragraph 352D) on  arrival.  His  uncle  and
aunt were present and settled in the United Kingdom but when he  arrived  in
the UK he was not already their de facto son, as it was not  known  at  that
stage whether  his  mother  and  sisters  would  be  located  in  Kosovo  or
elsewhere. As we understand it, his uncle and aunt only  came  to  stand  in
loco parentis for his parents after he arrived in  the  UK:  the  close  tie
between them, akin to  natural  parents-son,  was  not  pre-existing.   Even
accepting (as seems evident) that it developed quickly, it was not there  at
the outset (the appellant had not lived with his uncle and aunt  in  Kosovo,
although they were close neighbours).  Thus it cannot be said that  when  he
arrived in the UK  he  was  "accompanying  or  joining"  parents.   Nor  for
similar reasons could he have met the requirement  of  paragraph  352D  (iv)
that he was "part of the family unit of the person  granted  asylum  at  the
time that the person  granted  asylum  left  the  country  of  his  habitual
residence in order to seek asylum".  Further,  as  someone  in  the  UK,  he
would have been required by the relevant after-entry Immigration  Rules  for
under-18 children (paragraph 298) to hold a valid entry clearance.  (So  far
as paragraph 352D is concerned, however, paragraph 352E  specifically  omits
the  entry  clearance  requirement  as  one  to  be  met  when   considering
"[l]imited leave to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  as  the  child  of  a
refugee..."). Nevertheless, so far as we understand it, had the Home  Office
accepted he was a de facto son (once he had settled in with  his  uncle  and
aunt) his application for leave to remain would not have been refused  under
paragraph 298 or 352D solely on the basis of  his  lack  of  a  valid  entry
clearance or failure to have been part of the family  of  a  person  granted
asylum prior to arrival in the UK. To that extent, but to that extent  only,
Collins J is right to say that he missed out on a  potential  benefit  under
the Immigration Rules.

50. As regards  the  "One-off  exercise"  policy,  once  again,  whilst  the
appellant did not come within its terms, that was only because of  the  fact
that the appellant was not the natural son of his uncle  and  aunt.  It  was
not because his relationship to these two lacked substance. It is  difficult
to see an objective justification for treating his case  differently  simply
because he was not a son de jure. Further the appellant, having  arrived  in
the United Kingdom prior to 2 October 2000 was someone  who  would  in  this
way have come within the terms of the policy in its original form; he  would
not have needed to rely on its extension over time to  other  categories  of
post-2 October arrivals.

51. When considering the significance of a "near miss"  it  will  always  be
imperative to examine  the  surrounding  circumstances.  Is  the  underlying
purpose of the rule or  policy  one  which  can  be  seen  as  covering  the
individual  by  analogy?  How  closely   analogous   are   the   appellant's
circumstances to those covered by the rule or policy? Is there an  objective
justification for a like case not being treated alike?  Was  there  anything
done by the appellant or those representing him to try and  alert  the  Home
Office to the relevance of an analogous  rule  or  policy?  These  are  some
obvious questions which  may  arise.  In  the  appellant's  case  we  attach
particular  significance  to  the  fact  that  at  the  time  when  relevant
immigration rules and policies might have been seen  to  cover  closely  his
situation by analogy, he was a minor who had made  a  claim  for  asylum  on
arrival and the action of his uncle and aunt in establishing  and  deepening
family ties was one which was clearly in the best interests of the child,  a
consideration which United Kingdom legislation treats as a primary one:  see
AA (Afghanistan).  Paragraph  351  of  the  Immigration  Rules  states  that
"[c]lose attention should be given to  the  welfare  of  the  child  at  all
times". The appellant's  was  not  a  situation  where  the  family  members
concerned can be criticised for developing family ties at  a  time  when  it
was known an appellant's immigration status was precarious.

52. From the above it will be clear that there  were  two  relevant  factors
which the adjudicator failed to take into account when  considering  whether
the decision appealed against represented  a  disproportionate  interference
with the appellant's right to respect  for  private  and  family  life.  The
first was the factor of three years  delay  and  its  consequence  that  the
appellant did not  have  an  existent  policy  governing  ELR  unaccompanied
minors applied to his benefit; this  did  not  of  itself  to  amount  to  a
weighty factor. The other factor was of course that the  appellant,  on  the
adjudicator's findings of fact, was  a  de  facto  son  and  so  there  were
provisions under the Immigration Rules and under Home Office policies  which
analogously (albeit not wholly  so)  applied  to  him.  Taken  together  and
viewed in the broader context of the fact that the  appellant  had  come  to
the UK as an unaccompanied minor aged 16 having  effectively  lost  his  own
mother and father, we consider that the adjudicator's failure  to  treat  as
significant Home Office inaction on the appellant's  case  gave  rise  to  a
material error of law.


53.  Having  decided  that  the  adjudicator  materially  erred  in  law  we
considered whether we were in a position to decide the case  for  ourselves.
We have decided that we are. Both parties agreed that we were in  possession
of all the relevant facts and materials and that no useful purpose would  be
served by  adjourning  it  for  a  second-stage  reconsideration.  The  only
changes since the date of hearing before the adjudicator are ones which  are
not in dispute: namely that the appellant has now been  in  the  UK  over  7
years and that he continues to live with his  uncle  and  aunt  as  part  of
their family, has not formed an  independent  life  and  is  still  pursuing
studies.


54. We remind  ourselves  at  this  point  that  whilst  existing  case  law
establishes that delay is a relevant factor and  that,  in  the  case  of  a
person who would have benefited from some kind of leave previously  (had  an
existing  policy  being  timeously  applied  to  him),  there  may  be  some
"disbenefit" (procedural and/or  substantive),  whether  that  is  a  factor
which should carry any significant weight  will  depend  on  the  individual
circumstances. Similarly, the mere  fact  that  a  person  appears  to  have
missed out on the benefit of an existing immigration rule  or  concessionary
policy on a narrow basis will not assist unless the appellant's  substantive
situation falls squarely within the rationale of the  policy.   One  of  the
reasons why  careful  consideration  of  a  person's  situation  under  past
immigration rules and policies is of  particular  importance  in  conducting
the Article 8 balancing exercise, is that failure to apply the  benefits  of
the rule or policy is a factor reducing the (normally  preponderant)  weight
to be attached  to  the  interests  of  the  state  in  the  maintenance  of
effective immigration control: see PO  (Interest  of  the  state-Article  8)
Nigeria [2006] UKAIT 00087. A further point of importance is that   although
once a person has turned 18 and so can no longer  benefit  from  immigration
rules or policies relating to minors, past failures to consider him  or  her
under such rules or policies can create significant "disbenefits",  although
here too much will depend on  the  particular  circumstances  of  the  case.
Even so, none of these factors can in themselves establish that  a  decision
to remove constitutes a disproportionate interference  with  an  appellant's
right to respect for  private  and  family  life.  The  primary  focus  when
considering the proportionality  of  the  interference  has  to  be  on  the
overall features (procedural and substantive) of a person's case.


55. It seems to  us  that  considered  cumulatively,  the  appellant's  very
unusual immigration history and the surrounding circumstances are such  that
the decision to remove him amounts to a disproportionate  interference  with
his right to respect for private and family life.  When he  fled  Kosovo  he
had a well-founded fear of persecution. At a time in his life  when  he  was
in an extremely vulnerable position, arriving in the United  Kingdom  having
lost his family, his uncle and aunt took responsibility  for  his  care  and
treated him as a dependent son. If the Home Office saw it as  being  in  the
best interests of the child to make a prompt decision on his  asylum  claim,
they should have done so. Although he is now an adult he  has  continued  to
live with them as part of their family and they have sought  to  assist  him
in pursuing studies. For at least as long  as  the  appellant  was  still  a
minor, his uncle and aunt cannot be criticised in any  way  for  seeking  to
strengthen his new family life relationships in the United Kingdom and  thus
to ensure his welfare. Had a timeous decision been made on his asylum  claim
he would have received ELR until his 18th birthday. In his case  that  would
not have created any  practical  advantages  but  it  would  at  least  have
enabled him to apply, for so long as that leave was current,  for  variation
of leave to remain. Of  greater  importance,  had  the  Secretary  of  State
considered his case timeously, consideration would have had to be  given  to
his position under existing immigration rules (relating  to  settlement  for
children  and  limited  leave  for  refugee  children)  and  policies  which
analogously  covered  his  situation.  Although  the   appellant's   current
circumstances in terms of his physical and  mental  well-being  are  plainly
not truly exceptional, the disruption that would  be  caused  by  him  being
required to return to Kosovo,  coupled  with  the  past  denial  to  him  of
benefits (particularly  under  analogous  immigration  rules  and  policies)
makes the  decision  a  disproportionate  interference  with  his  right  to
respect for private and family life. Even though considered in isolation  it
could  be  said  that  there  were  no  insurmountable  obstacles   to   the
appellant's uncle and his  family  accompanying  him  to  Kosovo,  with  the
elapse of time - now over 7 years - both this family and the appellant  have
become embedded in the  United  Kingdom  in  a  way  which  would  not  have
happened had more  timeous  consideration  been  given  to  the  appellant's
asylum claim. The failure to consider the  appellant's  circumstances  under
analogous immigration rules and policies significantly  reduced  the  weight
to be attached to the normally preponderant interest of  the  state  in  the
maintenance of effective immigration control.

56. As already noted, the determination in this case was promulgated  before
9 June 2003 and, as a result, our jurisdiction is not confined  to  that  of
error of law. It is necessary  to  ask  therefore  whether  exercising  that
wider jurisdiction would justify a different decision on this  appeal.  That
requires  us  to  ask  whether  the  decision   of  the   adjudicator    was
sustainable: see Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  (Commencement
No. 4) (Amendment) (No. 2) Order 2003, E [2004] EWCA Civ [19] and CA  [2004]
EWCA Civ  1165  910],  [11].  Since  we  have  found  that  the  adjudicator
materially  erred  in  law,  it  must  follow  that  his  decision  is  also
unsustainable.

57. For the above reasons, the adjudicator materially erred in law and  also
reached an unsustainable decision. The decision we substitute  is  to  allow
the appellant's appeal on Article 8 grounds.

58. On the basis of the evidence before us in this case,  we  are  satisfied
that the appellant's circumstances are presently such  that  to  remove  him
amounts to a disproportionate interference with his  right  to  respect  for
private and family life.

Signed                                  Date:  14 May 2007
Senior Immigration Judge Storey


