

Asylum and Immigration Tribunal

    MG (Christians, including Coptic Christians) Sudan CG [2006] UKAIT 00047



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Determination Promulgated |
|On  14 March 2006                      |On 20 April 2006          |
|Prepared  15 March 2006                |..........................|
|                                       |.............             |




                                   Before

                 Mr H J E Latter - Senior Immigration Judge
                 Mr P D King, TD - Senior Immigration Judge
                        Mrs A J F Cross De Chavannes

                                   Between


                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:      Mr B Lams of Counsel
For the Respondent:  Mr L Parker, Home Office Presenting Officer

Christians in Sudan are not for that reason alone  at  risk  of  persecution
but some Christians (and in particular members of proselytising  evangelical
churches or Coptic Christians) may be in a more vulnerable position  and  in
the light  of  their  particular  circumstances  may  be  at  real  risk  of
persecution on account of their religion.  This  determination  replaces  TM
(Persecution - Christians- Individual  -  General)  Sudan  CG  [2002]  UKIAT
04849 as country guidance.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.       This is the reconsideration of an appeal against  a  decision  made
    on 3 February 2004 to  remove  the  appellant  as  an  illegal  entrant
    following the  refusal  of  his  claim  for  asylum.   The  appeal  was
    originally heard by an Adjudicator, Mr M L Dineen, on 24 June 2004.  He
    dismissed  the  appeal  on  both  asylum  and  human  rights   grounds.
    Permission to appeal to the Immigration Appeal Tribunal was granted  on
    2 December 2004.  By virtue of  transitional  provisions,  the  appeal
    proceeds as a reconsideration.

2.      Following a hearing on 10 October 2005 the Tribunal (the  President)
    held that there was a material error of law.   The  President  set  out
    his reasons as follows:
    "1.     This was an appeal by a citizen of Sudan from the  decision  of
         Mr M L Dineen sitting at  Hatton  Cross.   This  determination  was
         promulgated on 20 July 2004.  The asylum and human  rights  appeals
         were dismissed.


     2.     The case was heard in the block list on 10 October  2005.   It
         was  clear  no  reasons  were  given  for  the  view  that   Coptic
         Christians, as this appellant  was,  would  not  face  persecution.
         The parties agree that the matter was  right  for  reconsideration.
         It was indicated that it was likely to be a country guidance  case.




     3.     It was agreed that credibility  findings  would  stand.    All
         legal issues contended on the grounds of appeal are arguable."


3.      The reconsideration was  transferred  for  further  hearing  on  the
    issue of whether the appeal should be allowed or dismissed.

Background

4.      The Adjudicator accepted the appellant's account of events in  Sudan
    and at the first stage of the  reconsideration  it  was  accepted  that
    those credibility findings should stand.  The factual background to the
    claim can briefly be summarised as follows.  The appellant was born  in
    Khartoum in February 1979 and is a Coptic Christian.  At  the  time  of
    the military coup in Sudan in  1989  he  was  at  school.   A  campaign
    against Christians was started in  the  media  and  this  affected  the
    appellant as both his teachers and fellow pupils became hostile towards
    him.  He was given low grades and when he asked why, he was  told  that
    his father's religion, Christianity, was wrong and that if he converted
    to Islam, they would help him.  At the beginning of 1990 the  appellant
    was obliged to attend Islamic religion classes.   Although  his  father
    moved him to another school, this was no better than the previous  one.



5.      In 1995 the appellant's  father  was  arrested  and  detained.   The
    appellant did not know the reason save  that  it  was  connected  to  a
    problem his father had with the authorities relating to his supermarket
    business.  His father was detained for at least two weeks and badly ill-
    treated.  When he was released from detention he was covered  in  blood
    and his face was badly swollen.   On the advice of their family  doctor
    he was taken to hospital but when hospital officials discovered how the
    injuries had been incurred, they refused to treat him and said that  he
    should  be  taken  to  a  private  hospital.  On  the  way  there,  the
    appellant's  father  died.  The  appellant  completed   his   secondary
    education in 1998 and wished to go to university but was unable  to  do
    so unless he  served  three  months  with  the  Popular  Defence  Force
    (PDF).   He did not wish to do this because it  involved  the  risk  of
    having to fight against the Christian rebels in the south of Sudan.  He
    also feared that as a Christian he would be put at risk by  being  sent
    across uncleared minefields.

6.      The appellant started to work in his parents' supermarket  in  March
    1999.  This had been run by his mother since the death of  his  father.
    The appellant took over the management at the end of 1999.  His  mother
    told him that they had to pay 40,000 Sudanese pounds  to  two  security
    policemen when they came to the shop.  This was euphemistically  called
    tea money but in reality was protection money.   His  mother  told  him
    that if they did not pay the security police  they  would  fabricate  a
    false allegation against them.  There was no option but to pay and this
    happened every month.  In March 2002  the  appellant  paid  the  40,000
    Sudanese pounds to two security police but they also  took  food  items
    totalling 20,000 Sudanese  pounds.   Later  they  returned  asking  the
    appellant to buy a quantity of tinned food from them.  He said that  he
    would be willing to do so  if  they  gave  him  the  official  purchase
    invoices required by law.  When he checked the tins he noted  that  the
    expiry dates for the food had passed.   He said he could  not  buy  the
    food because he did  not  want  to  have  problems  with  the  taxation
    department.  Their response was to attack and insult  him.   They  took
    down icons of the Virgin Mary and St. George from the wall of the shop,
    threw them to the floor and stamped on them.  They ordered him to close
    the shop and forced him to go with them.

7.       The appellant was taken into detention.  He was slapped around  the
    face and called an atheist and a halabi. This treatment was repeated at
    intervals some fifteen or twenty times during the afternoon.  Later the
    same afternoon the two men who had arrested him returned and said  this
    was a lesson for him and that he was to tell  every  Copt  he  knew  to
    understand that they were slaves in an Islamic country  and  they  were
    their masters. The appellant was then released.

8.      In May 2003 the appellant spent an evening with friends in a  Coptic
    club in the Alamarat area of Khartoum.  After midnight he saw  a  woman
    who was trying to start her car.   He knew her as she was  one  of  his
    Coptic neighbours.  He offered her a lift home.  Their car was  stopped
    by police who despite the appellant's explanation slapped him and  said
    that he was attempting adultery and this was  an  offence.   They  were
    both arrested.  The girl was eventually allowed to call her brother. He
    arrived later with a friend, a police major, and paid a bribe of 50,000
    Sudanese pounds to the policeman on duty to have them released.

9.      The appellant decided at this stage that he should leave Sudan.   He
    tried to obtain passports for himself and his mother but he  could  not
    obtain them as he had not served with the PDF.   In December  2003  the
    appellant was told by a neighbour that his  mother  had  been  arrested
    following an argument with a police major at her place  of  work.   The
    appellant went to the police station in Omdurman.  He was  detained  as
    soon as he enquired about his  mother.    He  was  kicked  and  abused.
    Later he was taken to another police station and then  to  a  detention
    centre where he was detained for five days. During this period  he  was
    subjected to degrading physical and sexual abuse.   The  appellant  was
    threatened with not seeing his mother  again  unless  he  converted  to
    Islam.  He  was  warned  that  if  he  did  convert  and  reverted   to
    Christianity, he would be at risk of death as  an  apostate.    He  was
    told this by a police major who he later learned  was  the  person  his
    mother had had the argument with at her place of work which had led  to
    her arrest.

10.    Due to the intervention of the appellant's  uncle  who  contacted  an
    army colonel, a bribe of 5 million Sudanese pounds was paid  to  secure
    their release.  An agent was engaged to make the arrangements  for  the
    appellant and his mother to leave  Sudan.    They  left  from  Khartoum
    Airport and flew to a third country.  They were then hidden in a  lorry
    which crossed the channel by ferry.

11.     The appellant claimed asylum on 23 December  2003.   His  claim  was
    refused for the reasons set out in  the  respondent's  decision  letter
    dated 30 January 2004.  A number of credibility issues were raised  but
    these are no longer in issue, it being agreed at  the  hearing  of  the
    first stage of the reconsideration that the  Adjudicator's  credibility
      findings should stand.  An appeal by the appellant's mother following
    her unsuccessful claim was heard at Hatton Cross on  5  July  2004  and
    allowed. The issue was  not  explored  before  us  as  to  why  appeals
    relating to two family members with common issues of  fact  were  heard
    separately and we make no  comment  on  that,  save  to  emphasise  the
    desirability  of  linked  appeals  being  heard  together   where   the
    requirements of rule 20 of the Procedure Rules 2005 are met.

The Hearing before this Tribunal

12.    At the hearing  before  this  Tribunal,  the  appellant  put  in  two
    bundles of documents, 1A indexed and paginated 1-81 and 2A indexed  and
    paginated 1- 88.  Mr Lams also produced extracts from the US Department
    of State Reports for 2002, 2003 and 2006.   He indicated that he wished
    to put in evidence a UNHCR Report 2006 and a further short report  from
    Mr Peter Verney in  addition  to  the  reports  already  produced  (see
    paragraph 14 below).   The respondent relies on a bundle R indexed  and
    paginated 1-58 together with the  COIS  Report  for  Sudan  of  October
    2005.  At the hearing Mr Parker sought to put in four further documents
    (2R) including a COI request dated 3 March 2006 and  an  ESPAC  Report
    posted on 6 June 2002.  Mr Lams objected to  the  production  of  these
    reports on the basis that they raised controversial  matters  which  he
    would not be able to deal  with  without  an  adjournment.   Mr  Parker
    objected to extracts of the US State Department Reports being  provided
    as opposed to full copies of the reports.

13.    We were not  satisfied  that  there  was  any  justification  for  an
    adjournment of this hearing.  The original appeal  was  heard  in  June
    2004 and further directions in respect  of  this  reconsideration  were
    given on 10 October 2005 when it was held that  there  was  a  material
    error of law in the original determination.  The two documents objected
    to by Mr Lams were produced on the day of the hearing in  contravention
    of the directions requiring five days notice.  We were  satisfied  that
    the right course was to exclude those documents from evidence and  also
    not to permit the further report from Mr Verney also  produced  on  the
    day of the hearing to be put in evidence.  Mr Lams accepted  that  the
    extracts he had produced from the US State Department Reports were  not
    to be read in isolation and that the whole  report  should  be  put  in
    evidence.

Evidence of Mr Peter Verney: (i) Reports

14.    Mr Verney's reports are dated 28 May 2004  (1A  49-63)  and  6  March
    2006 (2A 1-15).  His professional background is set out at  page  2  of
    both reports (1A 50 and 2A 2).   In his first  report  he  sets  out  a
    brief history of the current government in Sudan which  took  power  in
    1989.    Before that, religious persecution in his view  was  generally
    waning and not state directed.  However, the present regime was  widely
    acknowledged, by religiously neutral organisations,  to  be  practising
    religious persecution.  There was  a  background  level  of  harassment
    which had often risen to intolerable levels.   It  was  his  view  that
    discrimination together  with  much  day-to-day  harassment  created  a
    background against which further extremes of abuse could be perpetrated
    with impunity on selected individuals with the  full  approval  of  the
    regime.  General hindrance and petty  harassment  of  Christians  could
    easily  develop  into  the  persecution   of   particular   unfortunate
    individuals.  Individual Christians might become targets for deliberate
    victimisation by the regime's security agents  with  the  approval  and
    encouragement of the state security apparatus.

15.    In every neighbourhood there was a popular committee of  those  loyal
    to the regime whose primary task was monitoring suspicious activity and
    enforcing the regime's aims.  In practice this had amounted  to  spying
    on dissident Muslims and using the power of office to destroy Christian
    businesses.  The small northern Christian community, unlike the  larger
    Christian community in the south which had been directly  embroiled  in
    the country's civil war, had generally been prosperous and had  avoided
    confrontation with the Islamic authorities.   However,  Christian-owned
    businesses had been subjected to harassment through government controls
    on licences, taxes and inspections.  Many Christian businessmen, mainly
    from the Coptic community had fled the country even when massive losses
    on currency exchange precluded the  resumption  of  activities  abroad.
    Coptic people often found it  impossible  to  avoid  identification  as
    Copts.  The regime was glad of the  departure  from  Sudan  of  certain
    groups of people including northern  Christians  whose  businesses  may
    have been seized.  On the assumption that the account  related  by  the
    appellant was true, it was Mr Verney's view that there was a risk  that
    he would be detained and subjected to hostile and abusive treatment  on
    return.  In the event of being allowed to re-enter the country  without
    immediate hindrance or detention, he would  nonetheless  be  liable  to
    surveillance and be vulnerable to a variety of subsequent  unacceptable
    abuses.  The greatest threat would be  from  actions  by  the  security
    forces including extrajudicial detention in clandestine "ghost  houses"
    and the accompanying unaccountable violence which could be carried  out
    with impunity by security officers.

16.    In his second report Mr Verney says that the appellant's  experiences
    as a young  Coptic  Christian  reflect  key  aspects  of  the  Sudanese
    government's Islamisation policy and  the  range  of  methods  commonly
    employed.  The appellant had exactly the background likely  to  attract
    adverse  attention  from  the  authorities.   The  regime's   implicit,
    ultimate intention was to force Coptic Christians  to  leave  and  take
    over their resources.  It was the view of contacts Mr Verney  had  with
    the Sudan Council of Churches that a process  of  attrition  was  still
    being conducted against members of the Coptic Church.

17.     The report goes on to describe  the  Coptic  Christians  as  a  long
    established but vulnerable religious  community  whose  leadership  has
    long adopted a non-confrontational position as regards  the  government
    and has not officially publicised  its  experience.   Nonetheless  they
    have been targeted by the current regime in  a  process  of  attrition.
    The report also deals with the peace  agreement  of  January  2005  and
    expresses the view that the balance of power in northern Sudan has  not
    been significantly altered.  The security apparatus remains  unchanged,
    with the same personnel, premises  and  behaviour.  The  dwindling  and
    vulnerable Coptic Christian  community  continues  to  face  persistent
    harassment from the  authorities  which  in  certain  individual  cases
    develops into full blown persecution. Mr Verney repeats his  view  that
    the appellant would find himself  in  a  very  dangerous  situation  if
    returned to Sudan under the present regime.


(ii) Oral Evidence

18.    In his oral evidence Mr Verney adopted  his  reports.   He  confirmed
    that he had lived and worked in Sudan for twelve years from  1977.   So
    far as sourcing his materials were concerned, he had used contacts with
    both Sudanese and non-Sudanese experts.  Many of his sources had  asked
    for anonymity because of the sensitivity of the political situation  in
    Darfur and Khartoum.  A distinction could  properly  be  drawn  between
    Coptic Christians and the Christians in  southern  Sudan.   The  Coptic
    community were quite isolated.  They had taken a  quiescent,  quietist,
    non-confrontational approach towards the authorities.   Generally  they
    were educated and skilled and had filled an administrative role.   They
    did not  have  much  connection  socially  or  in  terms  of  religious
    solidarity with the Christians in the  south.   They  were  treated  by
    Arabs with suspicion and as irrelevant by people in the south.

19.    Coptic Christians had been subjected to  a  war  of  attrition.  They
    were easily picked off because of their strategy of  "not  rocking  the
    boat".  The local security police might well profit from  what  was  in
    effect a protection racket.   Once  a  bribe  was  paid,  the  pressure
    continued.  Generally the Coptic community had been  fleeing  in  dribs
    and drabs from Sudan.

20.    The peace agreement was not as comprehensive as  suggested.   It  had
    failed in its task of making unity attractive.  Following the death  of
    John Garang, the southern leader who became  Vice  President  following
    the peace agreement, the southern Sudanese believed that there had been
    foul play whereas Muslim leaders called  for  a  Jihad.   The  security
    apparatus of the hardline group in power since 1989 was still in place.
    There was very little source for encouragement that the situation would
    improve.  The Sudanese government had become more sophisticated in  the
    way it intimidated people. Ostensible freedom of worship  was  allowed.
    It was not Mr Verney's view that any returning Coptic  Christian  would
    be  at  risk  but  many  were  potentially   vulnerable,   particularly
    individuals and families who had attracted adverse attention  from  the
    authorities.  This could happen when an  individual  was  perceived  as
    weak and susceptible to  bribery.   There  was  a  highly  antagonistic
    atmosphere towards Coptic Christians.  A small incident might  lead  to
    harassment but it could then lead to a cascade of consequences.

21.    In cross-examination Mr Verney made it clear that  he  had  not  been
    asked to interview the appellant.  He only interviewed appellants  when
    circumstances required him to or where it was necessary.  There  was  a
    sense in which the Coptic community was unlike other communities as  it
    was likely to sit on evidence and not come  forward.   The  authorities
    had been engaged in a drive to  remove  Christians  from  positions  of
    seniority. This  was  widely  recorded  and  in  his  view  was  beyond
    dispute.   The person he had spoken to on the Sudan Council of Churches
    was not a Coptic Christian.   Mr  Verney  accepted  that  the  Sudanese
    authorities showed different levels of interest in different  Christian
    groups. The  government  was  keen  to  stamp  on  some  of  the  newer
    evangelistic Protestant churches.  They were hostile to  proselytising,
    evangelical churches.  There had also  been  significant  problems  for
    mainstream churches but not on the same level.  Coptic Christians  were
    treated in a third  and  different  way  and  had  come  under  extreme
    pressure.  No other group was likely to face a similar challenge.

22.    There had been a small Jewish community but the  last  synagogue  was
    closed in 1983 and so far as  Mr  Verney  was  aware  the  last  Jewish
    Sudanese left about five years previously.  Coptic Christians tended to
    do well financially and this in  turn  drew  attention  to  them.   The
    southern Sudanese Christians were a different group who  had  taken  up
    arms and fought back against the  Khartoum  authorities.    The  Coptic
    Christians had no means of retaliation or guarding  their  own  ground.
    They often bent over backwards not to  give  offence  or  to  get  into
    trouble.  Mr Verney accepted that the risks were random  and  arbitrary
    in the sense that there would be a targeting of  individuals  perceived
    to be weak or annoying.  It could be something entirely  trivial  which
    brought an individual to the attention of the authorities or  it  could
    be their wealth or position.  One unfortunate encounter might lead to a
    chain of events amounting to persecution.  He accepted  that  prejudice
    had existed  before  1989  but  generally  Sudanese  Muslims  had  been
    tolerant towards those of other faiths although  there  had  been  some
    antagonism.  The problem now was that petty bullies  were  being  given
    position and free rein.

23.    In re-examination Mr Verney gave the example of a pharmacist who  had
    been accused falsely of having out-of-date medicines.  This illustrated
    a system of moving in on Coptic businessmen. It was unlikely  that  the
    appellant could escape attention if he returned.  It  may  be  that  he
    would be allowed through the airport but there would be  a  risk  of  a
    later raid by the police. He accepted  that  not  all  Copts  would  be
    picked up but there was an increased risk for Copts.

The Submissions

24.    Mr  Parker  submitted  that  there  was  no  evidence  to  support  a
    contention that Christians were generally at risk in Sudan. There  were
    a substantial number of Christians in that country.  He referred to the
    figures in the extract from the World Christian Encyclopaedia  at  R28.
    It was clear  from  the  background  evidence  that  missionaries  were
    allowed to operate in the south.   There  may  be  an  undercurrent  of
    hostility towards non-Muslims which may show itself in  harassment  and
    ill-treatment. The Coptic Church had been established in  Sudan  for  a
    long time and there was little evidence of a specific campaign  against
    it.  A different picture appeared from the US State  Department  Report
    and at best the evidence was tangential.   Even if the appellant was at
    risk in the north in the light of what had happened to him in the past,
      there appeared to be no good reason why he could not relocate in the
    south.  The events which triggered ill-treatment appeared to  be  based
    on economics rather than religious hostility.

25.    Mr Lams submitted that the evidence from Mr  Verney  taken  with  the
    background evidence indicated that Coptic Christians were vulnerable to
    persecution.  Any individual Coptic  Christian  was  at  risk  of  such
    targeting. There was a real risk of being the victim of arbitrary state
    power.  In such circumstances there  could  not  be  a  sufficiency  of
    protection.   The evidence showed that it was not just  a  question  of
    the behaviour of lone, rogue police officers but of  endemic  behaviour
    indicating a state sponsored course of conduct. There was a  difference
    in degree between the evidence of Mr Verney  and  other  parts  of  the
    background evidence  such  as  the  US  State  Department  Reports.  He
    referred us to Drrias, [1997] EWCA Civ 1181, a judgment of the Court of
    Appeal (Civil Division) where Thorpe LJ said that in  relation  to  the
    evidence adduced before a special adjudicator in relation to a claim of
    religious persecution by a Coptic Christian the evidence  was  all  one
    way and was corroborative of the appellant's oral  evidence.   Mr  Lams
    submitted that nothing had changed for the better since Drrias.    What
    had  happened  to  the  appellant  illustrated  the  risk   to   Coptic
    Christians.




The Law

26.    We remind ourselves that the  appellant  is  entitled  to  asylum  if
    owing to a well-founded fear  of  being  persecuted  for  a  Convention
    reason he is outside Sudan and is unable or, owing  to  such  fear,  is
    unwilling  to  avail  himself  of  the  protection  of   the   Sudanese
    authorities.  The onus is on him to show that  there  is  a  reasonable
    degree of likelihood that he will be at  such  risk  on  return.    The
    phrases "reasonable chance",  "serious  possibility"  and  "substantial
    grounds for thinking" have  been  approved  as  ways  of  appropriately
    expressing the degree of risk but the test is essentially whether there
    is a real risk of persecution: Sivakumaran [1988] Imm AR 147 and  Kacaj
    [2001] Imm AR 213.  A similar test applies to the assessment of a claim
    under article 3.

Assessment of the Background Evidence

27.    The general background relating to freedom of religion is dealt  with
    in the COIS Report for October 2005, paragraphs 6.67-80.   The  Interim
    National Constitution signed on 9  July  2005  provides  for  religious
    rights to be respected.  The report in fact only  sets  out  the  draft
    dated 16 March 2005 as final texts were not available  at  that  stage.
    However, the  report  goes  on  to  give  examples  of  the  abuse  and
    restriction of religious freedom at paragraphs 6.71-76.  It  refers  to
    various sources describing the restriction of activities of non-Muslims
    and at paragraphs 6.77-85 to reports of forced  religious  conversions.
    According to the US State Department  Report  of  2005  the  government
    continues to place many restrictions on non-Muslims,  non-Arab  Muslims
    and Muslims from tribes or sects not affiliated with the ruling  party.
    In general non-Muslims are allowed to worship freely in their places of
    worship but the authorities continue  to  restrict  the  activities  of
    Christians and followers of traditional indigenous beliefs.  There were
    reports that security forces harassed and at times  threatened  to  use
    violence against people on the basis of  their  religious  beliefs  and
    activities but it was unclear whether the harassment was for  religious
    or political reasons.  Muslims could proselytise freely  in  government
    controlled areas but non-Muslims were forbidden to proselytise.

28.    As to the general human rights background, the report  confirms  that
    the Sudanese government's record remains poor and there continue to  be
    numerous problems. Security forces continue to torture, beat and harass
    suspected  political  opponents  and  others.  Arbitrary   arrest   and
    detention continues  to  be  used.   In  the  US  Department  of  State
    International Religious Freedom Report for 2005 there is a reference to
    small but long established populations of  Greek  Orthodox  and  Coptic
    Right Christians mainly around Khartoum and northern cities.   The once
    25,000 Greek community has  been  reduced  to  approximately  500.  The
    Coptic community estimated that its numbers in the  past  were  between
    400,000-500,000 but many, mainly for  economic  reasons  had  left  the
    country  or  converted  to  Islam.  The  report  says  that  government
    officials have attended church services at Easter and Christmas to show
    solidarity and to  address  non-Muslims.    The  government  ostensibly
    expressed a policy of religious tolerance. However, non-Muslims as well
    as non-Arab Muslims continued to express concern that they were treated
    as second class citizens and were discriminated  against  in  religious
    matters such as the issue of permits and the building of  churches  and
    also with respect to jobs and other  societal  relations.  This  report
    confirms that missionaries continue to operate in  the  south,  running
    relief operations, medical clinics  and  churches.   Christian  workers
    including  priests  and  teachers  like  almost   all   visitors   have
    experienced long delays in getting visas.

29.    Following the signing of the peace accord there were  expressions  of
    optimism that the peace agreement would bring changes.  An  article  in
    Christianity Today August 2004 at 2A 85, said that the peace deal could
    finally bring a fresh start for southerners, many  of  whom  have  been
    persecuted for  their  faith.    It  referred  to  southern  Christians
    displaced in the north being able to return  home  and  practise  their
    faith without any hurdles and government curtailments.   This  hope  is
    reflected in the WWL: Countries Where  the  Situation  Improved  Report
    (2R1) which said that last year reported on the new hope Christians  in
    Sudan cherished with the signing of the peace deal  by  the  government
    and SPLA rebel leaders to end more than twenty years of civil  war.  In
    2004 there were less incidents of  violence against Christians  as  far
    as we can verify, compared to earlier years. In 2005 this trend  seemed
    to continue, with no confirmed reports of Christians being  killed  for
    their faith and fewer incidents reported, such as physical assaults and
    kidnappings.  We should also  note  the  present  situation  in  Darfur
    which, although not of direct relevance to the issues in  this  appeal,
    is evidence of the Sudanese authorities' attitude towards those of  the
    same ethnicity as the rebel groups in Darfur. The Aegis Reports  at  2A
    51-77 provide strong evidence of an  attempt  to  impose  rule  by  one
    ethnic group in Darfur by systematically excluding those  perceived  as
    being of African origin.

The Coptic Church in Sudan

30.    According to the World Christian Encyclopaedia at R27-36, there  have
    been Coptic Christians in  Nubia  since  the  fourth  century.   In  Mr
    Verney's report at 1A 61 he refers to the Copts moving in to  Sudan  in
    the sixth century to escape periods  of  oppression  in  Egypt.   Under
    Islamic rule they became subject to the code of  Dhimma  which  offered
    protection whilst giving them second class  citizenship.   Subsequently
    their proficiency in business and administration made them a privileged
    minority.  The return of militant Islam in  Sudan,  particularly  after
    the introduction of Islamic law in September 1983, led to a  new  phase
    of oppressive treatment of non-Muslims.  There  has  been  a  concerted
    effort to encourage them to leave  the  country  and  Copts  have  been
    dismissed from the civil service and judiciary.   Before  1989  it  was
    relatively easy for Copts to obtain Sudanese nationality  by  birth  or
    naturalisation but there are now reports of difficulties.  The possible
    recruitment of Copts into the regime's PDF militia for the jihad in the
    south has pitched them into a war against their co-religionists in  the
    south.  Coptic businesses have  been  subjected  to  suffer  harassment
    through government controls and many Coptic businessmen have  fled  the
    country even when this has led  to  a  massive  loss  through  currency
    exchange regulations.

31.    In 1995 there were less than 200,000 members of the Coptic  Christian
    community in Sudan according to Mr Verney and this broadly tallies with
    the figures given in the World Christian Encyclopaedia.  Their advanced
    literacy  and  numeracy  has  meant  that  their  role  has  been  more
    significant then their numbers would suggest.  They have adopted a non-
    confrontational  role  in  an  overwhelmingly  Muslim  society.   This,
    coupled with their light skin colour, has  helped  them  to  avoid  the
    worst excesses of religious and racial  discrimination  but  in  recent
    years they have been harassed and intimidated by  the  present  regime.
    They have common roots with  the  original  Christian  missionaries  in
    Sudan but tend to be overlooked in the debate on religious  persecution
    which focuses on the Christians in southern Sudan.


Evaluation of the Evidence

32.    We accept that Mr Verney is  an  expert  on  whose  evidence  we  can
    rely.  He was employed in Sudan from 1977 to 1989 in various capacities
    including  working  as  a  refugee  project  monitor  and  as  a  field
    officer.   He is the editor of Sudan Update and we  note  that  he  was
    commissioned as a special adviser on Darfur  to  assist  the  House  of
    Commons International Development Committee  and  Overseas  Development
    Institute.  He clearly has a wide knowledge of  Sudan  and  writes  and
    speaks with authority.  We accept his evidence about  the  attitude  of
    the Sudanese authorities towards Coptic Christians and the pressures on
    that community.  We accept that it is a vulnerable religious  community
    which has maintained a distinctive identity from  the  other  Christian
    churches and is  also  identifiable  by  its  social  and  professional
    background. To this extent they have become a quite isolated  community
    although many  are  prosperous  and  educated,  fulfilling  responsible
    positions in administrative bodies and the civil service.

33.    We accept that the position of some members of the  Coptic  community
    has worsened since the present regime came to power in  1989  with  its
    narrower view of  Islam  than  that  of  the  majority  of  the  Muslim
    population in Sudan. We find that there is a real risk  of  persecution
    for those members of the Coptic community who for whatever reason  have
    become the object of adverse attention from the  authorities  including
    the local security police.   The attention may be motivated  by  malice
    or  greed  leading  to  extortion  from  business  owners  as  in   the
    appellant's case. As  Mr  Verney  said,  the  initial  trigger  may  be
    something petty but the risk  is  that  it  leads  to  consequences  of
    mounting severity. When this happens to an individual Copt, there is no
    one to whom he can turn for protection.  The Sudanese  authorities  are
    complicit in this ill-treatment or turn a blind eye to it to the extent
    that the individual may  be  deprived  of  effective  protection.   The
    Coptic community, having adopted a low profile, in any event is a small
    community with no ability to provide its own members  with  protection.
     This leaves the individual without recourse to any form of protection.

34.     Mr  Verney  accepted  that  although  the   Coptic   community   was
    vulnerable, he would not say that all returning Copts  would  for  that
    reason alone be at real  risk  of  persecution.   We  agree  with  this
    analysis.  It cannot be said and has not been contended that Christians
    per se are at risk in Sudan.   They  form  about  16%  of  the  overall
    population and, even taking into account the religious  aspect  to  the
    civil war between the north and south it cannot be said, in  the  light
    of the present evidence particularly  following  the  peace  agreement,
    that  being  a  Christian  per  se  brings  with  it  a  real  risk  of
    persecution.

35.    Similarly, a Coptic Christian is not for that  reason  only  at  real
    risk of persecution.  Even though the numbers are relatively small  and
    concentrated in northern Sudanese towns, the evidence does not  support
    a conclusion that Coptic Christians generally are at risk. Many  Coptic
    Christians are in a position to flourish within  Sudanese  society  and
    their long-standing  association  with  the  area  can  work  to  their
    advantage. They remain, however, vulnerable to exploitation and do  not
    have a strong voice or the kind of solidarity exhibited  by  Christians
    in the south.  There is evidence which we accept of an increasing  lack
    of tolerance towards the Coptic Church and a real risk that individuals
    who come to the attention of the authorities may  find  themselves  the
    victims of serious ill-treatment but the nature and extent of that risk
    depends upon the individual's background and circumstances. The  recent
    history of the behaviour of the authorities towards  Coptic  Christians
    has contributed to a general process of attrition affecting the  Coptic
    community.

36.    We accept  Mr  Verney's  evidence  that  distinctions  can  be  drawn
    between the attitude of  the  Sudanese  authorities  towards  different
    groups of Christians.  We  accept  that  they  are  openly  hostile  to
    proselytising evangelical churches.  Members of mainstream churches may
    also,  in  the  light  of  their  own  individual  circumstances,  find
    themselves at risk of persecution.  The risk is greater for members  of
    the Coptic Church in the light of their isolated  position  in  society
    and their particular vulnerability not being part  of  a  larger  group
    able to deter persecution or to provide any remedy.

Summary of our Findings on the Risks for Christians in Sudan

37.    We were not referred in submissions  to  TM  (Persecution-Christians-
    Individual- General) Sudan CG [2002] UKIAT 04849.  This  dealt  with  a
    claim by a Roman Catholic.  The  Tribunal  reached  the  conclusion  in
    paragraph 22 of its determination that the evidence did not  show  that
    Christians were targeted per se as a group for treatment  amounting  to
    persecution but it accepted that at times harassment and discrimination
    against individual Christians in Sudan might amount to persecution.  We
    reach the same conclusion in the light of the evidence before  us.   We
    therefore confirm that being a Christian in Sudan does not without more
    give rise to a real risk of persecution.  However,  the  evidence  does
    confirm that some Christians are in a  more  vulnerable  position  than
    others.   Each  case  will  need  a  careful  examination  on  its  own
    particular facts including an assessment of whether there is in reality
    a connection between the ill-treatment complained of and  a  Convention
    reason.  The motivation for the acts of persecution  will  need  to  be
    carefully considered.

38.    The Sudanese authorities  are  particularly  hostile  to  members  of
    proselytising  evangelical  churches.    Coptic  Christians  are   also
    vulnerable because of their isolated position in society and because of
    a less tolerant attitude from the present authorities towards them.   A
    Coptic Christian who comes to the adverse attention of the  authorities
    for any reason may well find himself at real  risk  of  persecution  on
    account of his religion but we emphasise  again  that  each  case  must
    depend on its own facts.

39.    We are not satisfied  on  the  evidence  before  us  that  the  peace
    agreement has had any immediate effect to alleviate problems which some
    Coptic Christians may face.  It may be that the situation  will  settle
    in Sudan and that the authorities will take a  more  tolerant  attitude
    towards religious minorities but we are not satisfied that this is  the
    position at present.  The same security apparatus is in  place  in  the
    north following the peace agreement and  whatever  its  effect  in  the
    south, we accept Mr Verney's evidence that as yet there has been little
    if any discernable effect on the human rights position in the north.




The Position of the Appellant

40.     The  appellant's  account  of  events  in  Sudan  was  found  to  be
    credible.  It clearly fits in with the kind of behaviour  described  by
    Mr Verney in his reports. It was his view that in  the  light  of  past
    events, the appellant would be  at  real  risk  on  return  of  further
    adverse attention from the authorities. We agree with  this  assessment
    of the risk on return. In the light of what had happened in the past we
    are satisfied that there is a real risk  of  repetition.  There  is  no
    basis for a finding that circumstances have changed in such a way since
    the appellant left Sudan so as to reduce or minimise the  risk  to  the
    appellant.  Mr Parker sought to argue that  internal  flight  would  be
    open to the appellant in the south.  However, that issue was not raised
    in the Secretary of State's decision letter or at  the  hearing  before
    the Adjudicator and was only raised before us in submissions.  We  were
    not prepared to permit this point to be argued at such  a  late  stage.
    There was no  exploration  in  the  evidence  as  to  whether  internal
    relocation would as a matter of practical reality be available  to  the
    appellant.

41.    The issue was also raised at the hearing of whether there might be  a
    risk arising from the fact that the appellant  would  be  returning  to
    Sudan after a period of one year.  We have not heard evidence  on  that
    issue and did not find it necessary to  do  so  in  order  to  reach  a
    decision on whether the appellant in his particular circumstances would
    be at risk on return.  We are not in apposition to make any findings on
    that issue.   We were  referred  to  Court  of  Appeal's  judgments  in
    Drrias.   That case looked at the  position  as  at  the  time  of  the
    hearing before the special adjudicator in 1996.   The Court  of  Appeal
    held that she was entitled to find that the appellant would be at  real
    risk of persecution.  The use of this  case  as  an  authority  on  the
    current position in Sudan is relatively limited as the  evidence  is  a
    decade out of date.  We have sought to review the position in the light
    of the current evidence.

Decision

42.    The original Tribunal made a material error of law.  Having  reviewed
    the evidence before us, we allow this appeal on both asylum  and  human
    rights grounds.








                                                                H J E Latter
                                                    Senior Immigration Judge













                                  APPENDIX


      Cases, expert reports and background material before the Tribunal


Cases

TM (Persecution -Christians - Individual - General) Sudan  CG  [2002]  UKIAT
04849
Drrias [1997] EWCA Civ 1181
AE (Relocation - Darfur - Khartoum an option) Sudan CG [2005] UKAIT 00101
LM (Relocation - Khartoum - AE reaffirmed) Sudan [2005] UKAIT 00114

Expert Reports

Report of Peter Verney dated 28 May 2004 and further report  dated  6  March
2006, confirmed and updated by his oral evidence

Background material

COIS Sudan Country report October 2005
US Department of State country reports 2002, 2003, 2004, 2005, 2006.
US Department of State International Religious Freedom Report 2004, 2005
Amnesty International annual report 2005 Sudan
Human rights watch report Sudan January 2006
Aegis Trust Reports October 2005:
          'Naming the crisis: policy implications'
          'Darfur and the ideology of Sudan'
          'Systematic actions amounting to genocide'
          'Security'
          'Ending impunity'
          'Conclusions and recommendations'
Status of religious freedom in Sudan November 2005
Freedom for Sudanese Faith - Christianity Today magazine August 2004
Extract World Christian Encyclopaedia OUP 2001
OGN Sudan 13 December 2005
WWL: Countries where the situation improved.  Open Doors International 2006
International Affairs regional concerns - Sudan 2004


                                     ***

