
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal

      GS (Article 15(c): indiscriminate violence) Afghanistan CG [2009]
UKAIT 00044


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Procession House                     |                             |
|On 22 and 23 July 2009                        |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                       SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE MATHER
                      SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE P R LANE
                      SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE SOUTHERN

                                   Between

                                     GS
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Symes, Counsel, instructed by the IAS (Tribunal
Unit)
For the Respondent:    Mr R Palmer and Mr D Blundell, Counsel, instructed
                    by the Treasury Solicitor

There is not in Afghanistan such a high  level  of  indiscriminate  violence
that substantial grounds exist for believing that a civilian  would,  solely
by being present there, face a real  risk  which  threatens  the  civilian's
life or person, such as to entitle that person to the grant of  humanitarian
protection, pursuant to article 15(c) of  the  Qualification  Directive.  GS
(Existence of internal armed conflict) Afghanistan CG [2009] UKAIT 00010  is
no longer to be treated as extant country guidance.







                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    What follows  is  the  determination  of  the  panel.  Whilst  bearing
    another signature, the principal  work  on  it,  comprising  an  almost
    complete draft, was undertaken by Senior Immigration Judge Mather  who,
    since  being  taken  ill,  has  confirmed  that  he  agrees  with   the
    conclusion.  The determination concerns the application  and  scope  of
    Article  15(c)  of  the  Qualification  Directive  (2004/83/EC)   ("the
    Qualification Directive"),  incorporated  into  the  Immigration  Rules
    HC395 in paragraph 339C.  In  Part  7  of  the  determination  we  have
    summarised our findings, and the guidance from both the European  Court
    in Elgafaji v Staatssecretaris van  Justitie  (C-465/07)  (reported  at
    [2009] 2 CMLR 45), and the Court of Appeal in QD and AH v Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2009] EWCA Civ 620.

2.    We have considered the general conditions in Afghanistan.  In Part  9,
    we have explained why, at present, there is not, as a general matter, a
    serious and individual threat to a civilian's life or person by  reason
    of indiscriminate violence in situations of international  or  internal
    armed conflict.

3.    We deal with access to Jalalabad in Part 10, and  internal  flight  to
    Kabul in Part 11.  There is a discussion about enhanced risk categories
    in Part 12.


The Appellant


4.    The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan.  He originally  claimed  to
    have been born on 1 January 1990,  but,  following  a  social  services
    assessment, a date of birth  of  17  August  1989  was  recorded.   The
    Immigration Judge who originally heard his appeal observed that, either
    way, the appellant was over 18 at the time of the appeal.

Part 1

Immigration History

5.    The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom  unlawfully  on  3  August
    2005.  He applied for asylum shortly thereafter  but,  on  28  November
    2007, his application was refused.  The formal immigration decision was
    to remove him as an illegal entrant, with an indication that directions
    would be given for his removal to Afghanistan.

6.    The appellant appealed.  His appeal was heard by Immigration  Judge  B
    Lloyd on 18 January 2008.  In the  determination  which  followed,  the
    appeal  was  dismissed  on  refugee,  human  rights  and   humanitarian
    protection grounds.

7.    The appellant successfully applied for reconsideration.

8.    At an  earlier  reconsideration  hearing,  before  Senior  Immigration
    Judge Mather sitting alone, both parties agreed  that  the  Immigration
    Judge had made a  material  error  of  law.   That  is,  that  when  he
    considered the question of humanitarian protection he did not deal with
    Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive.  In other  words  he  did
    not consider` whether the appellant would be at real  risk  of  serious
    harm as the result of "a serious and individual threat to a  civilian's
    life or person by reason of indiscriminate violence  in  situations  of
    international or internal armed conflict".

9.    Following that hearing, the Tribunal  issued  directions,  which  were
    also published as country guidance.  The directions recorded  the  fact
    that, in a letter dated 7 January 2009, the respondent conceded that:

        "for the purposes of International Humanitarian Law ('IHL'),  there
        is at present an internal armed conflict in Afghanistan,  and  that
        for the purposes of IHL, the whole of the territory of  Afghanistan
        is to be treated as being in such conflict."

      For reasons which we will give later, that direction is now of  little
    relevance and consequently no longer falls to  be  treated  as  country
    guidance.

10.   When the matter came before us, Mr Symes did not seek to suggest  that
    the passage of time since the  Immigration  Judge's  determination  was
    such that we should reopen the question of  whether  the  appellant  is
    entitled to be recognised as  a  refugee,  because  of  any  change  of
    circumstances.  The matter proceeded before  us  only  on  humanitarian
    protection grounds, and in particular the provisions of Article  15(c).
    The appellant did not give evidence at  the  reconsideration  hearings.
    Oral evidence was given  by  Professor  Farrell  (see  Part  8  below).
    Although  we  refer  to  Article  15(c)   throughout   much   of   this
    determination, because we deal with the European Court's  judgement  in
    Elgafaji, in the United Kingdom Immigration Judges are  concerned  with
    the similarly worded provision in paragraph  339C,  which  incorporates
    Article 15(c) into our domestic law.

Part 2

The Facts

11.   The Immigration Judge found that the appellant was not a  credible  or
    reliable witness.

12.   The appellant had claimed  that  his  parents  had  been  murdered  in
    furtherance of a land dispute with the local commander, Gul Karim,  and
    the warlord, Hazrat Ali.  He expressed fear that he would  also  become
    their victim.  That was rejected.  It was  also  the  appellant's  case
    that his sister is married and living with her husband in Pakistan; and
    his brother died whilst in Dubai.  The respondent accepts, as expressly
    conceded by Mr Palmer, that the appellant comes from Jalalabad, in  the
    province  of  Nangarhar,  and  that  he  has  no  family  remaining  in
    Afghanistan.  It is our task to consider this appeal on the basis  that
    the appellant is a young man, about whom nothing has been  proved  save
    that he is from Jalalabad, is over 18, and has no immediate  family  in
    Afghanistan.


Part 3

Afghanistan - Brief History

13.   Mr  Symes  gave  a  very  brief  account  of  the  recent  history  of
    Afghanistan, which we quote in order to  put  this  determination  into
    context.  In paragraph 37 of his skeleton he said that:

        "The  conflict  is  protracted:  Afghanistan  has  endured  'almost
        constant warfare since the Soviet invasion in 1979'.  The  fracture
        of the Mujahedin following their successful overthrow of the puppet
        Soviet regime in 1992 led to civil war.  After the formation of the
        Taliban in 1994, there was civil war between them and the  Northern
        Alliance between 1996 and 2001.  The current conflict was triggered
        by the US led invasion of Afghanistan in late  2001.   The  current
        phase of internal armed conflict has been ongoing since 2002."

Part 4

The Relevant Legislation

14.   Paragraph 339C of the Immigration Rules HC 395 provides:

        "339C. A person will be  granted  humanitarian  protection  in  the
        United Kingdom if the Secretary of State is satisfied that:


        (i)      he is in the United Kingdom or has arrived at  a  port  of
             entry in the United Kingdom;


        (ii)     he does not qualify as a refugee as defined in  regulation
             2 of The Refugee or Person in Need of International  Protection
             (Qualification) Regulations 2006;


        (iii)    substantial grounds have been shown for believing that the
             person concerned, if he returned  to  the  country  of  return,
             would face a real risk of suffering serious harm and is unable,
             or, owing to such risk,  unwilling  to  avail  himself  of  the
             protection of that country; and


        (iv)      he  is  not  excluded  from  a  grant   of   humanitarian
             protection.


        Serious harm consists of:


        (i)      the death penalty or execution;


        (ii)     unlawful killing;


        (iii)    torture or inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment of
             a person in the country of return; or


        (iv)     serious and individual threat  to  a  civilian's  life  or
             person by reason of indiscriminate violence  in  situations  of
             international or internal armed conflict."

15.    The  appellant  is  not  excluded  from  a  grant   of   humanitarian
    protection.

16.   Paragraph 339C is in part derived from  the  Qualification  Directive,
    including Article 2 and the  definition  of  serious  harm  in  Article
    15(c).

17.   The following provisions of the Qualification Directive are  relevant,
    or referred to later:-

        "Recital


        (10) This Directive respects the fundamental  rights  and  observes
        the  principles  recognised  in  particular  by  the   Charter   of
        Fundamental Rights of  the  European  Union.   In  particular  this
        Directive seeks to ensure full respect for human  dignity  and  the
        right to asylum of applicants for  asylum  and  their  accompanying
        family members.


        (26) Risks to which a population of a country or a section  of  the
        population  is  generally  exposed  do  normally  not   create   in
        themselves an individual threat  which  would  qualify  as  serious
        harm.


        Article 2


        Definitions


        For the purposes of this Directive:


        ...


        (e) 'person eligible  for  subsidiary  protection'  means  a  third
        country national or a stateless person who does not  qualify  as  a
        refugee but in respect of whom substantial grounds have been  shown
        for believing that the person concerned, if returned to his or  her
        country of origin, or in the case of a stateless person, to his  or
        her country of former habitual residence, would face a real risk of
        suffering serious harm as  defined  in  Article  15,  and  to  whom
        Article 17(1) and (2) do not apply, and is unable, or owing to such
        risk, unwilling to avail himself or herself of  the  protection  of
        that country;


        Article 8


        1.  As part of the  application  for  internal  protection,  Member
        States  may  determine  that  an  applicant  is  not  in  need   of
        international protection if in a part  of  the  country  of  origin
        there is no well-founded fear of being persecuted or no  real  risk
        of suffering serious harm  and  the  applicant  can  reasonably  be
        expected to stay in that part of the country.


        2.  In examining whether a part of the  country  of  origin  is  in
        accordance with paragraph 1, Member States shall  at  the  time  of
        taking the decision on the application have regard to  the  general
        circumstances prevailing in that part of the  country  and  to  the
        personal circumstances of the applicant.


        3.  Paragraph 1 may apply notwithstanding  technical  obstacles  to
        return to the country of origin.


        Article 9


        (3) In accordance with Article 2(c), there  must  be  a  connection
        between the reasons  mentioned  in  Article  10  and  the  acts  of
        persecution as qualified in paragraph 1.


        Article 15


        Serious harm


        Serious harm consists of:


        (a) death penalty or execution; or


        (b) torture or inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment  of  an
        applicant in the country or origin; or


        (c) serious and individual threat to a civilian's life or person by
        reason of indiscriminate violence in situations of international or
        internal armed conflict."
         Article 17
         Exclusion
         1. A third country national or a stateless person is excluded from
         being eligible for subsidiary protection where there are serious
         reasons for considering that:
         (a) he or she has committed a crime against peace, a war crime, or
         a crime against humanity, as defined in the international
         instruments drawn up to make provision in respect of such crimes;
         (b) he or she has committed a serious crime;
         (c) he or she has been guilty of acts contrary to the purposes and
         principles of the United Nations as set out in the Preamble and
         Articles 1 and 2 of the Charter of the United Nations;
         (d) he or she constitutes a danger to the community or to the
         security of the Member State in which he or she is present.
        2. Paragraph 1 applies to persons who instigate or otherwise
        participate in the commission of the crimes or acts mentioned
        therein.

Part 5

Issues of Law that have been Resolved

18.    The  interpretation  of  Article  15(c)  has   not   proved   to   be
    straightforward.  The matter was referred  to  the  European  Court  in
    Elgafaji.  The Advocate General, in his opinion, said:

        "Interpretation is not easy and is, to  a  large  extent,  open  to
        debate..."

      Having considered his opinion, and the arguments, the Court  concluded
    first, that Article 15(c) is different from Article 3 of the ECHR which
    is essentially replicated in Article 15(b).  Therefore, the Court  said
    (at paragraph 28), Article 15(c) of the Directive  must  be  considered
    independently of Article 3 of the ECHR.

19.   In giving guidance on the interpretation of Article 15(c),  the  Court
    started by noting that  the  terms  "death  penalty",  "execution"  and
    "torture  or  inhuman  or  degrading  treatment  or  punishment  of  an
    applicant in the country of origin", used in Article 15(a) and  (b)  of
    the Directive, cover situations in which an applicant  is  specifically
    exposed to a risk of a particular harm.  It went on to say:

        "33.      By  contrast,  the  harm  defined  in  art.15(c)  of  the
             Directive as consisting of a 'serious and individual threat  to
             [the applicant's] life or person' covers a more general risk of
             harm.
        34.      Reference is made, more generally, to a 'threat ...  to  a
             civilian's life or person' rather  than  to  specific  acts  of
             violence.  Furthermore, that threat is inherent  in  a  general
             situation  of  'international  or  internal  armed   conflict'.
             Lastly, the violence in  question  which  gives  rise  to  that
             threat is described as 'indiscriminate', a term  which  implies
             that it may extend to people  irrespective  of  their  personal
             circumstances.
        35.      In that context, the word 'individual' must be  understood
             as covering harm to civilians irrespective of  their  identity,
             where the degree of indiscriminate violence characterising  the
             armed conflict taking place ... reaches such a high level  that
             substantial grounds are shown for believing  that  a  civilian,
             returned to the relevant country or, as the case may be, to the
             relevant region, would, solely on account of  his  presence  on
             the territory of that country or region, face a  real  risk  of
             being subject to the serious threat referred to in art.15(c) of
             the Directive.
        36.      That  interpretation,  which  is  likely  to  ensure  that
             art.15(c) of the Directive has its own field of application, is
             not invalidated by the wording of recital 26 in the preamble to
             the Directive, according to which:
                 'risks to which a population of a country or a  section  of
                 the population is generally exposed do normally not  create
                 in themselves an individual threat which would  qualify  as
                 serious harm.'
        37.      While that recital  implies  that  the  objective  finding
             alone of a risk linked to the general situation in a country is
             not, as a rule, sufficient to establish that the conditions set
             out in art.15(c) of the Directive have been met in respect of a
             specific person, its wording nevertheless allows - by  the  use
             of the word 'normally' - for the possibility of an  exceptional
             situation which would be characterised by such a high degree of
             risk that substantial grounds would be shown for believing that
             that person would  be  subject  individually  to  the  risk  in
             question.
        38.      The exceptional nature of that situation is also confirmed
             by the fact that the relevant protection is subsidiary, and  by
             the broad logic of art.15 of the Directive, as the harm defined
             in paras (a) and (b) of that article requires a clear degree of
             individualisation. While it is admittedly true that  collective
             factors play a significant role in the application of art.15(c)
             of the Directive, in that the person  concerned  belongs,  like
             other  people,  to   a   circle   of   potential   victims   of
             indiscriminate  violence  in  situations  of  international  or
             internal armed conflict, it is nevertheless the case that  that
             provision must be  subject  to  a  coherent  interpretation  in
             relation to the other two situations referred to in  art.15  of
             the Directive and must,  therefore,  be  interpreted  by  close
             reference to that individualisation.
        39.      In that regard, the more the applicant  is  able  to  show
             that  he  is  specifically  affected  by  reason   of   factors
             particular to his personal circumstances, the lower  the  level
             of indiscriminate violence required for him to be eligible  for
             subsidiary protection."

20.   Prior to the European Court's analysis of Article 15(c), the  Tribunal
    had  considered  its  meaning  on  two  occasions,  in  HH  and  Others
    (Mogadishu: internal armed conflict:  risk)  Somalia  CG  [2008]  UKAIT
    00022, and subsequently in KH (Article 15(c)  Qualification  Directive)
    Iraq CG [2008] UKAIT 00023.  Those cases considered the meaning  to  be
    put upon various terms found in Article 15(c), and its relationship  to
    Article 15(a) and (b).  In so doing they concluded that the  key  terms
    should be given a meaning consistent  with  International  Humanitarian
    Law (IHL). These cases were followed by AM & AM (armed  conflict:  risk
    categories) Somalia CG [2008] UKAIT 00091, which  also  considered  the
    Advocate General's opinion in Elgafaji.

21.   Subsequent to the European Court's judgment in Elgafaji, the Court  of
    Appeal considered the interpretation of Article 15(c), in  QD  and  AH.
    The Court disagreed with  the  notion  that  Article  15(c)  should  be
    interpreted with reference to IHL.  In so doing they said  that  in  KH
    (Iraq) the Tribunal's approach had:

        "led them  to  construe  'indiscriminate  violence'  and  'life  or
        person' too narrowly, to construe 'individual' too broadly, and  to
        set the threshold of risk too high."

22.    In  paragraph  19,  the  Court  identified  three   difficulties   in
    interpreting Article 15(c):-

        "(i)     the ostensibly cumulative but logically  intractable  test
             of 'a real risk' of a 'threat';


        (ii)     the contradictory postulation of  'individual  threat'  to
             life or safety from 'indiscriminate violence';


        (iii)    the requirement of 'armed conflict' when there may well be
             only one source of indiscriminate violence."

23.   Dealing with the interpretation of "a  real  risk  of  a  threat"  the
    Court said that, in the context of Article 15, a threat to a civilian's
    life  or  person  is  concerned  not  with  fear  alone  but  with  the
    possibility that it may become a reality.  In paragraph 29,  the  Court
    said that:

        "'Risk' in Article 2(e) overlaps with 'threat' in Article 15(c), so
        that the latter reiterates but  does  not  qualify  or  dilate  the
        former."

24.   The Court also concluded that the word 'serious' in Article  15(c)  is
    concerned with 'threats of real harm' and that the provision should  be
    read as referring to 'serious threats of real harm'.  Quoting paragraph
    136 of KH (Iraq), the  Court  also  concluded  (in  paragraph  33),  in
    relation to the degree of risk to  individuals  required  to  bring  an
    armed conflict situation within the purview of Article 15(c), that  all
    an applicant has to show is that incidents of indiscriminate violence:

        "were happening on a wide scale and in such  a  way  as  to  be  of
        sufficient severity to pose a  real  risk  of  serious  harm...  to
        civilians generally."

      In considering the degree of risk required, the Court  expressly  said
    that it was not appropriate simply to read across a test which had been
    expressed in AA (Zimbabwe) [2007] EWCA Civ 149,  namely  a  "consistent
    pattern of mistreatment".  The Court highlighted the  contrast  between
    methodical victimisation of those  suspected  of  disloyalty,  and  the
    occurrence of indiscriminate violence.  It  said  the  risk  of  random
    injury or death, which indiscriminate violence carries, is the converse
    of consistency.  In so doing it was making the point that the  test  is
    wider, and in so doing, approved that expressed in paragraph 136 of  KH
    (Iraq).

25.   Turning to what it had described as the contradictory  postulation  of
    individual threat arising from indiscriminate violence, the Court  said
    that the effect of that phrase had been settled by Elgafaji.

26.    Dealing  with  the  third  source  of  difficulty,  relating  to  the
    requirement for armed conflict when there may well be only  one  source
    of indiscriminate violence, the Court, in paragraph 38, said that:

        "the  phrase  'situations  of  international  or   internal   armed
        conflict' in Article 15(c) has an autonomous meaning which is broad
        enough to capture any situation of indiscriminate violence, whether
        caused by one or more armed factions  or  by  a  state,  and  which
        reaches the level described by the European Court in Elgafaji."

      The Court  agreed  with  the  UNHCR's  submission  that  there  is  no
    requirement for the  armed  conflict  to  be  exceptional.   The  Court
    emphasised that the word 'civilian' means a genuine non-combatant,  and
    not simply someone who is not in uniform.  The Court observed that  the
    UNHCR had submitted that former combatants should not be excluded  from
    protection, but did not itself express a view.  It  was  not  a  matter
    argued before us but we would consider that, whether a former combatant
    falls within the definition of a civilian, will be a question  of  fact
    and degree in every case in which the issue arises.

27.   In conclusion, in paragraph 40, the Court defined the  question  which
    the Tribunal has to answer (adapted by us for this case) as being:

        "Is there in [Afghanistan] or a material part of  it  such  a  high
        level of indiscriminate violence that substantial grounds exist for
        believing that an applicant such as [GS]  would,  solely  by  being
        present there face a real risk which threatens his life or person."

      By 'material part' the Court said it meant the applicant's home  area,
    or any potential place of internal relocation,  if  relevant.   In  our
    judgement, by so doing, the Court confirmed that it  is  possible,  for
    the purposes of the Qualification Directive, to have an armed  conflict
    in one part of  a  country,  when  other  parts  may  be  free  of  it.
    Similarly, even in an area of internal armed  conflict,  there  may  be
    parts where the high  levels  of  indiscriminate  violence,  needed  to
    obtain protection, are not achieved.

Part 6

The Remaining Unresolved Issues of Law

28.   This is the first occasion since QD and AH in which Article 15(c)  has
    come to be considered in detail by a panel of the Tribunal.   We  shall
    consider and apply the law as set out in Elgafaji and QD  and  AH,  and
    address a number of issues which those cases did not purport to settle.

29.   As a result of QD and AH, whether there is an internal armed  conflict
    in Afghanistan for IHL purposes, is not a relevant consideration.   For
    that reason, GS (Existence of internal armed conflict)  Afghanistan  CG
    [2009] UKAIT 00010 is  no  longer  to  be  treated  as  extant  country
    guidance.

30.   The issues which remain to be considered, are:

      . causation;


      . the distinction between discriminate and indiscriminate violence;


      . whether an applicant can rely on  indirect  consequences  of  armed
        conflict as well as direct ones;


      . whether criminal  activity  occurring  during  a  period  of  armed
        conflict is a relevant consideration;


      . the meaning of "life or person".

Appellant's Submissions on the Unresolved Issues

31.   In his skeleton, Mr Symes said little on these topics  save  to  refer
    to the overriding purpose of Article 15(c), which he said was  to  give
    temporary refuge to people whose safety is placed in  serious  jeopardy
    by indiscriminate violence.  He referred to paragraphs 23 to 34  of  QD
    and AH, and particularly to paragraph 35 of Elgafaji,  which  describes
    the necessary degree of indiscriminate violence as reaching:

        "such a high level that substantial grounds are shown for believing
        that a civilian, returned to the relevant country or, as  the  case
        may be, to the relevant region, would  solely  on  account  of  his
        presence on the territory of that country or region,  face  a  real
        risk of being subject to the serious threat referred to in  Article
        15(c)."

      He expressed the view that the reasoning in  Elgafaji  may  have  been
    informed by  the  Temporary  Protection  Directive  (Council  Directive
    2001/55/EC), as suggested in the UNHCR submission at paragraph 37.3  to
    the Appendix in QD and AH.  There it was said that Directive:

        "...applies to persons who have fled  'armed  conflict  or  endemic
        violence' and persons at serious risk of 'systemic and  generalised
        violations' of their human rights."

32.   In argument, Mr Symes considered  the  possible  forms  of  threat  to
    civilians.  He referred to the requirement for  a  threat  to  life  or
    person.  In QD and AH, whilst the Court said that the IHL  approach  in
    KH (Iraq) had led to too narrow a construct of "life or person", it did
    not venture an opinion as to what "threat to life or person" does mean.
     Mr Symes argued that Articles  15(a),  (b)  and  (c)  should  be  read
    together.  He  said  that,  whilst  QD  and  AH  did  not  mandate  the
    suggestion that they should be considered euisdem generis, it did imply
    that was the case.  He asked, rhetorically, whether casualties  arising
    from disease or malnourishment would be included, and  argued  that  is
    not ruled out under  the  provisions  of  Article  3  ECHR,  which  are
    replicated in paragraph 15(b).  He wondered whether Sedley LJ had  this
    in mind when he said, at the end of the judgment, that it was  possible
    that QD may succeed in his claim on the basis of Article 15(c).

33.   When the Tribunal reminded Mr Symes that there needed to be  a  causal
    nexus between the threat  to  a  civilian's  life  or  person  and  the
    indiscriminate violence, Mr Symes suggested that  where,  for  example,
    humanitarian  aid  supplies  were   interrupted   by   insurgents   the
    consequence of that interruption may be sufficient.  But,  he  conceded
    that there is a risk that those who  were  simply  poor  would  not  be
    successful.

34.   Dealing with the question  of  causation,  he  reminded  us  that  the
    wording in Article 15(c) is "by reason  of",  whereas  in  the  Refugee
    Convention causation is dealt with by the words "for reasons  of".   He
    argued that as the language is  almost  exactly  the  same  it  is  not
    possible to say that refugee  cases  are  not  relevant  to  issues  of
    causation, when  concerning  subsidiary  protection.   He  referred  to
    Article 9(3) of the Qualification Directive which, in  the  context  of
    the qualification as a refugee, provides:

        "...there must be a connection between  the  reasons  mentioned  in
        Article 10 of the acts of persecution as qualified in paragraph 1."

35.   He argued that Article 9(3) did not use  the  word  "exclusively",  or
    even "probably", it simply required "a connection" and,  he  argued,  a
    low level of connection.  He then  asked  whether  Article  9(3)  would
    apply to subsidiary  protection  and  suggested  that  the  possibility
    should not be excluded.  As IHL considerations have been ruled out,  he
    suggested that an approach similar to that in Article 9(3) would  be  a
    good way of resolving what is required by way of causation.

36.   He argued that  the  Qualification  Directive's  overall  approach  is
    purposive and referred to recital 10 which says that the Directive:-

        "seeks to ensure full respect for human dignity and  the  right  to
        asylum of applicants  for  asylum  and  their  accompanying  family
        members."

    He acknowledged that this recital also refers to refugee claims but, he
    argued, the Directive is such that the recital covers both refugees and
    subsidiary categories.  He argued that it is necessary to take a  broad
    approach to the harm from which Article 15  was  designed  to  protect,
    because recital 10 includes the reference to human dignity.  He  argued
    that it would be contrary to human dignity not to provide protection to
    those whose needs arise from either direct or indirect violence.

37.   He referred to the UNHCR view that serious (including  indiscriminate)
    threats  to  life,  physical  integrity  or  freedom,  resulting   from
    generalised violence or events seriously disturbing public  order,  are
    valid reasons for international protection under its mandate.  This was
    said, not only in their  January  2008  Position  Paper,  but  also  in
    paragraphs 50 to 55 of the submissions which appear in the appendix  to
    QD and AH.  That, he argued, also showed the need for a broad approach.

38.   He also relied on Article  61  of  the  Consolidated  Version  of  the
    Treaty Establishing the European Community, which  he  argued  mandates
    the progressive establishment of  an  area  of  freedom,  security  and
    justice, including "safeguarding  the  rights  of  nationals  of  third
    countries".  He argued that Article 15(c) should not  offer  protection
    any less extensive, as to the forms of  harm  contemplated,  than  that
    protected by Article 15(b).

39.   Mr Symes relied on the Advocate General in Elgafaji, at his  paragraph
    23, where he said:

        "Accordingly, although the case law of the Strasbourg Court is  not
        a binding source of interpretation of Community fundamental rights,
        it constitutes nonetheless a starting  point  for  determining  the
        content and scope  of  those  rights  within  the  European  Union.
        Taking that case law into account is, moreover, essential to ensure
        that the Union, founded on  the  principle  of  respect  for  human
        rights and fundamental freedoms, will contribute to  extending  the
        protection of those rights in the European area."

40.   Mr Symes argued that when the Court of Appeal  said,  in  QD  and  AH,
    that the Tribunal  had  erred  in  law  by  construing  "indiscriminate
    violence" "too narrowly", that amounted to an endorsement of the  UNHCR
    approach.  That approach requires all forms of violence, emanating both
    directly from the conflict itself  and  from  other  sources,  such  as
    opportunistic criminals taking advantage of the breakdown  of  law  and
    order, to be taken into account.  It followed, in his submission,  that
    all forms and consequences of violence in Afghanistan should be  deemed
    relevant to Article 15(c).  Mr Symes added that, when  the  Court  said
    that indiscriminate violence was broader than the IHL meaning, it could
    have ruled out categories of indiscriminate violence, but  did  not  do
    so.  In HH and Others (Somalia) (paragraph 333) the Tribunal said:

        "...It is clear  that  the  indiscriminate  violence  can  comprise
        violence perpetrated by  combatants,  which  fails  to  distinguish
        between civilian and military  targets.   But...the  indiscriminate
        violence does not have to be violence that emanates  directly  from
        the combatants themselves.  If that had been intended, we think the
        drafters could and would have said so.  The indiscriminate violence
        may, for example, be perpetrated  by  looters  and  other  criminal
        elements, taking advantage of a breakdown in law and order to go on
        the rampage."

      In paragraph 96 of KH  (Iraq),  the  Tribunal  drew  back  from  that,
    because of their IHL approach,  and  said,  in  effect,  that  criminal
    violence taking advantage of the lack of law and  order  would  not  be
    included.  Mr Symes argued that it would be, and the IHL  approach  had
    been found to be wrong.

Respondent's Submissions

41.   In their skeleton argument, Mr Palmer and Mr Blundell referred to  the
    jurisprudential history of Article 15(c).  They noted that  in  QD  and
    AH, although the UNHCR had argued against excluding  criminal  violence
    from the purview of the phrase "indiscriminate violence", the Court  of
    Appeal had not expressly adopted that part of the UNHCR's  submissions,
    in contrast to others.  They therefore argued that  the  position  with
    regard to criminal acts remains as set out by the Tribunal in paragraph
    96 of KH (Iraq).  There, it was said that criminal acts are capable  of
    being sufficiently  punished  within  the  framework  of  the  domestic
    criminal law of a country, even if that did not necessarily  happen  in
    practice; and that there is nothing in the text, the Directive, or  the
    preparatory documents  to  suggest  that  protection  against  criminal
    violence was intended.  That view is supported by the recital 26  which
    provides that risks to which a population is generally exposed are  not
    normally enough to entitle  an  applicant  to  the  protection  of  the
    Qualification Directive.   They  argued  that  nothing  in  QD  and  AH
    suggests that such acts should now be caught by  Article  15(c).   They
    asserted  that,  because  none  of  the  organisations  which   provide
    information about civilian casualties of war have attempted to  provide
    figures for victims of criminal acts, that suggests they  also  do  not
    consider it part of the indiscriminate violence to which Article  15(c)
    is addressed.

42.   Mr Palmer dealt with the findings in Elgafaji.  When he said that  any
    situation of indiscriminate  violence  has  to  reach  the  high  level
    described by the European Court, the Tribunal suggested  to  him  that,
    for persons who were at heightened risk,  there  is  a  relatively  low
    'Elgafaji test', and asked how this impacted on  his  submissions.   He
    said that depended  upon  what  "indiscriminate  violence"  means.   He
    argued that it is not any violence, or even major violence, but must be
    indiscriminate.  He said that the issue is whether a person is at  risk
    "by reason of indiscriminate violence in situations of international or
    internal armed conflict".  He suggested that a more helpful approach is
    to consider that as one phrase and ask what it means.  Even  if  it  is
    not to be construed strictly with IHL guidance, the  violence  must  be
    looked at in the context of armed conflict.  He  then  asked  what  the
    threshold is, saying that is bound up with the existence  of  an  armed
    conflict.  He suggested that the threshold was not that different  from
    the type of violence  which  the  Tribunal  identified  in  KH  (Iraq).
    Although we must take care, because in KH (Iraq) the  analysis  was  in
    relation to IHL, he argued that that did not mean that all the analysis
    went out of the window and noted that, at paragraph  94,  it  was  said
    that  indiscriminate  violence  could  still  cover  violence  targeted
    against civilians directly, so that targeted violence is  part  of  the
    general risk.  Although  QD  and  AH  had  found  that  "indiscriminate
    violence" had been construed too narrowly in KH (Iraq),  he  said  that
    was not an obvious answer to the question.  In QD  and  AH,  the  Court
    seemed to suggest that indiscriminate violence embraces armed  anarchy,
    but he acknowledged that may  well  not  display  the  nexus  that  was
    considered essential in KH (Iraq), although he  did  suggest  it  could
    explain the Delphic comments in QD and AH.

43.   Mr Palmer agreed with the view in KH (Iraq),  that  criminal  violence
    is not covered by "indiscriminate violence".  He said  first,  criminal
    violence is not indiscriminate and second, as had been accepted in HH &
    others (Mogadishu: armed conflict: risk) Somalia CG [2008] UKAIT  00022
    there has to be a nexus to the armed  conflict.   To  be  included  any
    criminal violence would have to be either caused, or permitted, by  the
    armed conflict, for example, if there were a total breakdown of law and
    order.  He suggested that any criminal activity had to be born of,  and
    not simply not prevented by,  the  internal  armed  conflict.   It  was
    therefore something close to what the Tribunal  had  identified  in  KH
    (Iraq) and not tied to military operations. We note that QD and AH,  at
    paragraph 21, included armed anarchy when speaking of a war zone.

44.   Mr Palmer said that Mr Symes had read  too  much  into  the  Court  of
    Appeal's remittal of the appellants' appeals in QD and AH.   He  argued
    that, as the Tribunal is the fact-finding body, and as it  had  applied
    the wrong legal test, it was not for the Court of Appeal to  apply  the
    appropriate test to the facts as found, if it was not clear whether the
    evidence could meet the appropriate test or not.  Not all the  evidence
    about Iraq was before the Court in QD and AH.

45.    When  considering  the  degree  of  risk  which  exists,  Mr   Palmer
    discouraged us from applying a formulaic approach, such as  relating  a
    real risk to a one in ten chance (Batayav v Secretary of State for  the
    Home Department [2003] EWCA Civ 1489).  He  argued  that,  in  general,
    formulaic tests do not find favour, and the test remains that  of  real
    risk.  He argued that it was completely inappropriate, as Mr Symes  had
    done, to divide the population by the number  of  incidents.   Even  if
    that had been appropriate, it would not be done by  taking  Afghanistan
    as a whole.  Whatever the test, the risk needs to be looked at area  by
    area and case by case.

46.   He suggested that Mr Symes had  effectively  said  that  the  Tribunal
    should consider all the effects of war, because  the  casualty  figures
    among civilians are so low, and did not reach anything like the one  in
    ten criterion.   If  he  did,  Mr  Palmer  argued  this  was  a  wholly
    illegitimate approach, unsupported by anything in either QD and  AH  or
    Elgafaji.

47.   Dealing with some of Mr Symes' other submissions, he argued  that  "by
    reason of" simply meant there  had  to  be  a  causal  connection.   He
    suggested that the approach in AM and AM was an  appropriate  one.   At
    paragraph 93 of AM and AM, the Tribunal said the test was whether  acts
    complained of were:

        "one, albeit not necessarily the only,  operative  reason  for  the
        feared persecution."

      In AM and AM, Counsel  had  suggested  an  example  of  indiscriminate
    shelling of a civilian neighbourhood which caused death and wounding to
    civilians, arguing that those deaths and woundings would plainly be "by
    reason of the indiscriminate  violence".   He  submitted  that,  if  in
    consequence of that violence, a surviving population was displaced to a
    region in which it was likely to die of starvation and  disease,  those
    consequences would also be "by reason of" the indiscriminate  violence.
    The Tribunal accepted that, with a caveat.  They said:

        "In order for the  indiscriminate  violence  to  be  an  'effective
        cause', it clearly cannot extend to include consequences  that  are
        connected only remotely."

      Mr Palmer submitted that the violence did not need  to  be  the  sole,
    but did need to be  an  operative,  cause;  and  not  too  remote.   He
    referred to Mr Symes' submission that:

        "Plainly there is 'a connection between' threats to life and person
        which are indirect effects of armed conflict and the indiscriminate
        violence which animates that conflict."

      and was anxious to say  that,  from  that  formulation,  it  does  not
    follow that there would always be a causal connection.  He gave  as  an
    example, a war which has caused food supply  problems  and  said  those
    problems are not an effect of indiscriminate violence.   He  emphasised
    that the test remains "by reason of indiscriminate violence".

48.   Dealing with Mr  Symes'  other  submissions,  Mr  Palmer  argued  that
    recital 10 of the preamble to the Directive is too vague to import  the
    reading which Mr Symes asked us  to  adopt.   It  does  not  mean  that
    Article 15(c) is there to protect human dignity.   He  reminded  us  of
    recital 26, which says that risks to which a population of a country or
    a section of the population is generally exposed do not normally create
    in themselves an individual threat which would qualify as serious harm.
     He said that, on Mr Symes' view of the  significance  of  recital  10,
    such risks would create individual threats.

49.   As to Mr Symes' assertions about the UNHCR view,  he  emphasised  that
    the UNHCR is not a source of law when it came to the interpretation  of
    the Qualification Directive.

50.   Returning to Mr Symes' assertion that,  at  the  very  least,  Article
    15(c) should offer protection no less extensive than the forms of  harm
    protected by Article 15(a) and (b), Mr Palmer  said  that  he  did  not
    accept that as a broad proposition.  He said that because, in Elgafaji,
    the European Court said that Article 15(c) was different, and  involved
    general harm, whereas 15(a) and 15(b) dealt with individual  risk.   He
    argued that Article 15(c), whilst protecting from  more  general  harm,
    still has the individual component to it.  As to  the  submission  that
    the Advocate General in Elgafaji had said that the European Union would
    "contribute to extending  the  protection  of  [human]  rights  in  the
    European Area", Mr Palmer argued that this had been covered in  QD  and
    AH.  It did not mean that there was to be a Europe wide protection from
    all the effects of war.  In particular in Afghanistan, not all problems
    can be included.  Much has been born of 30 years of armed  conflict  of
    differing degrees.  For example,  problems  could  be  caused  by  such
    things  as  bridges  being  blown  up,  and  that  would  not   suggest
    indiscriminate violence.

51.   Dealing still with indiscriminate violence, Mr  Palmer  asked  whether
    pro-government violence could be described  as  indiscriminate  in  the
    context of the care which was now being taken by ISAF (to which we will
    come later).   He  said  that  even  when  steps  are  taken  to  avoid
    casualties among civilians, they will continue to occur.  When they do,
    should the victims be properly described as victims  of  indiscriminate
    violence?  He argued that he was not trying to import a quasi-IHL test,
    but said that the government-supported forces are using a  high  degree
    of discrimination.   He  suggested  that,  whilst  the  anti-government
    forces are far  more  indiscriminate,  and  a  lot  of  anti-government
    activity can properly be  described  as  indiscriminate,  it  is  still
    necessary to determine the extent of the indiscriminate  violence.   He
    argued that evaluation is a matter of judgment, but suggested that  the
    evidence is not sufficient, in most cases, to show that a person is the
    victim of indiscriminate violence.   In  particular,  being  caught  in
    crossfire does not in itself demonstrate that  one  is  the  victim  of
    indiscriminate violence.

52.   During the course of discussing elevated risk  categories,  Mr  Palmer
    was anxious to suggest that it was not a question of  people  being  at
    risk because they are, say, teachers.  He said that the  common  factor
    among high risk categories is that they are perceived collaborators, in
    one form or  another.   There  has  been  evidence  of  warnings  about
    teachers taking mixed, or female, classes but that is not the  same  as
    saying that all teachers are at risk on return.  He emphasised that, if
    somebody is at risk because they are a  member  of  a  group,  such  as
    teachers, or even perceived collaborators, they may well have a refugee
    claim.  Therefore, when considering Article 15(c) risk, care  needs  to
    be taken to ensure that, if appropriate, they should be  recognised  as
    refugees, rather than granted humanitarian protection.

53.   Using the example that Mr Palmer gave,  namely  teachers  who  may  be
    warned against teaching mixed classes, or classes of  girls,  we  asked
    whether the approach taken in HJ (homosexuality: reasonably  tolerating
    living discreetly) Iran [2008] UKAIT 00044  applies  in  this  context.
    There the Tribunal (following a remittal from the Court of Appeal in  J
    v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1238) considered  the  extent  to  which  it  is
    reasonable to expect a person to avoid difficulties by modifying  their
    behaviour upon return to their home country.  Mr Palmer argued that the
    principles were  no  different.   He  said  Article  15(b)  effectively
    introduced Article 3 ECHR into the ambit of humanitarian protection and
    it was to Article 3 that the principle was applied.  He saw  no  reason
    for it not to apply equally to Article 15(c).  Mr Symes did  not  argue
    to the contrary.

Part 7

Conclusions about the Meaning of Article 15(c)




The overarching question


54.   We know, from the formulation in QD and AH, that the  question  to  be
    answered by the Tribunal is that posed at paragraph 40:

        "Is there in [Afghanistan] or a material part of  it  such  a  high
        level of indiscriminate violence that substantial grounds exist for
        believing that an applicant such as [GS]  would,  solely  by  being
        present there, face a real risk that threatens his life or person?"


The relevance of armed conflict

55.   Following QD and AH we know that, for  the  purposes  of  interpreting
    Article  15(c),  armed  conflict  is  not  defined  by   reference   to
    International Humanitarian Law and that it has:-

        "an autonomous meaning broad enough to  capture  any  situation  of
        indiscriminate violence,  whether  caused  by  one  or  more  armed
        factions or by a state, which reaches the level  described  by  the
        European Court of Justice in Elgafaji" (paragraph 35 of QD and AH).

56.   What this means is  that  the  real  focus  of  attention  is  on  the
    intensity of the indiscriminate violence, rather than on the nature  of
    the conflict giving rise  to  the  situation  in  which  such  violence
    exists. Accordingly, the formulation of the question by  Sedley  LJ  in
    paragraph 40 of QD and  AH  does  not  contain  a  reference  to  armed
    conflict.  In QD  and  AH  it  was  also  accepted  that  there  is  no
    requirement for the armed conflict to be exceptional, although a degree
    of intensity of indiscriminate violence is required in  order  to  pass
    the test in Elgafaji.


The required level of intensity of indiscriminate violence


57.   That test for the required degree of intensity  appears  at  paragraph
    35 of Elgafaji.  Having referred to the assessment having to be made by
    the authorities or courts of a member state, a person is to be entitled
    to humanitarian protection when:

        "The degree of indiscriminate  violence  characterising  the  armed
        conflict taking place...reaches such a high level that  substantial
        grounds are shown for believing that a civilian,  returned  to  the
        relevant country or, as the case may be, to  the  relevant  region,
        would solely on account of his presence on the  territory  of  that
        country or region, face a real risk of being subject to the serious
        threat referred to in Article 15(c) of the Directive."


58.   In paragraph 37, the  court  referred  to  "an  exceptional  situation
    which would be  characterised  by  such  a  high  degree  of  risk...";
    although  we  observe  the  warning  in  QD  and  AH   not   to   treat
    exceptionality as a legal requirement.


59.   That test was finessed in paragraph 39 of Elgafaji,  where  the  Court
    said:

        "In that regard, the more the applicant is able to show that he  is
        specifically affected  by  reason  of  factors  particular  to  his
        personal circumstances,  the  lower  the  level  of  indiscriminate
        violence  required  for  him  to   be   eligible   for   subsidiary
        protection."

      In relation to that last proposition,  the  Court  added  that  regard
    should be  had  to  the  area  in  which  indiscriminate  violence  was
    occurring, the actual destination of the applicant, and whether Article
    4(4) of the Qualification Directive applied.  Article 4(4) provides:-

        "The fact that an applicant has already been subject to persecution
        or serious harm or to direct threats of such  persecution  or  such
        harm, is a serious indication of the applicant's well-founded  fear
        of persecution or real risk of suffering serious harm, unless there
        are good reasons to consider that such persecution or serious  harm
        will not be repeated."

60.   The high degree of risk required to bring a situation  within  Article
    15(c) is emphasised by the Court throughout paragraphs 36 to  38.   The
    Court  recognised  that  Recital  26  of  the  Qualification  Directive
    provides that risks to which a population (or part) is exposed  do  not
    normally give rise to individual threat which would qualify as  serious
    harm, but said that the  word  'normally'  allows  for  an  exceptional
    situation characterised by such a high degree of risk that  substantial
    grounds would be shown for believing that a  person  would  be  subject
    individually to that risk in question.  That high level  of  risk,  the
    Court said, is confirmed by the subsidiary nature  of  the  protection.
    This was referred to in QD and AH where, in  paragraph  37,  the  Court
    spoke of events occurring on a  wide  scale  and  being  of  sufficient
    severity to pose a real risk of serious harm.

The interpretation of 'real risk of a threat'.

61.   QD and AH explained that Article 2 and Article  15(c)   read  together
    are concerned with serious threats of real harm.


Discriminate and indiscriminate violence distinguished


62.   An issue which has not  been  settled  by  the  jurisprudence  is  the
    distinction between discriminate and indiscriminate  violence.   We  do
    know, from QD and AH that  indiscriminate  violence  does  not  include
    methodical victimisation.  In paragraph 34 of Elgafaji, the Court  said
    the term implies that the violence may extend to people irrespective of
    their personal circumstances.  This appears to us to be a issue of fact
    in each case.  Neither party attempted to  define  the  difference  any
    more precisely, but rather proceeded by way of example.  It  would,  in
    our judgment, be indiscriminate violence if a suicide  bomber  were  to
    attempt to assassinate  one  individual  in  a  crowded  market  place.
    Similarly, the bombing of insurgents who were sheltering in  a  school,
    or  other  area  known  to  be  populated  by   civilians,   would   be
    indiscriminate.  On the other hand, a  targeted  attack  on  opposition
    fighters, which unexpectedly caught individuals in the crossfire  would
    not.   More  problematic  areas  may  include  the  use  of  improvised
    explosive devices  intended  to  attack  coalition  forces,  but  where
    explosions may occur  in  such  a  way  that  civilians  are  affected.
    Another problematic example is the incident we refer to later  where  a
    man driving a car bomb, intended to be used against a coalition convoy,
    unexpectedly collided with a tractor and detonated  the  bomb,  thereby
    killing civilians nearby.  The extent to which driving a car,  that  is
    in effect a bomb,  through  a  crowded  place  on  the  way  to  attack
    coalition forces is an  act  that  is  so  reckless  that  any  adverse
    consequences are indiscriminate, was not debated before us.


Criminal activity


63.   The question of whether criminal activity falls within  the  scope  of
    Article 15(c) is an issue which has been considered before.  KH  (Iraq)
    purported to largely rule it out (paragraph 96), but that  was  because
    its definition of armed conflict was based on IHL  considerations,  and
    we now know that  was  wrong.   In  HH  and  others  (Somalia)  it  was
    recognised that indiscriminate violence does not have  to  be  violence
    that emanates directly from combatants themselves.  The Tribunal said:

        "The indiscriminate violence may, for example,  be  perpetrated  by
        looters  and  other  criminal  elements,  taking  advantage  of   a
        breakdown in law and order to go on the rampage."

64.   Although he accepted that QD and AH could be read  so  as  to  include
    armed anarchy within the meaning of indiscriminate violence, Mr  Palmer
    argued that such violence may fail the nexus test.  He also argued that
    there is nothing in the text of the Directive, or  in  the  preparatory
    documents  to  suggest  that  criminal  violence  was  intended  to  be
    included; that risks to which the population are generally exposed  are
    not normally enough (recital 26 of the  Qualification  Directive);  and
    that criminal acts would be  capable  of  being  sufficiently  punished
    within the framework of domestic criminal law of the country,  even  if
    this may not necessarily happen in practice.  We do not agree with  his
    submission that paragraph 96 of KH (Iraq)  has  survived,  because  the
    reasoning therein was related to the need  to  protect  civilians  from
    violations of  IHL.   That  paragraph  did  consider,  as  an  example,
    criminal gangs exploiting the law and order vacuum by stealing oil from
    a pipeline, during an armed  conflict,  and  thereby  killing  innocent
    civilians indiscriminately.  That is an interesting example because  it
    illustrates the  difficulty  of  deciding  whether  the  indiscriminate
    violence has been caused by one or more factions, or  a  state.   There
    have been examples of that activity causing considerable loss  of  life
    and injury to innocent people in a complete absence of armed conflict.

65.   We see no  reason  in  principle  why  criminal  acts  should  not  be
    included in the scope of indiscriminate violence  and,  indeed,  it  is
    often difficult to separate armed conflict from a criminal act.  It  is
    hard to envisage an act more  criminally  culpable  than  carrying  and
    detonating a bomb in a crowded marketplace, whatever the  intention  of
    the person concerned.  Similarly, could it properly be argued that  the
    roadblocks set up for reasons of extortion around Mogadishu  in  recent
    years are not the consequence of a complete breakdown in law and  order
    arising from the armed conflict which is  manifestly  occurring  there?
    The correct approach is not simply to ask  whether  the  indiscriminate
    violence is criminal, or in pursuance of the armed conflict.  It  is  a
    question of causation.  The words used in Article 15(c) are "by  reason
    of indiscriminate violence in situations of international  or  internal
    armed conflict".  There therefore needs to be a causal link between the
    threat to life or person and  the  indiscriminate  violence,  but  that
    indiscriminate violence does not need to be caused by one or more armed
    factions or the state.  We emphasise that, criminal acts, as  with  any
    other form of indiscriminate violence, need be of  sufficient  severity
    to pass the Elgafaji test, and produce a serious and individual  threat
    to a civilian's life or person  (to  which  we  will  come).   Not  all
    criminal acts, by a very long way, would fall into that category.


Causal nexus


66.    What  is  the  level  of  nexus  required  between  the  serious  and
    individual threat and the indiscriminate violence?  We can do no better
    than to adopt the Tribunal's test in AM and AM, where it  was  accepted
    that there is no significant distinction between the words  "by  reason
    of" and "for  reason  of".   The  Tribunal  said  that  to  succeed  an
    applicant must show that the indiscriminate violence  is  an  effective
    cause of the serious and individual threat.  It does not need to be the
    only cause, but has to be more closely connected  than  only  remotely.
    That  is  also  consistent  with  Article  9(3)  of  the  Qualification
    Directive, which Mr Symes submitted should apply to the  assessment  of
    entitlement to humanitarian protection as it does to refugee status.

67.   The next question is whether indirect consequences  of  indiscriminate
    violence can be sufficient to bring a person within Article 15(c).   In
    our judgment this is also answered by considering the causal nexus, and
    will be a question of fact in each case.

68.   We look at the issue in the context of Afghanistan.  In doing  so,  we
    have regard to the evidence adduced in this case, which we describe  in
    more detail later.  In that country a  significant  proportion  of  the
    population does not have sufficient food and significant  numbers  have
    died of starvation.  There has been an armed conflict for  many  years,
    although it has not been consistent in its severity, and has not always
    involved the same parties.

69.   One consequence of the years of  conflict  is  that  agriculture,  and
    food  distribution,  have  suffered  and  that  has   given   rise   to
    difficulties of food supply.  In our judgment it cannot  be  said  that
    such a general situation has come about "by  reason  of  indiscriminate
    violence in situations of international or  internal  armed  conflict".
    The food supply difficulties arise from a situation that  has  gone  on
    for  many  years,  and  have  not  been  shown  to  be  the  result  of
    indiscriminate violence, as opposed to the targeted violence  of  armed
    groups against one another.  Also, there is  no  satisfactory  evidence
    that, even without an armed conflict, the situation in  Afghanistan  in
    this regard would be a great deal  better.   The  food  supply  problem
    cannot be shown  to  be  connected  otherwise  than  very  remotely  to
    indiscriminate violence, even if it is more closely connected to  armed
    conflict.

70.   On the other hand,  Mr  Palmer's  example  of  indiscriminate  bombing
    which leads to the population of a particular village having to flee to
    an area where they cannot be fed, could be said to have a causal  nexus
    with the indiscriminate violence.  The  distinction  is  underlined  by
    recital 26 of the Qualification Directive which provides that:-

        "Risks to which the population of a country or  a  section  of  the
        population  is  generally  exposed  do  normally  not   create   in
        themselves an individual threat  which  would  qualify  as  serious
        harm."

71.   That brings us to Mr Symes' assertion, that such  risks  are  included
    within the definition of Article 15(c) by virtue of recital 10  of  the
    preamble to the  Qualification  Directive.   That  makes  reference  to
    seeking to ensure full respect for human dignity.  We do not accept his
    arguments  that  recital  10,  when  read  with  Article  61   of   the
    Consolidated Version of the EU Treaty, means that  questions  of  human
    dignity have to be read into Article 15(c).  We prefer Mr Palmer's view
    that recital 10 is too vague to import that reading into Article 15(c).
     Recital 10 is an aspiration.  Nor do we take the simplistic  approach,
    that  Article  15(c)  should  be  seen  to  offer  protection  no  less
    extensive, as  to  the  forms  of  harm  comprehended,  and  protection
    contemplated, than Article 15(b).  We say that because, in Elgafaji, it
    was said that Article 15(c) is not the same as Article 15(a) and (b) in
    as much as 15(a) and (b) deals with individual risks, and Article 15(c)
    to a more general risk (despite its use of the word  'individual'.   An
    individual risk, and a general risk, are not the same  and  it  is  not
    therefore  appropriate  for  the  definition  of  one,  to  inform  the
    definition of another.  We find that  the  UNHCR  view,  whilst  to  be
    respected, is not persuasive of the interpretation of the Qualification
    Directive.


The meaning of life or person


72.   The next issue is the meaning of "life or person".  Clearly this  must
    mean more than just a risk of death; if  not,  the  words  "or  person"
    would have been unnecessary.  In KH (Iraq) the phrase was subjected  to
    an IHL analysis and that does not  assist.   In  QD  and  AH  the  only
    relevant finding is that "life or person" was construed too narrowly by
    the Tribunal in KH (Iraq).  Mr Symes, in his skeleton, suggested that a
    less narrow approach, and one which he suggested was impliedly found to
    be appropriate in QD and AH, is that seen in the  UNHCR  submission  in
    that case.  There, it was suggested that the forms of harm  covered  by
    Article 15(c) include all forms of serious physical  and  psychological
    harm, including flagrant breaches of qualified rights, such as  freedom
    of thought, conscience and religion.  We do not accept that the  threat
    to a civilian's  life  or  person  envisioned  in  Article  15(c)  goes
    anywhere near as far as Mr Symes argues.  As we have already said,  the
    UNHCR is not an authority on the interpretation  of  the  Qualification
    Directive.  The forms of harm suggested by UNHCR are broadly consistent
    with  those  from  which  protection  is  required  by   the   European
    Convention.  They are more appropriately dealt with, if they reach ECHR
    Article 3 levels, or otherwise are sufficiently  flagrant,  by  Article
    15(b).  They are also more  in  the  nature  of  individual  risks  and
    unlikely to arise as a result of indiscriminate violence.  Having  said
    that, there is no precise definition that can be applied to  the  words
    "or person".  In our judgment the threat to a civilian's person,  which
    may bring him within the scope of Article 15(c), must  be  informed  by
    the requirements in Articles 2(e) and 15(c).  An  applicant  must  show
    that there are substantial grounds for believing that he would  face  a
    real risk of suffering a serious and individual threat.   It  is  clear
    from Elgafaji that there is a high threshold, and we know from  QD  and
    AH that Article 15(c) is concerned with "serious threats of real harm".
     The meaning of "or person" must be read in the light of the  need  for
    "real harm" or "serious harm".  In that regard, it is possible to  read
    across the provisions of Article 15(b) to understand the level (but not
    type) of harm required to obtain the protection of Article 15(c).


The meaning of 'individual threat by reason of indiscriminate violence'


73.   Another issue for a decision maker is  the  interrelationship  between
    "individual threat" and "indiscriminate violence".  That  was  answered
    in paragraph 35 of Elgafaji (read with paragraph 39) and which we  have
    already quoted.  For the sake of completeness, we repeat it here:

        "35.     ...the word 'individual' must be  understood  as  covering
             harm to civilians irrespective of  their  identity,  where  the
             degree of  indiscriminate  violence  characterising  the  armed
             conflict  taking  place...reaches  such  a  high   level   that
             substantial grounds are shown for believing  that  a  civilian,
             returned to the relevant country or, as the case may be, to the
             relevant region, would, solely on account of  his  presence  on
             the territory of that country or region, face a  real  risk  of
             being subject to the serious  threat  referred  to  in  Article
             15(c) of the Directive.


        39.      In that regard, the more the applicant  is  able  to  show
             that  he  is  specifically  affected  by  reason   of   factors
             particular to his personal circumstances, the lower  the  level
             of indiscriminate violence required for him to be eligible  for
             subsidiary protection."


Enhanced risk categories


74.   There is one further matter with which we should  deal,  and  that  is
    the person with a  higher  level  of  risk.   In  Elgafaji,  the  Court
    referred to recital 26 of the Directive, where it is said that risks to
    which a population, or a section of the population,  of  a  country  is
    generally exposed, do not normally create in themselves  an  individual
    threat which would qualify as serious harm.  The  word  "normally"  was
    said, in Elgafaji, to allow  for  the  possibility  of  an  exceptional
    situation characterised by such a high degree of risk that  substantial
    grounds could be shown for believing that that person would be subject,
    individually, to the risk in question.  From that the  Court  concluded
    in paragraph 39:

        "...the more the applicant is  able  to  show  he  is  specifically
        affected  by  reason  of  factors  particular   to   his   personal
        circumstances, the lower level of indiscriminate violence  required
        for him to be eligible for subsidiary protection."

      There is  therefore  a  moving  standard  in  the  required  level  of
    indiscriminate violence, when a person is at a higher degree  of  risk.
    But, ultimately the  test  is  one  of  real  risk.   That  is  clearly
    demonstrated by the wording of Article 2(e), which makes  reference  to
    "substantial grounds...for believing...would face a  real  risk".   The
    varying standards of violence and risk  must  be  assessed  within  the
    overall criteria in Article 15(c).

Part 8

The Situation in Afghanistan

75.   In assessing the current situation in Afghanistan,  we  have  had  the
    benefit of a report, and  oral  evidence,  from  Professor  Farrell;  a
    report prepared in December 2008 by Dr Antonio Giustozzi; and a  wealth
    of documentary evidence produced by each of the parties.   We  reminded
    the parties that, unless they referred  expressly,  either  by  way  of
    skeleton arguments or submissions,  to  any  particular  piece  of  the
    documentary evidence they could not be certain that we  would  consider
    it, or assume that they relied upon it.

Dr Giustozzi

76.   Dr Giustozzi did not give  oral  evidence  to  the  Tribunal  but  his
    written report was before us. Dr Giustozzi has  been  accepted  by  the
    Tribunal as an expert on Afghanistan in a number of previous cases.  He
    visits Afghanistan regularly.  His report in this appeal was,  however,
    of limited value because it was prepared on  the  assumption  that  the
    appellant's expressed fear of Gul Karim and land grabs was correct.

77.   With regard to general conditions,  the  two  important  parts  of  Dr
    Giustozzi's report for present purposes are those  which  were  put  to
    Professor Farrell in cross-examination (paragraph 100 post).  We  shall
    describe those parts in the  context  of  that  cross-examination.   Dr
    Giustozzi also dealt with some aspects of general conditions in  Kabul,
    with which we will deal when we come to look at internal relocation.



Professor Farrell

78.   Professor Theo Farrell is Professor of War in  the  Modern  World,  in
    the Department of War Studies, King's College  London.   His  CV  shows
    that he is also Head of Military Studies Research for  the  King's  War
    Studies Group (which covers Defence Studies in the  Department  of  the
    Joint Services Command and Staff  College);  a  Consultant  to  the  UK
    Ministry of Defence; and  an  Associate  Fellow  of  the  Royal  United
    Services Institute.  His report  was  designed  to  assist  with  three
    issues:

    (i)     the measures used by those academics who study armed  conflicts
        in order to determine their severity;


    (ii)    whether Afghanistan is in a state of internal  armed  conflict;
        and


    (iii)   whether circumstances in Afghanistan  are  such  as  to  create
        "serious" risks to civilians in the armed conflict.

79.   To a large extent the  second  issue  is  a  matter  for  us,  and  is
    relevant to the extent that  it  is  a  factor  in  the  definition  of
    'indiscriminate violence' in accordance with Elgafaji, as explained  in
    QD and AH.  Mr Palmer did not seek, for our  purposes,  to  argue  that
    Afghanistan is not in a state of internal armed conflict.  The previous
    concession, that it is, for International Humanitarian Law purposes, is
    no longer relevant.

80.   In his report, Professor Farrell gave a brief history of the  academic
    study of war and an  explanation  of  the  development  of  the  "human
    security paradigm" in security studies.  He explained that the paradigm
    is a relatively new way of thinking about security,  not  in  terms  of
    securing states, but in terms of providing security  for  people.   The
    definition of security for people includes freedom from starvation  and
    oppression as well as violence.  This has led to a change in  approach.
    The assessment of the severity of a war used to  involve  estimates  of
    the number of war dead, and traditionally the emphasis was  on  numbers
    of military personnel killed.  The focus has now changed and  has  been
    directed to include civilian casualties, among other indicators of  the
    adverse impact of war on human security.

81.   Having explained how a war was defined for these purposes  (more  than
    1,000 military personnel dead; no period was specified),  he  explained
    that the interest of academics has now moved  to  include  intra  state
    conflicts, as well as inter-state disputes.

82.   He suggested that one way to measure the severity of a war is  by  the
    number of civilians killed and injured.  It is  especially  appropriate
    for internal armed conflicts, which often do not involve battle between
    recognised military forces, but often do involve violence  directed  at
    civilian populations.  He gave as  examples  three  internal  conflicts
    where the battle death threshold was less than 1,000  but  where  there
    were massive civilian losses.  These were: 2 million dead  in  Cambodia
    between 1975 and 1978, 350,000 dead in Somalia between 1990  and  1991,
    and 800,000 dead in Rwanda in 1994.  Professor Farrell  explained  that
    this "metric" can  be  problematic  in  application,  because  data  on
    civilian casualties can be variable in both substance and  reliability.
    He said this may be because parties to the conflict are less interested
    in gathering accurate data on civilian casualties, than in manipulating
    the data to support their own view of the conflict.  The data  provided
    by non-governmental organisations and  other  independent  studies  can
    also be very variable, with different researchers  providing  different
    casualty figures for the same conflict (he cited a difference in  Iraqi
    casualties, one based on the Iraq Body Count Project, and the other  on
    a study published in the Lancet).   Another  difficulty  in  estimating
    civilian casualties is that figures often do  not  distinguish  clearly
    between combatants and civilian casualties, not least because  in  many
    contemporary conflicts the line between a combatant and a  civilian  is
    blurred.  Also, estimates vary between direct and indirect  casualties.
    He described direct casualties as those killed and injured in fighting,
    whereas indirect casualties included those who were killed or  suffered
    serious injuries as a result of the effects of war.  He  gave  examples
    of  the  latter,  citing  imprisonment,  abuse,   starvation   or   the
    destruction of critical infrastructure and services.  He suggested that
    in order to  fully  appreciate  the  severity  of  a  conflict,  it  is
    necessary to include  indirect  casualties.   He  illustrated  that  by
    saying that of the 2 million civilians  that  died  in  Cambodia,  only
    80,000 to 100,000 were directly killed.  The rest  died  of  starvation
    and disease, because of  the  policies  of  the  Pol  Pot  regime.   He
    summarised by suggesting that the civilian casualties provide  a  truer
    estimate of the severity of an armed conflict than  battle  casualties,
    whilst acknowledging that compilation  of  reliable  data  on  civilian
    casualties involves challenges and methodological choices.

83.   Professor Farrell also  considered  that  two  other  consequences  of
    conflict should be taken into account as possible metrics.   The  first
    is  the  number  of  displaced  people,  including  both  refugees  and
    internally displaced persons (IDPs).  As,  in  this  jurisdiction,  the
    term refugee is a term of  art,  and  Professor  Farrell  confirmed  in
    evidence that by refugee he meant a person who was displaced,  but  had
    crossed an international border, we propose to use  the  acronym  "EDP"
    (externally displaced person) to describe such people.  He noted  that,
    on three occasions, United Nations  Security  Council  Resolutions  had
    been made when flows of EDPs became recognised as constituting a threat
    to international peace and security.  In two cases international  armed
    intervention took place despite a relatively  low  number  of  civilian
    deaths prior to intervention (in Haiti between 1991 and  1994,  and  in
    Kosovo).  He considered that numbers of displaced people was a  helpful
    measure, because  reliable  comparative  data  on  EDPs  and  IDPs  are
    available from the UNHCR.  The other metric is state failure.  He  said
    that  state  failure,  when  chronic,  can  lead  to  the  collapse  of
    infrastructure and basic services, including law and order, making life
    for communities unsustainable.  He recognised that state failure can be
    a causal factor in internal armed conflict, but emphasised  that  armed
    conflict can also be the cause of state failure.  He warned about using
    mass population displacement, and state failure, as  independent  tests
    of conflict severity.  He said mass population displacement  and  state
    failure  can  coexist,  with  mass  population  displacement  being  an
    indicator of state failure, and possibly a further contributor  to  it.
    He argued that, whilst  these  two  measures  may  provide  reinforcing
    evidence when looking at the severity of an armed  conflict,  they  are
    not necessarily independent tests of conflict severity.

84.   Professor Farrell therefore suggested  that  four  metrics  should  be
    applied to determine the severity of the conflict  in  Afghanistan  and
    the consequent risk  to  civilians,  namely  (i)  battle  deaths,  (ii)
    civilian casualties, (iii) population displacement, (iv) state failure.

85.   Turning, in his report, to  an  assessment  of  the  severity  of  the
    conflict in Afghanistan, and the risk to civilians,  Professor  Farrell
    said that military battle deaths  had  remained  relatively  low.   The
    figures he gave were 628 US military killed in action  and  402  non-US
    NATO forces, between 2001 and 2008.   He  did  not  have  any  reliable
    figure for battle deaths from the Afghan National Army.   News  reports
    suggest that the Taliban have suffered  far  higher  numbers,  with  an
    estimate from the Ministry of Defence suggesting 6,000 to 7,000 Taliban
    killed in action between 2006 and 2007.  As to civilian casualties, the
    estimate is that 2,118 civilians were killed in fighting  between  pro-
    government forces and insurgent groups in 2008. Prior to that, 2006 had
    been regarded as the highest  recorded  year  for  civilian  casualties
    since 2002.  He said  that  those  figures  do  not  include  civilians
    injured by the Taliban and Al-Qaeda in their campaign of  violence  and
    intimidation designed to  terrify  and  subdue  Afghans.   That  occurs
    especially in the South and East to prevent civilians  from  supporting
    the  democratically  elected  government.   According  to  the   Afghan
    Independent Human Rights Commission, the campaign  involves  abduction,
    murder, mutilation and maiming of civilians and is especially  directed
    at  those  accused  of  spying  or  collaboration,  as  well  as  local
    officials, police, teachers, medical staff  and  aid  workers,  with  a
    terror campaign of suicide and other bomb attacks that is increasing in
    intensity.  He said Human Rights Watch have estimated that up to  1,000
    civilians had lost their lives as a  result  of  Taliban  and  Al-Qaeda
    bombings in 2006, with an increasing trend towards improvised explosive
    devices ("IEDs") and suicide bomb attacks in 2007/2008.

86.    Tuning  to  population  displacement,  Professor  Farrell  said  that
    throughout 2006 and 2007 Afghanistan was the leading country of  origin
    for EDPs, producing 3.1 million or 20% of the  global  EDP  population.
    This figure equates to about 10% of the population of Afghanistan  and,
    although refuge was sought in 72 countries, 96%  went  to  Pakistan  or
    Iran, according to UNHCR.  It is thought that, as of  May  2008,  there
    are 150,000 IDPs in Afghanistan, of which 110,000 come from  the  South
    of the country.

87.   As to state failure, Professor Farrell gave a history of  attempts  to
    establish democratic central government.  He said  that  the  Brookings
    Institution  in  Washington  DC,  a  highly  respected  think  tank  in
    Washington which produces a monthly report  called  the  Afghan  Index,
    ranks Afghanistan as second, only after Somalia, on its index of  state
    weakness.  Not all measures put it in the  same  position  but,  whilst
    attempts continue to improve the situation, the impact  on  sustainable
    living is evident.  According to Brookings, only one  in  five  Afghans
    has access to safe drinking water, and only 12% had access to  adequate
    sanitation in 2008.  45% of Afghans experience food poverty, and infant
    mortality runs at 13% (20% for under 5s).

88.   In drawing his conclusion, Professor Farrell said that by any  measure
    Afghanistan is in  severe  conflict  but  that  conflict  is  producing
    relatively few deaths among the NATO military.  A conservative estimate
    puts the number of Taliban and Al-Qaeda deaths  in  the  low  thousands
    each year between 2006 and 2008.  That number exceeds the battle deaths
    threshold, using the most widely cited statistics and most  definitions
    of war.  As to civilians, he said the number killed in the fighting  is
    low in comparison with other conflicts, although the  Taliban  and  Al-
    Qaeda campaign of terror and intimidation has killed and  injured  many
    more.  With regards to population displacement, it is  extremely  high,
    with 10% of the population displaced externally, mostly to Pakistan and
    Iran.   He   considered   that   Afghanistan   suffers   from   chronic
    underdevelopment  of  local  government   infrastructure   and   social
    services.    Infant   mortality   and   illness   from   disease    and
    malnourishment, from thirty years of war, were adding indirect casualty
    figures which would be very high.  He said that the  situation  appears
    to be getting worse.  He quoted the UN Secretary General, reporting  in
    September 2008, that his impression  was  that  the  situation  in  the
    country had deteriorated over the previous six months, with 40% to  50%
    of the country inaccessible to UN aid activities, and an  upward  trend
    in insurgent attacks against aid workers and  convoys.   He  noted  the
    intensification of insurgent influence, in areas that  were  previously
    calm, including provinces  close  to  Kabul.   He  said  the  Brookings
    Institution recorded a 48% increase in attacks by Taliban and  Al-Qaeda
    in Kabul in 2008; and a 51% increase across the whole  of  Afghanistan,
    but with attacks concentrated in the South and  East  of  the  country.
    Nangarhar Province suffered 292  terrorist  and  insurgent  attacks  in
    2008, in comparison to 157 in Kabul.  In concluding, he said the direct
    risk to civilians of violence from insurgents, terrorists and  criminal
    gangs will remain very  high,  and  the  indirect  risk  to  civilians,
    associated with chronic state failure, will remain extreme.

89.   He appended to his report, at  page  23,  a  comparison  of  incidents
    carried out by Taliban/anti-government elements ("AGEs") by province in
    the first 39 weeks each of 2007 and 2008.  The figures for  Kabul  were
    106 and  157  respectively;  for  Nangarhar  244  and  292  and,  as  a
    comparison, Kandahar 534 and 820.   Although  percentage  changes  were
    provided we have not quoted those because when the figures are low, for
    example in Kabul, the percentage change can be misleading.

90.   In evidence, Professor Farrell  said  that  much  of  his  statistical
    information came from the Brookings Institution.  He was  asked  by  Mr
    Symes about the background causes for the lack  of  sustainable  living
    conditions.  He said that it was 30 years of war, starting with the 79-
    89 war between the Mujahedin and the Soviet-backed  regime,  mostly  in
    the Pashtun areas.  He  reiterated  that  it  is  now  consequences  of
    conflict  which  are  looked  at  particularly  carefully  in  security
    studies.  Interest lies no longer just  in  those  directly  killed  or
    involved in fighting, but rather in what is  required  for  sustainable
    living, what causes damage to the infrastructure, and what may  prevent
    sustainable living.

91.   He was asked whether this concept of the human security  paradigm  had
    received "traction" outside the academic community, and  said  that  it
    had.  It has attracted the  attention  of  the  United  Nations  which,
    through Kofi Annan, has set up an organisation to develop the  concept.
    The British Government position has been informed by the paradigm,  and
    there has been a section in the Foreign and Commonwealth Office  Annual
    Report on the responsibility of British forces to  protect,  which  was
    clearly informed by the paradigm.  He said that  it  also  informs  the
    Ministry of Defence who make reference to "the force for good".

92.   In cross-examination, he said military officers  have  been  persuaded
    to think of war very differently.  The first real lessons were  learned
    in Bosnia, where troops were led by the UNHCR.  The key lesson is  that
    victory is not  achieved  by  defeating  the  enemy,  but  by  creating
    conditions for a sustainable peace.  The new approach was therefore  an
    "effects based approach".  He said that, as a formal approach it has in
    fact recently been  abandoned  by  the  United  Kingdom,  although  the
    underlying philosophy has not.  He said that the idea is to  produce  a
    security umbrella of both aid and law and order.

93.    The  practical  effect  has  been  that  US  operations  increasingly
    emphasise the importance of  avoiding  civilian  casualties,  and  that
    Commanders in ISAF have been told to exercise restraint in  air  raids.
    He said that, although the risk  from  air  strikes  is  a  very  small
    element of risk in Afghanistan, the change can make  a  huge  political
    difference.

94.   Professor Farrell was asked about some of  the  statistics  he  relied
    upon.  He agreed there was a complication in the  estimated  casualties
    as between combatants and civilian casualties.  There were  very  small
    numbers of insurgent casualties caused by suicide attacks.  Even though
    groups of insurgents intent on an attack do take  shelter  in  civilian
    areas with their mortars, ISAF has a problem in  assessing  casualties,
    because the Taliban remove their dead and any bodies that are found are
    probably civilian.  He was unable to say how reliable the  figures  are
    for civilians  and  combatants.   He  thought  that  the  ISAF  figures
    probably err on the side of  caution,  as  they  have  no  interest  in
    exaggerating the figures.  He thought the figures for  Kabul  would  be
    more reliable than the overall  figures,  and  said  his  qualification
    about the validity of the figures has more application in the South  of
    the country.

95.   Asked about his  second  qualification,  that  concerning  direct  and
    indirect casualties, he  thought  that  the  figures  from  The  United
    Nations Assistance Mission to Afghanistan (UNAMA) probably referred  to
    direct casualties and did not attempt to measure indirect casualties.

96.   When asking about the risk to civilians by  reason  of  indiscriminate
    violence, Mr Palmer suggested that there is a wider effect than the war
    itself.  Professor Farrell accepted that a complicating aspect  is  the
    rise of warlords over the last twenty years.  He said there is still  a
    struggle between warlords and the central  government,  and  a  lot  of
    violence is directed towards individual families.  He argued  that  the
    warlords are part of the internal armed conflict but, as some  warlords
    are also ministers, it is not something that is often  recognised.   He
    said that the causes of indiscriminate  violence  vary  throughout  the
    country: part is the  NATO  campaign,  part  is  the  intimidation  and
    retribution by the Taliban and,  elsewhere,  warlords.   He  was  asked
    whether the effects of war are simply that: the effects of war; and not
    of indiscriminate violence.  He said that the level of problems is  the
    consequence of the war since 1979.  Prior to that  Afghanistan  was  no
    worse than any other Central Asian country, now it is much  worse.   He
    said there have been different phases and that, since 2008,  there  has
    been an increase in the use  of  IEDs  and  terrorist  attacks,  and  a
    decline in ambushes.  He accepted that the recent  increase  in  battle
    casualties was linked to an increase in offensive  activities  and  the
    increase in ISAF troop numbers.

97.   Professor Farrell was taken to a chart  on  page  17  of  his  report.
    That showed there had been 1,445 civilian deaths as a direct result  of
    fighting between pro-government forces and  AGEs  in  the  first  eight
    months of 2008.  He accepted that figure was low, compared  with  other
    conflicts around the  world.   He  said  the  figure  did  not  include
    civilians deliberately killed and injured by the Taliban and  Al-Qaeda.
    He was then taken to the figures produced by  UNAMA  in  January  2009.
    These did deal with civilian  casualties  caused  by  AGE  actions  and
    showed 62% of the 1,160 victims had been as a result of suicide and IED
    attacks, and 23% from assassinations.  1,160 amounted  to  55%  of  the
    total casualties  for  2008.   Of  the  AGE  actions,  the  balance  of
    casualties (15%) arose from rocket attacks and  ground  engagements  in
    which civilian bystanders were affected.  In other words, he  accepted,
    the latter were caught in traditional crossfire, or because  they  were
    too close to a target.  He  accepted  that  the  assassination  figures
    represented targeted collaborators.  Dealing with  his  acknowledgement
    that, in the light of all this, the figures for  civilian  deaths  were
    low, he said this war does not "hit a lot  of  civilians",  but  it  is
    necessary to look at second order effects; in particular, the fact that
    10% of the population has fled across the  border.   He  accepted  that
    according to the Brookings Institution,  4  to  5  million  people  had
    returned to Afghanistan since 2002, but  said  that  EDP  numbers  were
    still very large, although the IDPs were a relatively small number.

98.   Professor Farrell  acknowledged  that  the  data  show  the  trend  in
    increased Taliban and Al-Qaeda IED and suicide bomb attacks  from  2007
    to 2008.  Figures were given for this in a table 1.3 from the Brookings
    Institution copied into his  report  at  page  13.   Professor  Farrell
    agreed that he drew the inference of the increasing trend from  the  US
    army fatalities shown there.

99.   The table on  page  23  of  his  report,  to  which  we  have  already
    referred, contains the comparison of incidents carried out  by  Taliban
    and anti-government elements, by province.  He accepted  those  figures
    did not distinguish between attacks on troops and those  on  civilians.
    He said that one cannot analyse the levels of danger  to  civilians  by
    province, otherwise than by extrapolating  the  national  figures.   He
    said the totals are increasing, and from that he inferred  an  increase
    in violence between the two sides.

100.   Asked  whether  there  were  up-to-date  figures,  for  incidents  by
    province, Professor Farrell said there were up-to-date figures  in  the
    latest Brookings Institution report, but it now deals only  with  IEDs,
    and not all incidents.  He said that report showed that  in  Nangarhar,
    in the first six months of 2009, there were 89 IED events, which was up
    71%.  He did not know how reliable that data is.  He did however accept
    that an 'IED event' includes the discovery of  an  IED,  and  does  not
    imply that there were any casualties.  Professor Farrell said  that  he
    has recently realised (he did not say why) that  there  is  less  of  a
    trend towards IEDs and suicide bombers than the figures show, and  that
    the Taliban are still conducting formation attacks.

101.  Professor Farrell was asked about Dr Giustozzi's report, in  which  he
    said, at paragraph 4,  that  there  are  more  military  casualties  in
    Afghanistan than Iraq, and more civilian casualties in Iraq,  and  that
    indiscriminate terrorist attacks are not practised in Afghanistan.   Mr
    Palmer said the respondent does not go quite as far as that, but  asked
    Professor Farrell if he had any comment.   His  response  was  that  Dr
    Giustozzi's view is not inconsistent with the evidence which he had put
    forward.  He said the direct risk to civilians is low, but the indirect
    risk is great because of the last thirty years of  conflicts.   He  was
    also referred to paragraph 5 of Dr Giustozzi's report, where the latter
    said:

        "Like in Iraq, the risk to  civilians  is  not  evenly  distributed
        around the territory of the country.  It is highest in the southern
        provinces and along the highways going from Kabul to the  provinces
        of the south and south-east.  Significant levels of risk then exist
        in the south-east and in the east.  The risk is lower in the north,
        north-east and in the central highlands.  In Kabul City the risk is
        modest: there have been bloody attacks but the casualty rate  among
        the city's 5 million inhabitants is rather low."

      Asked if he had any comment, Professor Farrell said  that  he  broadly
    agreed.  The view was perfectly reasonable in relation  to  the  direct
    risk to civilians.  It was put to him that the indirect risks  are  not
    evenly distributed, and are relatively light in  areas  where  aid  can
    reach.  He agreed with that, and said it was more difficult to know how
    the pattern will  develop.   He  reminded  us  that  the  UN  Secretary
    General's report  to  the  Security  Council  spoke  of  the  worsening
    situation throughout Afghanistan.  He said that, to  some  extent,  the
    degree of indirect risk reflects the reach of ISAF.  There is  a  delay
    before aid gets into areas where ISAF have deployed because, when  they
    first arrive, they come against enemies in the short term.  He accepted
    that increasing troop numbers will help overall, but asked rhetorically
    how long it will take and whether the  United  States  will  remain  in
    Afghanistan.

102.  He was then asked about the last sentence in his report, in  which  he
    said  the  direct  risk  to  civilians  of  violence  from  insurgents,
    terrorists and criminal gangs will remain very high.  Professor Farrell
    said that he would add warlords "into the mix" as well  as  the  Afghan
    security forces, and that in referring to direct risk he was talking of
    injury and fatality.  It was put to him that criminal  gangs  have  not
    featured in his report.  He  said  that  was  really  included  in  his
    reference to warlords.  He said that in Nangarhar  the  governor  is  a
    particularly unsavoury character.  Asked what risk that  presented,  he
    said that, with such a person as a governor, "What can  the  population
    expect of its local government?"   Asked  whether  the  criminal  gangs
    caused a direct risk of violence he said the point is that,  whilst  in
    parts of Afghanistan there are attempts to restore law  and  order,  in
    other parts there is no protection at all.  As an impression,  he  said
    risk from criminal gangs will be  high.   Asking  about  indirect  risk
    associated with chronic state failure, Mr Palmer suggested  that  would
    need to be looked at by area.  Professor Farrell agreed, saying that it
    is not the problem in Kabul.  He was not sure whether it was  the  case
    in Jalalabad, although it is generally in Nangarhar, which is described
    as one of the most challenging provinces, and where state failure is at
    its highest.  Mr Palmer suggested that risks in  Nangarhar  were  lower
    than in other provinces, and Professor Farrell said that  according  to
    the new table, a comparison of IED  events  by  province  and  regional
    command, Nangarhar had the second highest number (after Khost).  Of the
    89 events, 42 were successful (i.e. detonated) and  47  were  not.   He
    accepted that the numbers of devices did not put the level of  violence
    into an exceptional category, although he said the general  climate  is
    very hostile to basic necessities and to sustainable living.   He  said
    that, in Nangarhar, IEDs form a direct  risk  to  people,  whereas  the
    indirect risk there was associated with chronic state  failure.   Asked
    whether he could point to any evidence to show that even indirect  risk
    was extreme in Jalalabad, he said he could not, but there are  problems
    throughout Afghanistan.

103.  Asked by the Tribunal whether there  was  a  correlation  between  the
    number of EDPs outside Afghanistan  and  the  level  of  violence;  and
    whether one could infer that the numbers were directly as a  result  of
    what happens on the  ground  now,  or  at  the  time  when  they  left,
    Professor Farrell said it was possible it  was  a  reflection  of  what
    happened when they left, but he was not an expert on  "refugee  flows".
    He went on to say that, when comparing food security with the number of
    EDPs, the position did not appear to have improved on the ground.

Background material submitted on 23 July

104.  On the second day of the hearing, the appellant handed in  an  Updated
    Version of his Extracts from  Country  Evidence;  a  document  entitled
    Afghanistan Index - Tracking Variables of Reconstruction  and  Security
    in Post-9/11 Afghanistan (Brookings, July 15, 2009); and a UN Report of
    the Security Council mission to Afghanistan, 21 to  28  November  2008.
    The respondent served the UNHCR Eligibility  Guidelines  for  Assessing
    the International Protection Needs of Asylum-Seekers from  Afghanistan.
    We have taken these materials into account, together with the  rest  of
    the evidence. They do not materially differ from the general thrust  of
    the other evidence. Besides the submissions recorded, we  observe  that
    paragraphs 36 and 37 of  the  Security  Council's  Report  describes  a
    deteriorating humanitarian situation, "resulting from a combination  of
    natural disasters, lack of Government capacity to prepare and  respond,
    and insecurity", aggravated by "the deficit in food  production".  Some
    40,000 Afghans die every year "as a result of hunger  and  poverty,  25
    times more than die as a result of the violence". On  page  43  of  the
    UNHCR's Eligibility Guidelines, it is said that "due to the  fluid  and
    volatile nature of the conflict, lack of comprehensive  monitoring  and
    reporting from all conflict areas and variations in terms of numbers of
    civilian casualties reported, UNHCR is not in a position  to  designate
    specific conflict areas of Afghanistan in which there is a serious  and
    indiscriminate threat to the life, physical  integrity  or  freedom  of
    Afghans as  a  result  of  generalized  violence  or  events  seriously
    disturbing public order". It is suggested that claims based on  a  fear
    of serious and indiscriminate harm  arising  from  the  armed  conflict
    should be assessed individually on their merits.

Respondent's Submissions on the Other Background Material

105.  We have found that in the Afghan context,  in  general,  the  indirect
    consequences of the armed conflict described in  paragraphs  66  to  70
    above do not contribute to the individual  risk  to  people  generally,
    because of the remoteness of the consequences and the requirement for a
    causal link.  For that reason we do not need to deal with much  of  the
    background material which has been placed before us, and which goes  to
    such matters as life expectancy, food poverty and other adverse impacts
    of war on human security short of serious injury and death.  Even then,
    because of the reference in Article 15(c) to  indiscriminate  violence,
    we  are  not  concerned  with  those  who  are  directly  targeted   in
    assassination  attempts,  or  those  who  are  accidentally  harmed  by
    combatants, but where neither party  is  acting  in  disregard  of  the
    safety of civilians, for example by firing at insurgents taking shelter
    amongst civilians.

106.  The respondent's  case  is  that  the  civilian  casualty  figures  in
    Afghanistan fall very far short of demonstrating  the  high  levels  of
    indiscriminate violence necessary to meet the test set out in Elgafaji.
     Mr Palmer referred to the civilian casualty  figures  for  2008  which
    showed that 2,118 deaths had arisen that year, of which  828  had  been
    caused by government forces and 1,160 by AGEs.  He argued that  the  UN
    Secretary General's Report of 10 March 2009 and the UNAMA Annual Report
    2008 show that the  casualties  from  pro-government  forces'  activity
    arose as a result of (a) a limited number of larger incidents  and  (b)
    air strikes.  The UN Secretary General's  Report  stated  that  68%  of
    casualties caused by pro-government forces had been the result  of  air
    strikes.

107.  He then argued that those figures related to a period before a  number
    of recent developments were introduced to tackle them.   The  first  of
    those is a surge of US troops, and an increase in NATO troops.  Second,
    there has been the important announcement by  General  McChrystle,  the
    United States Commander  in  Afghanistan,  of  a  new  directive  which
    restricts the use of US air strikes in areas  where  civilians  are  at
    risk.  The General indicated to the US Senate  Armed  Forces  Committee
    that the struggle might be at a critical point in gaining  the  support
    of  the  Afghan  people.   General  McChrystle  has  also  issued   two
    directives with measures aimed  at  reducing  the  number  of  civilian
    casualties and establishing a process  to  improve  the  collection  of
    relevant data.  They followed a promise by the American Ambassador that
    coalition forces  would  change  their  tactics  in  order  to  prevent
    civilian casualties in the future.  In their skeleton, Mr Palmer and Mr
    Blundell  suggested  that  these  developments   show   that   civilian
    casualties caused by pro-government forces cannot be described as being
    caused by indiscriminate violence.  In the absence of evidence that the
    reality on the ground has changed, we would not go so  far  as  to  say
    that no civilian casualties caused by pro-government forces can  be  so
    described, but it is a step in the right  direction  and  many  of  the
    civilian casualties caused by pro-government forces will not have  been
    caused by indiscriminate violence.   The  respondent  cited  the  UNAMA
    Report as demonstrating that the new directives from  the  US  military
    have already yielded results.  The report shows that,  apart  from  one
    incident when an air strike erroneously targeted a wedding celebration,
    killing 37 civilians, there was  a  reduction  in  civilian  casualties
    caused by pro-government forces in October  and  December  2008.   That
    strike on a wedding party is one reason we consider  the  submission  -
    that no civilian casualties caused  by  pro-government  forces  can  be
    described as having been caused by  indiscriminate  violence  -  is  an
    overstatement.

108.  Mr Palmer asserted that there is evidence that  the  tactics  employed
    by AGEs have changed in a way that will lead to fewer civilian  deaths.
    He said that the Taliban have begun to target military individuals more
    specifically, and have moved away from face-to-face confrontation.   It
    is said that marks a shift from attacks on  civilian  targets.   It  is
    reported, both in the Newhaven Register for  3  January  2009,  and  an
    article "Possible Change in Taliban Tactics" in the Daily Times  for  8
    June 2009, that their tactic is  increasingly  to  use  explosives  and
    bombings against the military, and long range marksmen to  fire  on  US
    troops.  Mr Palmer argued that the recent developments  show  that  the
    figures for civilian casualties  for  2008  should  not  be  viewed  as
    casualties arising from indiscriminate violence, both  because  of  the
    coalition forces' attempts  to  reduce  civilian  casualties,  and  the
    Taliban's move away from some of its traditional techniques.

109.  In a further  analysis  of  the  figures,  the  respondent's  skeleton
    argument asserts that  only  a  small  subset  of  civilian  casualties
    constitutes true victims of indiscriminate violence.  The UNAMA  Report
    for 2008 suggests that, of the  2,118  civilian  casualties  for  2008,
    1,160 were caused by anti-government elements.  Of those, 207 were  the
    victims of assassinations.  By definition  these  are  the  victims  of
    targeted violence which cannot  be  said  to  be  indiscriminate,  save
    possibly to the extent that they have  been  targeted  irrespective  of
    their civilian status.  The skeleton  suggests  that,  particularly  in
    assessing risk to the appellant, targeted victims should not be counted
    as victims of indiscriminate violence, because the appellant himself is
    not at such a risk, as he has no features that  would  put  him  in  an
    enhanced risk group.  It is also suggested  that  the  725  victims  of
    suicide and IED attacks must contain a proportion that were "caught  in
    the crossfire".  The skeleton argument accepts that there are  examples
    of such techniques which clearly do amount to indiscriminate  violence,
    such as the suicide bomb attack referred to by UNAMA where a  prominent
    tribal leader was targeted with the result that, not only  were  12  of
    his  auxiliary  police  colleagues  killed,  but  also  67   civilians.
    Similarly, a bomb was detonated in Khost, in December 2008, as a  group
    of schoolchildren were walking past, killing 5 of them.   However,  not
    all the documented attacks belong in that category, says  the  skeleton
    argument.  Among those that would not are a suicide car bomb attack  on
    a convoy of foreign troops on 31 January 2009  which  clearly  targeted
    against military personnel,  but  in  which  two  civilians  were  also
    killed; an attack on a convoy of Afghan police which killed one  child,
    as well as four police officers, in April 2009;  and  an  attack  on  a
    security firm convoy on 4 May 2009, which killed two civilians.

110.  Finally, of the 164 victims in 2008 that were  killed  by  "other  AGE
    tactics", the skeleton asserts that it cannot  be  assumed  that  these
    were victims of indiscriminate violence as not all  rocket  attacks  or
    ground   engagements   which   affect   civilians   would   amount   to
    indiscriminate violence.  In conclusion,  the  respondent  argues  that
    only a minority of the total civilian casualties of 2,118 can  properly
    be said to be relevant  victims  of  indiscriminate  violence  for  the
    purpose of establishing a level of risk which the appellant  may  face.
    The figures do not demonstrate the very  high  level  of  risk  for  an
    individual without enhanced risk factors which may render him a  target
    for insurgents.

111.  In their skeleton, Counsel  for  the  respondent  suggested  that  the
    situation in Jalalabad is such that security incidents continue to take
    place there but the objective evidence does not suggest that  the  risk
    of such events taking place is high  enough  to  amount  to  a  general
    Article 15(c) risk.  They argue that there is no satisfactory  evidence
    that Jalalabad is any more dangerous, for an  ordinary  civilian,  than
    any other part of Afghanistan.  Such objective  evidence  as  there  is
    about isolated security incidents does not suggest they  amount  to  an
    Article 15(c) risk.

112.  That the trend of reducing casualties  has  continued  into  2009  was
    confirmed by NATO on  22  April  2009.   EarthTimes.org  reported  that
    Western and Taliban-led forces  had  killed  almost  40%  fewer  Afghan
    citizens in the first three months of the year than in the same  period
    in 2008.  It was said by Counsel that this reflects, at least in  part,
    increased efforts to reduce the body count.  According to NATO, Taliban-
    led fighters  killed  four  times  as  many  Afghan  civilians  as  did
    international forces  in  the  first  quarter  of  the  year  and  that
    proportion has not changed from the previous year.  They accepted  that
    a further internet report from Afghanconflictmonitor.org suggested,  on
    20 July this year, that figures used by  the  United  Nations  and  the
    Afghanistan Independent Human Rights Commission may  well  represent  a
    substantial undercount but argue that  this  does  not  mean  that  the
    underlying trend they have demonstrated is wrong.

113.  Before moving on to the  appellant's  submissions  we  should  comment
    that one difficulty with the figures that we have been  provided  with,
    is that they tend to be Afghanistan-wide.   It  is  apparent  from  the
    province  by  province  analysis  which  appears   in   the   Brookings
    Institution  Afghanistan  Index  that  the  incidents  are  not  evenly
    distributed  throughout  Afghanistan.   Another  difficulty  with   the
    Brookings figures is that, for example, in the most  recent  report  of
    IED events, there is no indication as to casualties  where  the  events
    were said to have been successful.  There is also no indication  as  to
    the division of casualties as between the armed forces and the civilian
    population.  We should add that  a  large  amount  of  the  statistical
    information we have seen deals with military and police casualties.  In
    our judgment, that  does  not  help,  to  any  significant  extent,  to
    demonstrate  the  risk  to  civilians.   Whilst  some  incidents   will
    undoubtedly take place in areas  where  there  are  civilians  present,
    others may well occur in isolated or unpopulated areas.

The Appellant's Submissions on the Background Evidence

114.  For the appellant, Mr Symes had  attached  to  his  skeleton  argument
    extracts from the country evidence that had been produced  by  the  IAS
    Research Unit.  He provided an updated version on the second day of the
    hearing.  The extracts deal with  three  sections  of  the  bundles  of
    documents.  The first with humanitarian issues and health,  the  second
    with violence in Jalalabad and Kabul, and  the  third  a  selection  of
    other passages.  In addition, the appellant relies on material supplied
    on the second day of the hearing but referred to by Professor  Farrell,
    that is to say the Brookings  figures  on  IEDs,  and  the  2008  UNAMA
    Report.

115.  The first  extract  of  the  country  evidence  documents  deals  with
    humanitarian issues and health.  As that is an area we  have  concluded
    does not generally fall for consideration under Article 15(c),  and  in
    particular not in relation to Afghanistan,  for  the  reasons  we  have
    already given, we have not considered those pages (pages 100 to 113  of
    Tab E of Volume 1) in detail.

116.  We deal with violence in Kabul and Jalalabad later.   With  regard  to
    the third category of documents, we observe at page 135 in Volume 2  of
    the appellant's bundle, details  of  a  briefing  to  the  UN  Security
    Council on 3 July 2009.  There it was suggested that  if  managed  well
    the situation in Afghanistan, ahead of the  defining  presidential  and
    provincial elections, could become a turning point in  the  efforts  to
    end the conflict.  The spokesman, however, went on to say that  he  had
    to be careful not to present a rosy picture of the  situation,  as  the
    ongoing conflict  seriously  undermined  prospects  of  progress.   The
    number of security incidents rose above the 1,000 mark  for  the  first
    time in May, a 43% increase over the same period in 2008.  He  said  it
    "had been the most intense fighting season  so  far  experienced".   At
    page 154, the IAS extracts highlight a report dated 23 June 2005 by the
    Secretary General on the situation in Afghanistan, and its implications
    for international peace and security.  This report also refers  to  the
    increase in incidents,  saying  that  the  rise  is  due  to  increased
    fighting in the traditional conflict areas in the South and  East,  but
    also that insurgent activities in previously stable areas, particularly
    in the North, have expanded.  On a more positive note, it was  reported
    that as a result of improved coordination between the  Afghan  National
    Army, the Afghan National Police Force and the National Directorate  of
    Security there has been a sharp decrease in security incidents in Kabul
    and the surrounding provinces.  The report refers to the free  movement
    of unarmed civil servants being adversely affected, and  makes  mention
    of the continuing deliberate  targeting  of  government  officials  and
    employees, religious scholars, civilian contractors and the  government
    and the aid community.  It said that,  compared  with  the  first  four
    months of 2008, the reporting period had been marked by an increase  in
    assassinations, abductions, incidents of intimidation  and  the  direct
    targeting of aid workers, including the United Nations staff,  although
    the number of aid workers killed had dropped  sharply,  with  only  one
    case being reported during the first four months of 2009.

Part 9

Discussion

117.  In assessing the evidence, the one thing which struck us  particularly
    was  Professor  Farrell's  assertion  that  the  number   of   civilian
    fatalities directly caused by both sides to the conflict in Afghanistan
    (including those assassinated by  the  Taliban/al  Qaeda)  was  low  in
    comparison with conflicts of a similar size elsewhere. This emerges  in
    particular from the questions put to Professor Farrell  regarding  page
    17 of his report.  Whilst it is apparent that any assessment of risk to
    civilians needs to cover not only those casualties, but also those  who
    are injured as a result of intimidation by insurgents (which the  table
    on that page does not cover and  as  to  which  no  reliable  data  was
    presented), Professor Farrell was nevertheless clear that  the  current
    conflict in Afghanistan cannot be said  to  involve  a  high  level  of
    civilian casualties (albeit that he urged us to take account of what he
    considered were the conflict's indirect effects).  We conclude that the
    number of direct victims  of  indiscriminate  violence,  arising  as  a
    result of the armed conflict, does not demonstrate that the  appellant,
    upon whom the burden of proof lies, has established that there is  such
    a high level of indiscriminate  violence  that  there  are  substantial
    grounds to establish that he would, solely by  being  present  in  that
    country, face a real risk which threatens his life or person.  We reach
    this view bearing in mind what the Court of Justice had  to  say.   The
    appellant has not shown that incidents of indiscriminate  violence  are
    happening on so wide a scale, and/or in  such  a  way,  as  to  pose  a
    serious threat of real harm. So far as indirect effects of violence are
    concerned, we have already explained why we do not consider that  these
    can be said to fall within the scope of Article 15(c).

118.   We  acknowledge  that  the  material  provided,  in  particular  that
    referred to by Mr Symes,  deals  in  a  qualitative  way  with  various
    incidents, not least the unfortunate bombing by the United States of  a
    wedding party  in  November  last  year.   That  incident  has  clearly
    affected the statistics that would otherwise demonstrate an improvement
    since the change in tactics announced by General MaChrystle.

119.  We have considered  the  appellant's  evidence  concerning  safety  in
    Nangarhar (in which Jalalabad is situated), which is  to  be  found  in
    Section J of the  IAS  extracts  of  the  evidence.   This  qualitative
    evidence deals with a number of incidents.  The first was  that  on  18
    May 2009, in eastern Nangarhar, four Afghan National Army soldiers  and
    their companions were arrested for  shooting  three  shopkeepers  at  a
    plaza in Jalalabad City.  Mr Palmer made the point that,  if  anything,
    this showed that there was a degree of protection  available  from  the
    state.

120.  On 11  May  2009,  Voice  of  America  referred  to  eighteen  people,
    including eleven construction workers, being killed by bomb and suicide
    attacks the previous Sunday.  The source article, found on page 551  of
    the appellant's bundle, shows  that  seven  of  those  killed  were  in
    Helmand and three in Zabul, only eight being in Nangarhar.  Those eight
    were killed when their vehicle hit a roadside bomb and of course it  is
    not known whom that was intended to catch.

121.  On 21 March 2009, there was reference to seven civilians and a  police
    officer being killed in eastern Nangarhar.   The  source  document,  on
    page 564 of the appellant's  bundle,  says  more  and  illustrates  the
    difficulty of deciding whether incidents should properly  be  described
    as involving indiscriminate violence.   In  that  incident,  a  suicide
    bomber wanted to attack a convoy of US army vehicles.  As it approached
    the convoy, the car he was driving hit a tractor trailer and exploded.

122.  On 17 January 2009, it was reported that a suicide  bomber,  targeting
    foreign troops in eastern Nangarhar, killed one  civilian  and  wounded
    six people, including three police.  Again, it is not clear  that  that
    can be properly described as indiscriminate violence.

123.  Finally, the same incident is reported twice.   In  November  2008,  a
    suicide bomber rammed a vehicle into a US convoy as it drove through  a
    busy market.   The  reports  are  not  entirely  clear  on  where  this
    occurred, one saying it was in Jalalabad.  Eleven died,  including  one
    soldier, with possibly 74 others wounded.  It seems  to  us  that  this
    incident is properly described  as  involving  indiscriminate  violence
    because the incident occurred in a crowded market.

124.  It is very difficult, from reading a  number  of  qualitative  reports
    concerning various incidents occurring in different parts of a country,
    to get a reliable feel for what  is  really  going  on.   Many  of  the
    incidents are reported more than once,  and  the  political  stance  of
    those reporting the incident is not always clear.  Nobody is suggesting
    that the situation in Afghanistan is anything but a very long way short
    of ideal but, in order to assess the risk in this case it was necessary
    to analyse  the  situation  quantitatively.   That  has  been  possible
    because of the detailed statistics about the numbers  of  attacks,  and
    the level of casualties.  It has been possible to get a good indication
    of the proportion of civilian casualties which  can  be  attributed  to
    indiscriminate violence.  When that is done, and to the extent that  we
    have  already  demonstrated,  the  numbers  of  civilians   killed   by
    indiscriminate violence turns out to be a great deal  less  than  might
    otherwise have been expected.

125.  Professor Farrell said in his evidence that  one  view  was  that  for
    each  death  arising  from  indiscriminate  violence,  there  could  be
    something like an average of eight wounded.  Obviously that  figure  is
    very variable but, even if it were correct, it is not possible to  know
    the proportion of those casualties which represents the very  seriously
    injured, or how many suffer little more than cuts and bruises.  It  was
    an interesting observation, but not  one  that  we  found  particularly
    helpful in our analysis.  Even if we assume that a proportion  of  that
    figure was seriously injured, then the numbers of  casualties  involved
    would not elevate the risk sufficiently to bring the general  situation
    within Article 15(c).

126.  What we have just said about the statistics is  true  for  Afghanistan
    as a whole.   The  limited  amount  of  evidence  available  about  the
    incidents on a province by province basis, either in Nangarhar, or more
    particularly Kabul, does not suggest that the risk is at the high level
    required to satisfy Article  15(c).   It  therefore  follows  that  the
    appellant will not be at real  risk  of  serious  harm  as  defined  in
    Article 15(c) in his home area or in Kabul.

127.  The incidents cited by Mr Symes are  further  evidence  of  continuing
    violence, but do not themselves  suggest  that  the  more  quantitative
    assessment  carried  out  and  based  on  the  statistics  produced  by
    Professor Farrell, is wrong.  They illustrate the day to day hazards of
    living in Afghanistan, but do not elevate the risk to such a level that
    Article 15(c) is engaged.

Part 10

Access to Jalalabad

128.  Having concluded that the appellant would  not  be  at  real  risk  of
    serious harm as  defined  in  Article  15(c),  were  he  to  return  to
    Jalalabad, the next question is whether he can safely  get  there.   We
    have evidence about the road between Kabul, to where it  is  agreed  he
    would  be  returned,  and  Nangarhar.   This  was  dealt  with  by  the
    respondent's counsel in their  skeleton  argument.   They  refer  to  a
    report  by  the  International  Council  on  Security  and  Development
    ("ICOS") (formerly the SENDIS Council) that the Jalalabad road  is  not
    safe after the Sarobi  Junction.   In  the  bundles,  there  are  other
    reports which describe the highway in more positive terms, saying  that
    it has been improved in terms of resurfacing since the overthrow of the
    Taliban.  The respondent argues that none of the other reports refer to
    serious security incidents of an extent that  would  give  rise  to  an
    Article 15(c) risk.  It is of course for  the  appellant  to  establish
    that he would not  be  able  to  access  Jalalabad  safely.   For  this
    purpose, the appellant would in our judgment have only to show that  he
    would be at real risk of serious harm from any cause,  not  limited  to
    that in Article 15(c).

129.  The ICOS Report says little more  than  was  quoted  in  the  skeleton
    argument.  The report has been  criticised  by  a  NATO  spokesman  who
    described figures contained in it, relating to the Taliban presence  in
    Afghanistan, as "not credible at all".   Observations  about  the  ICOS
    methodology are to be  found  in  a  report  from  RFE/RL  (Radio  Free
    Europe/Radio Liberty) on 8 December 2008.  The report  deals  with  the
    headline findings of ICOS but then reports the NATO spokesman as saying
    that NATO and the Afghan Government reject the report.  The report  was
    said by the Afghan Government to have used questionable methodology, to
    be conceptually  confused  and  to  have  misinterpreted  the  sporadic
    terrorising, and media orientated activities, of the Taliban.

130.  The other evidence about the Kabul to Jalalabad road is found  between
    pages 347 and 371 of Volume 4 of the evidence.  The author of a  report
    dated 30 June 2009 headlines his article "A Journey on the  Treacherous
    Road to Kabul" but his headline is not borne  out  by  the  text.   The
    author was startled by  an  insurgent  attack  on  an  American  Humvee
    outside the  entrance  to  the  Ministry  of  Agriculture  in  downtown
    Jalalabad, but that was clearly targeted  violence  not  involving  the
    highway.  The author then set  off  towards  Kabul  and  encountered  a
    convoy of vehicles carrying mine-resistant ambush  protective  vehicles
    ("MRAPs") towards one of the US bases.  One MRAP had come off its  flat
    bed trailer while rounding a steep mountain curve.  He went on to say:

        "Afghan drivers are still discovering the dangers  of  driving  too
        fast on the country's newly paved roads.  The network of  roads  in
        this country deteriorated horribly during the past quarter  century
        of conflict.  Many Afghan drivers are more accustomed  to  creeping
        on bone jarring dirt tracks at speeds of barely 10mph."

      He later came across a traffic jam in the  mountains  because  another
    MRAP had fallen off a trailer, but  said  that  things  should  improve
    shortly because a Chinese company is about to finish "paving" the  last
    stretch of highway through the mountains east of Kabul.   Having  taken
    to walking, to avoid the traffic jam, the author then found a  gang  of
    dozens of motorcycle taxi drivers offering to ferry travellers back  to
    Kabul.  Many were revving motors and doing  wheelies.   Some  yodelled,
    others performed tricks, either driving the bikes using their  feet  or
    lying on their stomachs on the seats of bikes as they raced through the
    mountains.  There is a less subjective report on  the  highway  by  Eng
    Consult Limited which shows a high level of investment in the road.   A
    table, at paragraph 7, shows that the road  was  being  used  (in  both
    directions) by an average of 5,582 vehicles per day (during the  period
    24 June to 30 June 2007) and that, of those vehicles,  53%  were  cars,
    jeeps, four wheel drives and taxis.  The respondent's skeleton argument
    suggests that puts into perspective the  limited  number  of  incidents
    reported on that highway.

131.  Such evidence as we  have  shows  that  the  road  between  Kabul  and
    Jalalabad is heavily used and subject to considerable investment.  That
    is not to say there will never be incidents on the road but there is no
    satisfactory evidence that there is  a  reasonable  likelihood  of  the
    appellant being caught up in one.  There is  serious  doubt  about  the
    ICOS Report, which in any  event  is  extremely  brief  and  devoid  of
    reasoning, to the effect that the road is not safe beyond a  particular
    point.  The other evidence provided by the respondent contradicts that,
    and in the absence of any better evidence from the  appellant,  he  has
    failed to make out his case in that regard.  We do not  find  that  the
    appellant would be at real risk of serious harm, however defined,  when
    travelling from Kabul to Jalalabad.

Part 11

Internal Relocation

132.  Even if we were wrong about the situation in Jalalabad, or  access  to
    it, the appellant still has the option of internal relocation to Kabul,
    to where he will be returned.  In this respect the  test  is  not  that
    required by Article 15(c), or any other part of Article  15,  but  that
    set out in Article 8 and considered in Januzi v Secretary of State  for
    the Home Department [2006] UKHL 5 and AH (Sudan) [2007] UKHL  49.   For
    that purpose, to succeed the appellant has to show  that  it  would  be
    unduly harsh to expect him to move to Kabul or, in other words, that it
    would be unreasonable to expect him to do so having regard to  all  the
    circumstances.  The appellant is a healthy young  man  with  sufficient
    resources to have made it to the United Kingdom and to have lived here.
     In PM and Others (Kabul - Hizb-i-Islami) Afghanistan CG  [2007]  UKAIT
    00089 the Tribunal found, following a country guidance case in which Dr
    Giustozzi gave oral evidence at some length,  that  it  is  not  unduly
    harsh or unreasonable in all the circumstances, to expect such a person
    to relocate to Kabul and that it is not unreasonable to expect  him  to
    do so.  That issue was considered again, most recently  in  RQ  (Afghan
    National Army - Hizb-i-Islami  -  risk)  Afghanistan  CG  [2008]  UKAIT
    00013, and there was no material change in the assessment.

133.  We asked Mr Symes whether there was anything, in that  section  of  Dr
    Giustozzi's report, dealing with general conditions in Kabul, that  had
    not previously been considered by the Tribunal in those earlier  cases,
    or which cast doubt on the continuing  reliability  of  the  Tribunal's
    earlier findings.  He said there  was  not.   In  the  absence  of  any
    evidence to challenge the findings in those  earlier  country  guidance
    cases we are bound by them and find that it  is  not  unduly  harsh  or
    unreasonable in all the circumstances to expect a young man, about whom
    nothing else is known, to relocate to Kabul.

Part 12

Enhanced Risk Categories

134.  There is one final matter which we should deal  with,  as  this  is  a
    country guidance case.  That  is  the  question  of  enhanced  risk  to
    particular categories of individuals.  The European Court made it clear
    in Elgafaji that where a person comes within a group of people for whom
    there is an enhanced risk, the degree of indiscriminate  violence  does
    not need to be as high as it would otherwise have to  be  in  order  to
    invoke Article 2 or Article 15(c).  We have already observed  that  the
    ultimate test is that of real risk of serious harm.  We have not  heard
    much evidence about enhanced risk categories, and that is not an  issue
    we have had to consider in relation to the appellant.   It was accepted
    by counsel for the respondent that those  who  could  be  perceived  as
    collaborators may be considered to be in such  a  category.   That  may
    include teachers, local government officers and  government  officials.
    The concept of a group of people at  enhanced  risk  of  indiscriminate
    violence is not an immediately obvious one.   The  difficulty  concerns
    the use  of  the  word  "indiscriminate",  but  the  answer  is  partly
    contained in QD and  AH,  which  considered  the  "individual  risk  of
    indiscriminate violence".  The way in  which  an  enhanced  risk  might
    arise for a group can best be demonstrated by example.   If,  say,  the
    Taliban wanted to make a  point  about  teachers  continuing  to  teach
    girls, it may resolve to kill a teacher.  It would not be any  specific
    teacher but one who came into their sights.  A teacher is of course not
    a combatant and an attempt to kill the first teacher they  came  across
    could be argued to demonstrate that teachers were then at enhanced risk
    of indiscriminate violence.  Another possible example could be disabled
    people.   If  a  bomber,  or  sniper,  were  to  walk  into  a  crowded
    marketplace, the public may well flee.  A man with only one  leg  would
    move considerably more slowly and arguably as a result would  be  in  a
    higher risk group than the general public.  In view of the  paucity  of
    evidence, we cannot give a  list  of  risk  categories,  and  certainly
    cannot say that any particular occupation or status puts a person  into
    such a higher risk category.  We merely record that there may  be  such
    categories, and that if a  person  comes  within  one,  the  degree  of
    indiscriminate violence required to succeed may  be  reduced  depending
    upon the particular facts of the case both in terms of  the  individual
    concerned, and the part of Afghanistan from which he comes.  It  should
    also be borne in mind that such a person may, depending on  the  facts,
    be entitled to refugee status rather than  relying  on  the  subsidiary
    protection offered by Articles 2 and 15 of the Qualification Directive.
     We emphasise that those examples should not be taken to indicate  that
    teachers, or the disabled, are members of enhanced risk groups, without
    proof to that effect.

135.  For all the reasons which we have given,  and  the  Immigration  Judge
    having made a material error of law in failing to consider the question
    of Article 15(c), we substitute our own decision:-

            The appeal is dismissed.

            The appellant is not entitled to humanitarian protection.


Signed                                             Date


Senior Immigration Judge P R Lane

                                    Annex

                      Schedule of documentary evidence


          DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE SUBMITTED ON BEHALF OF THE APPELLANT



|          |Document                                       |Date           |
|          |Uppsala Conflict Data Program, Afghanistan -   |Undated        |
|          |Uppsala University                             |(Accessed:     |
|          |                                               |05/12/2008)    |
|          |UNHCR's Eligibility  Guidelines for Assessing  |03/01/2008     |
|          |the International Protection Needs of Afghan   |               |
|          |Asylum-Seekers -  United Nations High          |               |
|          |Commissioner for Refugees                      |               |
|          |International Crisis Group, Taliban Propaganda:|24/07/2008     |
|          |Winning the War of Words? [Excerpt]            |               |
|          |Voice of America News, Twin Blasts Hit Police  |07/09/2008     |
|          |HQ in Kandahar                                 |               |
|          |"Troops in Contact": Air strikes and Civilian  |08/09/2008     |
|          |Deaths in Afghanistan - Human Rights Watch     |               |
|          |Human Rights Watch, Afghanistan: Civilian      |08/09/2008     |
|          |Deaths From Airstrikes on the Rise             |               |
|          |Institute for War and Peace Reporting (UK),    |11/09/2008     |
|          |Helmandis Fear Taleban Noose Tightening        |               |
|          |Voice of America News, Blast Outside Kabul     |13/09/2008     |
|          |Kills Afghan Governor                          |               |
|          |Office of the United Nations High Commissioner |16/09/2008     |
|          |for Human Rights (OHCHR), New UN figures show  |               |
|          |sharp rise in Afghan civilian casualties       |               |
|          |International Committee of the Red Cross       |16/09/2008     |
|          |(ICRC), Afghanistan: update on the humanitarian|               |
|          |situation                                      |               |
|          |Voice of America News, Taliban Kidnap More Than|22/09/2008     |
|          |140 Laborers in Afghanistan                    |               |
|          |United Nations News, Citing rising terrorism,  |22/09/2008     |
|          |UN extends Afghan security force for another   |               |
|          |year                                           |               |
|          |The situation in Afghanistan and its           |23/09/2008     |
|          |implications for international peace and       |               |
|          |security: Report of the Secretary-General -    |               |
|          |United Nations                                 |               |
|          |US Senate Armed Services Committee, Hearing:   |23/09/2008     |
|          |The situation in Iraq and Afghanistan          |               |
|          |Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty, High-Profile  |28/09/2008     |
|          |Afghan Policewoman Assassinated In Kandahar    |               |
|          |United Nations News, Security situation in     |29/09/2008     |
|          |Afghanistan 'markedly' worse, reports          |               |
|          |Secretary-General                              |               |
|          |HJT Research, US general says insurgents are   |01/10/2008     |
|          |gaining in Afghanistan                         |               |
|          |United Nations News, UN envoy calls for        |06/10/2008     |
|          |political 'surge' to tackle Afghan security,   |               |
|          |humanitarian needs                             |               |
|          |United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees  |06/10/2008     |
|          |(UNHCR), Afghanistan Security Update Relating  |               |
|          |to Complementary Forms of Protection           |               |
|          |North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO)      |09/10/2008     |
|          |Parliamentary Assembly, Economic Reconstruction|               |
|          |in Afghanistan: Developmental and Security     |               |
|          |Implications                                   |               |
|          |Economic Reconstruction in Afghanistan:        |09/10/2008     |
|          |Developmental and Security Implications - North|               |
|          |Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO)            |               |
|          |Parliamentary Assembly                         |               |
|          |Afghanistan: Lack of access may spread         |02/11/2008     |
|          |diseases, Health Ministry warns Integrated     |               |
|          |Regional Information Networks News (IRIN)      |               |
|          |Build on positive trends to reverse            |14/10/2008     |
|          |deteriorating situation in Afghanistan, says   |               |
|          |Secretary-General's Special Representative     |               |
|          |while briefing Security Council - United       |               |
|          |Nations                                        |               |
|          |UN Envoy: Afghan Violence at Highest Level     |14/10/2008     |
|          |Since 2002 -  Voice of America News            |               |
|          |United Nations News, Top UN envoy warns deadly |14/10/2008     |
|          |Afghan attacks on increase as situation worsens|               |
|          |United Nations News, Current crises threaten to|20/10/2008     |
|          |plunge more Afghans into poverty, warns UN     |               |
|          |official                                       |               |
|          |Afghanistan: Rights body accuses Taliban -     |22/10/2008     |
|          |Integrated Regional Information Networks News  |               |
|          |(IRIN)                                         |               |
|          |Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty, Once A Sign Of|22/10/2008     |
|          |Hope, Afghan Highway Becomes A Taliban Hunting |               |
|          |Ground                                         |               |
|          |Voice of America News, Three Shot Dead in      |25/10/2008     |
|          |Afghan Capital,                                |               |
|          |Increasing hardship and limited support for    |28/10/2008     |
|          |growing displaced population - Internal        |               |
|          |Displacement Monitoring Centre (Norwegian      |               |
|          |Refugee Centre), Afghanistan                   |               |
|          |Voice of America News, Taliban Bus Attack in   |19/10/2008     |
|          |Southern Afghanistan Kills 30                  |               |
|          |Integrated Regional Information Networks News  |28/10/2008     |
|          |(IRIN), Afghanistan: Little help for civilians |               |
|          |repeatedly displaced by conflict               |               |
|          |UK Parliament House of Commons, Commons Hansard|29/10/2008     |
|          |Debates 29 October 2008 (Westminster Hall):    |               |
|          |Afghanistan                                    |               |
|          |Voice of America News, Taliban Claims          |30/10/2008     |
|          |Responsibility for Kabul Suicide Bomb          |               |
|          |Integrated Regional Information Networks News  |02/11/2008     |
|          |(IRIN), Afghanistan: Lack of access may spread |               |
|          |diseases, Health Ministry warns                |               |
|          |Voice of America News, Afghan Intelligence     |04/11/2008     |
|          |Official Killed in Kandahar                    |               |
|          |Voice of America News, Afghan President Says   |05/11/2008     |
|          |Air Strikes Kill 40 Civilians at Wedding Party |               |
|          |Voice of America News, US Official: Taliban    |08/11/2008     |
|          |Tactics Deliberately Endanger Afghan Civilians |               |
|          |United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees  |10/11/2008     |
|          |(UNHCR), Afghanistan at the crossroads:        |               |
|          |Drought, food crisis drive Afghans out of      |               |
|          |villages                                       |               |
|          |US Center of Excellence in Disaster Management |10/11/2008     |
|          |& Humanitarian Assistance (COEDMHA), Dozens    |               |
|          |killed in weekend security incidents across    |               |
|          |Afghanistan                                    |               |
|          |Voice of America News, Kandahar Attack Targets |12/11/2008     |
|          |Government Officials                           |               |
|          |Afghanistan Suicide Bombing Targets US Military|13/11/2008     |
|          |Convoy -   Voice of America News               |               |
|          |Integrated Regional Information Networks News  |13/11/2008     |
|          |(IRIN), Afghanistan: Unexploded ordnance poses |               |
|          |threat to returnees                            |               |
|          |The new Baghdad - Sydney Morning Herald        |15/11/2008     |
|          |(Australia)                                    |               |
|          |US and British troops killed in Afghanistan -  |16/11/2008     |
|          |EuroNews                                       |               |
|          |EuroNews, US and British troops killed in      |16/11/2008     |
|          |Afghanistan                                    |               |
|          |Voice of America News, Afghanistan's Taliban   |17/11/2008     |
|          |Reject Offer for Peace Talks                   |               |
|          |United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees  |17/11/2008     |
|          |(UNHCR), Afghanistan at the crossroads: Afghans|               |
|          |return home to live under tents                |               |
|          |EurasiaNet, Afghanistan: Refugee Returns Should|18/11/2008     |
|          |No Longer Be A Cause For Celebration In Kabul  |               |
|          |Voice of America News, Afghan Government       |18/11/2008     |
|          |Struggles to Resettle Returnees                |               |
|          |United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees  |18/11/2008     |
|          |(UNHCR), Afghanistan at the crossroads: Invest |               |
|          |in Afghan returns or risk further displacement,|               |
|          |cautions UNHCR                                 |               |
|          |International Rescue Committee (USA), Press    |27/11/2008     |
|          |Release - Afghanistan: Aid Agencies Ask the UN |               |
|          |Security Council for Assistance to Reach       |               |
|          |Communities and Avoid Humanitarian Crisis      |               |
|          |Voice of America News, Car Bomb Kills 4 Near US|27/11/2008     |
|          |Embassy in Kabul                               |               |
|          |Dogged By Security Failings, Karzai Seeks      |29/11/2008     |
|          |Re-election - Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty  |               |
|          |Voice of America News, Suicide Bomber Kills 3  |30/11/2008     |
|          |in Afghan Capital                              |               |
|          |Voice of America News, Suicide Bombing Kills 10|01/12/2008     |
|          |in Afghanistan                                 |               |
|          |The New York Times, Afghan Refugees Return Home|03/12/2008     |
|          |but Find Only a Life of Desperation            |               |
|          |Voice of America News, NATO Chief: More Troops |03/12/2008     |
|          |Needed in Afghanistan                          |               |
|          |Voice of America News, US Troops to Focus on   |07/12/2008     |
|          |Protecting Afghan Capital                      |               |
|          |RFE/RL, Taliban In 72 Percent Of Afghanistan,  |08/12/2008     |
|          |Think Tank Says, [Excerpt]                     |               |
|          |US Department of Defense, Gates Pledges More   |11/12/2008     |
|          |Resources to Fight Protracted War in           |               |
|          |Afghanistan                                    |               |
|          |Report of the Security Council Mission to      |12/12/2008     |
|          |Afghanistan 21 to 28 November 2008 - UNSC      |               |
|          |Report S/2008/782                              |               |
|          |Policing in Afghanistan: Still Searching for a |18/12/2008     |
|          |Strategy -  International Crisis Group         |               |
|          |From Hope to Fear: An Afghan Perspective on    |23/12/2008     |
|          |Operations of Pro-Government Forces in         |               |
|          |Afghanistan - Afghanistan Independent Human    |               |
|          |Rights Commission                              |               |
|          |Insurgent Abuses Against Afghan Civilians -    |23/12/2008     |
|          |Afghanistan Independent Human Rights Commission|               |
|          |Some 50 Afghan Policemen Arrested For Helping  |30/12/2008     |
|          |Taliban -   Radio Free Europe, Radio Liberty   |               |
|          |International Herald Tribune, Afghan           |02/01/2009     |
|          |corruption: Everything for sale                |               |
|          |United Nations News, Returning refugees to     |02/01/2009     |
|          |Afghanistan struggle to earn a living wage, say|               |
|          |UN agency                                      |               |
|          |Integrated Regional Information Networks News  |05/01/2009     |
|          |(IRIN), Afghanistan: Little to eat for IDPs in |               |
|          |makeshift Kabul camp                           |               |
|          |Voice of America News, Suicide Bomber Attacks  |08/01/2009     |
|          |Foreign Troops, Kills Civilians in Afghanistan |               |
|          |Report of the High Commissioner for Human      |16/01/2009     |
|          |Rights on the situation of human rights in     |               |
|          |Afghanistan and on the achievements of         |               |
|          |technical assistance in the field of human     |               |
|          |rights (Advance Edited Version) - Office of the|               |
|          |United Nations High Commissioner for Human     |               |
|          |Rights (OHCHR)                                 |               |
|          |Voice of America News, Suicide Car Bomb Kills 5|17/01/2009     |
|          |Outside US Base in Kabul                       |               |
|          |Afghan civilian killed, six wounded in suicide |17/01/2009     |
|          |attack on police in east - BBC Monitoring South|               |
|          |Asia                                           |               |
|          |International Herald Tribune, In Afghan south, |22/01/2009     |
|          |Taliban fill NATO's gaps                       |               |
|          |Voice of America News, Violence Plagues Afghan |22/01/2009     |
|          |Voter Registration                             |               |
|          |Afghanistan and Pakistan: Raise Voices for     |26/01/2009     |
|          |Civilian  Protection - Refugees International  |               |
|          |(USA)                                          |               |
|          |BBC Monitoring South Asia, Three civilians     |26/01/2009     |
|          |killed in mine blast in eastern Afghan province|               |
|          |Voice of America News, Afghan Presidential Poll|29/01/2009     |
|          |Postponed Until August                         |               |
|          |Voice of America News, Suicide Bomber Kills 21 |02/02/2009     |
|          |Police Officers in Afghanistan                 |               |
|          |Agence France Presse, Suicide blast targets    |05/02/2009     |
|          |foreign troops in Afghanistan                  |               |
|          |Agence France Presse, Three cops killed in     |09/02/2009     |
|          |Afghan blast                                   |               |
|          |Institute for War and Peace Reporting (UK),    |10/02/2009     |
|          |Northerners Leaving in Droves                  |               |
|          |Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty, Coordinated   |11/02/2009     |
|          |Taliban Attacks Kill At Least 26 In Kabul      |               |
|          |Kabulis Stunned by Taleban Raid - Institute for|12/02/2009     |
|          |War and Peace Reporting (UK)                   |               |
|          |Institute for War and Peace Reporting (UK),    |12/02/2009     |
|          |Kabulis Stunned by Taleban Raid                |               |
|          |Voice of America News, US Envoy Faces Daunting |13/02/2009     |
|          |Task in Reversing Afghan Decline               |               |
|          |United Nations Assistance Mission to           |17/02/2009     |
|          |Afghanistan (UNAMA), Annual Report on          |               |
|          |Protection of Civilians in Armed Conflict, 2008|               |
|          |Afghanistan: Tens of thousands of people       |18/02/2009     |
|          |displaced by fighting and hunger - Amnesty     |               |
|          |International                                  |               |
|          |nstitute for War and Peace Reporting (UK),     |18/02/2009     |
|          |Afghan Rebel Chief Defies Coalition Forces     |               |
|          |Afghanistan: Civilian deaths up 40 percent -   |25/02/2009     |
|          |Integrated Regional Information Networks News  |               |
|          |(IRIN)                                         |               |
|          |Integrated Regional Information Networks News  |26/02/2009     |
|          |(IRIN), Afghanistan: IDPs in northwest battle  |               |
|          |cold, diseases and hunger                      |               |
|          |Agence France Presse, Civilians wounded, guards|01/03/2009     |
|          |killed in Afghan violence                      |               |
|          |Civilians increasingly at risk in Afghanistan -|02/03/2009     |
|          |International Committee of the Red Cross       |               |
|          |Afghan Election Date Highlights Political and  |04/03/2009     |
|          |Security Uncertainty - Voice of America News   |               |
|          |Afghanistan: Tempted by a Taliban job offer -  |05/03/2009     |
|          |Integrated Regional Information Networks News  |               |
|          |(IRIN)                                         |               |
|          |Report of the Secretary-General on the         |10/03/2009     |
|          |situation in Afghanistan and its implications  |               |
|          |for international peace and security - United  |               |
|          |Nations                                        |               |
|          |Integrated Regional Information Networks News  |12/03/2009     |
|          |(IRIN), Afghanistan: Food still unaffordable   |               |
|          |for millions                                   |               |
|          |US Fed News, AFGHAN, U.S. FORCES CAPTURE       |12/03/2009     |
|          |BOMBING SUSPECTS, SEIZE TALIBAN SUPPLIES       |               |
|          |Afghanistan: New U.S. Administration, New      |13/03/2009     |
|          |Directions - International Crisis Group        |               |
|          |Trend News Agency (Azerbaijan), 7 Afghan       |15/03/2009     |
|          |policemen missing - official                   |               |
|          |Voice of the Jihad, Taleban claim destroying US|15/03/2009     |
|          |tank in Afghan east                            |               |
|          |Afghan Violence Kills 14, Including 4 US, 2    |15/03/2009     |
|          |British Troops - Voice of America News         |               |
|          |Agence France Presse, Four NATO soldiers killed|15/03/2009     |
|          |in Afghan blast: force                         |               |
|          |Suicide Bomber Kill 11 in Southern Afghanistan,|16/03/2009     |
|          |- Voice of America News                        |               |
|          |New York Daily News, 4 G.I.S ARE KILLED IN     |16/03/2009     |
|          |AFGHAN BLAST                                   |               |
|          |Afghanistan: "Humanitarian work has never been |18/03/2009     |
|          |as difficult as now" - Integrated Regional     |               |
|          |Information Networks News (IRIN)               |               |
|          |The Nation, Taliban commander arrested         |18/03/2009     |
|          |US FED News, AIRMAN KILLED IN EASTERN          |18/03/2009     |
|          |AFGHANISTAN                                    |               |
|          |Reuters, UPDATE 4-Bomb attack kills Afghan MP, |19/03/2009     |
|          |four bodyguards                                |               |
|          |Pajhwok Afghan News, Villagers say two         |19/03/2009     |
|          |civilians killed in US raid                    |               |
|          |Cop, 7 civilians perish in Nangarhar blast -   |21/03/2009     |
|          |Pajhwok Afghan News                            |               |
|          |Pajhwok Afghan News, Cop, 7 civilians perish in|21/03/2009     |
|          |Nangarhar blast                                |               |
|          |Conflict against the Taliban could last a      |26/03/2009     |
|          |decade:  Kilcullen Conflict could last a       |               |
|          |decade: Kilcullen Counter-insurgency expert    |               |
|          |David Kilcullen joins The 7.30 Report -        |               |
|          |Australian Broadcasting Commission             |               |
|          |Voice of America News, New York Times: Widening|26/03/2009     |
|          |Taliban Insurgency Aided by Pakistan           |               |
|          |The Times of Central Asia, Afghanistan         |27/03/2009     |
|          |Voice of America News, Taliban Threatens More  |29/04/2009     |
|          |Violence in Afghanistan                        |               |
|          |Reuters, US raid killed 97 civilians - Afghan  |26/05/2009     |
|          |rights group                                   |               |
|          |Amnesty International, Amnesty International   |28/05/2009     |
|          |Report 2009: Afghanistan (extract)             |               |
|          |RIU Country of Origin Report - Afghanistan:    |03/06/2009     |
|          |Internal armed conflict; Kabul; Jalalabad; IFA |               |
|          |- Covering October 2008 to 2nd May 2009        |               |
|          |USFED News: Complex Situation in Afghanistan   |03/07/2009     |
|          |could be Turning Point if Managed Well         |               |
|          |Brookings Afghanistan Index - Tracking         |15/07/2009     |
|          |Variables of Reconstruction & Security in      |               |
|          |Post-9/11 Afghanistan                          |               |


         DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE SUBMITTED ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT



|          |Document                                       |Date           |
|          |GlobalSecurity.org - Military: Hazrat Ali      |18/02/2002     |
|          |Institute for War and Peace Reporting -        |03/04/2002     |
|          |Nangarhar Dispute Threatens to Escalate        |               |
|          |UNHCR Jalalabad District Profile               |04/08/2002     |
|          |Human Rights Watch - Killing You is a Very Easy|28/07/2003     |
|          |Thing For Us                                   |               |
|          |The Jamestown Foundation - A Shift In U.S.     |04/05/2004     |
|          |Strategy In Afghanistan? (Part I)              |               |
|          |BBC News Online - Karzai 'shuffles' Afghan     |20/07/2004     |
|          |warlords                                       |               |
|          |Council on Foreign Relations - AFGHANISTAN:    |15/09/2004     |
|          |Karzai vs. the Warlords                        |               |
|          |The Daily Telegraph - Combat losses fail to    |11/09/2006     |
|          |deter Taliban fighters                         |               |
|          |The Naval Postgraduate School, Winter 2007     |2007           |
|          |Journal - Understanding the Taliban and        |               |
|          |Insurgency in Afghanistan                      |               |
|          |ICOS Afghanistan Map                           |2007           |
|          |BBC News Online - Afghans primed for mortgage  |22/06/2007     |
|          |revolution                                     |               |
|          |United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, |31/01/2008     |
|          |Map of Afghanistan - IDPs Population Estimate  |               |
|          |(Individuals) by Camps and Settlements -       |               |
|          |January 2008                                   |               |
|          |US Department of State - Bureau of Democracy,  |11/03/2008     |
|          |Human Rights, and Labor 2007                   |               |
|          |United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees  |01/06/2008     |
|          |Global Report 2007 - Afghanistan (extract)     |               |
|          |National Public Radio (NPR) - A Journey on the |01/06/2008     |
|          |Treacherous Road to Kabul                      |               |
|          |The Observer - Fear, disillusion and despair:  |08/06/2008     |
|          |notes from a divided land as peace slips away  |               |
|          |Request and Answer on Death of Hazrat Ali,     |19/08/2008     |
|          |Military Commander                             |               |
|          |ICOS Afghanistan Map                           |11/2008        |
|          |ICOS Kabul Maps                                |11/2008        |
|          |United Nations Assistance Mission in           |01/2009        |
|          |Afghanistan (UNAMA) Human Rights Unit - Annual |               |
|          |Report on Protection of Civilians in Armed     |               |
|          |Conflict 2008                                  |               |
|          |The New Haven Register: "US commanders see     |03/01/2009     |
|          |shift in Taliban Tactics."                     |               |
|          |Request and Answer on Ownership of Land in     |20/01/2009     |
|          |Afghanistan                                    |               |
|          |The National - Afghans want 'foreigners' out of|28/01/2009     |
|          |Kabul                                          |               |
|          |The Long War Journal: US Troops kill Taliban's |16/02/2009     |
|          |shadow governor for Badghis province           |               |
|          |Country of Origin Information Service (COIS) - |18/02/2009     |
|          |Country of Origin Information Report on        |               |
|          |Afghanistan                                    |               |
|          |Documentary source material referred to in the |18/02/2009     |
|          |COIS Report dated 18.02.09                     |               |
|          |Calgary Herald: "Negotiating with the Taliban  |09/03/2009     |
|          |no change in tactics: Obama"                   |               |
|          |Guardian.co.uk; "Europe to contribute 5,000    |04/04/2009     |
|          |extra troops to Afghanistan."                  |               |
|          |UKBA Operational Guidance Note (OGN) on        |08/04/2009     |
|          |Afghanistan (version 7.0)                      |               |
|          |The Institute for War and Peace Reporting - The|23/04/2009     |
|          |Occasional Taleban                             |               |
|          |The Heinz Journal - Economics Key to Reducing  |07/05/2009     |
|          |Worldwide Terrorism Risk                       |               |
|          |New York Times: "A vow to cut Afghan civilian  |20/05/2009     |
|          |deaths"                                        |               |
|          |Reuters; "Extra US troops in Afghanistan by    |31/05/2009     |
|          |mid-July."                                     |               |
|          |The Daily Times: "Possible change in Taliban   |08/06/2009     |
|          |tactics",                                      |               |
|          |CCN: "New directive to restrict US air strikes |23/06/2009     |
|          |in Afghanistan"                                |               |
|          |United Nations Secretary-General's Report - The|23/06/2009     |
|          |situation in Afghanistan and its implications  |               |
|          |for international peace and security           |               |
|          |Country of Origin Information Service (COIS) - |26/06/2009     |
|          |Country of Origin Information Report on        |               |
|          |Afghanistan                                    |               |
|          |Additional documentary source material referred|26/06/2009     |
|          |to the COIS Report dated 26.06.09              |               |
|          |International Institute for Strategic Studies  |29/06/2009     |
|          |Armed Conflict Database - Afghanistan Timeline |               |
|          |(January 2009 to June 2009)                    |               |
|          |UNHCR Eligibility Guidelines for Assessing the |07/2009        |
|          |International Protection Needs of              |               |
|          |Asylum-Seekers from Afghanistan - UNHCR        |               |
|          |Afghanistan Independent Human Rights           |Undated        |
|          |Commission: Annual Report 2008 (covering period|               |
|          |from 1 January to 31 December 2008)            |               |
|          |The Naval Postgraduate School Program for      |Undated        |
|          |Culture & Conflict Studies                     |               |
|          |Engconsult Ltd - Excerpt from Interim Report:  |Undated        |
|          |Preparing Road Rehabilitation and Capacity     |               |
|          |Building Cluster Project                       |               |





