
FD (EEA discretion: basis of appeal) Algeria [2007] UKAIT 00049

                       ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at: Field House
Date of Hearing: 3 April 2007

                                   Before:


 Mr C M G Ockelton, Deputy President of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
                       Senior Immigration Judge Grubb

                                   Between

                                     FD
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the Appellant:           Mr C Lam, instructed by David Tang & Co.
For the Respondent:          Mr P Deller, Home Office Presenting Officer

The Tribunal has jurisdiction to review the exercise  of  the  Secretary  of
State's discretion under the EEA Regulations applying  to  "extended  family
members".  In such  cases  the  Tribunal  is  not,  therefore,  confined  to
considering whether the decision was a lawful one.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Algeria.  He appealed to  an  Immigration
    Judge against the  decision  of  the  respondent  on  9  November  2006
    refusing to issue him with a residence card as confirmation of a  right
    of residence within  EU  law.   The  Immigration  Judge  dismissed  his
    appeal.  He sought and obtained an order for reconsideration.  Thus the
    matter comes before us.

 2. We do not know when the appellant came to the  United  Kingdom.   On  1
    August 2001 he was issued with a residence document valid until 29 July
    2008 as the spouse of a Portuguese national.   On  18  July  2005  that
    residence document was revoked following the breakdown of the marriage.
     He appealed against that revocation, but his appeal was dismissed. The
    appellant then claimed that he had entered into a relationship  with  a
    French national, with whom he had been  living  since  July  2004.   He
    applied to remain on the basis of that relationship.  We are  concerned
    with the refusal of that application.  The refusal proceeded  from  the
    basis that the appellant's only claim to remain  was  as  an  "extended
    family  member"  within  Regulation  8  of  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006 (SI 2006/1003), that he  was  therefore
    entitled  to  a  residence  card  only  in  the  Secretary  of  State's
    discretion, if it appeared to him right to issue one, and that, as  the
    appellant had no leave to remain in the United Kingdom,  the  Secretary
    of State declined to exercise his discretion in the appellant's favour.
     The grounds of appeal to the Immigration Judge were that the appellant
    had a right to remain in the United Kingdom under EU law,  specifically
    Article 3(2) of the Directive 2004/38/EC, and that, in any  event,  the
    mere fact that he had no leave to remain in the United Kingdom  at  the
    time he made his application was an inadequate basis for refusing  him.
    The Immigration Judge held that Article 3(2) gave no substantive rights
    to the appellant.  He also held  that  the  decision  not  to  issue  a
    residence card on the ground given was "perfectly  in  accordance  with
    the  law".   Thus  he  dismissed   the   appeal.    The   grounds   for
    reconsideration, on the basis on which the order was made by the Senior
    Immigration Judge, are not entirely easy to understand, but it is clear
    that they  raise  two  discrete  issues.   The  first  relates  to  the
    interpretation of Article  3(2):  if  the  appellant  has  a  right  of
    residence under European law under that  Article,  the  United  Kingdom
    legislation appearing to make it a matter of the Secretary  of  State's
    discretion could have no force.  The second issue arises  only  if  the
    appellant has no right of residence under  Article  3(2).   It  is  the
    question whether the Immigration Judge acted correctly  in  determining
    the appeal simply on the basis that the Secretary of  State's  decision
    was in accordance with the law, or whether the Immigration Judge should
    have considered whether the Secretary of State's discretion should have
    been exercised differently.

 3. So far as the first issue is concerned, we, like the Immigration Judge,
    are not persuaded that Article 3(2) gives the appellant any substantive
    right  of  residency  (or  indeed  entry  into)  the  United   Kingdom.
    Arguments based on Article 3(2) are raised with very great frequency in
    the Tribunal at present.  We have given our views on the issue in  some
    detail elsewhere [1] and we do  not  need  to  repeat  them  here.   We
    accordingly reject the appellant's claim insofar as it is based on  the
    right of residence.

 4. The consequence of that is that the appellant is entitled to  residence
    in the United Kingdom only in accordance with national legislation.  In
    the  United  Kingdom  the  national  legislation  is  the   Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006, to  which  we  have  already
    referred.  The Immigration Judge  having  found  that  the  appellant's
    relationship with his current partner, the French national is  durable,
    it is beyond argument that the appellant is an "extended family member"
    within the meaning  of  Regulation  8.   Regulation  17(4)  accordingly
    applies to him.  That Regulation, so far as relevant, provides that the
    Secretary of State "may issue a residence card" to a person such as the
    appellant on the basis of a relationship such as he  has  with  an  EEA
    national if "in all the circumstances it appears to  the  Secretary  of
    State  appropriate  to  issue  the  residence  card".   That  provision
    certainly incorporates a discretion.  It is a discretion which may,  or
    may not, be exercised in favour of a particular claimant.

 5. In the present case, evidently, the discretion was not exercised in the
    appellant's favour.  The Immigration Judge found that the Secretary  of
    State acted lawfully.  The claimant argues that the Tribunal  can,  and
    in his case should, review the exercise of the discretion and allow the
    appeal on the basis that the discretion should have been  exercised  in
    his favour.

 6. Does the Tribunal have  power  to  review  the  lawful  exercise  of  a
    discretion in these circumstances?  The answer is not entirely obvious.

 7. Section 84(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  sets
    out the grounds upon which a person may appeal to the Tribunal  against
    an immigration decision of a kind mentioned in s82(2).   Amongst  those
    grounds are:

      "...
          d) that the appellant is an EEA national or a member of the family
             of an EEA national and the decision  breaches  the  appellant's
             rights under the Community Treaties in respect of entry  to  or
             residence in the United Kingdom;
          e) that the decision is otherwise not in accordance with the law;
          f) that the person  taking  the  decision  should  have  exercised
             differently a discretion conferred by immigration rules;
        ... ."

 8. Section 86 is  headed  "Determination  of  Appeal",  and  the  relevant
    subsections are as follows:

      "...
          3) the Tribunal must allow the appeal in so far as it thinks  that
             -
              a) a decision against  which  the  appeal  is  brought  or  is
                 treated as being brought was not in accordance with the law
                 (including immigration rules), or
              b) a discretion exercised in making a decision  against  which
                 the appeal is brought or is treated as being brought should
                 have been exercised differently.
      ...
      (5)   In so far as subsection (3) does not apply, the  Tribunal  shall
dismiss the appeal.
       (6)   Refusal  to  depart  from  or  to  authorise  departure   from
             immigration rules is not the exercise of a discretion  for  the
             purposes of subsection (3)(b)."


 9. An EEA decision, such as that which was made by the Secretary of  State
    in the appellant's  case,  is  not  within  the  types  of  immigration
    decision listed in s82.  But s109 allows regulations  to  be  made  (by
    statutory instrument: s112) to make provision about, and about  appeals
    against, decisions about a person's entitlement to remain in the United
    Kingdom if he has or claims to have a right under any of the  Community
    Treaties.  The Regulations are the Immigration (European Economic Area)
    Regulations 2006.  Regulation 26 gives a  right  of  appeal  under  the
    Regulations.  Regulation 26(7) is as follows:

        "The provisions of or made  under  the  2002  Act  referred  to  in
        Schedule 1 shall have effect for the purposes of  an  appeal  under
        these  Regulations  to  the  Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal  in
        accordance with that Schedule.

10. The Schedule is as follows:

        "The following provisions of, or made  under,  the  2002  Act  have
        effect in relation to an appeal  under  these  Regulations  to  the
        Asylum and Immigration Tribunal as if it were an appeal against  an
        immigration decision under section 82(1) of that Act:


        section 84(1), except paragraphs (a) and (f);
        sections 85 to 87;
        sections 103A to 103E;
        section 105 and any regulations made under that section; and
        section 106 and any rules made under that section."

11. There is, therefore, in principle no difficulty about  the  appellant's
    rights of appeal.  The problem is, however, that the ground  of  appeal
    in s84(1)(f) specifically relating to an exercise of  a  discretion  is
    not available because it is excluded by Schedule 1 to the  Regulations.



12. If the actual decision against which the appellant appeals was  one  in
    which  the  Secretary  of  State  failed  to  exercise  an   applicable
    discretion, the appellant's only remedy is to have his  appeal  allowed
    on Abdi (D S) v SSHD [1996] Imm AR 148 principles, in that the decision
    was not in accordance with the law: SY and others [2006]  UKAIT  00024.
    Where the discretion has been exercised, however, it seems to  us  that
    despite the provisions to  which  we  have  referred  in  the  previous
    paragraph, it is open to a person in the appellant's situation to claim
    that a discretion under the  Regulations  should  have  been  exercised
    differently, and that the Tribunal has jurisdiction to  substitute  its
    own view of  how  the  discretion  should  have  been  exercised.   The
    reasoning is in three stages, as follows.

13. First, the appellant has the ground of appeal under  s84(1)(d).   As  a
    person within Article 3(2) of the Directive, his right "in  respect  of
    entry to or residence in the United Kingdom" is the right which  exists
    in accordance with national  legislation.   Article  3(2)  itself,  and
    Regulation 17(5) implementing it,  provide  that  there  is  to  be  an
    extensive examination of an  applicant,  and  a  justification  of  any
    denial of entry or residence.

14.  Secondly,  the  national  legislation  is  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006, which,  as  we  have  seen,  give  the
    Secretary of State a discretion.  Thus, the appellant  has,  under  the
    Community Treaties, a right to be subject to the proper exercise  of  a
    discretion (for that is what national legislation requires), as well as
    the right to a justification of any  refusal.   The  ground  of  appeal
    under s84(1)(d) encompasses these factors.

15. Thirdly, having raised those matters, the appellant is entitled to have
    his appeal allowed under s86(3)(b) if the  Tribunal  considers  that  a
    discretion exercised in making the decision should have been  exercised
    differently.  There is no doubt that a decision under Regulation  17(4)
    involves the exercise of  a  discretion.   Although  the  discretionary
    decision is not one under the Immigration Rules, s86(6) has no  impact,
    because it is not a matter of  departing  from  the  Immigration  Rules
    either.  The Rules contain no provisions relating to  EU  nationals  or
    members of their family as such.

16. We should draw attention to  the  fact  that  this  line  of  reasoning
    depends  on  the  appellants'  being  within  both  Article  3(2)   and
    Regulation 8 (the two may not be congruent).  A  person  who  does  not
    come within the definition of "extended family member" in Regulation  8
    has no right to consideration under the discretion; and  a  person  who
    does not come within  the  terms  of  Article  3(2)  has  no  EU  right
    reviewable by means of s84(1)(d).

17. We conclude that the  Tribunal  has  jurisdiction  as  claimed  by  the
    appellant in this case.  It follows that the Immigration Judge erred in
    law in confining himself to the question whether the actual exercise of
    discretion by the Secretary of State was  a  lawful  act  by  him.   He
    should have gone on to consider whether the discretion should have been
    exercised differently.  That error of law was clearly material, because
    it cannot be said that if it  had  not  been  made,  the  result  would
    necessarily have been the same.

18. We must therefore consider whether the  appeal  should  be  allowed  or
    dismissed.  The  appellant  did  not  give  oral  evidence  before  the
    Immigration Judge, choosing to rely instead solely on  his  history  as
    recorded.  There was no additional evidence  before  us:  Mr  Lam  did,
    however, assert that the appellant's partner is pregnant.   No  further
    details were available.  Mr Lam submitted that the appellant  had  been
    of good behaviour.  He had committed  no  criminal  offences,  and  had
    never drawn any benefits.  He had not worked; he had always  relied  on
    his wife or partner to support him.  He had been in the United  Kingdom
    for a considerable length of time and had been with his  partner  since
    2004.  His only reason for not wanting to travel now  was  so  that  he
    could remain with her.  They had not been able to get  married  because
    of the restrictions on  marriages  by  immigrants,  although  they  had
    entered into an Islamic marriage ceremony.  There  were  no  facilities
    for obtaining entry clearance in Algeria and he would have to  make  an
    application (whether by post or in person) to the  British  Embassy  in
    Tunis.

19. It is  for  the  appellant  to  show  that  the  Secretary  of  State's
    discretion  should  have  been  exercised  differently.   Although  the
    appellant's case was that the only ground  for  refusal  was  that  the
    appellant had no leave at a time of the decision,  that  is  not  quite
    right.  There were two additional grounds.  One was that the  appellant
    was not merely a person without leave: he was an overstayer.  The other
    was that the Secretary of State's attempts to maintain the practice  of
    treating unmarried partners of EEA nationals in a manner  which  is  in
    substance no different from the  treatment  of  unmarried  partners  of
    British citizens.  The appellant entirely fails  to  persuade  us  that
    such a policy should not be applied to him.  The Secretary  of  State's
    decision was undoubtedly lawful, and, further,  we  are  not  persuaded
    that the Secretary of  State's  decision  should  have  been  exercised
    differently.

20. Like the Immigration Judge, we turn briefly to Article 8, although  the
    grounds for reconsideration do not  raise  human  rights  issues.   The
    appellant is perfectly able to travel  and  he  and  his  partner  have
    always known that his immigration status was precarious.   His  partner
    may, if she chooses, travel with him, or she may remain here  in  order
    to support any application he makes for entry  clearance  from  abroad.
    There  is  nothing  in  his  case  to  suggest   that   it   would   be
    disproportionate to apply to him the rules that are applicable  to  him
    as an unmarried partner of an EEA national who seeks to live  with  his
    partner here.

21. For the foregoing reasons, having found a material error of law in  the
    Immigration Judge's decision, we substitute a determination  dismissing
    the appeal.








                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT
                                                             Date:

-----------------------
[1] AP and FP (Citizens Directive Article 3(2); discretion; dependence)
India [2007] UKAIT 00048

