
IP and others (A2 national - worker authorisation - exemptions) Bulgaria
[2009] UKAIT 00042

                       Asylum and Immigration Tribunal



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|                                        |                        |
|On 11 August  2009                      |                        |
|At Field House                          |                        |


                                   Before

                       Senior Immigration Judge Storey



                                   Between

                                     IP
                                     YP
                                     AP


                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr P Morris of Counsel, instructed by Avon & Bristol
Community Law Centre
For the Respondent: Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer

1. Paragraphs (2)-(11) of reg 2 of the  Accession  (Immigration  and  Worker
Authorisation) Regulations 2006 as amended identify 10  separate  and  free-
standing situations in which an A2  national  (a  national  of  Bulgaria  or
Romania)  is  not  an   accession   State   national   subject   to   worker
authorisation.

2. So amended (with effect from  16  March  2007),  reg  2(2)  exempts  from
worker authorisation an A2 national who on 31 December 2006 was  in  the  UK
with leave to remain not subject to any condition restricting employment  as
well as an A2 national given such leave after that date.

3. Exemption from worker authorisation under the 2006 Accession  Regulations
as amended does not automatically entitle an A2 national to  a  registration
certificate as a qualified person. It only permits him to be  considered  in
the same way as other EEA nationals: EA (EEA: 3 months  residence)  Bulgaria
[2008] UKAIT 00017 and  SH  (A2  nationals-worker  authorisation  exemption)
Bulgaria [2009] UKAIT 00020 reaffirmed. Exempt A2 nationals can qualify  for
a registration certificate under  any  of  the  subcategories  of  qualified
person under reg 6 of the Immigration (European Economic  Area)  Regulations
2006. Non-exempt A2 nationals,  by  contrast,  can  only  show  they  are  a
qualified person  under  reg  6,  as  a  self-employed  person  or  a  self-
sufficient person or as a student.

4. In the light of recent European Court of Justice authority, RP (EEA Regs-
worker-cessation) Italy [2006] UKAIT 00025 remains good law.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    This is  a  reconsideration  of  three  appeals.  The  appellants  are
    citizens  of  Bulgaria  who  are  husband,  wife  and   child.   In   a
    determination notified on 27 February 2009 Immigration Judge (IJ)  A  E
    Walker dismissed the first appellant's appeal against a decision by the
    respondent  dated  6  January  2009  refusing  to  issue  him  with   a
    registration certificate as confirmation of his right of  residence  in
    the United Kingdom under EU law. She also dismissed the appeals of  the
    second and third appellants against decisions of the same date refusing
    to  grant  them  registration  certificates  as  family  members  of  a
    Bulgarian national who is exercising Treaty  rights  in  the  UK  as  a
    worker.  All  three  were  successful  in  obtaining   an   order   for
    reconsideration which now falls for me to render.

2.    Four things bear highlighting at the outset.  First,  Bulgaria  (along
    with Romania) became an EU Member State on 1 January 2007 and nationals
    of these two countries became  known  as  "A2  nationals".  Second,  by
    virtue  of  the  Accession  (Immigration  and   Worker   Authorisation)
    Regulations  2006  (SI  2006/3317,  hereafter   "the   2006   Accession
    Regulations"), nationals of Bulgaria were subjected to a requirement of
    worker  authorisation  and,  unless  falling  under  various  exemption
    clauses, could not benefit in the same way as other  European  Economic
    Area (EEA) nationals from free movement rights accorded  under  Council
    Directive 2004/38/EC ("the Citizens Directive") and  the  corresponding
    UK legislation, the Immigration (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations
    2006  (SI  2006/1003,  hereafter  "the  2006   EEA   Regulations")   in
    particular. Third, the  2006  Accession  Regulations  have  since  been
    amended by the Accession (Worker Authorisation and Worker Registration)
    (Amendment)  Regulations  2007  (SI  2007/3012).  The  latter  includes
    amendments to  reg  2  of  the  2006  Accession  Regulations.   Fourth,
    however, none of these  measures  affected  the  ability  of  Bulgarian
    nationals, as EEA nationals, to benefit from  rights  accorded  by  the
    2006 EEA Regulations to non-worker categories, i.e. as students or self-
    sufficient persons or self-employed persons.

3.    The three appellants' immigration histories and the first  appellant's
    work record are also of some importance. The  first  appellant  entered
    the United Kingdom on 30 April 1999 for 6 months. On the  basis  of  an
    application made on 26 October 1999 he was granted discretionary  leave
    to remain on 24 July 2004 for two years; this was not  subject  to  any
    condition restricting employment.  On  30  June  2006  he  applied  for
    indefinite leave to remain. On 8 November  2007  the  respondent  wrote
    stating that his application was still outstanding. On 30 October  2007
    his application was deemed to have been withdrawn for the  reason  that
    he had left the country for a period. He was  said  to  have  been  re-
    admitted as an EEA national. On 5 December  2008  the  first  appellant
    applied for a  registration  certificate  to  confirm  he  was  an  EEA
    national entitled to a registration certificate as a worker exempt from
    worker authorisation requirements. The  second  appellant  married  the
    first appellant on 3 May 2005 and came to the UK in June 2005  and  has
    been here continuously since then except for short periods.  The  third
    appellant was born in Norwich on 13 September 2006. They  both  applied
    for a registration certificate at the same time as the first appellant,
    as family members of the first appellant.

4.    Two aspects of  the  first  appellant's  immigration  history  are  of
    particular import:  first, that  it  is  not  in  dispute  that  on  31
    December 2006 he was in  the  UK  and  was  entitled  to  work  without
    restriction by virtue of s.3C(1) of the Immigration Act 1971 due to the
    fact that his application for indefinite leave to remain (ILR) made  on
    30 June 2006 was still outstanding; and second, that  during  2007  all
    three appellants returned to Bulgaria (for  relatively  short  periods)
    before returning to the UK.

5.    During 2006 and 2007 the  first  appellant  worked  for  a  number  of
    employers and was able to produce ample evidence of that at the hearing
    in the form  of  numerous  payslips  and  tax  documents.  Potentially,
    therefore, he stood to benefit from reg 2(3))  of  the  2006  Accession
    Regulations  which exempts from the requirement of worker authorisation
    a national of Bulgaria or Romania if he was legally working in  the  UK
    on 31 December 2006 without interruption for a period of 12  months  up
    to  31 December 2006. Reg 2(3) provides:

         "(3) A national of Bulgaria or Romania is not  an  accession  State
         national subject to worker authorisation if he was legally  working
         in the United Kingdom on 31st December 2006 and  had  been  legally
         working in the United Kingdom without interruption  throughout  the
         period of 12 months ending on that date."


6.    Before the IJ the first appellant's principal submission was  that  he
    fell within the reg 2(3) exemption by virtue of  having  12  months  of
    continuous lawful employment immediately prior  to  31  December  2006.
    That submission fell on stony ground, the IJ correctly observing  that,
    since the first appellant had himself accepted that  (contrary  to  reg
    12(2)(c)) there were in excess of 30 days during 2006 when he  did  not
    work, there had been interruption.  In the  IJ's  opinion  it  followed
    from the first appellant's failure to bring himself within the reg 2(3)
    exemption that he was not entitled to a registration certificate,  nor,
    in turn, were his wife and child.

7.    The appellants' grounds for reconsideration make no attempt to  revive
    the reg 2(3) issue but argue that the IJ  simply  overlooked  that  the
    first appellant was entitled to benefit from a separate exemption under
    the 2006 Accession Regulations embodied in reg 2(2).  They contend that
    reg 2 should be construed as identifying a series of exceptions to  the
    rule that an  A2  national  is  subject  to  the  worker  authorisation
    requirement and that reg 2(2)  is  one  such  exception.  Their  author
    points out (correctly) that this issue should have  been  addressed  by
    the IJ because it had been clearly identified in paras 6 and 7  of  the
    original grounds of appeal. Mr Morris reiterated these grounds  in  his
    skeleton  argument  and  oral  submission.  Mr  Melvin  said  that  the
    respondent  did  not  accept  that  reg  2(2)  was  free-standing   and
    considered that reg 2(2)-(4) were inextricably linked.

8.    If the grounds for reconsideration are right, then the IJ clearly  did
    err in law. In order to decide the issue it is necessary to set out reg
    2 in full. As already noted, it  was  amended  by  the  2007  Accession
    Amendment Regulations. These came into force on 16 March  2007.  Reg  2
    now provides:
         "Accession State national subject to worker authorisation

           2 (1)  Subject to the following paragraphs of this regulation, in
               these  Regulations  "accession  State  national  subject  to
               worker  authorisation"  means  a  national  of  Bulgaria  or
               Romania.

              (2)      A national of Bulgaria or Romania is not an accession
               State national subject to  worker  authorisation  if  on  31
               December 2006 he had leave to enter or remain in the  United
               Kingdom under the 1971 Act  that  was  not  subject  to  any
               condition restricting his employment or  he  is  given  such
               leave after that date.

             (3)  A national of Bulgaria or  Romania  is  not  an  accession
               State national subject to worker  authorisation  if  he  was
               legally working in the United Kingdom on 31st December  2006
               and had been legally working in the United  Kingdom  without
               interruption throughout the period of 12  months  ending  on
               that date.

             (4)  A national of Bulgaria or Romania who legally works in the
               United Kingdom without  interruption  for  a  period  of  12
               months falling partly or wholly  after  31st  December  2006
               shall cease to be an accession  State  national  subject  to
               worker authorisation at the end of that period of 12 months.

        (5)      A national of Bulgaria  or  Romania  is  not  an  accession
               State national subject to worker  authorisation  during  any
               period in which he is also a national of-

             a) the United Kingdom; or

               (b) an EEA State, other than Bulgaria or Romania.

             (6)  A national of Bulgaria or  Romania  is  not  an  accession
               State national subject to worker  authorisation  during  any
               period in which he is the  spouse  or  civil  partner  of  a
               national of the United Kingdom or of a person settled in the
               United Kingdom.

            (7)   A national of Bulgaria or  Romania  is  not  an  accession
               State national subject to worker  authorisation  during  any
               period in which he has a permanent right of residence  under
               regulation 15 of the 2006 Regulations.

           (8)   A national of Bulgaria or  Romania  is  not  an  accession
               State national subject to worker  authorisation  during  any
               period in which he is a family member of an EEA national who
               has a right to reside in the United Kingdom under  the  2006
               Regulations, unless that EEA national is-

               (a)   an  accession  State  national   subject   to   worker
               authorisation; or

               (b) a  national  of  Bulgaria  or  Romania  who  is  not  an
               accession              State  national  subject  to   worker
               authorisation solely by  virtue          of  falling  within
               paragraph (1) or (10B).

            (9)   A national of Bulgaria or  Romania  is  not  an  accession
               State national subject to worker  authorisation  during  any
               period in which he is a highly skilled person  and  holds  a
               registration certificate that includes a statement  that  he
               has  unconditional  access  to  the  United  Kingdom  labour
               market.

          (10)    A national of Bulgaria or  Romania  is  not  an  accession
               State national subject to worker  authorisation  during  any
               period in which he is in the United Kingdom as a student and
               -

                  (a) holds a  registration  certificate  that  includes  a
               statement that           he is a student who may work in the
               United Kingdom                whilst a student in accordance
               with the condition  set  out  in                   paragraph
               (10A); and

                          (b) complies with that condition.

           (10A)      The condition referred to in paragraph  (10)  is  that
             the student        shall not work for more  than  20  hours  a
             week unless -

                  (a) he is following a course of vocational  training  and
             is                    working as part of that training; or

                  (b) he is working during his vacation.

          (10B)   A national of Bulgaria or  Romania  who  ceases  to  be  a
                 student at the end  of  his  course  of  study  is  not  an
                 accession State national subject  to  worker  authorisation
                 during the period of four months beginning with the date on
                 which his course ends  provided  he  holds  a  registration
                 certificate that was issued to him before the  end  of  the
                 course that includes a statement that he  may  work  during
                 that period.

           (11)   A national of Bulgaria or  Romania  is  not  an  accession
                 State national subject to worker authorisation  during  any
                 period in which he is a posted worker.
            (12)  For the  purposes  of  paragraphs  (3)  and  (4)  of  this
          regulation-

                       (a) a person working in the United Kingdom during  a
             period            falling before 1st January 2007 was  working
             legally in the             United Kingdom during  that  period
             if-


                              (i) he had leave to enter or  remain  in  the
             United Kingdom                    under the 1971 Act for  that
             period, that leave allowed  him              to  work  in  the
             United     Kingdom,     and     he     was     working      in
             accordance with any condition on that  leave  restricting  his
                         employment; or


                              (ii) he was entitled to reside in the  United
             Kingdom   for   that                     period   under    the
             Immigration (European Economic Area)               Regulations
             2000...    or    the    2006    Regulations    without     the
             requirement for such leave;
                      (b)  a person working in the  United  Kingdom  on  or
             after 1st                     January 2007 is legally  working
             during any period in which            he-

                              (i) falls within paragraphs (5) to (10B); or

                            (ii) holds an  accession  worker  authorisation
             document and is                    working in accordance  with
             the conditions set out in that                document;
                     (c)  a person shall be treated as having worked in the
             United                  Kingdom  without  interruption  for  a
             period of 12 months if he         was legally working  in  the
             United Kingdom at the beginning             and  end  of  that
             period and any intervening periods  in  which               he
             was not legally working in  the  United  Kingdom  do  not,  in
               total, exceed 30 days.

             (13)  In this regulation-

                    (a)  "posted worker" means a worker who  is  posted  to
             the United          Kingdom, within  the  meaning  of  Article
             1(3)  of  Directive                  96/71/EC  concerning  the
             posting  of  workers...,  by  an                   undertaking
             established in an EEA State;

                (b) the reference to a person settled in the United Kingdom
             shall          be  interpreted  in  accordance  with   section
             33(2A)... of the 1971          Act."

9.    I would accept Mr Morris's submission  that  most  of  the  paragraphs
    comprising reg 2 are properly to  be  read  as  a  series  of  separate
    exemptions. That is clear for several reasons. First, none of them  are
    expressed as cumulative requirements (by use, e.g., of the word "and").
    Second,  they  plainly  delineate  persons  in  a  diverse   range   of
    situations: paragraphs (2)-(11)  identify  10  separate  situations  in
    which a national of Bulgaria or  Romania  is  not  an  accession  State
    national subject  to  worker  authorisation.  Reg  2(2)  deals  with  a
    national of Bulgaria (or Romania) who either  had  leave  to  enter  or
    remain in the United Kingdom under the 1971 Act  on  31  December  2006
    that was not subject to any conditions restricting  his  employment  or
    who is given such leave after that date;  reg  2(3)-(4)  deal  with  A2
    nationals with a history of  legally  working  in  the  United  Kingdom
    without interruption for a period of 12 months ending on 31 December or
    falling  partly  before  or  after  that  date;  reg  2(5)  exempts  A2
    nationals who have concurrent UK  nationality  or  the  nationality  of
    another EEA State other than Bulgaria and  Romania;  reg  2(6)  exempts
    persons who are the spouse or civil partner  of  a  UK  national  or  a
    person settled in the UK;  reg  2(7)  exempts  family  members  of  EEA
    nationals who have a right to reside in the UK; reg 2(9) exempts highly
    skilled persons holding a registration certificate  stating  they  have
    unconditional access to the UK labour  market;  reg  2(10),  (10A)  and
    (10B) exempt A2 nationals in the UK as a student (in certain  specified
    circumstances); and reg  11(2)  covers  posted  workers.  It  would  be
    nonsense to suggest that a person could only show he was  exempt  under
    reg 2 if he was, at one and the same time, able  to  meet  all  of  the
    requirements of reg (2)-(11).  A person could not be  at  one  and  the
    same time, for example, a person here with leave to enter  not  subject
    to conditions restricting  his  employment,  a  student  and  a  posted
    worker.  Third (coming to Mr Melvin's contention that reg 2(2)-(4) were
    inextricably linked), it is also easily discernible  why  reg  2(3)-(4)
    should apply separately from reg 2(2). The latter covers a  person  who
    either on 31 December 2006 had leave to enter or remain in the UK which
    is not subject to any condition restricting his employment as well as a
    person who was granted such leave since that date. Such a  person  does
    not necessarily have to have worked or be working in the UK. Reg 2 (3)-
    (4) provide a different set of pathways that are specifically for those
    with a history of 12  months  unbroken  lawful  employment  immediately
    before or after 31 December 2006.


10.   Some illustration of the different purposes of  reg  2(3)-(4)  on  the
    one hand and reg 2(2) on the other is afforded by Tribunal case law. In
    both EA (EEA: 3 months residence) Bulgaria [2008] UKAIT 00017 and in SH
    (A2 nationals-worker authorisation  exemption)  Bulgaria  [2009]  UKAIT
    00020 the Tribunal had to consider the case of an appellant who  sought
    to show, on the strength of working in the UK, that he met the reg 2(4)
    requirement of 12 months continuous lawful employment.  In  both  cases
    the appellant failed to meet this requirement, albeit  only  by  a  few
    days. Neither appellant could have qualified  under  reg  2(2)  because
    both had previously worked in the UK under a work permit and, as  such,
    both were persons whose leave to enter or  remain  in  the  United  was
    subject to a restriction, namely that they work  only  for  a  specific
    employer. In the first appellant's case, by contrast, as at 31 December
    2006 he was here with limited leave to remain that was not  subject  to
    any restriction on his employment. He was free to work for anybody.


11.    In seeking to persuade me that the first  appellant  met  the  (self-
    standing) requirements of reg 2(2) Mr  Morris  drew  attention  to  the
    wording  of  the  application  form  which  the  first  appellant   had
    completed: BR  (1).  Section  7  of  this  form,  headed  "Exempt  from
    Accession State worker authorisation" stated:


        "If you had current leave to enter or remain in the United  Kingdom
        under the 1971 Act you may be exempt from  Accession  State  worker
        authorisation. If you can answer 'yes'  to  any  of  the  following
        questions, you may be issued with  a  registration  certificate  to
        confirm that you can work in the UK without restrictions.


         7.1      Are you a Bulgarian or Romanian national who had leave  to
             enter or remain in the UK on 31 December 2006  (or  have  been
             given such leave after that date) under the  1971  Immigration
             Act  and  that  leave  was  not  subject  to   any   condition
             restricting employment?


                 ...".


12.   The first appellant had answered 'yes' to this question   and  he  was
    correct to do so, submitted Mr  Morris,  because  indisputably  "on  31
    December 2006 the first appellant had leave to remain in the UK with no
    restriction on his employment".

13.   I would accept that the wording of Section 7 of this form  might  lead
    an applicant to think that if he could show that on 31 December 2006 he
    had leave to enter or remain without a condition restricting employment
    he would necessarily be exempt, but the  form  is  essentially  seeking
    personal particulars, not giving legal guidance and, significantly,  it
    does not say that a 'yes' answer  necessarily  means  an  applicant  is
    exempt;  it  simply  says  that  a  'yes'  answer  'may'  result  in  a
    registration certificate being issued. It remains in any event that  an
    applicant can only succeed if he can meet the  actual  requirements  of
    reg 2(2).

14.   Had it not been for the  amendment  made  to  reg  2(2)  by  the  2007
    Accession Amendment Regulations, I would not have accepted Mr  Morris's
    reading of reg 2(2) as affording an historic basis  for  exemption.  In
    its previous form reg 2(2) read simply:  "A  national  of  Bulgaria  or
    Romania  is  not  an  accession  State  national  subject   to   worker
    authorisation if he has leave to enter or remain under the 1971 Act and
    that leave is not subject to any condition restricting his employment".
    Unlike reg 2(3), that provision was cast in the present  tense.  Unlike
    reg 2(3), it was not tied to the position of  an  applicant  as  at  31
    December 2006; it simply exempted a national  of  Bulgaria  or  Romania
    from worker authorisation "if he has leave to enter or  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom under the 1971 Act and that leave is not subject to  any
    condition restricting his employment."  (emphasis  added).  Under  that
    previous wording the first appellant could not have qualified since his
    s.3C leave lapsed when he departed from the UK in  February  2007:  see
    s.3C(3) of the 1971 Act. The same applies to the two other appellants.

15.   However, it is clear from use of the word "or" that reg  2(2)  in  its
    amended form does enable an  A2  national  to  be  exempt  from  worker
    authorisation either because of his historic position as at 31 December
    2006 or because of his present position ("or he is  given  leave  after
    that date") Thus I consider Mr Morris's submission on this  point  must
    prevail. Both the date of decision and the date  of  hearing  of  these
    appeals fell on dates after the 2007  Accession  Amendment  Regulations
    came into force (16 March 2007).

16.   Accordingly the IJ erred in law  in  failing  to  recognise  that  the
    first appellant had a  separate  ground  for  claiming  exemption  from
    worker authorisation, based not on reg 2(3), but on reg 2(2) by  virtue
    of the fact that on 31 December 2006 he had leave to enter or remain in
    the UK under the 1971  Act  that  was  not  subject  to  any  condition
    restricting his employment.


17.   It remains to  consider,  however,  whether  this  error  of  law  was
    material. In his skeleton argument and submissions Mr Morris sought  to
    argue that the error had to be material since at the hearing before the
    IJ "the only issue was whether the first appellant was exempt from  the
    worker authorisation requirements.  Thus  there  was  no  issue  as  to
    whether he was a qualified person if he was so exempt, i.e. as either a
    worker or a jobseeker".   However,  there  was  no  concession  by  the
    respondent and in any event the relevant issue is a legal one:  whether
    or not the first appellant meets the requirements for being issued with
    a registration certificate as set out in the 2006 EEA  Regulations.  In
    order to meet those requirements it is not enough that  one  be  exempt
    from worker authorisation requirements.  An A2 national who  is  exempt
    from worker authorisation will still be ineligible for  a  registration
    certificate unless he can show he is a qualified person under the  2006
    EEA Regulations: see  EA (EEA:  3  months  residence)  Bulgaria  [2008]
    UKAIT 00017.

18.   Thus the first appellant can only show he met  those  requirements  by
    establishing that he is a qualified person under reg 6 of the 2006  EEA
    Regulations.  Indeed, exemption under the 2006 Accession Regulations is
    not even essential to an A2 national being considered as to eligibility
    for a registration  certificate  in  any  capacity.  It  only  controls
    whether he can be considered as a worker or a  jobseeker  (two  closely
    related categories). An A2 national who  fails  to  establish  such  an
    exemption can still qualify for a registration certificate  if  he  can
    show he was a qualified person under one of the other categories of reg
    6.

19.    Although  rejecting  Mr  Morris's  argument  on  materiality,  I   am
    nevertheless persuaded that the IJ's error was a  material  one  for  a
    different reason. Her erroneous approach to the exemption issue had the
    effect of unduly narrowing  her  consideration  of  whether  the  first
    appellant was a qualified person, causing her to exclude  consideration
    of him as a worker. Reg 6 of the 2006 Accession Regulations as  amended
    provides:


             "(1) In these Regulations, 'qualified person'  means  a  person
                 who is        an EEA national and in the United Kingdom  as
                 -


                   a) a jobseeker;
                   b) a worker;
                   c) a self-employed person;
                   d) a self-sufficient person; or
                   e) a student."




20.   By finding that  the  first  appellant  was  not  exempt  from  worker
    authorisation the IJ wrongly excluded  consideration  of  his  position
    under reg 6(1)(b).


My decision

21.   Having decided that the IJ materially erred in law, I decided  that  I
    was in a position to decide the appeals for myself, although only if  I
    first gave the parties  an  opportunity  to  furnish  further  evidence
    updating the first appellant's work history since the date  of  hearing
    before the IJ.  By virtue of Schedule 1 to the 2006 EEA Regulations the
    appellants'  appeals  are  governed  by  s.85(4)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and, in the context of  a  second-stage
    reconsideration,  I must consider their eligibility for a  registration
    certificate presently.  Within  the  time  limit  set  the  appellants'
    representatives  wrote  enclosing  evidence  to  show  that  the  first
    appellant had commenced employment on 3 September 2009. The  respondent
    did not respond.

22.   In my judgement, now that it  has  been  established  that  the  first
    appellant falls within one of  the  specified  exemptions  from  worker
    authorisation requirements set out in  reg  2  of  the  2006  Accession
    Regulations, he is entitled to a registration  certificate  if  he  can
    show he is a qualified person within any of the subcategories of reg 6.
    In point of fact the IJ had looked at all of these except for that  for
    a worker and had concluded that the first appellant satisfied  none  of
    them. It is unnecessary for me to analyse whether her analysis of these
    different possibilities was correct at the time of the hearing, since I
    have to assess the position now.

23.   Self-evidently, the first appellant  obviously  cannot  qualify  as  a
    student or as a self-sufficient person.  Nor in  my  judgement  can  he
    qualify as a self-employed person, for two reasons.  The  first  reason
    relates to his application for Jobseekers Allowance. As pointed out  by
    the IJ, by applying for Jobseekers Allowance very  soon  after  ceasing
    work  he was demonstrating that he was available for employed work:  as
    stated  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Rowland  in  CJSA/2687/2007,   with
    reference to reg 6(2)(c)-(d) of the 2006 EEA Regulations:

          "...it is plain that job-seeking for the purposes of subparagraphs
          (c) and (d) must relate to a preparedness to  take  up  offers  of
          employment as a worker made through an employment office  and  not
          merely opportunities for establishment as a  self-employed  person
          with which such offices do not generally deal".


24.   The second reason relates to  the  nature  of  the  first  appellant's
    application. The BR (1) form he filled in contained several alternative
    sections: section 3, for those  applying  as  a  self-employed  person,
    section 4 for those applying as a student, section 5 for those applying
    as a self-sufficient person and  then  various  sections  dealing  with
    claims  for  exemption  from  Accession  State  worker   authorisation,
    including section 7 relating to past employment.  The  first  appellant
    left the  self-employment  (and  student  and  self-sufficient  person)
    sections blank and filled in only the section  7  worker  authorisation
    exemption details.  That is to say, the first  appellant's  unequivocal
    position in his application form (and subsequently) has  been  that  he
    was seeking a registration certificate on the basis of employment. Self-
    employment did not come into it. The  definition  of  a  'self-employed
    person' contained in reg 4(1)(b) is that a:


          "'self-employed person' means a person who establishes himself  in
          order to pursue activity as a self-employed person  in  accordance
          with  Article  43  of  the  Treaty   establishing   the   European
          Community".


25.   If it was the first appellant's  purpose,  post-accession,  to  pursue
    activity as a self-employed person, he could have been expected to have
    said so.

26.    I  will  pass  over  whether  the  first  appellant  qualifies  as  a
    jobseeker. Mr Morris did not argue that he was; as  already  noted  the
    first appellant has an outstanding appeal against refusal of Jobseekers
    Allowance, on which I have no further information; and  finally,  I  do
    not need to decide the matter in order to dispose of this appeal.

    The issue of whether the first appellant is a worker


27.   By a process of elimination the  first  appellant's  only  avenue  for
    demonstrating that he is a qualified person is if he can show he  is  a
    worker. Before reciting the facts of his case, it is useful  to  recall
    Tribunal case law. In RP (EEA Regs - worker - cessation)  Italy  [2006]
    UKAIT 00025 the Tribunal held:
          "1. A person who has been a worker within the meaning of Community
          law does not cease to be a worker  simply  by  virtue  of  falling
          unemployed, but he must be able to show that he has been genuinely
          seeking work and has not effectively abandoned the labour market.
          2. In assessing whether a person has satisfied the condition  that
          he is or has remained a worker, the national court must  base  its
          examination on objective criteria and assess as a  whole  all  the
          circumstances of the case relating to  the  nature  of  both  that
          person's activities whilst in the Member State and any  employment
          relationship(s) at issue".
28.    That  the  above  propositions  continue  to  reflect  Community  law
    principles can be seen from the recent judgement of the European  Court
    of Justice (ECJ)  in Vatsouras Case C-2/08 and Koupatantze Case 3/08, 4
    June 2009 (2009)  EUECJ  C-22/08.  The  judgment  concerned  two  Union
    citizens who were admitted to Germany and  after  employment  of  short
    duration became unemployed, giving rise, among  other  issues,  to  the
    question of whether they continued to be workers. At para 29 the  Court
    stated:
        "29.     Furthermore, with regard to the duration of  the  activity
              pursued, the  fact  that  employment  is  of  short  duration
              cannot, in itself, exclude that employment from the scope  of
              Article 39 EC (see Case C-3/90  Bernini  [1992]  ECR  I-1071,
              paragraph 16, and Case C-13/01 Ninni-Orasche  [2003]  ECR  I-
              13187, paragraph 25)."


29.   At para 40 they emphasised the importance, when  assessing  whether  a
    person remained a worker (and so be entitled to receive a benefit of  a
    financial nature intended to facilitate access to the  labour  market),
    of the factor of whether that person could show he had established real
    links with the labour market of that State.

30.   Turning to the first appellant's situation  three  things  stand  out.
    First it is clear that since March 2007 (confining my consideration  to
    his history since 16 March 2007 when the amended  reg  2  of  the  2006
    Accession Regulations came into force) the first appellant  had  worked
    for at least five different employers. Even assuming that  the  IJ  was
    right to classify three of these as self-employment (which in light  of
    the Article 39 of the  2006  EEA  Regulations  concept  of  worker,  as
    applied by reg. 4(1)(a)  of  the  2006  EEA  Regulations,  was  perhaps
    questionable), the first appellant had  clearly  by  those  employments
    established ties with the national labour market. As noted by  Advocate
    General Colomber in his Opinion in the Vatsouras Case [2009]  EUECJ  C-
    22/08_O at para 62 "...employment however modest  does  show  that  the
    person is capable of entering into an employment  relationship  ",  and
    also at para 63: "Anyone wishing  to  join  the  workforce  has  better
    credentials if they have  carried  out  responsibilities  with  a  wage
    earning aspect of some kind in the past."

31.   Second, although the first appellant last worked in  October  2008  he
    applied for Jobseekers Allowance very soon after. That  is  significant
    (irrespective of whether or not he was eligible) in that it shows  that
    once he fell unemployed he was seeking a benefit of a financial  nature
    intended to facilitate his return to the labour market. I also bear  in
    mind that as a result of refusal decisions both from the  DWP  (of  his
    application for Jobseekers Allowance) and from the respondent  refusing
    his application for a registration  certificate,  the  first  appellant
    must have been in some state of uncertainty about his ability  to  work
    lawfully.

32.   Third, even assuming he had remained  unemployed  since  October  2008
    until the date of hearing before the IJ, he has now, since 3  September
    2009, recommenced employment. Whilst it is implicit in what the ECJ say
    in Vatsouras that employment for only a short period may not suffice to
    make someone a worker within the  meaning  of  Article  39,  the  first
    appellant's very recent employment has to be considered in the  context
    of his previous real links with the labour  market  together  with  his
    plain intention (evinced through his claim for Jobseekers Allowance) to
    return to the labour market.

33.   In short, his particulars lead me to conclude that he had  established
    ties with the national labour market in March 2007- October  2008;  and
    that, even though there is no evidence to show that he became  employed
    again until 3 September 2009, the surrounding circumstances satisfy  me
    that he had not ceased to maintain an active interest in rejoining  the
    labour market.  Accordingly  I  consider  that  the  first  appellant's
    current circumstances bring him within the category  of  worker  within
    the meaning of reg 6(1)(b) of the 2006 EEA Regulations, which (via  reg
    4(1)(a)) refers to the meaning of that term under  Article  39  of  the
    E.C. Treaty.

34.   For the above reasons, the IJ materially erred in law. The decision  I
    substitute for his is to allow the appellants' appeals.  By  virtue  of
    being a qualified person under reg 6 of the 2006  EEA  Regulations  the
    first appellant is entitled to a  registration  certificate  under  reg
    16(1).  The  second  and  third  appellants  are   also   entitled   to
    registration certificates under reg 16(3).


Signed



Senior Immigration Judge Storey




