

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

     Naz (subsisting marriage - standard of proof) Pakistan [2012] UKUT
                                 00040(IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 14 December 2011                           |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                    Before

                         MR JUSTICE BLAKE, PRESIDENT
                         DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, ISLAMABAD
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 SHABANA NAZ
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. N Smart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:  Aman Solicitors


     i) It is for a claimant to establish  that  the  requirements  of  the
        Immigration Rules are met or that an immigration decision would  be
        an interference with established family life. In  both  cases,  the
        relevant standard for establishing the  facts  is  the  balance  of
        probabilities.


    ii) Post decision visits by a sponsor to his spouse are  admissible  in
        evidence in appeals to show that the  marriage  is  subsisting:  DR
        (ECO: post-decision evidence) Morocco * [2005] UKIAT 00038 applied.



      DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal by the Entry Clearance Officer against a decision  of
    Judge Freer promulgated 25 July 2011 allowing the  appeal  of  Mrs  Naz
    (the claimant) against a refusal of entry  clearance  to  come  to  the
    United Kingdom  as a spouse.

 2. The brief chronology is that the claimant is a  national  of  Pakistan.
    Her husband is settled in the United Kingdom.  He travelled to Pakistan
    for an extended visit from 14 November 2008 to 14 September 2009. On  9
    April 2009 a marriage ceremony took place between them for which  there
    are two pieces of evidence, a Nikah Nama and a set of photographs.

 3. The Entry Clearance Officer refused the application for  the  following
    reasons:

        "It  is  reasonable  to  expect  that  in  a  genuine,  subsisting,
        supporting  and  affectionate  relationship  which  you  claim  has
        existed since 2008 that there  would  be  significant  evidence  of
        regular  contact,  signs  of  companionship,   emotional   support,
        affection,  and  abiding  interest  in  each  other's  welfare  and
        wellbeing.  I note your sponsor was not  present  at  the  marriage
        ceremony and  a  proxy  marriage  was  undertaken.   You  have  not
        provided sufficient evidence of  your  claimed  telephone  contact.
        Given the background to your relationship, the lack of evidence  of
        personal contact and regular correspondence between you  I  am  not
        satisfied that you have genuinely formed a relationship and durable
        with  outward  signs  of  affection  and  companionship.  You  have
        therefore failed to demonstrate satisfactorily that  both  you  and
        your sponsor intend to live permanently with each other as  his  or
        her spouse or that there is any affection and support between  you.
        You have also failed to demonstrate that there is any substance  to
        the marriage.  Therefore on the balance of probabilities I  am  not
        satisfied that your relationship with your sponsor is subsisting or
        you intend to live with your sponsor".


 4. There was an appeal to the First-tier Tribunal when  the  husband  gave
    evidence. Like the ECO, the judge referred to the guidance given in  GA
    ("Subsisting" marriage) Ghana * [2006] UKAIT 00046. That authority says
    at paragraph [12] that subsisting means not merely that the marriage is
    still  in  existence  as  a  legal  formality   but   the   matrimonial
    relationship subsists.

 5. The judge took into account the evidence that was placed before him  in
    the  notice  and  grounds  of  appeal,  the  wedding  photographs,  the
    sponsor's passport, the witness remittances  slips  and  the  sponsor's
    statement of July 2011. He observed correctly at [9] that the burden of
    proof is on the appellant and the  standard  of  proof  required  is  a
    balance of probabilities. Thereafter there are some problems with  this
    determination.

 6. First, at [10] the Judge makes an error against the  interests  of  the
    appellant when he says that s. 85(5) of  the  Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act") limits  him  to  considering  only
    evidence at the time of the decision to  refuse  entry  clearance.  For
    that reason he excluded from consideration a post-nuptial visit between
    17 February 2011 to 17 April 2011. That is an error because s. 85(5) of
    the 2002 Act only excludes post-decision evidence that does not  relate
    to an issue or a circumstance that was in contention at the time of the
    decision.  The law is properly  explained  in  DR  (ECO:  post-decision
    evidence) Morocco * [2005] UKIAT 00038 in which the  President  of  the
    IAT (Mr Justice Ouseley)  explains  that  post-decision  evidence  that
    throws light on circumstances in contention and  in  existence  at  the
    time of the decision is admissible.   However,  this  error  could  not
    found a ground of appeal by the ECO.

 7. The judge next found that the Entry Clearance Officer made a mistake in
    considering that this was a proxy marriage and concluded that both  the
    photographs showing the bride and groom present at the marriage and the
    Nikah Nama itself supported the fact that both parties were present. As
    has been carefully pointed out before us by Mr Smart for  the  ECO,  an
    analysis of the document demonstrates that the bride  had  appointed  a
    proxy to represent her, and the sponsor's signature on the Nikah was in
    block  capitals  rather  than  the  signature  used  elsewhere  in  the
    documents before us. However the judge  is  perfectly  right  that  the
    Nikah Nama did not itself suggest that the sponsor was represented by a
    proxy and so the  ECO  was  wrong  to  conclude  that  the  documentary
    evidence suggested that sponsor was not present.

 8. We decided de bene esse to hear some further evidence from the  sponsor
    on the question of the Nikah Nama and he pointed out that the bride had
    a proxy because she was in a separate room but the Iman  attended  with
    the proxy to ask the bride whether she was willing to get married,  and
    she did consent in person. His evidence to us  is  that  the  signature
    purporting to be the bride's signature on the Nikah Nama is indeed  her
    signature and he identifies the person in the  wedding  photographs  as
    the claimant. In addition he was asked why  his  signature  appears  in
    capitals rather than the signature that he has used on his passport and
    his witness statement and indeed a remittance slip.   He  says  he  was
    asked by the Iman to sign in capitals for reasons of clarity and had no
    reason to  dispute  that.   Although  none  of  us  purports  to  be  a
    handwriting expert, insofar as any comparison can be made  between  the
    block capitals of the sponsor's  name  there  and  else  where  in  the
    documents there does not appear to be a significant difference  between
    them. We therefore accept this evidence that was not challenged  by  Mr
    Smart.

 9. There was accordingly no error in the judge's conclusion that  the  ECO
    had misunderstood the position at the time of the wedding. This  is  an
    important aspect of the case because the judge accepted  the  sponsor's
    evidence that he came to Pakistan to get married  and  that  he  had  a
    three month post-nuptial stay in Pakistan when they resided as  husband
    and wife.

10. Third, the judge said the gap between the marriage in  April  2009  and
    the application for entry clearance in June 2010 concerned him and  the
    sponsor's evidence was confused as to when he  got  married.   He  then
    noted at paragraphs 24 and 26:
        "It is therefore far from the strong case so I remind myself of the
        standard of proof here is a relatively low one.  He has the  burden
        of proving the material facts to be so and I  recognise  that  here
        the burden has not passed to the respondent.  There is considerably
        more than nothing admissible in their favour in the way of evidence
        and there is no surviving suggestion of forgery or of any  kind  of
        deceit.  Given that I have in  the  light  of  undisputed  evidence
        removed the proxy issue from the table."

        "I find the appellant's case just reaches the low threshold.  It is
        borderline case but I must recognise the great importance given  by
        current law to the enjoyment of family life and so I would allow it
        on human rights in any event if not under the  Immigration  Rules".
        (emphasis supplied)

11. This reasoning is confusing and  gives  rise  to  Mr  Street's  central
    submission that the judge has applied the wrong standard of  proof.  It
    is of course trite that the standard of proof of the primary  facts  in
    entry clearance  claims  is  the  ordinary  civil  balance.  A  similar
    standard applies in Article 8 cases, where the  claimant  alleges  that
    immigration action interferes with subsisting private or  family  life.
    Before we address this submission we will consider the next error  made
    by the judge.

12. Fourth, the judge criticised the ECO's reference to s. 108 of the  2002
    Act because fraud was not alleged but the judge was wrong to make  that
    an issue in the case. All the ECO was  saying  was  that  the  Tribunal
    should not receive fresh evidence save insofar as was permitted  by  s.
    108 to disprove fraud. With respect to the ECO, that is not a  complete
    statement of the law for reasons we have already given by reference  to
    DR (Morocco) * (above).  However, there was no  suggestion  of  forgery
    being made by the ECO and so this  was  not  a  case  where  the  civil
    standard was more exacting in practice because it fell on  a  party  to
    substantiate fraud.

13. We cannot be sure what the judge meant by a relatively low standard  of
    proof and a low threshold. This was neither a case for the  application
    of  the  criminal  standard  nor  the  lower  standard  or   reasonable
    likelihood applied in  asylum  claims.  The  judge  should  have  asked
    himself simply whether it was more probable than not that  the  parties
    intended to live together as husband and wife and that the  matrimonial
    relationship was subsisting. Within the  civil  standard  this  was  an
    ordinary as opposed to what is  sometimes  described  as  a  heightened
    scrutiny.

Material error of law

14. Despite  these  potential  flaws  in  the  judge's  reasoning,  we  are
    satisfied that  he  did  not  get  the  standard  of  proof  wrong.  He
    identified the right standard  at  the  outset  and  all  his  positive
    findings reflect  that  standard  rather  than  a  flawed  approach  of
    inquiring only as to whether there was a  reasonable  possibility  that
    the parties intended to live together. He found  the  sponsor  somewhat
    confused  but  not  trying   to   mislead.    There   were   no   false
    representations deployed or peculiar features to this application.

15. The judge's reference to the delay in applying for entry clearance does
    not in itself raise any suspicion as to the nature of the relationship.
    It is obvious, even if it was not explored in the evidence below,  that
    any sponsor who wants to promote an application which may  succeed  has
    first to return to the United Kingdom to find employment  after  a  ten
    month break in Pakistan and second to produce evidence  of  maintenance
    and accommodation to the Entry Clearance Officer in the application.

16. The judge concluded first that the sponsor had stayed in  Pakistan  for
    the purpose of residing with his wife;  second  that  the  sponsor  had
    supported his  wife  post-nuptially  by  remittances;  third  that  the
    telephone card evidence taken with  his  oral  evidence  supported  his
    assertion that he telephoned his wife.  He found the sponsor to  be  an
    honest albeit confused witness. There was thus ample evidence on  which
    the judge could have found that it was more probable than not that  the
    parties intended to  live  together  as  man  and  wife  and  that  the
    matrimonial relationship was subsisting.  Reading the determination  as
    a whole we are satisfied that this is what the judge did find.

17. It was unnecessary in those circumstances for the judge to have allowed
    the appeal on Article 8 grounds. If the appellant succeeded  under  the
    Rules there was no failure of the positive obligation to respect family
    life under Article 8(1) of the ECHR. If by contrast the judge  was  not
    satisfied on the facts that the Rules  were  met,  there  would  be  no
    positive obligation to admit parties to a marriage who probably did not
    intend to live together as husband and wife in the United Kingdom.

18. In these circumstances despite the points that have been carefully made
    to us, we conclude that the judge did not err in his  consideration  of
    the claim under the Immigration Rules and any errors in  reasoning  are
    not matters of any substance.   We  conclude  that  he  did  apply  the
    correct standard of proof and  there  was  no  material  error  of  law
    enabling us to set aside the decision and re-make it.

19. In any event if we were to re-make the decision for ourselves we  would
    have reached the same decision as the judge on the evidence before  him
    plus the post-nuptial visit of February to April 2011 which he  wrongly
    excluded and the further evidence as to the  Nikah  ceremony  we  heard
    from the sponsor.

Decision

20. The judge made no material error of law.  This  appeal  is  accordingly
    dismissed and the judge's decision stands.

                              Signed


                 Mr Justice Blake
                 President of the Upper Tribunal
                             Immigration and Asylum Chamber


                               Date:  13 January 2012

