

Asylum and Immigration Tribunal

  OM (Returning citizens - minorities - religion) Uzbekistan CG [2007] UKAIT
                                                                       00045

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 20 October 2006                            |On 23 May 2007               |
|                                              |                             |



                                   Before

                       SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE MATHER
                      SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE MCGEACHY
                               MRS S I HEWITT

                                   Between


                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Pievsky, Counsel, instructed by Paul L Simon
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Home Office Presenting Officer

It has not been established that Uzbek citizens whose passports expire
cannot obtain a renewal from Embassies abroad, or that returnees who have
been abroad for longer than permitted by an exit visa, are at real risk of
disproportionate punishment on return.

There is no satisfactory evidence that non-Uzbeks face discrimination of
such a nature as to amount to persecution, or serious harm, or a breach of
their article 3 rights.

Whilst followers of all religions, save for Muslims who attend registered
Mosques, are subject to a degree of harassment it does not in general
amount to persecution, serious harm or a breach of a worshippers' human
rights.  However, ministers of religion, those who practice religion in
unregistered premises, particularly active members of evangelical Christian
congregations, and proselytising or fundamentalist denominations of any
religion may be at risk depending on the facts in every case.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Uzbekistan.  She was born on 25  February
    1973.  She is a convert to the Baptist church.

Immigration History

2.   The appellant left Uzbekistan on 1 March 1996,  flying  direct  to  the
    United Kingdom where she was granted leave to enter as a  student.   On
    23 July 1996 she applied for asylum.  On  12  August  2004  (just  over
    eight years later) the respondent refused to vary her leave  to  enter,
    having refused her asylum application.  The appellant appealed  and  on
    22 November 2004 an Adjudicator (Ms E G Elliman) dismissed  the  appeal
    on both asylum and human rights grounds.

3.   The appellant submitted  grounds  in  support  of  an  application  for
    permission to appeal  and  her  application  was  refused  by  a  Vice-
    President of the Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal  on  24  February  2005.
    Further grounds  were  submitted  in  support  of  an  application  for
    statutory review and, on 26 April 2005, Wilkie  J  reversed  the  Vice-
    President's decision on two grounds.  Firstly, he considered  that  the
    Adjudicator had misunderstood or  misapplied  some  of  the  background
    evidence.  Second, he considered that delay in the order of eight years
    was a matter which  should  be  weighed  in  the  balance  against  the
    maintenance of an effective immigration policy when considering Article
    8 ECHR.  The coming into force of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment
    of Claimants etc) Act 2004 has resulted in the appeal being dealt  with
    as a reconsideration.

     In finding that the Immigration Judge had made  an  error  of  law  the
    Tribunal said:

        "The parties agreed that the Adjudicator had failed  to  take  into
        account  the  issue  of  the  excessive  delay  in   deciding   the
        application when assessing the Article 8 appeal.


        We are also satisfied that the Adjudicator  erred  in  law  in  her
        assessment of the asylum claim by failing to take into account  the
        specific  evidence  adduced  of  the  treatment  of  Christians  in
        Uzbekistan as set out in grounds 7 b and c and  ground  14  of  the
        application for statutory review."

     Grounds 7b and c (the Tribunal must have meant 8  b  and  c)  refer  to
    delay.  Ground 14 refers to the treatment of Christians.

The Reconsideration Hearing

4.   We started the hearing  by  discussing  with  the  representatives  the
    extent of the reconsideration.  Both parties agreed that there had  not
    been  any  attack  on  the  Adjudicator's   findings   concerning   the
    appellant's evidence as to her claim.  The attack was in respect of the
    way in which she had applied those findings to the background  evidence
    and in relation to the delay.

The Adjudicator's Findings and the Basis of the Appellant's Claim

5.   The Adjudicator by no means accepted all of the  appellant's  evidence.
    She started her findings by saying that there was a significant part of
    the evidence to which she could  attach  no  credence  and  no  weight.
    However, she accepted that the appellant is  a  committed  Baptist  and
    that she and her husband converted "to Christianity" in 1995 when  they
    married.  The Adjudicator said it seemed likely that her  mother-in-law
    may have encouraged their conversion because she herself was a  Baptist
    convert.  The appellant asserted that her husband's paternal  relatives
    were opposed to the marriage "but their reasons remain  unclear".   The
    Adjudicator felt bound to assume  the  appellant's  ethnicity  (she  is
    Russian) would not have been an issue for her father-in-law because his
    own first wife had similarly been a Russian.  Thus the Adjudicator  did
    not accept that ethnicity was a cause of the  opposition  despite  that
    being asserted by the appellant.  She did "accept it as possible"  that
    their religious conversion may have been a cause.

6.   For the sake of completeness we record a number of assertions that  the
    Adjudicator did not accept.  She did not accept that there was any link
    between problems that  the  appellant's  father  experienced,  and  her
    marriage.  Similarly, she did  not  accept  that  there  was  any  link
    between ill-treatment he had suffered and his death.   The  Adjudicator
    said there was nothing, other than assumption, in support of the claims
    that had been made about  that.   Similarly,  while  she  accepted  the
    appellant's sister Alla may  have  had  some  problems,  there  was  no
    evidence to show that they were linked  to  the  appellant's  husband's
    family  or  that  any  harm  was  inflicted  as  a  result   of   their
    interference.   In  making  that  observation  she   noted   that   the
    appellant's mother and Alla still  lived  in  Tashkent  and  apparently
    practised their religion without interference.  She said that there was
    no evidence to suggest that the  death  of  the  appellant's  husband's
    grandmother was as a result of religious hatred.   In  rejecting  those
    parts of the evidence the Adjudicator acknowledged that such things can
    be difficult to prove.  She recognised that corroboration should not be
    looked upon as a necessity in  asylum  claims  but  observed  that  the
    appellant's fears and assumptions about the cause of problems were  not
    supported by any evidence at all.  She summarised her findings of  fact
    by saying:-

     "My findings ... are simply that she  and  her  husband  converted  to
        Christianity and that his paternal family members were  hostile  to
        the marriage and the appellant but that his mother was instrumental
        in their conversion, having herself recently converted  to  Baptism
        (in the summer of 1995 ...).   I  accept  the  police  visited  the
        appellant in October 1995, seeking out her husband who was, at that
        time, liable for military service.  I find the appellant's  mother-
        in-law tried her best to assist her son and the appellant to  leave
        Uzbekistan in March 1996 and that she took some advice  from  David
        Smith and that consequently the couple came over with  a  group  of
        students and did not apply for  asylum  immediately.   I  find  the
        appellant herself has a real subjective fear of some  harm  if  she
        returns but the question is of whether she is, in fact, a refugee."


7.   During the course  of  her  findings  the  Adjudicator  considered  the
    appellant's own experiences in Uzbekistan  prior  to  leaving.   Having
    said that there was hostility to  the  appellant's  marriage  from  her
    father-in-law, the Adjudicator recorded that the  appellant  said  they
    married in secret.  The Adjudicator then said  that,  on  the  evidence
    before her, the appellant has not suffered any problems  directly  from
    her father-in-law  or  in  any  other  way.   The  appellant  said  her
    husband's problems with the police were because he did not want  to  do
    his military service.   The  Adjudicator  concluded  that  it  was  his
    liability for military service which was the most pressing  reason  for
    their desire to leave the country.  Having said that,  the  Adjudicator
    did accept there had been some hostility from other individuals at  the
    time of the appellant's baptism.  She and her mother-in-law,  who  also
    gave evidence, referred to a group of people who  watched  the  baptism
    and then threw stones.  The Adjudicator found that  was  an  unpleasant
    experience but that the level of harm was not  such  as  to  amount  to
    persecution.

8.   During her account of the evidence, the  Adjudicator  referred  to  the
    suggestion that the appellant's husband's father and  grandfather  were
    both  involved  with  the  KGB  and  were  well-known  for  that   (his
    grandfather was  said  at  one  time  to  have  been  Minister  of  the
    Interior).  A statement in a letter from the appellant's mother-in-law,
    who is also Russian born and became a Baptist after visiting the United
    Kingdom in 1993, asserts that there is a fifteen year jail sentence for
    claiming  asylum  in  another  country.   She  apparently  returned  to
    Tashkent and was converted there in 1995, the week before the appellant
    and her own son.  The letter, dated 2  July  2000,  suggests  that  the
    appellant's  mother-in-law  moves  between  the  United   Kingdom   and
    Uzbekistan.  There was  no  finding  by  the  Adjudicator  about  those
    matters.

The Appellant's Evidence

9.   The appellant started by confirming that  the  contents  of  her  three
    witness statements were true.  The first was dated 10 November 2004 and
    was before the Adjudicator.  The other two post-date the  Adjudicator's
    hearing.  The second  is  dated  29  May  2005  and  refers  to  events
    involving the appellant's sister, Alla.  In it the appellant  said  she
    was told by her mother-in-law, in a telephone call on 11 May 2005, that
    her sister had been arrested.  It is not clear  how  her  mother-in-law
    knew.  She had been released by the time  the  appellant  was  able  to
    speak to her mother in Uzbekistan.  She said her sister told  her  that
    she had been enticed to a private home, but on arrival was  grabbed  by
    armed police officers who planted drugs on her.  She  was  taken  to  a
    place where drug offenders were held.  That concerned her  because  she
    had previously been to prison for ten years after  the  police  planted
    drugs on her.  (There is evidence elsewhere that her sister was sent to
    prison in 2002 for three years(paragraph 16 page 2)).  At  paragraph  9
    of her statement the appellant said:-

        "9.  Both my mother and my sister were told by the police, that she
             would be released only if they paid  the  sum  of  $1,000.   My
             mother and sister told them they had no money.  The police said
             they knew all about my sister, and that she had money.


        10.  They told my sister things they could only  have  learnt  from
             her medical records at her doctor's  surgery,  and  many  other
             things that were entirely private.  They said  that  they  knew
             she went to church, and where the church met.  They  said  they
             knew who her friends were, and where they lived."

10.  Her sister was then taken to another building  where  there  were  more
    police and she was asked to provide sexual favours.   She  refused  and
    her mother was told that the required bribe had risen  from  $1,000  to
    $2,500.  Her mother raised the money that day and,  upon  payment,  her
    sister was released.  Her sister subsequently  reported  that  she  was
    being followed.  The appellant concluded her statement by saying  that,
    as a result of what happened to her sister, she was now  terrified  for
    her life and that if she were returned to Uzbekistan she believed  that
    she would suffer imprisonment and physical and sexual abuse or even  be
    killed by the KGB, as she said her father had been.  She said that  the
    fact she was a Christian, an  ethnic  Russian,  and  had  been  refused
    asylum in the United Kingdom, were all known  by  the  police  and  her
    husband's family.  For any of those things she could be killed  or  put
    into prison.  She concluded her statement by saying that  she  was  now
    estranged from her husband who was intending to return to Uzbekistan on
    the day she made the statement.

11.  The third statement, dated 12 October 2006, was prepared to  bring  the
    Tribunal up to date with events  in  the  appellant's  life  since  the
    Adjudicator's hearing.  She confirmed that she has  two  sisters.   Her
    elder sister, Natasha, lives in Armenia with her Armenian  husband  and
    children.  She is a non-practising  Christian.   The  family  moved  to
    Armenia because of their  Russian  ethnicity,  not  because  they  were
    Christians.

12.  Her other sister, Alla, is single and is  now  also  in  Armenia.   The
    appellant's mother remains  in  Tashkent  working  in  the  appellant's
    former mother-in-law's office.  She does practise her Christianity  but
    in a private house.  The appellant is now divorced from her husband.

13.  The appellant attends the Salmon Lane Baptist church  on  Sundays,  and
    Bible Study classes on Thursday evenings.  She also attends services at
    a second church, in  the  East  End.   The  latter  is  an  evangelical
    congregation, in the Anglican tradition, which meets on a barge  moored
    in the Thames.  She gave an example of the way  in  which  that  pastor
    practises by saying he invites members of the local  Bengali  community
    to visit the church.  He has created a prayer room, with  a  Koran,  to
    allow them to pray there.  This is in the hope  that  they  will  learn
    sufficient  about  the  faith  that  they  wish  to  be  converted   to
    Christianity.

14.  The appellant said that  she  has  made  many  friends  through  church
    activities.  She has a particular friend, Eva, who lives nearby and  is
    Swedish.  Her pastor, David Smith, is also a close friend.  She  has  a
    Philippino friend, Flor.  She described other  friends  and  says  they
    help each other out a lot, for example  if  they  are  not  well.   She
    described her relationship with her  neighbours  and  work  colleagues.
    She described how she has been involved with the Salmon  Lane  football
    team for a year, as physiotherapist and first aider.  She is registered
    as a part-time student at Birkbeck College and hopes  to  begin  a  law
    degree course next year.  She is currently working at  a  laser  clinic
    for skin therapy, and has been since 2001.   She  said  that  when  she
    first started working she was permitted to do so but was told  to  stop
    after the  Adjudicator  dismissed  her  appeal.   Notwithstanding,  she
    decided to carry on.  She quoted a Biblical reference as  justification
    for that.  She said that she did so because she would have no other way
    of supporting herself, and the flat which she is buying with a mortgage
    would be repossessed.  She concluded the statement by  saying  that  if
    she were returned to Uzbekistan she could not practise her faith  as  a
    Christian openly because  she  would  be  in  constant  fear  of  being
    arrested and imprisoned.  She would find it hard to get a  proper  job,
    because of her Russian ethnicity, as priority is given to Uzbeks.   She
    said that her ex-husband is close to the regime but even he  would  not
    be able to help her if the regime wanted to prosecute her for remaining
    outside the country without permission for so long.   She  referred  to
    the death of her ex-husband's grandmother (the asserted significance of
    this was rejected by the Adjudicator as not having any relevance to the
    claim).  She concluded her statement by saying that she has  now  spent
    over ten years in the United Kingdom and, while she has no family here,
    she has friends in her church.  They have become her family.  She would
    lose everything and everybody that she has depended on  throughout  the
    ten years if she were returned.

15.  The appellant gave oral evidence to us.  She confirmed  that  when  she
    left Uzbekistan both her sisters were living there.   Alla  left  after
    her second arrest.  Her elder sister, Natasha, left  two  years  before
    that, in 2003.  She said her father died two months after  she  got  to
    the United Kingdom and her mother is still in Uzbekistan.   Her  mother
    is no longer going to church as it has been closed down.  She said that
    since she arrived here her family is her church, and her friends in the
    church.  Her pastor is more than a pastor.   He  cares  about  her  and
    loves her like his own daughter.

16.  Cross-examined, the appellant  was  first  asked  whether  her  sister,
    Alla, was a Baptist.  The appellant gave a very  careful  but  rambling
    answer, the effect of which was that her sister is a Christian but  she
    could not say if she is a Baptist or is orthodox.  She said her  sister
    had been in jail  for  three  years  from  2002.   She  said  that  the
    reference in paragraph 9 of her statement to  the  police  saying  that
    they knew "all about my sister, and that she had money" was a reference
    to what they know about the appellant.   There  was  a  great  deal  of
    questioning about this, and in particular when it was that  the  police
    said they knew all about the appellant.  It  was  not  clear  that  the
    appellant understood the thrust of the question when it was put to  her
    in English and for this part of the evidence  the  Russian  interpreter
    was used.  That did not particularly help and after questioning  by  Mr
    Deller, Mr Pievsky, and the panel, the evidence seemed to be  that  the
    police had said this to Alla when they arrested her in 2002,  but  Alla
    did not tell the appellant until she spoke to her in 2005.

17.  The appellant said that before she left Uzbekistan  she  conducted  her
    worship by going to church and by meeting with a few  people  who  were
    Christians.  That included her former mother-in-law, and  a  friend  of
    hers, at the church where they used to go.  Since she has been  in  the
    United Kingdom she has carried on  the  same  way,  but  also  has  the
    freedom to speak about her faith.  She  was  asked  whether  there  was
    anything she would want to do in Uzbekistan  that  she  couldn't.   She
    said that pursuing her faith there would cause problems, and even  just
    going to church would be a problem.  She said that  being  a  Christian
    requires her to present her faith and speak to others and  that  it  is
    impossible to witness in Uzbekistan.  She explained that  by  'witness'
    she meant speaking about Jesus to people that don't know about him.  In
    answer to a question from the panel she said that if she were to  speak
    to Muslims about Christianity  in  Uzbekistan,  as  she  did  with  the
    Bengali community in London, that would cause her problems.  She  would
    try speaking to them and invite them to the church but  she  would  put
    herself in danger because she would not know what was in their minds.

The Appellant's Sister's Statement

18.  Alla Makhova made a statement in Russian dated 9 October  2006  and  we
    had a translation.  In her statement she described how she was arrested
    in possession of drugs in February  2001.   She  said  that  they  were
    planted on her in a taxi in which she was travelling home.  As a result
    she spent three years in prison.   She  described  her  time  there  in
    graphic terms.  Although she said  she  was  mistreated,  she  was  not
    raped, but did become  ill  and  still  suffers  from  gastritis.   She
    described how she was released in February 2004 and arrested again  for
    the same reason.  That time she escaped prison because her mother  paid
    a bribe.  (The dates do not tie in with the appellant's evidence  about
    this).

    Evidence of Craig Murray

Statement

19.  Mr Murray made a short witness statement, dated  31  August  2006.   He
    started by saying that he joined the Foreign  and  Commonwealth  Office
    ('FCO') in 1986, serving at various posts  around  the  world  and  was
    appointed the British Ambassador to Uzbekistan in August 2002.  He left
    there in October 2004 and left the FCO in February 2005.   His  witness
    statement is not sourced, although we acknowledge that the evidence  he
    gave came substantially from his own experience during his own time  in
    Uzbekistan.  His evidence is quite different  from  that  of  the  more
    academic form of expert who gathers information and  collates  it  from
    third party  sources.   He  concluded  his  statement  by  saying  that
    virtually all international news organisations have  been  banned  from
    Uzbekistan.  In particular  Reuters,  the  BBC,  Associated  Press  and
    Agence France  Press  have  had  their  offices  closed  by  the  Uzbek
    authorities.  He said that independent sources of information  are  not
    readily available,  either  about  the  situation  generally,  or  with
    specific reference to religious freedom and expression.  He  said  that
    there are a number  of  organisations  operating  outside  the  country
    "which do a heroic job in getting information out, about what  goes  on
    there".  He referred expressly to Forum 18, based  in  Oslo  and  Human
    Rights Watch, based in New York.

20.  In his statement Mr Murray  said  that  he  estimates  that  there  are
    950,000 Christians in Uzbekistan, of which  the  overwhelming  majority
    are Russian Orthodox.  The number of Baptists is much smaller.  Without
    saying  why,  he  considered  that  Christianity  is  in   decline   in
    Uzbekistan.  He said that there are  churches  in  most  parts  of  the
    country but they must be State-registered.  It is forbidden to  worship
    outside State-controlled and registered buildings.  He said the Baptist
    Union of Uzbekistan is registered but is  prevented  from  opening  new
    churches  or  establishing  new  congregations  by   the   registration
    procedure.  He said there have been numerous incidences of churches and
    congregations being forcibly shut or closed down because they were  not
    registered.  He observed that the registration process gives the regime
    control over religious expression, including the  stipulation  of  what
    should be preached.

21.  As to religious expression, he said the regime's attitude towards  that
    is unchanged since Soviet times.  He said that there is some  religious
    expression but "within very narrow limits  and  strictly  regulated  by
    law".  He said  it  is  forbidden  outside  State-controlled  activity,
    because Uzbekistan is a "very totalitarian  State"  and  any  religious
    expression is  considered  suspect.   He  said  that  proselytising  is
    illegal and, because this is a fundamental tenet of the Baptist  faith,
    it is the law most frequently used  against  Baptists.   He  said  that
    evangelical behaviour leads to conflict  with  the  regime  and  brings
    severe consequences.  He repeated his  observation  that  Baptists  who
    wished to establish new congregations, or lead services in places other
    than a State-registered building find that it is illegal and  therefore
    subject to sanction.  He said  there  is  a  proposed  new  law  before
    Parliament which is intended to make it an offence to discuss  religion
    at all outside a State-registered building.  Perhaps cynically, he said
    that, as the Uzbek Parliament only meets twelve days  a  year  and  has
    never refused to pass any Bill (no Bill  ever  having  been  introduced
    other than by the regime), he is confident the new law will  come  into
    force.

22.  Dealing with the  consequences  of  breaching  the  laws  on  religious
    expression,  he  said  that  it  is  easy  to  breach  the  laws,  even
    unwittingly.  Any individuals found in breach  would  not  normally  go
    through the established court procedure and,  even  if  they  did,  the
    courts are not independent and do not represent  the  rule  of  law  as
    understood in the West.  He  described  the  police  as  venal  and  an
    instrument of repression used by the regime against those it  perceives
    to be a threat.  He said that contravention, by an individual,  of  the
    laws on religious expression is more likely to lead to  blackmail  than
    to being brought before a court.  He said that assaults and beatings by
    the police were common, as is "sexual  blackmail"  against  women.   He
    acknowledged that there have been some recorded cases of Baptists being
    fined or imprisoned for proselytising, but  he  still  considered  that
    most would not go to court.  He said that, "rape by the police  happens
    all the time to women", particularly those who are in breach of the law
    including that on religious expression.  He said women  are  vulnerable
    to false accusations.  He referred to this being well documented in his
    own book "Murder in Samarkand".  Although he  made  reference  to  this
    book, it was not produced in evidence.

23.  Mr Murray then dealt with the risks  to  the  appellant  on  return  to
    Uzbekistan.  He said that as a female Baptist "she would be the  target
    for sexual assault and rape" (our emphasis) as has  happened  to  other
    female Baptists.  The very fact of being a  female  Baptist,  he  said,
    would be the justification for serious sexual assault, irrespective  of
    whether there had been  an  actual  breach  of  the  law  on  religious
    expression.

24.  He also said that someone who had been out of the country for  as  long
    as the appellant (just over 10� years),  without  valid  reason,  would
    inevitably be  the  subject  of  grave  suspicion.   He  said  that  as
    Uzbekistan  is  a  very  effective  totalitarian   State,   which   has
    sophisticated instruments  of  regulation  and  control,  there  is  no
    prospect of being able to slip  quietly  back  into  the  country.   He
    described a computerised entry system at the airport with  a  permanent
    secret police presence.  He said anyone who  arouses  the  authorities'
    interest is immediately referred  to  them.   The  appellant's  arrival
    would be noted and she would be suspected because she had not  kept  in
    contact with the Uzbekistan Embassy in London.  He also said that, even
    if she were able to  get  through  the  airport,  her  arrival  in  any
    particular area would come to the attention  of  the  equivalent  of  a
    Parish Council (the Makhalla Committee).  He said that,  unlike  Parish
    Councils in the United Kingdom,  they  are  anything  but  benign  even
    though they have a similar  administrative  status  within  the  State.
    They are an example of an official agency of  control  which  regularly
    reports to the regime any activity by residents that is  considered  to
    be suspicious.  He said the appellant would find herself the subject of
    a report by the Makhalla Committee which would lead to her being picked
    up by the police, with the consequences that he described earlier.   He
    did not suggest what, if anything, she would need to  do  in  order  to
    draw herself to the attention of  the  Makhalla  Committee  other  than
    moving to the area.

Craig Murray -Oral Evidence

25.  Mr Murray said that, of  the  950,000  Christians,  he  estimated  that
    10,000 to 20,000 were Baptists.  There is a difference between the  way
    the Baptists and the Russian Orthodox are treated.  He said  there  was
    some harassment of Russian Orthodox Christians, but not  so  intensely.
    He would not regard them as being in danger simply for being members of
    the Russian Orthodox church.  He said there were many documented  cases
    of difficulty for Baptists, and for  Jehovah's  Witnesses.   There  are
    10,000 Jehovah's Witnesses in Uzbekistan and they suffer a  great  deal
    of  persecution.   He  said  that,  in  general,  it  is   evangelising
    Protestants who experience difficulty because their religion is new  to
    the country, whereas the Russian Orthodox religion was there before the
    bulk of the laws were established.  He described  the  State  as  being
    very wary of any independent thought.  Any religious teaching,  or  any
    ethical code superseding the  State,  is  not  acceptable  in  a  truly
    totalitarian society.

26.  Speaking about the appellant being the subject of  grave  suspicion  on
    return because she had been out of the country,  Mr  Murray  said  that
    Uzbekistan has an exit visa system.  The appellant would have needed  a
    visa and permission to leave.  She would have  not  been  permitted  to
    remain outside the country longer than the secret police allowed.   All
    passports expire  when  the  holder  reaches  21.   In  general,  Uzbek
    Embassies abroad do not issue new passports because, by not  doing  so,
    they can force people to return home.  Failing to return is  viewed  as
    anti-regime.  He said that he knew of two people who were deported from
    Germany who were seriously mistreated and imprisoned on return.  He was
    not able to say  anything  about  deportees  from  the  United  Kingdom
    because, he said, the United Kingdom has never  returned  anybody.   Mr
    Pievsky asked  Mr  Murray  the  source  of  his  assertions  about  the
    mistreatment of women.  He said that  he  had  spoken  to  the  victims
    themselves, he had taken into account the conditions in Uzbekistan, and
    the views of the United Nations Special Rapporteur.  He said there  was
    no independence of the judiciary, and 99% of criminal cases  end  in  a
    guilty verdict.  He said the majority of people who are  picked  up  by
    the police do not even go to court, and that  Baptists  are  more  than
    likely to be beaten, sexually abused and forced to pay bribes.  He said
    there is no working criminal system, the police are venal and there  is
    prominent sexual abuse of women.  He said that the account given by the
    appellant's sister was entirely credible and typical of other  accounts
    he had heard.  He was surprised that, although she had suffered  sexual
    abuse and was beaten and humiliated, she was not raped.   He  said  she
    should be grateful for that.  He said that the planting of narcotics is
    a routine procedure with people that the police wish to persecute, such
    as politicians and Christians.  Mr Murray said that his own partner had
    suffered from having narcotics planted on her.

27.  Mr Murray said that  references  in  Home  Office  documents  to  Uzbek
    refugees in America are to a number (many hundreds) who fled  after  an
    incident in May  2005  known  as  the  Andijan  (also  referred  to  as
    Andizhan) massacre, when 500 to 600 people were killed.  He said that a
    large of group of people fled and ended up in Idaho.  A great  deal  of
    pressure was put on their families in Uzbekistan to get them to return.
     He said the human rights situation has  got  worse  and  that  Freedom
    House rates Uzbekistan as among the worst three regimes in the world in
    that respect.

28.  Cross-examined, Mr Murray  said  that  Uzbekistan  separated  from  the
    Soviet Union in 1991 but is run by essentially the same regime now,  as
    it was in Soviet times.  For example, the President is the same person.



29.  Asked how the  Protestant  evangelical  churches  got  a  foothold,  Mr
    Murray  said  that  the  early  nineties  were  a  period  of  apparent
    liberalisation in economic and religious terms and they  were  able  to
    establish themselves then.  The Russian  Orthodox  and  Roman  Catholic
    churches are longer established.  Asked why they should be left  alone,
    given the distrust of independent thought in a totalitarian State which
    seems to regard the manifestation  of  beliefs  as  so  concerning,  Mr
    Murray said they adopt a "quietest" course and take care not  to  upset
    the regime.  They do not proselytise.  He was not saying  there  is  no
    antagonism, but in general being a member  of  the  Roman  Catholic  or
    Russian Orthodox church would not produce a fear of persecution.

30.  Mr Murray said the current exit visa system is similar  to  that  which
    was in force in 1996 and is effectively unchanged since  Soviet  times.
    He was asked what it was that would give rise to the authorities  being
    suspicious of the appellant if she were to return.  He said that having
    been illegally out of the country was in itself a crime  and  would  be
    considered as showing that the appellant was not a good patriot.

31.  Mr Murray was asked about the targeting of family members.  He said  it
    was common for pressure to be applied in that way.  He gave the example
    of the Rector of the University of Samarkand who  was  dismissed  in  a
    purge  of  ethnic  Tajiks  in  2003.   He  said  that   many   students
    demonstrated about the dismissal and within days their parents were all
    sacked from their jobs.  He described this as a  capricious  attack  on
    family members which was typical of State control.  He  said  that,  on
    the other hand, there were baffling times when it does not happen.   He
    is fearful for his own partner's family because she is living with  him
    and he has written a book about the regime.  He said that,  in  such  a
    capricious state, persecution of families as punishment happens a  lot.
    He said that this is more likely to happen to politicians than  because
    of religion, but seldom happens in respect of  criminal  activity.   He
    said that being a Baptist, or a Jehovah's Witness, was  considered  the
    equivalent of political dissent.

32.  He was asked how he knew about the two  asylum  seekers  from  Germany.
    He said that in 2001 a Swedish delegation had visited Uzbekistan to see
    whether it was possible for them to return failed asylum seekers.   He,
    and the German Ambassador, held  a  meeting  with  the  delegation  (he
    explained the Swedes have no embassy in Uzbekistan).  He was told about
    the two by the German Ambassador.  He was told that  one  of  them  was
    still in jail two years later.  The other had been beaten and released.
     He had no details  about  why  two  were  returned.   There  was  some
    discussion about the Andijan refugees in America, and what had happened
    to give rise to their flight.  Mr Murray said there had been a confused
    situation which seemed to have been caused  by  the  arrest  of  twenty
    businessmen charged with Islamist extremism.  The grievances were  then
    expressed because of high utility prices, the closure of  the  borders,
    and high unemployment.  He  explained  that  Andijan  relies  on  cross
    border trade.  He said the expression of the grievances  gave  rise  to
    the shooting of people which went on for 2  or  3  days.   People  fled
    because of  the  immediate  risk  to  life.   He  regarded  the  recent
    situation in Uzbekistan as a deteriorating one, following a  revolution
    in Georgia.  He said the regime decided that the best way  to  avoid  a
    similar thing happening in Uzbekistan was to crack  down  even  harder.
    The  situation  generally  has  been  deteriorating  since  2001.    He
    considered that the Andijan massacre was a  sufficiently  serious  even
    that it could have led to a revolution.

33.  Asked why the Government did not just make the religions they  did  not
    like illegal, Mr Murray said there was  a  reluctance  to  go  back  on
    legislation that  had  been  passed,  but  he  did  not  rule  out  the
    possibility.  He said the Government is making it  very  difficult  for
    Baptist churches  to  operate.   He  had  met  a  Baptist  minister  in
    Uzbekistan who said the religion is growing, but Mr Murray thinks he is
    wrong.  He said  the  new  Bill,  which  provides  for  a  ban  on  the
    discussion of religious views outside church  buildings,  has  not  yet
    been published as law.  It has been published as  a  Bill,  but  as  no
    Government Bill was voted on between 2000 and 2004,  and  on  occasions
    Parliament does not appear to have known  that  it  has  voted  a  bill
    through, he did not think there was any doubt that it would become law.
     The driving force behind the Bill is the Ministry of the Interior, and
    it is primarily targeted at Islam.  He said Islam  is  the  predominant
    religion which the authorities are keen to keep within State-controlled
    places of worship.  Mr Deller asked  him  why,  if  the  measures  were
    primarily against fundamentalist Islam, he thought that the  law  would
    in practice be used against minority Christian faiths.  Mr Murray  said
    that almost any law that could be used for  harassment  and  extortion,
    would be.  He said it  was  something  else  with  which  to  blackmail
    Baptists.  That also happens with generic criminal activity because the
    police are more interested in extorting money than bringing  people  to
    court.

34.  He was asked about Uzbekistan's standing and its alliances.  Mr  Murray
    said the omens are poor.  Uzbekistan had an alliance  with  the  United
    States which used to have an airbase there.  Last year it switched  its
    allegiance to concentrate on Russia and China.  He said this was partly
    motivated by gas contracts, but also because of US pressure about human
    rights issues.  In relation to the banning of news  organisations,  and
    general hostility to human rights organisations, Mr Murray  said  there
    was no hope on the horizon.  The country has expelled NGOs  which  were
    involved in development and relief work; more than a hundred  had  been
    asked to leave including the Peace Corps.

35.  Mr Murray said that most of  his  information  comes  from  first  hand
    dealings with Uzbeks.  Whilst  Ambassador,  he  did  a  great  deal  of
    talking and has been able to continue many of his contacts  in  private
    life.  He said that  Human  Rights  Watch  have  their  own  people  in
    Uzbekistan but getting information is not easy.  Information has to  be
    smuggled out.

36.  In re-examination Mr Pievsky referred to two laws  which  had  recently
    been introduced.  They are referred to in the US  Department  of  State
    "International Religious Freedom Report 2006: Uzbekistan", published on
    15 September 2006.  One, passed in December 2005, increased  the  fines
    for repeat offences or violations of the law  on  religious  activities
    such as illegal meetings,  processions  and  ceremonies.   The  second,
    passed in June 2006, was to punish illegal production, storage,  import
    or distribution of materials of religious content.  Mr Murray said that
    neither of those were the Bill he had referred  to,  which  was  a  yet
    further provision.

37.  In answer to  questions  from  the  panel,  Mr  Murray  said  that  the
    population of Uzbekistan is said to be 27 million but he thinks that it
    is 22 million.  He said that more than 20 million are Muslims.   Whilst
    the majority of people would describe themselves  as  Muslim,  he  said
    that, out of more than 100 of his friends, he only knows one  who  does
    not drink vodka.  He described it as a local form of Islam.

38.  Mr Murray said, in part 7 of his report (it  does  not  have  paragraph
    numbers), that the appellant would be the target for sexual assault and
    rape, being a female Baptist.  It was put to him that  this  implied  a
    near certainty.  He said he  did  not  mean  to  say  that  all  female
    Baptists are sexually assaulted, but that being returned after  a  long
    absence the appellant almost certainly would be.  She would  be  likely
    to be.  He commented that when an  attractive  woman  is  seen  by  the
    police they will find an excuse.  It was put to him that  many  of  the
    police would feel that this was morally wrong, to  which  he  responded
    that there may be a few who think that way  but  in  general  they  are
    extraordinarily venal.  He referred to the  UN  Special  Rapporteur  on
    torture and his 2002/3 report in which he said they found  torture  was
    widespread and systematic.  He said "If you have not been there, it  is
    difficult to understand how widespread and common it is".

39.  Mr Murray was asked whether there were circumstances  when  a  passport
    would be renewed out of country and  he  said  that  if  a  person  was
    closely connected to the regime anything is possible,  but  he  or  she
    would need to be very well connected.  Embassies have the ability to do
    it and, for example, sons and daughters of ministers who  are  here  as
    students would have their  passports  renewed.   He  did  not  think  a
    person's religion is shown on the passport, although ethnicity is.   It
    was also put to him that the law seems to  give  a  right  to  practise
    one's religion within  the  confines  of  premises,  and  that  if  one
    practised one's religion quietly there would be no problems.  Mr Murray
    said that is not necessarily so.  He said there have been recent  cases
    of beatings of Baptists who were not proselytising.  Behaving  lawfully
    is not necessarily a protection from the  authorities.   He  said  that
    when he lived in Uzbekistan there was a registered  Baptist  church  at
    the bottom of the Residence garden but it was still frequently  raided.
    He said the expression "discussion of religion" is a quotation from the
    Minister of the Interior, who introduced the Bill.

40.  Mr Murray acknowledged that his departure from  the  FCO  was  "angry".
    He said he does not now get any information directly from  the  FCO  to
    keep him up to date.  He said it is dangerous to telephone, but he gets
    a lot of email information from Uzbekistan.  He said he is regarded  as
    an expert and was recently the keynote speaker at  a  Central  Eurasian
    Studies conference in Michigan.  He said that  is  an  organisation  of
    American Professors who study Central Asia.  The fact he was invited as
    a keynote speaker was an acceptance of his  continuing  expertise.   He
    said he had recently had a meeting  with  an  Uzbek  opposition  leader
    (Mohammed Salih), who is in exile and normally to be found  in  Turkey.
    He occasionally meets  members  of  the  current  regime  privately  in
    London.  He continues to develop, and keep up his contacts, in order to
    campaign.  Asked whether the reference to 'campaign' suggested  he  had
    an agenda and may not be entirely objective, he said  "I  am  a  strong
    believer in human rights".  Asked why members  of  the  regime  may  be
    speaking to him, in view of his book and his  attitude,  he  said  that
    things may change and those people realise  that  is  possible.   Other
    regimes have been toppled.  He said that many Uzbeks accept  him  as  a
    good-hearted, friendly, party through whom they  can  communicate  with
    each other.  He gave as an example a leader of the  Sunshine  Coalition
    who is now in prison in Uzbekistan and whose treatment has been subject
    to complaint.  Ten  months  ago  Mr  Murray  had  dinner  with  him  in
    Washington, the day before he returned to Uzbekistan.  The man had been
    trying to broker agreements on a reform agenda and Mr Murray  had  been
    involved in trying to facilitate agreement.  Finally, he said that when
    he  and  the  British  Government  parted  company  and   ended   their
    relationship the FCO took great care to say that they do not  have  any
    disagreement with Mr Murray's views  on  human  rights.   He  said  the
    Secretary of State said as much in Parliament.

Objective Evidence - General

41.   Both  before  us,  and  the  Adjudicator,  the  appellant  produced  a
    substantial amount  of  documentation.   In  addition,  the  respondent
    produced a bundle.  We  indicated  that  we  expected  the  parties  to
    expressly refer to those parts of the bundles upon  which  they  relied
    either in submissions or, in the  appellant's  case,  in  his  skeleton
    argument.  We did  not  wish  either  party  to  later  criticise  this
    determination on  the  basis  that  we  had  omitted  to  deal  with  a
    significant piece of evidence  to  which  we  had  not  been  expressly
    referred.

The Appellant's Objective Evidence

42.  The Human  Rights  Watch  World  Report  2006  starts  by  saying  that
    Uzbekistan's disastrous human rights record worsened  further  in  2005
    after a Government massacre of demonstrators in Andijan  in  May  2005.
    It said this:-

         "The Government committed major violations of the rights to freedom
         of religion, expression, association, and assembly, and such abuses
         only  increased  after  the  May  massacre.   Uzbekistan   has   no
         independent judiciary, and torture is widespread in both  pre-trial
         and  post-conviction  facilities.   The  Government  continues  its
         practice of controlling, intimidating, and  arbitrarily  suspending
         or interfering with the work of civil society  groups,  the  media,
         human rights  activists,  and  opposition  political  parties.   In
         particular,  repression  against  independent  journalists,   human
         rights defenders,  and  opposition  members  increased  this  year.
         Government  declarations  of  human  rights  reform,  such  as   an
         announcement that the Government will abolish the death penalty and
         the President's declaration of support for Habeas  Corpus,  had  no
         practical impact."


     Under the heading "Religious Persecution" Human Rights Watch said:-

         "For  years  the  Government  has  imprisoned  on  "fundamentalism"
         charges individuals whose peaceful Islamic beliefs, practices,  and
         affiliations   fell    outside    strict    government    controls.
         Approximately 7,000 people are believed  to  have  been  imprisoned
         since the Government's campaign against independent Islam began  in
         the mid-1990s.  The Government justifies this campaign by referring
         to the "war on terror," failing to distinguish  between  those  who
         advocate violence and those who peacefully express their  religious
         beliefs; it used the  May  2005  events  in  Andijan  to  give  new
         validation to the campaign.  By November, Human  Rights  Watch  had
         documented 194 religious believers convicted in 2005 with at  least
         69 more awaiting trial; the true numbers are believed  to  be  much
         higher.


         Conditions in Uzbekistan's prisons  are  poor,  and  religious  and
         political prisoners suffer particularly harsh treatment.  According
         to testimony by relatives, prisoners are forced to sign  statements
         begging President Islam Karimov for forgiveness,  renouncing  their
         faith, and incriminating themselves as  terrorists.  Prisoners  who
         refuse are punished with beatings, time in  punishment  cells,  and
         even new criminal prosecutions."


    The report said that the Government has made  no  visible  progress  on
    ending the use  of  torture.   Human  Rights  Watch  received  credible
    allegations of torture during investigations in  pre-trial  custody  as
    well as in prisons and  reports  that  police  use  torture  and  other
    illegal means to coerce  statements  and  confessions  from  detainees.
    Defence lawyers are prevented from visiting clients, which would  be  a
    safeguard against torture in pre-trial detention.  Courts ignore claims
    that confessions were obtained under torture and accept the confessions
    into evidence.   In  trials  of  religious  believers,  defendants  are
    routinely sentenced to long prison terms based solely or  predominantly
    on such confessions.


43.  Earlier, in October 2003, Human Rights Watch wrote an  open  letter  to
    the United States Commission on International Religious Freedom  asking
    that Uzbekistan (and Turkmenistan) should be designated  'countries  of
    particular concern' under the  terms  of  the  International  Religious
    Freedom Act.  The letter gives two pages of reasoning  in  relation  to
    Uzbekistan.  The bulk of the  reasoning  dealt  with  the  Government's
    treatment of Muslims who practised Islam outside  Government-controlled
    institutions.  It discussed Muslims who have peacefully expressed their
    religious beliefs and who, as a result, are tortured  and  ill-treated.
    It  dealt  with  a  number  of  individuals  who  have  been  seriously
    mistreated in prison  as  a  result  of  their  religious  beliefs  and
    activities and  to  the  extent  that  those  who  may  associate  with
    religious prisoners are also  punished.   There  was  reference  to  an
    individual who died in  pre-trial  custody,  apparently  from  torture,
    after being detained by the National Security Service some days earlier
    on suspicion  of  belonging  to  a  banned,  but  non-violent,  Islamic
    organisation.  The last third of the second page  dealt  with  minority
    religions and referred to seven occasions  on  which  Christian  groups
    were prevented from gathering due to police  raids;  three  members  of
    Christian groups who were fined for religious activity;  two  Christian
    groups who were denied registration; two Christians who were  detained,
    one being beaten; and seven Christians who  were  imprisoned,  six  for
    leading or attending religious gatherings at private homes and one  for
    inciting religious hatred.  No distinction was drawn between  different
    Christian denominations.  Finally, the report dealt with Hare  Krishnas
    who had been fined, prevented from gathering and had  their  literature
    confiscated.  They are said to fear wearing saris due  to  the  ban  on
    religious dress.

US Department of State, Country Reports  of  Human  Rights  Practises  2005:
Uzbekistan (Published 8.3.2006)

44.  This report started by saying "The Government's  human  rights  record,
    already poor, worsened considerably during the year".  It  referred  to
    routine and systematic torture and abuse of detainees by  the  security
    forces, restricted freedom of  assembly  and  association  and  blocked
    registration of any religious  congregations,  societal  discrimination
    against ethnic Uzbek  Christians,  persistent  societal  discrimination
    against women.  At page 25 of 26 it is  said  that  the  law  prohibits
    employment and discrimination on the basis  of  ethnicity  or  national
    origin and said, "However, Russians  and  other  minorities  frequently
    complained about limited job opportunities.  Senior  positions  in  the
    Government, bureaucracy and business generally were reserved for ethnic
    Uzbeks, although there were numerous  exceptions".   It  described  the
    population as being  mainly  Uzbek  but  with  significant  numbers  of
    Russians, Tajiks, Tartars and Kazakhs, together  with  ethnic  Koreans,
    Meskhetian Turks and Germans.  The report referred to  an  increase  in
    arbitrary arrest and detention, sometimes on falsified  charges  during
    the course of the previous year.  It referred to routine and systematic
    torture,  beatings  and  other  mistreatment  of  detainees  to  obtain
    confessions and a continuing insufficient protection against  arbitrary
    arrest and detention which often takes place in order to extort bribes.
     On page 4 of the report it said  "As  in  previous  years,  there  are
    reports that police beat Jehovah's Witnesses".  At page 15,  under  the
    heading "Freedom of Religion", the report said this:

     "While the law provides for freedom  of  religion  and  separation  of
        church and State, in practice the Government  restricted  religious
        activity.  The law treats all religious  groups  equally;  however,
        the Government supported the country's Muslim heritage  by  funding
        an  Islamic  university  and  providing  logistical   support   for
        citizens' participation in the  Hajj.   The  Government  sought  to
        promote what it considered a moderate version of Islam through  the
        control and financing  of  the  Muslim  Board  of  Uzbekistan  (the
        Muftiate), which  in  turn  controls  the  Islamic  hierarchy,  the
        content of imams' sermons,  and  published  Islamic  materials.   A
        small number of unofficial, independent  mosques  were  allowed  to
        operate under the watch of official imams.


        The law requires all religious groups and congregations to register
        and provides strict and burdensome registration criteria, including
        a requirement that each group  present  a  list  of  at  least  100
        national citizen members to the local branches of the  Ministry  of
        Justice.  This and numerous other provisions, such as a requirement
        that a congregation already have a valid legal address, enabled the
        Government  to  find  technical  grounds  for  denying  a   group's
        registration petition, such as  grammatical  errors  in  a  group's
        charter.  This suppressed the activities of Muslims who  sought  to
        worship outside the system of State-sponsored mosques, as  well  as
        members of unregistered Christian churches and other groups.

         Any religious  service  conducted  by  an  unregistered  religious
         organisation is illegal.  Police occasionally broke up meetings  of
         unregistered  groups.   Members  of  some   Christian   evangelical
         congregations were detained during the year and occasionally beaten
         by authorities.   Religious  groups  are  prohibited  from  forming
         political parties and social movements."


    There was reference to 125 members of an unregistered Baptist church in
    Surkhandarya province being detained and questioned and to two  Baptist
    pastors, and four church members, being arrested after a raid on  their
    church in Tashkent in June 2005.  On  page  16  there  is  a  paragraph
    setting out the difficulties in registration.  It said  the  number  of
    registered religious congregations increased by 32 to  2,201  of  which
    2,016 were Muslim (i.e. 185 were not).  It said that local  authorities
    continued to block the registration, or re-registration, of evangelical
    Christian congregations in six  provinces  and  that  registration  was
    denied to the Pentecostal church in Chirchiq.  The Emmanuel  church  in
    Nukus,  the  only  registered  Protestant  church  in  the  city,   was
    deregistered.  A Protestant non-denominational  church  ministering  to
    the international community has been unable to obtain registration  for
    several years, at least in part because it could  not  meet  the  legal
    requirement for a minimum of  100  members  who  are  citizens  of  the
    country.  Out of eleven Jehovah's Witnesses churches  in  the  country,
    only two are registered.  It is said that  police  routinely  question,
    search and arbitrarily fine individual Jehovah's  Witnesses  throughout
    the country.  Their meetings were disrupted during  the  year  and  200
    church members arrested, although most were released  soon  afterwards.
    The report says that the overwhelming majority of those  arrested  were
    suspected HT members [HT  is  a  banned  extremist  Islamist  political
    organisation called Hizb-ut-Tahrir] but the  Government  also  arrested
    members of Tabligh, an  Islamic  group  with  origins  in  South  Asia.
    Others  arrested  were  those  who  the  Government  broadly   labelled
    'Wahhabi'.  It reported that prisoners suspected of  Islamic  extremism
    are not allowed to practise their religion freely in  prison,  and  not
    allowed a Koran.


45.  At page 17 of the report it  is  said  that  Christians  who  tried  to
    convert Muslims,  or  who  had  among  their  congregation  members  of
    traditionally Muslim ethnic groups, often  faced  official  harassment,
    legal action or, in some cases, mistreatment.  There was reference to a
    number of Jehovah's Witnesses who have been arrested  and  fined  large
    sums  for  proselytising  and  disseminating  literature.   There   was
    reference  to  the  police  staging  raids  on  unregistered  Christian
    congregations  on  Good  Friday.   There  was   reference   to   police
    confiscating over 1,000 officially  approved  religious  booklets  from
    Baptists who belonged to an unregistered congregation  in  Tashkent  on
    March 6.   The  report  said  that  seven  members  were  detained  and
    questioned  for  six  hours  before  being  released.   The  Government
    provides a State religious censor who  has  to  approve  all  religious
    literature and, whilst discouragement  and  official  blocking  of  the
    production or import of Christian  literature  in  the  Uzbek  language
    occurs, Bibles are available in many other languages.   The  Government
    has taken no action on an  OSCE  Expert  Panel  Report  in  2003  which
    recommended lifting the bans on  proselytising  and  private  religious
    instruction.

US  Department  of  State  "International  Religious  Freedom  Report  2006:
Uzbekistan (Published 15.9.2006)

46.  This report said that there was a decline in the  status  of  religious
    freedom during the period covered by the report and that  a  number  of
    minority religious groups "including  congregations  of  a  variety  of
    Christian  denominations"  had  difficulty  in  satisfying  the  strict
    registration requirements.  It said that Protestant groups with  ethnic
    Uzbek members reported operating in a climate of harassment  and  fear.
    However, it also went on to say:-

     "The Government continued its campaign  against  unauthorized  Islamic
        groups suspected of extremist sentiments or  activities,  arresting
        numerous alleged members of these groups  and  sentencing  them  to
        lengthy jail terms."


    It also said,


        "The  Government  generally  did  not  interfere  with  worshippers
        attending sanctioned mosques and granted approvals for new  Islamic
        print, audio, and video materials.  A small but growing  number  of
        underground mosques operated under the close scrutiny of  religious
        authorities and the security services."


    The report said,

         "The generally tolerant  relationship  among  religious  groups  in
         society contributed  to  religious  freedom;  however,  neighbours,
         family, and employers often  continued  to  pressure  ethnic  Uzbek
         Christians, especially recent converts  and  residents  of  smaller
         communities."


    Under the heading "Status of Religious Freedom" there was reference  to
    the legal equality of  religious  denominations  and  the  Government's
    support for the country's Muslim heritage, as was referred  to  in  the
    main US State Department report.  There was reference to  the  two  new
    legal provisions, to which Mr Murray referred, and the requirement  for
    registration and a minimum number of citizen members.  The report  said
    that, at 30 June 2006, there were  182  registered  minority  religious
    groups, which included 59 Korean Christians, 36  Russian  Orthodox,  23
    Baptist, 21 Pentecostal ("Full Gospel"), 10 Seventh  Day  Adventist,  8
    Jewish, 5 Roman Catholic, 6 Baha'i, 3 Lutheran, 4  "New  Apostolic",  2
    Jehovah's Witnesses, 1 Krishna Consciousness group, 1 Temple of Buddah,
    1 Christian "Voice of God" church and 1 Armenian Apostolic.


47.  There was  reference,  at  page  16  of  the  report,  to  a  court  in
    Karakalpakstan rejecting an appeal by the Emmanuel church of  Nukus  to
    overturn an earlier Ministry of Justice decision to close  the  church.
    It was said that among the reasons was a charge that the church members
    were  promoting  Christianity  to  children  without   their   parents'
    permission.  There had at one time been approximately twenty Protestant
    churches in that region and this was  the  last  to  close.   The  same
    paragraph says that local  authorities  continue  to  pressure  Baptist
    churches associated with  the  International  Council  of  Churches  of
    Evangelical   Christians/Baptists,   a   denomination   that    rejects
    registration on principle.  The local authorities were said  to  demand
    the registration of their congregations.

48.  We were particularly taken to an account of an event in June 2005  when
    24 Gospel Pentecostal  church  members  in  Tashkent  were  taken  into
    custody, and several credible media outlets  reported  that  they  were
    verbally and physically abused, threatened with rape  and  interrogated
    for several days.   This  was  said  to  be  under  the  guise  of  the
    investigation of the murder of an American citizen who belonged to  the
    church.  Government authorities harassed church  members  for  allowing
    ethnic Uzbeks into their congregation.  The report referred to some 160
    congregants from the former Emmanuel Full Gospel church  in  Nukus  who
    were celebrating Easter in a local hotel when 50 policemen stormed  the
    premises and arrested eight of them, including the pastor.  Many of the
    congregation  including  children,   were   threatened   into   signing
    statements renouncing their faith and after hours  of  questioning  the
    church members were released without charge or fine.  The caretaker  of
    the same church in Nukus was attacked by the police.   He  was  beaten,
    and his arm broken, in an attempt to  intimidate  the  leaders  of  the
    church into relinquishing the property to the Government.

49.  In April 2006 there were co-ordinated raids on the homes  of  Jehovah's
    Witnesses on their holy day.  500 people or more were  detained.   Some
    were beaten, and women threatened with rape.  Most were released within
    a day.  A pastor in Andijan went  into  hiding  in  2006  for  fear  of
    arrest.  It is said that he faces  between  ten  and  twenty  years  in
    prison if found guilty of treason charges.   No  further  details  were
    given.  Mr Pievsky drew our attention to the references to Baptists who
    worship privately being told they are breaking the law, imprisoned  and
    fined; to Baptist copies of religious texts in the Uzbek language being
    confiscated, and to members of any unregistered church being liable  to
    detention.

International Helsinki Federation for Human Rights

50.  The International Helsinki Federation for Human Rights  report,  "Human
    Rights in the OSCE Region: Europe,  Central  Asia  and  North  America,
    Report 2006 (Events of 2005): Uzbekistan", was published on 1 May 2006.
     It agreed with the reports we have already referred to that the  human
    rights situation deteriorated in 2005.   It  referred  to  the  Andijan
    massacre and its  aftermath.   It  referred  to  a  massive  crackdown,
    following years of repression of opposition and civil society.  It said
    this could be seen in the context  of  recent  political  upheavals  in
    Kyrgyzstan,  Ukraine  and  Georgia   which   have   put   the   Karimof
    administration in fear of a broad  democratic  movement  developing  in
    Uzbekistan.  US/Uzbek  relations  have  cooled  and  the  US  has  been
    requested to withdraw its troops from the country.  The European  Union
    imposed sanctions on Uzbekistan, apparently arising out of the  Andijan
    massacre.  The  report  referred  to  little  progress  being  made  in
    combating torture and ill-treatment by law  enforcement  officials  and
    described the practice  as  widespread.   In  relation  to  freedom  of
    religion and religious tolerance the report said that:

             "As in previous years,  minority  religious  communities  faced
             repression such as raids,  interrogation  and  fines  and  some
             reports indicated the situation worsened in  the  aftermath  of
             the Andijan events.  Among others,  Protestants  and  Jehovah's
             Witnesses communities reported growing  harassment  during  the
             second half of the year."

     There was reference to three Jehovah's Witnesses  being  convicted  and
    heavily fined.  They were found guilty  of  attending  meetings  at  an
    unregistered religious organisation.  The section also  indicated  that
    the  Government  is  continuing  a   long-standing   campaign   against
    independent  Muslims  and  has  imprisoned  thousands  of  Muslims  who
    practise their faith outside State-controlled  institutions.   It  said
    that the Government does not make any  distinction  between  those  who
    advocate violent methods, and those who peacefully express their views.



Annual Report of the United States  Commission  on  International  Religious
Freedom, May 2006

51.  This report has a section on Uzbekistan which started  by  saying  that
    fundamental human rights, including the freedom of religion or  belief,
    had been under assault since independence in 1992.  It referred to  the
    restrictive  laws  on  religion,  severely  limiting  the  ability   of
    religious communities to function, in order  to  facilitate  the  Uzbek
    Government's exercise of  a  high  degree  of  control  over  religious
    communities, as well as  the  approved  manner  in  which  the  Islamic
    religion is practised.  It referred to continuing crackdowns on  Muslim
    individuals, groups and mosques  that  do  not  conform  to  Government
    prescribed  practices.   That  has  resulted  in  the  imprisonment  of
    thousands of people.  It noted that torture continues to be  widespread
    and that in 2003 the UN's special rapporteur on torture concluded  that
    torture or similar  ill-treatment  is  systematic  and  the  pervasive,
    persistent nature  of  torture  throughout  the  investigative  process
    cannot be denied.  It said that, even after  the  publication  of  that
    report, a  reliance  on  the  use  of  torture  has  not  significantly
    decreased.  In Mr Pievsky's skeleton he referred to that  part  of  the
    report  which  said  that  local  authorities  continue  to  block  the
    registration  or  re-registration  of  numerous  Protestant   Christian
    congregations in the country  and,  that  arrest  of  Protestants  have
    occurred,  along  with  detention  in  psychiatric  hospitals,   severe
    beatings, sentences to labour camps,  raids  on  churches,  interrupted
    services and confiscated Bibles.  In so doing he did not refer  to  the
    several paragraphs about  the  difficulties  faced  by  various  Muslim
    denominations including Wahhabi and Hizb-ut-Tahrir, including, on  page
    173:-

     "As with Muslims, members of Protestant and other  minority  religious
        groups have been arrested, sometimes  on  spurious  drug  or  other
        charges."


    There was reference to the Government modifying the country's  criminal
    and administrative  codes  to  introduce  heavier  fines  for  repeated
    violations of rules  on  religious  meetings  in  December  2005.   The
    Commission recommended that  Uzbekistan  be  named  as  'a  country  of
    particular concern' because  of  its  severe  violations  of  religious
    freedom which were described as systematic, ongoing and egregious.  The
    previous year Uzbekistan was only on a watch list.  The  recommendation
    that Uzbekistan be regarded as of particular concern ties in  with  the
    Keston Institute submission to the  United  Nations  Committee  Against
    Torture (undated).  The Keston Institute, based in Oxford, was  founded
    to defend religious liberty in post-Communist and Communist  countries.
    In its submission it referred to a number of case histories.  The first
    has already been referred to earlier.  The pastor of  the  Full  Gospel
    Church in Nukus was arrested in 1999; books were confiscated.   He  was
    arrested with two church colleagues and all  were  arrested,  tied  up,
    beaten on the soles of their feet and deprived of food for three  days.
    On an earlier occasion he had been forcibly detained in  a  psychiatric
    hospital, in 1997.  He was reportedly in receipt of death threats  and,
    in September 1997, sentenced to two years  forced  labour  for  holding
    unsanctioned meetings (but in  fact  was  allowed  to  live  at  home).
    Second the pastor of the Full Gospel Church in Bukhara was arrested  in
    1999 and sentenced to five years in prison on  drugs  charges  and  for
    spreading extremist propaganda.  He claims the drugs  were  planted  on
    him.  Third, the pastor of the  Full  Gospel  Church  in  Tashkent  was
    arrested and sentenced in 1999 by a  district  court  to  one  year  in
    prison on charges of missionary activity.  The report notes his  church
    has repeatedly been denied official registration.  Fourth,  the  police
    raided an unregistered church,  the  Baptist  congregation  in  Karshi,
    where they detained,  beat  and  imprisoned  many  of  the  congregants
    including women and teenagers.  Maltreatment was reported.


International Christian Concern Country Report, July 2003

52.  This report  notes  that  missionary  activity  and  proselytising  are
    illegal and says that raids and prosecutions of Christians were  common
    between 1998 and 2003.  It mentions Adventist Christians going on trial
    in Karakalpakstan in July  2002.   In  March  2003,  it  is  said  that
    Christian groups in the same region were being forced to meet  secretly
    due to increasing pressure on the non-Muslim  community.   There  is  a
    report in December 2002 of two Pentecostal Christians being taken  into
    custody and tortured by police in an attempt to get them to confess  to
    studying the Bible together.  The organisation, International Christian
    Concern, is (from its name) clearly a Christian organisation.  It  does
    not deal with difficulties faced by other religious minorities.

Christian Science Monitor

53.   The  Monitor,  in  November  2003,  reported  the  President  of   the
    International Religious Freedom Watch (based  in  Virginia)  as  saying
    that, for evangelical Protestants in particular, life has recently been
    getting worse.  It then referred to a number of  incidents  such  as  a
    judge ordering  the  burning  of  211  copies  of  a  Baptist  magazine
    confiscated by customs officials,  ten  Baptist  women  being  detained
    overnight accused of Wahhabism and  reports  of  attempts  to  suppress
    independent Protestant churches.  This report started by saying,  "This
    is not a good time to be a Protestant Christian or a devout  Muslim  in
    Uzbekistan".  It also referred to the official Uzbek view  that  "Harsh
    policies are necessary to prevent the country from being taken over  by
    Muslim fanatics".

Stop Violence Against Women, 28 January 2004

54.  This  organisation,  based  in  Minnesota,  reports  on  the  women  of
    Uzbekistan's ethnic minority groups who,  it  says,  experience  shared
    particular hardships, with ethnic Russians  combating  lingering  anti-
    Russian sentiment.  It  says  that  ethnic  Russians  are  experiencing
    official discrimination, such  as  restrictions  on  Russian  political
    parties, refusal to grant dual citizenship and  the  refusal  to  grant
    official language status to the Russian  language.   It  suggests  that
    ethnic Russians have limited access to Government  and  private  sector
    jobs and that some have responded by  relying  on  Moscow  to  pressure
    Uzbekistan or by emigrating to Russia.  The  report  says  that  ethnic
    minorities who are also Muslim have  suffered  under  the  Government's
    brutal crackdown which began in 1997.  It sets out a number of ways  in
    which that  manifests  itself,  including  the  expulsion  of  students
    wearing Islamic attire, girls wearing the hijab and Soviet  style  hate
    rallies at which neighbours are assembled to denounce such Muslim women
    and mothers as 'enemies of the people'.

Worldnet Daily, July 1 2005

55.  This report, which concluded by saying  "for  regular  updates  on  the
    persecuted church, sign up  for  Voice  of  the  Martyrs  free  monthly
    newsletter", describes the author as a "freelance  writer  and  founder
    and director of Joy Junction, New Mexico's largest  emergency  homeless
    centre".  It deals with a member of a Pentecostal  church  in  Tashkent
    who was allegedly tortured in police custody.  He was a  19  year  old,
    tortured by both police officers and  cell  mates,  in  an  attempt  to
    pressure him to abandon his  Christian  faith.   He  underwent  several
    beatings, suffering broken ribs, and had  needles  inserted  under  his
    fingernails for twelve days.  He had been arrested, and accused of  the
    murder of a US citizen who worked the Pentecostal church  in  Tashkent.
    It is said that a Tashkent  pastor,  and  another  church  member,  had
    earlier been similarly treated.  It seems that although the 19 year old
    was originally arrested on suspicion of murder, his problems arose once
    the authorities discovered he was a Christian.

    Assist News Service, Tuesday December 30 2005

56.  This service is run by "Gospel for  Asia",  a  missionary  organisation
    based in California.  In December it reported that there  has  been  an
    increase in the physical and psychological violence against  Christians
    in order to force them to renounce their faith.  The article  concluded
    by saying that an estimated 200  million  Christians  worldwide  suffer
    interrogation, arrest and even death for their faith  in  Christ,  with
    another 200 to 400 million facing discrimination and alienation.

Human Rights Without Frontiers

57.  This organisation produced a chronology of events from January to  June
    2006 which refers to the beating of a pastor  in  Andijan  in  December
    2005 and the breaking of the arm of the church caretaker, (referred  to
    in the US State Department report and elsewhere), on 30 April 2006.  It
    also set out a number of other incidents of a similar nature.   Nothing
    is said about the nature of the organisation.

Ferghana.ru Information Agency Article, 30 August 2006

58.  A brief item reports the police breaking up an evangelical  seminar  in
    Termez.  It is said that some of those arrested were soon released, but
    six left in detention including a Ukrainian  who  was  on  a  visit  to
    Uzbekistan.  The source of the information is said to be the "Christian
    Megaportal in Uzbekistan".


The Barnabas Fund

59.  The Barnabas Fund UK had an item on  the  internet  dated  1  September
    2006.  This brief report also referred to the  Ukrainian  national  who
    was detained.  It also referred to  "a  well-known  church  leader  and
    evangelist, Sergui Hripunof" who was given a week to leave the  country
    with his wife and  children.   The  report  said  this  is  the  second
    incident of the deportation of a church leader  from  Uzbekistan  in  a
    month.  It did not give the nationality of Mr Hripunof but, as  he  has
    been deported, he is presumably not an Uzbek.  The  report  also  dealt
    with the increase in fines for  unregistered  religious  activity,  and
    referred to an incident in August when a group of Uzbek Christians were
    arrested in Surkhandarya.  The item did  not  say  anything  about  the
    Barnabas Fund but concludes with a request for prayers and support  for
    Uzbek  Christians.   It  attributed  the  increase  in   anti-Christian
    activity to the fifteenth anniversary of Uzbekistan's independence on 1
    September.

Bosnews Life - 3 September 2006

60.  This report, from an organisation about which  nothing  is  known  save
    that  it  is  based  in  Budapest,  was  found  on  a  website   called
    www.Christianpersecution.info.  It refers to the deterioration reported
    by the Barnabas  Fund  in  relation  to  1  September  celebrations  of
    Uzbekistan's independence.  It also  referred  to  the  deportation  of
    Sergui Hripunof and the  increased  fines  for  unregistered  religious
    activity.  A later report (11 September 2006)  from  the  same  source,
    reported the release  of  six  men  who  had  been  detained  around  1
    September, including a Ukrainian national on  holiday.   It  said  that
    other Christians arrested at the same time, including  some  women  and
    children, had been beaten before they were released and  that  some  of
    the women had been sexually abused.  It said that this  is  "the  first
    report of this in modern church history in Uzbekistan".  It  also  said
    that two of the men had received burns to their skin, having had  their
    hands and feet held in buckets of quicklime.   The  report  also  dealt
    with the deportation of  Victoria  Khripunova  of  "Tashkent  embattled
    Bethany Baptist church" on 5 September.  The report also said:-

     "It comes as Western diplomats are seeking to  re-establish  relations
        with  Uzbekistan  and  its  perceived  autocratic  President  Islam
        Karimof, whom critics say does not allow "an independent  religion"
        such as Christianity, apparently for fear it  could  undermine  his
        powerbase in the Islamic nation."


    We observe that it does not refer to the fact that  many  of  the  laws
    were aimed at the Muslim religion.

Forum 18

61.  Forum 18 is one of the sources relied upon  by  Mr  Murray.   There  is
    considerable reference to their  materials  in  Mr  Pievsky's  skeleton
    argument.   He  described  Forum  18  as  an  organisation  devoted  to
    monitoring issues relevant to Article 18 of the  Universal  Declaration
    of Human Rights, the Article guaranteeing freedom of religion.   It  is
    also said to monitor human rights abuses worldwide.   The  organisation
    is based in Norway.  The mission statement on its website says that  it
    is a Christian initiative which is independent of  any  one  church  or
    religious group.  Its independence is said to be safeguarded by a board
    whose members are Protestant, Orthodox and Catholic Christians, and who
    are responsible for matters of policy and fund-raising.  It claims that
    Forum 18 is an instrument to promote the implementation of  Article  18
    and concentrates upon growth in open  breaches  of  religious  freedom,
    especially situations where the lives  of  individuals  or  groups  are
    threatened, and  where  the  right  to  gather  based  upon  belief  is
    threatened.  It says that it is committed to religious freedom for  all
    on the basis of Article 18.

62.  The first report was dated 26 March 2003.  It dealt with  a  series  of
    raids in Karakalpakstan.   In  particular  there  was  reference  to  a
    private house being raided, for a second time, where two ethnic  Kazakh
    Protestants were talking.  Also to a separate  raid  in  December  2002
    when two men were taken to a police station, tortured  and  an  attempt
    made to force them to sign a statement to the effect that they had been
    preaching to each other.   They  were  later  sentenced  to  five  days
    imprisonment.  Two women were detained for 27 hours in  February  2003,
    following a raid on an apartment in Khojali.  Whilst in custody, it  is
    said they were insulted for being Christians, and were accused of being
    Wahhabis, illogical as that may be.

63.  In an item dated 26 March 2004, there is a report of  an  Uzbek  lawyer
    based in Tashkent who  had  his  licence  to  practise  cancelled.   He
    believed that this is because he defended believers.  It is  said  that
    he has  represented  Pentecostals,  Baptists  and  Adventists  and  was
    working to regain the registration  taken  from  a  Baptist  church  in
    February.   Whilst  local  officials  in  the  Department  of   Justice
    Administration in Tashkent denied that was the reason  for  him  losing
    his licence, no other satisfactory reason has been forthcoming.  On  21
    April 2004 there was a report of 11 Protestants in Nukus,  the  capital
    of Karakalpakstan, being arrested and pressured to renounce their faith
    and convert to Islam.  They were  said  to  be  members  of  the  local
    "Church of Christ".  The local prosecutor said they were members of  an
    unregistered religious organisation.  Others  were  fined  for  holding
    religious meetings in private.  Six  people  were  fined  for  offences
    under the administrative code.

64.  On 7 July 2004, Forum 18 reported that the  secret  police  in  Urgench
    interrogated two Baptists and beat one of them.  The  authorities  said
    this was because their activity was illegal, their church  having  lost
    its registered status.  On 30 September 2004  there  was  a  report  of
    secret police raiding a prayer meeting at the Greater Grace  church  in
    Samarkand.   The  authorities  said  this  was  unregistered  religious
    activity.  The church claimed it had been prevented  from  registering,
    whereas the authorities said that their statute did not comply with the
    law.  During the course  of  the  detentions  several  police  officers
    referred to themselves as Muslims and said that there was "no need  for
    any Christian churches or other faiths in Uzbekistan".

65.  Forum 18's Central Asia correspondent claimed that on  16  August  2005
    he was unjustifiably  detained,  and  deported  from  Uzbekistan.   The
    article disclosed that he had been  detained  on  arrival  at  Tashkent
    airport because his name was on a  list  of  undesirable  persons.   He
    observed that he had previously entered Uzbekistan since  the  date  it
    was said that his name first appeared on that list.  The  correspondent
    is a Russian national called Igor Rotar.  His by-line  appears  on  all
    the Forum 18 articles to which we have been referred.

66.  On 14 March 2006 there was  an  account  of  the  interrogation  of  40
    Protestants over a period of 18 days.  They had been found  in  a  caf�
    and were asked to admit that they were  in  an  unauthorised  religious
    meeting.  At around the  same  time,  9  Pentecostalists  at  a  social
    gathering  where  there  was  legal  religious  literature,   had   the
    literature confiscated and fines imposed.   One  person,  a  Protestant
    visiting from Tashkent, was accused of missionary  activity,  which  is
    illegal.  Her passport was taken.  She was relieved of  the  equivalent
    of 138 Euros as security, the article claimed illegally.

67.  On  19  April  2006  it  was  reported  that  the  country's  Jehovah's
    Witnesses suffered raids, mass detentions and  rape  threats  on  their
    holy day, 12 April, on which they commemorate the death of  Jesus.   It
    was said that the raids were particularly severe that  year,  with  one
    witness being beaten by the police and suffering  a  brain  haemorrhage
    and severe concussion.  Female Witnesses  were  threatened  with  rape.
    This was said to be despite assurances  from  the  country's  Religious
    Affairs  Committee  that  the   Government   would   not   attack   the
    commemorations.  On 19 May 2006  Forum  18  referred  to  a  number  of
    issues, including the detention of a group of Protestants  following  a
    police raid on  a  private  flat.   The  owner  was  fined.   There  is
    reference to a Korean preacher being accused  of  conducting  "illegal"
    missionary "activity" to attract the local population to the  Christian
    religion.  In Tashkent higher education students who had been  detained
    during the raid on a private flat were threatened with  expulsion  from
    their institution because of their faith.

68.  On 30 July 2006, Forum 18 referred to proceedings having  been  started
    against a Protestant in Uzbekistan, for  offences  which  carry  up  to
    three years imprisonment as a punishment if proved.  It was  said  that
    all he had done was to fail to conceal his religious convictions and to
    speak to fellow believers about religious matters.  In the province  of
    Karakalpakstan there  are  no  registered  Protestant  churches,  which
    effectively means all Protestant  activity  is  illegal,  according  to
    Forum 18.  On 21 August 2006, Forum 18 reported the  proposed  increase
    in fines and prison sentences for attempting to share religious  belief
    with others and, on 5  September  2006,  that  the  Ferghana  Jehovah's
    Witness community lost its registration  leaving  only  one  registered
    Jehovah's Witness community in Uzbekistan.  On 6 September 2006,  Forum
    18 reported a "massive armed  police  and  secret  police  raid"  on  a
    Protestant summer camp where twenty church members  were  detained  and
    many of them beaten.  It is said that most were freed within  24  hours
    but five were held until 4 September, and  one  remained  in  detention
    (two days later).  Some were fined whereas  a  Ukrainian  visitor,  Uri
    Stefanko,  is  to  be  deported.   There  was  a  report  of   Victoria
    Khripunova, from Tashkent's Bethany Baptist church, being deported on 5
    September.  This has been reported elsewhere.   It  is  said  that  the
    deportation of Victoria Khripunova was in order to target  her  husband
    who is an Uzbek citizen  and  the  church's  pastor.   If  so,  it  was
    successful because he left voluntarily with his wife.   Forum  18  said
    that, if Stefanko is  deported,  that  would  make  a  total  of  seven
    deportations from Uzbekistan, in retaliation  for  religious  activity,
    during the year.

The Respondent's Objective Evidence

69.  On the 30 August 2006, the website of Radio Free Europe  reported  that
    a third group of Uzbek refugees were preparing to return home from  the
    United States.  These are some of the people who  had  fled  Uzbekistan
    following the incidents in Andijan in May  2005.   They  had  initially
    gone to Kyrgyzstan, were granted United  Nations  refugee  status,  and
    resettled in Idaho.  A group of 12 went home in July 2006 followed by a
    further 41 in the middle of August.  The report said that  150  Andijan
    refugees were resettled to the United States in 2005.  It is said  that
    among those planning to return are relatives of  Akram  Yoldashev,  the
    purported  leader  of  a  radical  religious  group  which  the   Uzbek
    authorities blame for the Andijan uprising.  Only four or  five  Uzbeks
    have decided not to return.  Www.dialoguz.com reported on  the  Freedom
    House compilation  of  the  most  dictatorial  regimes  in  the  world,
    published  on  6  September.   The  report   included,   referring   to
    Uzbekistan;

     "The Government's repression of members of  the  political  opposition
        and of  Muslims  not  affiliated  with  state-sanctioned  religious
        institutions intensified following a series of deadly  bombings  in
        Tashkent in February 1999."


    The same report refers to the aftermath of the violence in  Andijan  in
    May 2005, when the BBC closed its bureau in  Tashkent.   That  followed
    continued Government harassment since reporting  the  violence.   There
    was also mention of the deportation of Igor Rotar, from  Forum  18,  in
    August.  A correspondent  from  Radio  Free  Europe/Radio  Liberty  was
    sentenced to six months for slandering a State  official.   The  report
    went on to say:-


         "The  Government  permits  the  existence  of  certain  mainstream
             religions, including approved Muslim and Jewish communities, as
             well as the Russian Orthodox church and  some  other  Christian
             denominations.  However, the activities of other  congregations
             are restricted through legislation that requires all  religious
             groups to comply with burdensome  state-registration  criteria.
             Involvement in religious activities carried out by unregistered
             groups is punishable by fines  or  imprisonment,  and  meetings
             held  by  such  groups  have  been  raided   and   participants
             interrogated  and  arrested.   The  1998  Law  on  Freedom   of
             Conscience and  Religious  Organisations  prohibits  activities
             including proselytising and private religious instruction,  and
             requires groups to obtain a licence to  publish  or  distribute
             materials.


         The Government exercises  strict  control  over  Islamic  worship,
             including the content of imams' sermons, and is suspicious  and
             intolerant of followers of Muslim organisations not  sanctioned
             by the state.  Many members of such groups have  been  arrested
             or imprisoned on  charges  of  anti-constitutional  activities,
             often under the  pretext  of  the  Government's  fight  against
             militant Islamists.  Muslim prisoners are  frequently  tortured
             for their religious convictions or to compel them  to  renounce
             their beliefs.  .... According  to  Forum  18  the  authorities
             followed the wave of 2004  suicide  bomb  attacks  with  a  new
             crackdown against religious Muslims, as well  as  believers  of
             other faiths, including Protestants  and  Jehovah's  Witnesses.
             This policy  of  repression  accelerated  after  the  May  2005
             killings  in  Andijan;  Human  Rights  Watch   documented   190
             religious believers convicted by November 2005."

    There is mention of the Makhalla Committees referred to by  Mr  Murray.
It said:-


         "Open and free  private  discussion  is  limited  by  the  Makhalla
         Committees,  traditional  neighbourhood  organisations   that   the
         Government  has  turned  into  an  official   system   for   public
         surveillance  and  control.   According  to  Human  Rights   Watch,
         Makhalla Committee members went door-to-door to tell all  residents
         not to speak with journalists or foreigners about the 2005  Andijan
         killings."

     There was evidence that the judiciary is subservient to  the  President
    who appoints all judges and can remove them from office  at  any  time.
    There was also evidence that  police  routinely  physically  abuse  and
    torture suspects to extract confessions which are accepted by judges as
    evidence, and often serve as the  basis  for  convictions.   There  was
    reference to law enforcement authorities,  reportedly  often,  planting
    narcotics, weapons and banned religious literature on suspected members
    of Islamic groups, or political opponents,  to  justify  their  arrest.
    There  was  reference  to  racial  and  ethnic   discrimination   being
    prohibited by law but the belief that senior  positions  in  Government
    and business are reserved for  ethnic  Uzbeks  being  widespread.   The
    report  referred  to  the  Government  severely  limiting  freedom   of
    residence and movement within the country and across borders.  It  said
    that there are restrictions on foreign travel, including the use  of  a
    system of exit visas, which are often issued selectively.  It said that
    permission is required from local authorities to move to  a  new  city,
    and permission  is  rarely  granted  for  people  wishing  to  move  to
    Tashkent.

70.  The 2005  US  Department  of  State  Country  Report  on  Human  Rights
    Practices had a section on freedom of movement.  It dealt with internal
    movement and movement abroad.  It said this:-

     "The Government required citizens to obtain  exit  visas  for  foreign
        travel  or  emigration,  and  while  it  generally  granted   these
        routinely, local officials often demanded a small  bribe.   In  the
        past, authorities did not require an exit visa for travel  to  most
        countries of the former Soviet Union; however, during the year  the
        Government introduced a new registration system requiring  citizens
        to obtain a special stamp from local authorities in their place  of
        residence in  order  to  leave  the  country.   Citizens  continued
        generally to be able to travel to neighbouring states, and the  new
        stamp requirement was not uniformly enforced."


    There was reference to  travel  to  Afghanistan  and  events  following
    Andijan.  The section concluded:-


     "Emigration and repatriation were restricted in that the law  does  not
        provide  for  dual  citizenship.   In  practice,  returning   Uzbek
        citizens had to prove to authorities  that  they  did  not  acquire
        foreign citizenship while abroad, or face prosecution.  However  in
        practice, Uzbek  citizens  often  possessed  dual  citizenship  and
        travelled without issue."

Assessment of the Expert and Objective Evidence

71.  We have some concern about Mr Murray's evidence.  He is in  an  unusual
    position and it has given us cause to reflect on the  weight  which  we
    should give to his opinion.  We say that for this  reason.   Mr  Murray
    has produced a short statement which is  entirely  unsourced.   He  has
    given evidence during the course of which  he  gave  an  indication  in
    general terms as to some of the sources which he relies upon.   In  one
    aspect, the return of the  German  failed  asylum  seekers,  there  was
    express source, namely the German Ambassador.   Having  said  that  his
    report was unsourced, we acknowledge that he is not  an  expert  of  an
    academic nature who  relies  upon  the  reports  of  others  for  their
    information.  Rather, he had been the United  Kingdom's  Ambassador  in
    Uzbekistan for two years or so and is therefore a person who has had an
    exceptional opportunity to observe and  obtain  information.   We  also
    acknowledge that, the Uzbekistan Government having ejected much of  the
    foreign  press,  and  many  NGOs,  there  is  limited  opportunity  for
    obtaining information about  what  is  going  on  there.   It  must  be
    acknowledged that Mr Murray's career did not come to a conventional end
    and he himself described his parting with the FCO  as  'angry'.   There
    was a great deal in the national press and the  media  generally  about
    his departure from both Tashkent and the FCO.  He accepts that he  does
    not receive  up-to-date  information  from  the  FCO,  he  having  left
    Tashkent in 2004.  During the course of his departure he left his  wife
    and now has an Uzbek partner.  We do not know her status in the  United
    Kingdom and Mr Murray has expressed concern as to how  the  Uzbeks  may
    treat her family both because she  is  associating  with  him,  and  is
    outside the country, and also because he has written  a  critical  book
    about the Uzbek regime.  In the course of telling us about the  way  in
    which the appellant may be treated upon return, and the way in which he
    gets his information from  both  current  members  of  the  regime  and
    opposition parties, and previous contacts from his days in Tashkent, he
    told us that this information is valuable to  him  in  "his  campaign".
    Challenged about "his campaign", he simply said he is a great  believer
    in human rights.  We are left with  the  impression  that  although  Mr
    Murray is in a unique position to assist us about Uzbekistan,  he  also
    has interests of his own which may effect,  consciously  or  otherwise,
    the interpretation  which  he  puts  on  facts  and  events.   We  have
    therefore decided that although  the  factual  incidents  of  which  he
    speaks  are  likely  to  be  reliable,  we  should  treat   with   some
    circumspection his interpretation of them.  That is not to say that  we
    reject all his interpretation out of hand.  We are  fortunate  in  this
    case that there is also a great deal of background evidence from  other
    sources.

72.  The other background evidence was voluminous.   We  have  tried  during
    the course of our summary of it to give an indication as to the  nature
    of each source.  We have done that because we are conscious  that  some
    sources are reporting from a particular  point  of  view  and  are  not
    necessarily wholly objective.  It is apparent that  very  many  of  the
    short reports came from evangelical Christian organisations.  If  their
    reports were read alone one would be left with the impression that  the
    Uzbek laws controlling religion were aimed at controlling the Christian
    churches, whereas the reality is, as Mr Murray said, that the laws were
    actually introduced  with  a  view  to  attempting  to  control  Muslim
    fundamentalism.  They are used against non-registered Muslim  religious
    establishments, as well as Christian ones.  We do not say that in order
    to suggest that the Uzbek regime is any more  tolerant  than  it  might
    otherwise appear but simply to show that it is intolerant  of  a  great
    deal more than just evangelical Christians.

73.  There are really three issues which concern  the  appellant  and  which
    may all be of general interest  for  country  guidance  purposes.   The
    first is the way in which a person who has been out of the country  for
    some time may be treated on return.  Mr Murray described  a  system  of
    exit visas and that was confirmed by the US  State  Department  report.
    It is said by Mr Murray that all young  person's  passports  expire  on
    their twenty first birthday.  He said this was so that they would  have
    to return to Uzbekistan and, in order to ensure that happens  embassies
    do not renew passports.  His evidence was that the embassies can  renew
    passports, and do so for the  most  favoured,  such  as  the  sons  and
    daughters of ministers.  We  accept  that  passports  expire  when  the
    holder becomes 21 although there is no evidence other than Mr  Murray's
    unsupported assertion.  We have no reason to doubt  that  part  of  his
    evidence.

74.  We are not satisfied that it is  not  possible  to  obtain  a  passport
    renewal outside  Uzbekistan.   We  say  that  because  the  appellant's
    husband has recently returned there and he will in all probability have
    had to obtain some form  of  travel  document.   He  arrived  with  the
    appellant in 1996.  We have not been told  of  any  difficulty  on  his
    part.  Although it is said that his father was  in  the  KGB,  and  his
    grandfather before him, there is no reason to suppose that he is  among
    that very small group of people that  Mr  Murray  says  can  get  their
    passports renewed.   The  fact  that  he  has  returned  undermines  Mr
    Murray's assertion that it is not possible to  get  documentation.   We
    accept he may not have been issued with an  actual  passport  but  that
    does not matter.  It is the fact he was in possession  of  an  official
    document that enabled him to  return,  apparently  without  difficulty,
    which is important.  His return also detracts very considerably from Mr
    Murray's evidence, and the appellant's mother-in-law's assertion,  that
    there is severe punishment for those who do return, having stayed  away
    beyond the  end  of  their  exit  visa.   The  appellant  is  still  in
    communication with her mother-in-law and we have no doubt that  if  her
    former husband had been charged, or even imprisoned,  as  a  result  of
    returning after a long absence, she would have heard about  it  and  we
    would have been told.  We find there is no satisfactory  evidence  that
    it is not possible to obtain a travel document (whether it be a renewed
    passport or some other  form  of  documentation).   Nor  is  there  any
    satisfactory evidence to show that a returnee is likely to be  punished
    for having been out of the country for longer than was  permitted.   We
    will deal later with the question of whether a long  absence  may  give
    rise to questioning, and if so, the likely consequences of that.

75.  The second issue arises from the  fact  that  appellant  is  an  ethnic
    Russian.  The only background  evidence  concerning  the  treatment  of
    minorities was an assertion that there is a widespread belief that  the
    top jobs  are  reserved  for  ethnic  Uzbeks.   The  evidence  (in  the
    respondent's evidence referred to in  paragraph  69  (ante))  was  that
    discrimination on ethnic grounds is contrary to the law.  Although  the
    Stop Violence Against  Women  report  (paragraph  54  ante)  refers  to
    discrimination against minorities,  we  have  not  heard  or  read  any
    satisfactory evidence about discrimination against ethnic minorities of
    a nature that would come  anywhere  to  amounting  to  persecution,  or
    serious ill-treatment that would entitle the appellant to  humanitarian
    protection or would amount to a breach of her rights  under  Article  3
    ECHR.  There is no satisfactory evidence  of  serious  mistreatment  of
    ethnic minorities in Uzbekistan.

76.  The third area is the question  of  religion  and,  more  specifically,
    evangelical Christianity.  Mr Murray told us that the requirements  for
    registration of places of worship was brought  about  by  a  desire  to
    control Islamic fundamentalism.  When it was put to him that  it  would
    not therefore be used against Christians it was  his  observation  that
    once a law is in place it can be used against Christians.  The evidence
    which we have gone through in some detail shows that it is unlawful  to
    practise one's religion anywhere other than in a  registered  place  of
    worship.  It is also demonstrable that registration is not made easy by
    the authorities, at least insofar as those religions they consider more
    difficult  are  concerned.   The  evidence  does  not   indicate   that
    mainstream mosques  have  any  problems,  nor  that  Jews,  or  Russian
    Orthodox or Roman Catholic Christians do.  Mr Murray described them  as
    "quietest" religions.  It was his view that what the  authorities  wish
    to prevent is independent anti-Government thought which  they  perceive
    as having the potential to undermine the authority of the State.

77.  It also seems that  the  Government  forbids,  or  at  least  seriously
    discourages, proselytising, whether that  is  described  as  missionary
    activity or preaching.  This may also be as a result of its  desire  to
    keep fundamentalist Muslims under control but there is  no  doubt  from
    the objective  material  that  the  law  is  used  against  evangelical
    Christians and on at least one occasion, followers of Hare Krishna.  As
    yet the proposed law forbidding discussion of religious beliefs outside
    places of worship has not been brought into effect although  we  accept
    that its proposal demonstrates a particular mindset on the part of  the
    authorities.  The authorities  also  maintain  control  over  religious
    literature, but there does not seem to be  any  difficulty  in  getting
    permission for Bibles in languages other than Uzbek.   This  may  be  a
    result of the desire to control fundamentalist Muslims.

78.  Uzbekistan itself is said to be a Muslim country in  that  by  far  the
    greatest majority of its population refer to themselves as Muslims.  Mr
    Murray described it as being a particular local variant of Islam and he
    gave as an example the large proportion of his Muslim friends who drink
    alcohol.  Whilst it does not seem appropriate to describe Uzbekistan as
    a secular State, because the President  has  indicated  his  desire  to
    uphold Islamic tradition, it is certainly not a theocracy and  it  does
    not appear to have an official religion.

79.  By far the majority of the reports of the  mistreatment  of  Christians
    relate to members of evangelical  denominations.   Similarly,  by  far,
    problems arise when  churches  are  not  registered  and,  where  as  a
    consequence of failing to register or otherwise, religious meetings are
    held in private houses or other places that are not registered.   There
    seems to be a degree of distrust of those who come from abroad to  take
    part in religious activity as illustrated by the willingness to  deport
    them.  There is little doubt that there is some tendency to  deregister
    places of worship, although Mr Murray reported  at  least  one  Baptist
    minister who felt that the denomination is  growing  within  Uzbekistan
    (he himself doubted that was the  case).   He  reported  a  raid  on  a
    registered  church  at  the  bottom  of  the  residency  garden.    The
    background evidence also tends to show that those who are  most  likely
    to be detained are ministers and other particularly active  members  of
    congregations.  Very often the outcome was little more than a fine, but
    there are reports of general mistreatment of an unpleasant nature, some
    of which arguably amounted to torture, during periods of detention.

80.  Whilst we acknowledge the large amount of material that  has  been  put
    before us, we observe that much of it comes from the  more  evangelical
    denominations of Christianity.  It is  also  clear  that  many  of  the
    reports deal  with  the  same  incidents  (for  example  the  incidents
    surrounding the Emmanuel Church in Nukus and its  deregistration).   We
    therefore bear in mind that the volume of incidents is not as great  as
    might at first appear, but that is not to say that there is no problem.
     The question is whether or not a  person  such  as  the  appellant,  a
    Baptist, can safely return.  The background evidence does not appear to
    suggest that an ordinary member of an evangelical congregation would be
    at real risk of serious ill-treatment.  (By  ill-treatment,  from  this
    point in the determination, we mean  either  persecution,  mistreatment
    sufficient to give rise to  a  grant  of  humanitarian  protection,  or
    inhuman or degrading treatment under the provisions of Article 3 ECHR.)
     That is particularly the case if a person were to  join  a  registered
    church and to worship at registered premises.   There  is  insufficient
    evidence of ill-treatment  of  ordinary  members  of  congregations  to
    suggest that Baptists, or others who regard spreading  the  word  as  a
    real part of their religion, are at real risk  of  persecution  either.
    In saying that, we acknowledge that people from time to time have  been
    accused, for example, of preaching to each other in private homes,  but
    the background evidence suggests that in the main they are  people  who
    are members of unregistered churches.   We  acknowledge  there  may  be
    exceptions but none sufficient to indicate a real risk.

81.  There appear to  be  some  churches  which,  on  principle,  refuse  to
    register and by so doing effectively challenge the authorities.   There
    is no suggestion that the appellant has been, or would be, a member  of
    such a church.  She has not said that she must join such a  church  and
    therefore we are not concerned  from  her  point  of  view  about  that
    possibility.  Insofar as country guidance is concerned, it seems to  us
    that if an appellant can establish that he or she genuinely desires  to
    belong to  such  a  church,  and  to  challenge  overtly  the  laws  of
    Uzbekistan, then more careful thought needs to be given to their claim.
     However difficult it may appear to  comply,  Uzbekistan  has  a  legal
    framework  which  permits  religious  minorities  to   practise   their
    religions.  The motivation of a person who claims that they must join a
    church which insists on practising outside the legal framework must  be
    the subject of serious scrutiny.  It is possible that such a person may
    be able to establish a real risk  of  serious  harm,  but  it  will  be
    difficult for them to do so.   They  will  need  to  show  that  it  is
    genuinely for reasons of religion that they intend to  behave  in  that
    way  and  not  merely  in  order  to  establish  a  claim  to   asylum,
    humanitarian protection or other grounds for remaining  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

82.  The other category of person who may be capable  of  establishing  that
    he or she would be at real risk is a pastor or other  serious  activist
    within a church.   Such  persons  may,  if  they  were  to  attempt  to
    proselytise outside a registered place of worship, in a way  which  the
    authorities may regard as provocative or obvious, may, depending on the
    facts of the individual case, be able to establish  that  they  are  at
    real  risk.   Again,  the  genuineness  of  their  intentions  and  the
    motivation for it will  be  issues  that  the  Tribunal  will  wish  to
    consider.

The Appellant's Own Claim

83.  The appellant maintains that the fact the police,  when  arresting  her
    sister on fabricated drugs  charges,  said  they  knew  all  about  the
    appellant, whom they regarded as wealthy and living abroad, puts her at
    risk.  There was some considerable discussion about whether this was in
    2002 or 2005.  The oral evidence turned out, probably,  to  be  to  the
    effect that the police had said this in 2002 on  the  occasion  of  the
    first arrest but the appellant's sister did not mention it until  2005,
    after she was released on payment  of  a  bribe  following  the  second
    arrest.  We say 'probably' because it was extremely  difficult  in  the
    medium of either English, or Russian, to get a straight answer from the
    appellant.  Clearly some of  that  was  a  failure  to  understand  the
    question, but we are not satisfied that it all was.  The appellant  had
    already demonstrated her  ability  to  dissemble  when  she  was  asked
    whether her sister was a Baptist or not.  Clearly she is not,  but  the
    appellant did not want to say so and she therefore  took  to  giving  a
    confusing and rambling answer.  We believe that she was doing the  same
    about the incident with the police.  We find it impossible to interpret
    her witness statement as saying that the police were referring to  her.
    The witness statement clearly meant  that  the  police  said  that  the
    appellant's sister, who was with them, was regarded  as  having  money.
    The appellant was not credible on this point.  We do  not  regard  what
    the police said as being in any way indicative  of  this  family  being
    targeted, or consequently that there would be any risk to the appellant
    because of her membership of that family.  We  know  remarkably  little
    about the appellant's younger sister.  She is the only  member  of  the
    family that appears to have been arrested twice, and on both  occasions
    claims that she had  drugs  planted  on  her.   That  is  not  entirely
    inconsistent with the way in which the police sometimes operate, as  is
    apparent  from  the  background  evidence.   That  such  'evidence'  is
    sometimes planted does not  mean  that  people  who  are  arrested  are
    innocent.  We contrast the ease with which the appellant's  sister  was
    released on  payment  of  a  relatively  modest  bribe  on  the  second
    occasion, with the 10 year sentence that she said she was given on  the
    first.  In any event she now lives in Armenia, as does the  appellant's
    eldest sister.  The appellant's mother remains in Uzbekistan and  there
    has been no suggestion that she has been targeted either as a result of
    the appellant's sister's activities, or any belief that the family  has
    money.

84.  The appellant is a convert to the Baptist church, it  would  seem  from
    another form of Christianity.  The only hint as to her religion,  prior
    to converting to being a Baptist, was that contained in one  answer  in
    her interview.  Her  husband,  who  also  converted,  appears  to  have
    converted from Islam.  He has returned to Uzbekistan with  no  reported
    difficulty.  He is an  ethnic  Uzbek.   The  appellant's  mother-in-law
    seems to have been the vehicle for their conversion  and,  we  observe,
    seems to visit Uzbekistan and the UK.  The appellant  said,  in  recent
    evidence, that her mother has been prevented from going to  her  church
    as it has been closed down, but we have not heard that she has been  in
    any  difficulty  or  that  she  has  been  prevented  from  worshipping
    elsewhere.  The appellant's latest statement is that she worships in  a
    private house but there is no mention of problems.  We do not know  her
    mother's  denomination.   So  far  as  the  appellant's   religion   is
    concerned, we are satisfied for the reasons we have given  above,  that
    she would not be at real risk on return on that account.  She seems  to
    have a close relationship with her pastor and  in  the  United  Kingdom
    does take part in evangelical activities but, there  is  nothing  about
    her evidence which suggests to us that  she  would  feel  compelled  to
    practise her religion in a way that  would  distinguish  her  from  the
    average evangelical Christian in Uzbekistan.  As we have  said,  we  do
    not accept that they are at real risk without more.  We do not  suggest
    that there is never any risk and  we  acknowledge  that  there  can  be
    difficulties, on occasion, when practising any  minority  religion,  or
    Islam in unregistered premises in Uzbekistan.  The fact the appellant's
    mother remains there, and the appellant's ex-husband has returned (both
    converts to Christianity from  Islam)  adds  to  our  belief  that  the
    appellant herself is not at real risk for that reason.

85.  It was put in argument that the  appellant  would  be  at  risk  for  a
    number of reasons which should be  looked  at  cumulatively.   We  have
    dealt with her religion.   We  have  already  said  that  there  is  no
    satisfactory evidence of serious discrimination against ethnic Russians
    nor is there satisfactory evidence  that  the  appellant  would  be  in
    difficulty on return because she  has  overstayed  her  exit  visa  and
    currently has no  valid  passport.   Would  she  come  under  suspicion
    because she has been away for so long?  It has been asserted  that  she
    would.  We have been shown no evidence in  support  of  that  assertion
    save for Mr Murray's account of  the  two  German  returnees  who  were
    detained on arrival, one of whom remains in detention.  Whilst that  is
    a reason for suggesting that the appellant may be at some risk of being
    detained, we note that Mr Murray knew nothing about the  reason  as  to
    why the two returnees had been deported, or removed, from Germany.  Nor
    do we know anything about why they left Uzbekistan in the first  place.
    Whilst speculative, it is not beyond the bounds of possibility that the
    one who remains in detention was wanted before he left.  We  simply  do
    not know.  For those reasons we  are  satisfied  that  the  appellant's
    claim cannot succeed under the Refugee  Convention,  that  she  is  not
    entitled to humanitarian protection  and  that  by  returning  her  the
    United Kingdom would not be in breach of her  rights  under  Article  3
    ECHR.


The Appellant's Claim - Article 8 ECHR

86.  The appellant has no basis under the immigration  rules  for  remaining
    in the United Kingdom.  Her most recent evidence sets out  the  private
    and family life which she enjoys in the United  Kingdom.   She  is  now
    divorced from her husband who has returned to Uzbekistan.  She does not
    therefore enjoy any family life as such.  Insofar as her  private  life
    is concerned she clearly has a great deal of support  from  her  pastor
    who, she says, loves her like a daughter.  She  has  a  fulfilling  and
    enjoyable life in her church.  Her friends seem  to  be  mostly  fellow
    Christians and her social life is based upon her  church.   She  has  a
    job, although she should not be working.  She is defying the respondent
    and the law by carrying on working when she has been told  she  was  no
    longer to do so.  She is in the process of buying a flat by  using  her
    salary to pay the mortgage.  We do not know whether there is any equity
    in it.  The concept of private  and  family  life  under  the  European
    Convention is not sufficiently wide as to  embrace  all  matters  which
    could be described as private life.  The appellant has not  shown  that
    she has any weighty private life considerations.  She has made friends,
    enjoys going to church and is working illegally.  She has  expressed  a
    wish to study law at university and is currently registered as a  part-
    time student studying for a "Certificate in English for Legal  Method".
    We acknowledge that during the eight years  it  took  to  consider  her
    application for asylum, and  in  the  time  since,  the  appellant  has
    developed community ties and made friends.  We do  not  find  that  the
    elements of private life are sufficiently  strong  that  requiring  the
    appellant to return to Uzbekistan would breach her right to private and
    family  life.   The  appellant  has  not  established  that   she   has
    sufficiently significant elements of private  and  family  life  to  be
    worthy of protection by virtue of article 8 ECHR.

87.  The most striking aspect of this case is that it  took  the  respondent
    eight years to reject her claim to be  recognised  as  a  refugee.   Mr
    Deller, acknowledging that the Court of Appeal had not  disagreed  with
    the Tribunal's description of a 3� year delay  as  a  public  disgrace,
    told us this is the longest delay he had come across.  Delay,  however,
    goes to the question of proportionality.  Proportionality only  becomes
    relevant when the respondent intends to remove an appellant in  such  a
    way that there would be a breach of  a  protected  private  and  family
    life.  That is not so here.  From a legal  point  of  view  it  is  not
    possible to take the delay into account when assessing the  appellant's
    wish to remain in the United Kingdom.  In saying that,  we  acknowledge
    that she has not entirely acquiesced in that delay and there have  been
    instances of her solicitors trying to follow up  the  application.   In
    the meantime she has, to some extent, established herself here,  having
    spent a significant  proportion  of  her  mature  life  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

88.  We have received and read  the  appellant's  counsel's  note  following
    Huang v SSHD {2007]  UKHL  11.   Nothing  in  either  the  opinion,  or
    counsel's note, has made  us  take  a  different  view.   We  took  the
    decision  ourselves.   We  have  not  considered  proportionality   and
    therefore would not have needed to have regard to 'exceptionality'.

89.  The respondent would not be in  breach  of  the  appellant's  right  to
    respect for her private and family life if he were  to  return  her  to
    Uzbekistan.

90.  The appeal is dismissed on asylum and human rights grounds.

    The appellant is not entitled to humanitarian protection.




Signed                                  Date

Senior Immigration Judge Mather


1.    US  Department  of  State;  International  Religious  Freedom  Report:
    Uzbekistan, 15/09/06 [.....]

2.   Human Rights Watch World Report 2006 - Uzbekistan

3.   Human Rights Watch  Open  Letter  to  US  Commission  on  International
    Religious Freedom, 20/10/03

4.   US Department of State; Country Reports on Human Rights Practices  2005
    (08/03/2006

5.   US Department of State; International Religious  Freedom  Report  2006:
    Uzbekistan (15/09/06)

6.   International Helsinki Federation for Human  Rights;  Human  Rights  in
    the OSCE Region: Europe, Central Asia and North  America,  Report  2006
    (Events of 2005): Uzbekistan (01/05/2006)

7.    Annual  Report  of  the  United  States  Commission  on  International
    Religious Freedom, May 2006

8.   Keston  Institute;  Torture  of  Religious  Believers  in  Uzbekistan:-
    Submission to United Nations Committee Against Torture

9.   International Christian Concern, July 2003 Country Report

10.  Assist News Service, 13 December 2005

11.  The Christian Science Monitor, 6 November 2003

12.  Stop Violence Against Women, 28 January 2004

13.  Worldnet Daily, 1 July 2005 Archive

14.   Human  Rights  Without  Frontiers   'Uzbekistan:   Religious   Freedom
    Chronology of Events, January - June 2000'

15.  Ferghana.ru report on Item from the Christian Megaportal, 30/08/2006

16.  Barnabas Fund (UK), 1 September 2006

17.   BosNews  Life   (on   www.christian_persecution.info)   03/09/06   and
    11/09/2006

18.  Forum 18, Various News Items

19.  Radio Free Europe Website, 30/08/2006

20.  www.dialoguz.com Freedom House 'Waste of the Worst:  The  World's  Most
    Repressive Societies, 2006'
