

Asylum and Immigration Tribunal

                   SH (Baha'is) Iran CG [2006] UKAIT 00041

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Promulgated                |
|On 25 January 2006                              |On 27 April 2006           |
|                                                |...........................|
|                                                |............               |


                                   Before

                        SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE LANE
                      SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE ROBERTS
                       immIGRATION JUDGE i. MACDONALD


                                   Between


                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:  Mr R De Mello, counsel, instructed by the Immigration
Advisory Services (Leeds)
For the Respondent: Mrs R Petterson, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

(1) An Iranian Baha'i is not as such at real risk of persecution in Iran

(2) Such a person will, however, be able to demonstrate a well-founded  fear
of persecution if, on the facts of the case, he or she is reasonably  likely
to be targeted by the Iranian authorities (or their  agents)  for  religious
reasons. Evidence of past persecution will be  of  particular  relevance  in
this regard.  It is doubtful if a person who has not previously come to  the
serious adverse attention of the  authorities,  by  reason  of  his  or  her
teaching or particular organisational or other activities on behalf  of  the
Baha'i community in Iran , will be able, even in  the  current  climate,  to
show that he or she will be at real risk on return.

1.   The appellant, a citizen of Iran born on 29 August  1953,  entered  the
      United Kingdom on 23 April 2005 using a twelve-month visitor's  multi-
      visa, which was valid from 14 February 2005 to 14 February  2006.   He
      was accompanied by his  wife.   On  10  October  2005,  the  appellant
      claimed asylum.  On 16 November 2005 the  respondent  decided  (i)  to
      vary the appellant's leave to enter  the  United  Kingdom,  so  as  to
      terminate that leave, and (ii) that the appellant should be removed to
      Iran by  way  of  directions.  The  appellant  appealed  against  that
      decision on the grounds that his removal from the  United  Kingdom  in
      consequence of it would breach the United Kingdom's obligations  under
      the Refugee Convention and would be unlawful under section  6  of  the
      Human Rights Act 1998  as  being  incompatible  with  the  appellant's
      rights under the ECHR.

2.   The burden of proof is on the appellant to show that,  if  returned  to
      Iran, he would be at real risk of persecution for a Refugee Convention
      reason, or of treatment that would violate the ECHR.  The Tribunal has
      applied that standard of proof in the  present case.  It  has  reached
      its findings having regard to the evidence as a whole, examining  that
      evidence in the round.

   3.  The  appellant's  documentary  evidence   comprises   three   written
      statements by him, a written statement of his wife, the oral  evidence
      of the appellant and his wife and the oral and written evidence of  Mr
      Barnabus Leith, Mr Daniel Wheatley, and Dr Nazila Ghanea-Hercock.  The
      Tribunal also had before it  the  respondent's  bundle  of  documents,
      including records of interviews  with  the  appellant  and  his  wife,
      university and medical certificates relating to the appellant's  wife,
      and the letter of refusal addressed to the appellant dated 16 November
      2005.


The appellant's claim

4.   The appellant claims to fear persecution  in  Iran  by  reason  of  his
      Baha'i faith.  The appellant qualified as a doctor in  Iran  in  1979,
      the same year in which his father in law was compelled to flee to  the
      United Kingdom as a result of difficulties  arising  from  his  Baha'i
      faith.    The appellant married in 1981.  Both the appellant  and  his
      wife encountered difficulties in pursuing their profession as doctors,
      on account of their faith.  The appellant  was  arrested  in  1983  on
      charges relating to his activities as a Baha'i, and sentenced  to  ten
      years imprisonment by the Revolutionary Court.  Whilst in prison,  the
      appellant  was  beaten  and  kept  from  time  to  time  in   solitary
      confinement. Together with other Baha'is, he  was  released  in  1989,
      having served some five years eight months of his sentence.

5.   After his release, the appellant and his wife struggled to practise  as
      doctors. They were hampered by  government  restrictions,  which  they
      considered were placed on them by reason of their being  Baha'is.  The
      appellant sought redress by writing on approximately twenty  occasions
      to persons in  the  Iranian  government.  On  one  occasion  when  the
      appellant visited the offices of the Prime Minister the appellant  was
      told by the officials there that he was a spy for Israel.

6.   The appellant's house was confiscated by the authorities in  1994,  for
      the reason that it had been given to them by the appellant's father-in-
      law, a prominent Baha'i.  In that year, the  appellant  and  his  wife
      finally secured passports, after attempting to do so for some  fifteen
      years.  They travelled to the United Kingdom and subsequently returned
      to Iran.

7.   In 1998 the appellant was arrested in connection  with  his  activities
      as a lecturer  at  the  Baha'i  Institute  of  Higher  Education.  The
      appellant was sentenced to ten years imprisonment by the Revolutionary
      Court. This time,  however,  he  was  not  beaten  whilst  in  prison,
      although he was compelled to have his head shaved and was placed in an
      overcrowded cell.   After  fourteen  months  and  fourteen  days,  the
      appellant was released by the Court of  Appeal,  which  the  appellant
      ascribed in part to international pressure  on  Iran  to  improve  the
      treatment of Baha'is.

8.   After his second release, the appellant went to  work  in  the  surgery
      which his  wife  was  running  in  Isfahan.   The  couple  experienced
      financial difficulties as a result of  the  fact  that  patients  with
      medical insurance could not recoup from their insurers  the  costs  of
      being treated by Baha'i doctors.

9.   In 2000, the appellant again travelled to the United Kingdom  and  also
      the USA.   On return to Iran, the appellant and his wife were  roughly
      handled by the authorities, who interrogated them about the trip.

10.  In July 2004 the appellant  was  arrested  at  home  whilst  hosting  a
      devotional meeting involving a form of Baha'i  teaching  developed  by
      that organisation known as the Ruhy Institute.  Ruhy teaching  enables
      non-Baha'i people to become familiar with the  Baha'i  faith.  One  of
      those present on 12 July 2004 at the devotional meeting was  a  Muslim
      who had informally converted to the Baha'i faith. The appellant's wife
      was also arrested and accused of converting Muslims to that faith. The
      appellant was released on bail after two nights in detention.

11.  The appellant and his wife entered the United Kingdom on 23 April  2005
      as  visitors.   Their  purpose  was  to  visit  the  parents  of   the
      appellant's wife and to attend certain medical events in this country.

12.  On 5 October 2005, the appellant's wife received a telephone call  from
      a relative in Iran who told her that she and the appellant should  not
      return to that country.  The brother-in-law rang again on  10  October
      when he spoke to the appellant.  The brother in law told the appellant
      that the latter would be arrested at the airport on  arrival  in  Iran
      and that there was an arrest  warrant  out  for  him.   The  appellant
      inferred that the decision to make the telephone call had  been  taken
      by the Baha'i community in Isfahan. An Iranian friend of the appellant
      who was in the United Kingdom returned  to  Iran,  where  he  met  the
      appellant's  brother-in-law  on  20  October  2005.   The  friend  was
      informed that hard-liners who were in  the  Iranian  security  service
      regretted the fact that the appellant had been  released  on  bail  in
      2004.  That particular information was said to have been given to  the
      appellant's brother-in-law by a Baha'i from the appellant's community.



  13. As a result of the first telephone  conversation  on  5  October,  the
      appellant and his wife decided that they would be in  danger  if  they
      were returned to Iran and the appellant accordingly claimed asylum.

The Baha'i faith

14.   The Home Office Science and Research Group's October  2005  Report  on
      Iran contains (at paragraphs 6.80 and 6.81) a brief description of the
      Baha'i faith. Founded in the mid-nineteenth century in  southern  Iran
      as an offshoot of Shi'a Islam, it has since developed into a  separate
      religious faith. For the Baha'is, God is completely  transcendent  and
      unknowable, although divine manifestations occur throughout history in
      the form  of  prophets  such  as  Adam,  Moses,  Jesus,  Mohammed  and
      Zoroaster. The founder of the Baha'i faith,  Baha'ullah,  was  such  a
      manifestation. Although all prophetic religions are considered  to  be
      true, Baha'is consider that theirs is the most suitable to the present
      age. Mohammed is not regarded by Baha'is as the  'seal'  of  prophets.
      The  Baha'i  faith  has  no  priesthood  but  there  is   instead   an
      administrative hierarchy  of  elected  local  and  national  Spiritual
      Assemblies. The highest organ of administration is the Universal House
      of Justice in Haifa, Israel.


The appellant's oral evidence

15.  At the hearing the appellant gave evidence with the  assistance  of  an
      interpreter in the Farsi language.  The appellant was,  however,  able
      to communicate to a significant extent in English, and did so when  he
      so chose.  The appellant adopted the written  statements,  from  which
      the above summary of his account is largely taken.  Mr De Mello  asked
      the appellant why he had not claimed asylum during one of his  earlier
      visits to the United Kingdom or, indeed, when he last arrived in  this
      country  in  April  2005.    The  appellant  said  that  despite   the
      difficulties he and his wife had encountered, they remained  committed
      to their Baha'i community in  Iran.  The  telephone  conversations  in
      October 2005,  however, had persuaded the appellant that he  would  be
      in serious danger if he were now to return.  He  would,  nevertheless,
      continue to practise as a Baha'i, if given the opportunity in Iran.

16.  In cross-examination, the appellant was asked about  the  letters  that
      he had written to  various  people  in  Iran,  complaining  about  the
      difficulties he and his wife were encountering  as  doctors.  He  said
      that some ten to fifteen letters had been written  but  each  one  had
      been copied to a number of individuals.   As  a  result  of  one  such
      letter, the appellant's wife had  finally  been  enabled  to  work  in
      private practice.

17.  The appellant explained in more detail the problems  that  he  and  his
      wife had encountered in  working  as  doctors.   In  Iran,  under  the
      regulations in force at the time, a newly  qualified  doctor  was  not
      permitted to engage in private practice unless and until he or she had
      completed a period of time working on behalf of the government in what
      the  appellant  described  as  poor  areas.    Owing  to  the  Iranian
      government's dislike of Baha'is, however, doctors of that  faith  were
      not allowed to work for the government and thus could not  fulfil  the
      preconditions of working in private practice. Married women  were said
      by the appellant to be exempt from the relevant  requirement  but  the
      difficulties faced by the appellant's wife, at least for a  time,  was
      that her marriage as a Baha'i was  not  officially  recognised.   From
      1989, however, the appellant acknowledged that both he  and  his  wife
      had been able to work in private surgeries.

18.  The appellant was asked about his answers at his Home Office  interview
      concerning the Baha'i Institute of Higher  Education.   The  appellant
      confirmed what he had  there  said,  namely,  that  after  his  second
      release from imprisonment, the Baha'i community had decided  that  the
      appellant should no longer be involved in the Institute.

19.  It was put to the appellant that his evidence regarding  the  visit  to
      Iran in October 2005 of an Iranian friend  had  not  occurred  in  his
      earlier statements. Nor had it  been  mentioned  in  his  Home  Office
      interview.    The appellant said that he was unsure whether the friend
      had returned from Iran at the time of  the  interview  on  4  November
      2005.  It had also been necessary to ask the friend for his permission
      to refer to him. No question about the friend  had  been  put  to  the
      appellant at the interview.  The appellant confirmed that his brother-
      in-law had informed him about  the  warrant  for  the  arrest  of  the
      appellant.  The appellant was asked again about the involvement of the
      friend and said that he had found out about what the friend  had  been
      told in Iran only after the Home  Office  interview.    The  appellant
      therefore agreed that the interviewing officer could not be criticised
      for failing to ask about the matter.

20.  As for how the Baha'i community had found out about the  views  of  the
      Iranian secret service towards the appellant, the latter said that the
      community had certain  trusted  people  who  liaised  with  government
      departments including the Ministry  of  Intelligence.   The  appellant
      presumed that it was such a Baha'i who  had  passed  on  the  relevant
      information concerning the appellant.  These  Baha'is  representatives
      were trusted by the Baha'i  community  and  regarded  by  the  Iranian
      authorities as trustworthy.

21.  The appellant said that the person who had been  chairing  the  meeting
      at home in 2004, which had been  raided  by  the  authorities,  was  a
      former Muslim who had declared an interest in the Baha'i faith but had
      not yet been recognised as such. Asked if it was  normal  for  such  a
      person to be in charge of devotional meetings, the appellant said that
      it was the case with the Ruhy Institute training.

22.  The appellant said that when he last left  Iran,  the  authorities  had
      checked on the computer to see if he was prohibited from  leaving  and
      had discovered that he was not.

23.  In re-examination, the appellant said that after his release  in  1994,
      he and his wife had encountered difficulties  in  practicing  medicine
      because insurance companies would not reimburse the  medical  expenses
      of people who had consulted Baha'i physicians.

24.  The appellant confirmed that he believed that his home  had  been  kept
      under surveillance whilst he  was  carrying  out  teaching  activities
      there. The Ruhy teaching involved a different person  being  appointed
      to lead the group on each occasion that there was a meeting.  Asked if
      he would continue  with  such  prayer  meetings,  if  he  were  to  be
      returned, the appellant  said  that  certain  limitations  were  being
      imposed upon the Ruhy Institute but that he would pursue it  'but  not
      so openly'.

Evidence of the appellant's wife
25.  The appellant's wife gave evidence. She adopted her written  statement.
       Like the  appellant,  she  spoke  with  the  assistance  of  a  Farsi
      interpreter but often preferred to answer in English.

26.  In her statement, the appellant's wife described how  her  parents  had
      fled Iran because of religious persecution and that  she  had  studied
      medicine at Shiraz University.  Although able to complete her  course,
      six months after her graduation, those Baha'i students  still  at  the
      university had been dismissed from it.   This  had  also  happened  in
      other Iranian universities. In 1981, the appellant's wife  visited  in
      prison certain of her Baha'i friends who had been sentenced to  death.
      They were executed  shortly  thereafter.  The  statement  went  on  to
      describe the first sentence of imprisonment of the appellant  and  how
      the appellant's wife had difficulty in making  visits  to  the  prison
      where he was held.  Even after the appellant's wife was able to open a
      surgery in 1984, she experienced  harassment  and  other  difficulties
      from the authorities.  These included  spurious  official  inspections
      of the premises and, and on one occasion,  the  appropriation  of  the
      surgery of the appellant and his wife in Evaz by  a  covetous  doctor.
      The statement also dealt with the difficulties  that  arose  from  the
      attitude of the health insurance companies. As  for  the  1984  prayer
      meeting incident, the statement recorded that the appellant's wife was
      arrested and then told to go to the Revolutionary  Court  because  the
      appellant would be appearing there.  The  appellant  was  released  on
      bail with the assistance of a Baha'i friend. The  statement  ended  by
      describing how the appellant's wife spoke on the telephone in  October
      2004 to her cousin (her husband's brother-in-law) who warned her  that
      it was dangerous for the couple to return to Iran.

27.  In examination-in-chief, the appellant's wife  adopted  her  statement.
      She  said  that  she  had  harboured  an  ambition  to  specialise  in
      dermatology but had been prevented from pursuing this in Iran, as  she
      was a Baha'i. She had hoped to have been able to undertake courses  in
      this subject whilst in the United Kingdom.

  28. Cross-examined, the appellant's wife confirmed that she  had  believed
      that their house was under surveillance continuously after her husband
      had been released from detention in 2004.  Asked why,  therefore,  she
      had not claimed asylum when she arrived in the United Kingdom in 2005,
      the appellant's wife said that she and her husband arrived as visitors
      and their intention then was to return to Iran. They had  intended  to
      remain in Iran, despite the difficulties, with which they  had  coped.
      However, following the Presidential election and  the  telephone  call
      from the appellant's brother-in-law, she and  the  appellant  realised
      that it would be 'suicidal' to return to Iran.  Her husband's life was
      now at risk.  Asked why she and the appellant had not  claimed  asylum
      after the appellant's second imprisonment, the appellant's wife  again
      said that they had wished to remain committed to their Baha'i friends,
      despite the difficulties.

29.  In answer to questions from the Tribunal,  the  witness  explained  the
      nature of the copy certificates set out at Annex C1 to 4 of  the  Home
      Office bundle.  These documents were confirmation  of  her  university
      qualifications and permits to practise medicine privately in Iran.

Evidence of  the  Hon.  Barnabas  Leith,  Secretary  for  External  Affairs,
National Spiritual Assembly of the Baha'is of the United Kingdom

30.  Mr Leith spoke to his written report.  That  report  included  a  brief
      history of the Baha'is,  with  which  we  shall  deal  later  in  this
      determination.   The witness said that an important part of his duties
      as the Secretary  for  External  Affairs  of  the  National  Spiritual
      Assembly was to defend the  human  rights  of  Baha'is  in  Iran.  The
      National Spiritual Assembly of the Baha'is of the  United  Kingdom  is
      affiliated to the Baha'i   International Community, a non-governmental
      organisation with United Nations offices in New York and  Geneva.  The
      BIC endeavours to maintain contact with Baha'is in Iran.  The  witness
      said that care was taken to ensure that  the  evidence  obtained  from
      Iran was verified, before being presented to national governments.  Mr
      Leith said that  the  Foreign  and  Commonwealth  Office  trusted  the
      information supplied to them and acted upon it without  the  need  for
      further verification. The witness had also met with the team leader of
      the Immigration and Nationality Directorate of  the  Home  Office  and
      assisted the Home Office in establishing whether claims by Iranians to
      be Baha'is were genuine. The requirement to tell the truth was central
      to Baha'i ethics.

31.  Mr De Mello asked the witness about paragraph  32  of  his  report,  in
      which it was stated that the appellant was firm in his Baha'i  beliefs
      and had chosen to accept imprisonment  and  physical  violence  rather
      than cease manifesting those beliefs in private  and  in  public.  The
      witness said that he was familiar with the appellant and had  met  him
      on previous visits to the United Kingdom.  The  appellant's  name  was
      familiar to the witness as a person who had been imprisoned in Iran.

32.  The witness was also asked about paragraph 33 of the  report  in  which
      it is stated that the  Baha'i  community  in  Iran  has  continued  to
      manifest its faith in private and in public 'continuing  to  pray  and
      study and educate their children and young people, drawing on whatever
      resources they are able to muster, meeting in Baha'i   homes,  despite
      continuing intimidation by  state  actors  as  well  as  by  non-state
      actors, including members of the Hojjatiehj  Society'.    The  witness
      said that, because of pressure upon them, Baha'is found  it  difficult
      to rent halls for their meetings and they also did not want to be seen
      to be stirring up trouble. Accordingly, meetings at  home  had  become
      their modus operandi.

33.  The witness said that the Ruhy Institute originated in  Colombia.  What
      it produced was essentially a set of training materials, comprising at
      present seven books.  The materials were intended  both  for  existing
      Baha'is to study and for those interested in the faith.

34.  Mr Leith said that the Hojjatiehj Society had been founded in  1953  by
      a Shi'ite seminarian who had  studied  the  Baha'is  and  conceived  a
      hatred of them. The society grew in size and influence  and  had  been
      behind actions to disrupt the Baha'i   and their meetings. The Society
      had also managed to infiltrate the Baha'i community. During  the  time
      of Ayatollah Khomeni, the Society's  activities  had  been  restricted
      since Khomeni had not approved of it.  Now, however, it  was  enjoying
      something of a renaissance. Indeed,  it  was  believed  that  the  new
      President, Ahmadinejad, had been a member of the society and that  its
      activities met with his approval, in that they would foster  chaos  in
      society, in preparation for the coming of  the twelfth Imam (for whose
      reappearance the Shi'ias are waiting).

35.  Mr Leith  said  that  in  the  experience  of  the  National  Spiritual
      Assembly, the Iranian judiciary were  reluctant  to  put  anything  in
      writing as regards warrants, charges and convictions  of  Baha'is,  in
      case such a document  found  it  way  to  the  Baha'i    International
      Community and, thereafter, to the United Nations or one of its  member
      states. Although sentences had originally been  in  writing,  for  the
      last four or five years, as far as the Baha'is could discern, this had
      changed.  Some sixty-two Baha'is were accordingly awaiting  trial  but
      without knowing the charges against them.

36.  The witness was asked about paragraph 21 of his  report,  in  which  he
      stated  that  the  situation  for  Baha'is  in   Iran   had   markedly
      deteriorated over the course of 2005 and was now judged to be  at  its
      most serious since 1998, the year of the last execution of  a  Baha'i.
      In December 2005, Dhadihu'llah Mahrami,  a  Baha'i    serving  a  life
      sentence for apostasy, died in his cell in Yazd  prison.   Mr  Mahrami
      was said to have no known health concerns and  it  had  been  reported
      that he had been  threatened  with  death  several  times  by  various
      officials.

37.  Mr Leith said that the deterioration  in  the  situation  followed  the
      writing of an open letter in  November  2004  to  the  then  President
      Khatami, by what was understood to be an informal grouping of Baha'is.
       The letter drew attention to  what  was  said  to  be  the  continued
      persecution of Baha'is in Iran but did  so  in  moderate  terms.   The
      letter requested the President to rectify the situation and to  enable
      the Baha'is to practise their religion freely.  As for the death of Mr
      Mahrami, the witness said that there were  suspicions  as  to  how  he
      might have died, given his apparently healthy state, and the fact that
      no cause of death had been given by the Iranian authorities.

38.  Cross-examined, Mr Leith said that he was fairly certain  that  he  had
      met the  appellant  in  the  United  Kingdom  in  2001.   As  for  the
      Hojjatiehj Society, there had been a number  of  articles  about  this
      organisation in the United Kingdom press. Asked about the  appellant's
      evidence that, after his second imprisonment, he had severed his links
      with the Institute of Higher Education, the witness said that  once  a
      person had been perceived by the Iranian authorities as high  profile,
      his movements  and  activities  would  thereafter  be  monitored.  The
      appellant had never been reluctant about his activities in the  Baha'i
      community and had been a  prominent  Baha'i  as  far  as  the  Iranian
      authorities were concerned.

39.  Asked about the appellant's evidence  regarding  the  contacts  between
      the Iranian secret services and  certain  Baha'i  representatives,  Mr
      Leith said that he had read information to that effect but  could  not
      give Mrs Petterson any details.

40.  The witness was asked about paragraph 25 of  his report. This reads  as
      follows:

             '25. There are believed to be 300,000-350,000 Baha'is in Iran.
                  We clearly  do  not  expect  the  Iranian  authorities  to
                  prosecute all of them.  While  interrogating  one  of  the
                  Baha'is arrested in 2005, an  intelligence  agent  stated:
                  "We have learned how to  confront  [the  Baha'is].  We  no
                  longer pursue ordinary [Baha'is]; we  will  paralyse  your
                  inner core". This comment  seems  to  define  the  current
                  strategy  of  the  Iranian  authorities  in  their  latest
                  attempt to undermine the long-term viability of the Baha'i
                  community. This new policy is characterised by identifying
                  and targeting a group of Baha'is who play an  ad  hoc  but
                  vital role in providing communal activity  and  leadership
                  for the wider community'.

41.  Mr Leith was asked where this comment had come from.  He said  that  it
      would have been obtained as part  of  the  process  of  acquiring  and
      validating information from Iran, described in paragraphs 3  to  6  of
      his report.

42.  Those paragraphs describe how the BIC maintains  contact  with  Baha'is
      in Iran, despite the difficulties of  communication,  given  that  the
      authorities are believed  to  monitor  telephone  calls  and  e-mails.
      Although there is no formal Baha'i administration in Iran, there is an
      informal administrative committee known as The Friends in Iran.  These
      convey information to the BIC about actions taken against the  Baha'is
      by state and non-state actors and about other developments relating to
      the deprivations of human and civil rights suffered by Baha'i. The BIC
      is said to insist that this information is checked and  double-checked
      before it is conveyed  to  some  or  all  of  the  National  Spiritual
      Assembly to share with their governments.   Accuracy  is  said  to  be
      regarded as more important than speed.

43.  The witness said that the comments recorded  in  paragraph  25  of  his
      report would have come from a Baha'i who had had this said to  him  or
      her.  The aim of the speaker would have been to create fear within the
      Baha'i community.

44.  The witness said that it seemed  highly unlikely that  a  Muslim  would
      have been asked to lead a devotional meeting. The  appellant  had  not
      contacted the witness from Iraq.

45.  In re-examination, Mr Leith was asked to expand upon paragraph 25.   He
      said that the BIC had seen a concerted attempt  on  the  part  of  the
      authorities to detain  at  national  and  local  level  those  Baha'is
      perceived to act as coordinators within their community.  One  such  a
      person had been pursued whilst taking a bus trip  and  then  arrested.
      Such coordinators and also educators, such as the Baha'i Institute for
      Higher Education, had been targeted.

     Evidence of Mr Daniel Wheatley,  National  Spiritual  Assembly  of  the
Baha'is of the United Kingdom

46.  Mr Daniel Wheatley spoke to his report.   This  further  described  the
      deterioration in the situation for Baha'is in Iran during 2005.  Those
      Baha'is who had been assaulted, detained or imprisoned  were  said  to
      have played a role in the efforts of the Baha'i community to  preserve
      its communal identity and to educate their young. Two specific  trends
      in the worsening situation for Baha'is in the  period  2003-2005  were
      identified.  In spring 2002 the United  Nations  Commission  on  Human
      Rights had discontinued its  international  scrutiny  of  Iran,  after
      eighteen years of continuous monitoring. In  November  2004,  the  BIC
      reported the first incidents in what with hindsight were  said  to  be
      seen as a major national crackdown on leading Baha'i activists,  which
      increased throughout 2005.

47.  The witness said that he believed there had  been  an  attempt  by  the
      authorities to use those Baha'is detained  in  the  initial  round  of
      detentions in order  to  obtain  greater  information  about  what  he
      described as the 'inner core' of the Baha'i  community.   He  believed
      that the Iranian's current  policy was to target the leaders  of  that
      community and those promoting education within it.   The  election  of
      President Ahmadinejad had produced an even stronger commitment on  the
      part of the government to the suppression  of  the  Baha'is.  Although
      there was no actual evidence  to  link  the  new  President  with  the
      Hojjatiehj Society, it  had  been  widely  reported  that  such  links
      existed. In this regard,  the  witness  referred  to  footnote  39  to
      paragraph 40 of his report,  which  was  a  reference  to  an  article
      entitled 'A Cowardly Flight'.  That article  had  been  obtained  from
      Iran very recently.

48.  The witness said that the second cycle or phase  involved  the  removal
      of the inner core of Baha'is.  Paragraph 32 of  Mr  Wheatley's  report
      described the arrest of two Baha'is on 26 July 2005, one of  whom  was
      detained incommunicado by the Revolutionary Court.  The  witness  said
      that the person concerned had been  carrying  out  teaching  work,  an
      activity which the Iranians were trying to stop.  The Baha'i community
      had been told to cease its  teaching  activities  and  this  had  been
      accompanied by a threat to remove protection from the Baha'is if  they
      did not comply.

49.  The witness said that in 1998 there were 500 raids on Baha'i homes  and
      the appellant's detention had occurred during this campaign.

50.  Mr Wheatley considered  that  the  appellant  would  be  one  of  those
      targeted by the authorities on the basis of  his  involvement  in  the
      teaching  of  the  Baha'i  faith.  The  incident  in  July  2004   was
      significant  in that a Muslim was present who had decided  to  embrace
      the Baha'i faith. The last Baha'i to be  executed  in  Iran  had  been
      killed  because  he  had  converted  an   individual,   although   the
      appellant's situation was, if anything, worse in that the person  said
      to have been converted in the other case had asserted  that  she  came
      from a Baha'i background.  The witness said that the case in  question
      was described in paragraph 12 of his report, where we  find  that  the
      executed Baha'i was a man known as Rohani, who died on 21  July  1998.
      No document informing him of  his  death  sentence  was  ever  issued.
      Overall, the witness considered that the situation for Baha'is in Iran
      had deteriorated in recent times and that Baha'is  lacked  protection.
      Thus, Baha'i property could be confiscated or seized, whilst a  Baha'i
      who had been killed in a  road  accident  could  be  denied  financial
      compensation in the courts.  Mr Wheatley also considered that  Baha'is
      could be killed with impunity.

51.   Cross-examined,  the  witness  confirmed  that  the  appellant   would
      certainly be considered as a part of the 'inner core'  of  Baha'is  in
      Iran. Asked why this would be, if he had been told after 1999 that  he
      should not take part in the Institute of Higher  Education's  teaching
      activities, Mr Wheatley said that it was up to an individual Baha'i as
      to how to manifest his religion and that it was a  core  principle  of
      the faith that a Baha'i should share it with others.  The witness said
      that he was not aware that the appellant had  ceased  activities  with
      the Baha'i Institute of Higher Education. In any  event,  Mr  Wheatley
      contended that the appellant's detention following the prayer  meeting
      in July 2004 was something that would prove worse  for  the  appellant
      than the activities he has  undertaken  with  the  Institute.  As  for
      leaving Iran, notwithstanding being on bail in  connection  with  that
      incident, the witness said that a person in Iran could be  re-arrested
      and that there was a level of arbitrariness involved. Certain  Baha'is
      had been allowed to travel to a conference in Berlin but had then been
      arrested on return to Iran.

  52. Mr Wheatley said that the information received in the  United  Kingdom
      regarding the Iranian authorities' attitude to  the  'inner  core'  of
      Baha'is had arrived very recently, in January 2006.   Asked  what  was
      meant in the last sentence of paragraph 41 of his report by 'communal'
      activity, the witness said that it included such things  as  the  Ruhy
      programme, prayer meetings and classes for children.



Evidence of Dr Nazila Ghanea, Senior Lecturer in International Law in  Human
Rights, University of London, Institute of Commonwealth Studies

53.  Dr Ghanea spoke to her report. In it, Dr Ghanea  set  out  her  reasons
      for considering that the election of President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad  is
      likely to have a deleterious  effect  on  what  is  already  difficult
      position  of  Baha'is  in  Iran.  The  report  then   considered   the
      respondent's letter of refusal  in  the  context  of  imprisonment  of
      Baha'is and the criminal justice system in Iran.

54.  Dr Ghanea was asked about paragraph 17 of the  letter  of  refusal  and
      paragraph 8 of her report, where she  commented  on  the  respondent's
      view that a person of interest to the authorities would not be allowed
      to leave Iran. The witness said that there was no  connection  between
      being allowed to leave the country and state  interest  in  a  person.
      Annex II to her report had been the taken  from  the  website  of  the
      office of the Supreme Leader, Sayyid Ali Khamenei.  It set out a fatwa
      on Baha'is, issued by the Supreme Leader. Dr Ghanea did not know  when
      the fatwa had originally been issued. A person  could  be  accused  of
      apostasy even many years after the conversion in  question.  So,  too,
      could the person who had brought about the conversion.

55.  The witness said that the appellant had served some seven years of  the
      twenty year total  imprisonment  in  respect  of  which  he  had  been
      sentenced, and accordingly could find himself  subject  to  a  further
      thirteen years in prison. Any re-arrest of the appellant  upon  return
      to Iran could lead to him serving  the  remainder  of  the  sentences.
      Furthermore, the fatwa was in effect an invitation to anybody in  Iran
      to attack the appellant. The new president was unlikely to be moved by
      international pressure on behalf of the Baha'is. Dr Ghanea  considered
      that he saw himself as ushering in the age of the twelfth Imam.

56.  Cross-examined, the witness confirmed that the fatwa in Annex II  would
      have been issued in recent years. Asked why  the  appellant  had  been
      released in 2004,  notwithstanding  the  allegation  of  apostasy,  Dr
      Ghanea said that the authorities might have wished to keep  him  under
      surveillance.  It was put to her that, in respect of the   second  ten
      year sentence, the appellant had appealed to the Appeal Court  and  he
      said that they had declared him innocent.  She was asked how it  could
      be that the appellant might be required to serve the remainder of that
      sentence.  Dr Ghanea said that she  did  not  know  whether  what  the
      Appeal Court had done was the same as overturning the  sentence.   She
      also said that the Iranian authorities had, to her  own  knowledge,  a
      deep and thorough interest in Baha'is.  She had discovered  this  when
      an ambassador to Iran had spoken to her at the United Nations about  a
      book she had published on the Baha'is and  it  was  plain  from  their
      conversation that he was thoroughly familiar with its details.

57.   Asked   about   the   appellant's   evidence   that   certain   Baha'i
      representatives had contact with the Iranian  security  services,  the
      witness said that she considered it was plausible that  Baha'is  might
      learn through such contacts about possible  future  risks,  since  the
      regime has opponents working within it at many  levels.  Human  Rights
      Watch had reported that there had recently been a  substantial  change
      in government key personnel and that all  the  signs  were  that  2006
      could herald a return to the situation  experienced  in  Iran  in  the
      1980s.

58.  Re-examined, Dr Ghanea said that in July 2004, when the  appellant  was
      detained for a third  time,  reformists  had  still  been  within  the
      Iranian government but that was no longer the position.

The situation of Baha'is in Iran

Home Office science and research group - Iran Country Report October 2005

59.  Having described the nature of  the  Baha'i  faith  (see  paragraph  14
      above) the Iran Country Report of October 2005 contains the  following
      information about the situation of Baha'is in Iran.

             '6.82 According to the UNHCR and also a statement to the UN by
                   the Baha'i International Community   of  1998, the Baha'i
                   community in Iran  is said to number 300,000  -  350,000.
                   It is the largest religious minority in the  country  and
                   traditionally  has  suffered  discrimination.   Ayatollah
                   Mohammed Yazdi, who resigned as head of the judiciary  in
                   August 2000, stated in 1996 that the Baha'i    faith  was
                   an espionage organisation.  According to the USSD  report
                   2002 trials against Baha'is  have  reflected  this  view.
                   Their religion is not acknowledged as a separate faith by
                   Iranian Muslims, but is regarded  as  a  heretical  sect.
                   Anti-Baha'i  sentiment  is  rooted  in  the   theological
                   disapproval   of   the   religious   establishment;   the
                   perception that they cooperated with the Shah regime  and
                   opposed the revolution; and  the  belief  that  they  are
                   agents of espionage activities, Zionism and  imperialism.
                   The Baha'i World Centre is in  Haifa,  Israel,  and  even
                   before 1979 many Baha'is made remittances and pilgrimages
                   to Israel.  Baha'i links with an area  which  is  now  in
                   Israel lies in Baha'ullahj's death in exile in  what  was
                   at that time Ottoman Palestine.  Participation  in  party
                   politics  is  not  permitted  among  Baha'is  and  anyone
                   breaking this rule is liable to expulsion.  There  is  no
                   evidence of Baha'is being involved in partisan  politics,
                   in Iran or elsewhere.


             6.83 According to various reports from UNHCR and the USSD  not
                   being one of the protected religious minorities in  Iran,
                   Baha'is experience discrimination including extrajudicial
                   executions,   arbitrary   detention,    dismissal    from
                   employment and  confiscation  of  properties.  Many  have
                   reportedly  been  denied  retirement  pensions  and  work
                   permits, unemployment benefits, business  and  commercial
                   licences.  Some Baha'is dismissed from public sector jobs
                   were  required  to  return  the  salaries  and   pensions
                   received while they were working, and Baha'i farmers  can
                   be denied access to  farm  cooperatives,  which  deprives
                   them  of  their  only  access  to  credits,   seeds   and
                   fertilisers. Although  Baha'is  do  have  access  to  the
                   courts and have used  them  on  occasion  to  attempt  to
                   reverse specific decisions, almost invariably  the  court
                   rules  against  them.  Baha'is  are  refused   entry   to
                   universities. An FIDH report of 2002 illustrates that the
                   application form has four boxes for different  religions,
                   none of which is Baha'i.


             6.84 According to the USSD report  2002,  property  rights  of
                   Baha'is are generally disregarded and  both  private  and
                   business properties may be confiscated. Blood  money  for
                   Iranians killed is not enforceable where the victim is  a
                   Baha'i.   A bill was passed by the  Majlis  early  (2003)
                   which equalised the  "blood money" paid to  the  families
                   of crime victims.  Payvand News reported in  29  December
                   2003 that on 27 December 2003 the bill  was  approved  by
                   the Expediency Council.  But since  Baha'is  were  not  a
                   recognised  religious minority, the  change  in  the  law
                   does not apply to them. In 1996  the  Head  of  Judiciary
                   stated that Baha'ism was an  espionage  organisation  and
                   Baha'is  have  since  been  strictly  forbidden  to  seek
                   probate.


             6.85  Freedom of movement out of the country can be  difficult
                   for Baha'is. They are generally denied identity cards and
                   passports.  According to a written statement to the UN by
                   the Baha'i International Community  of 1998, the  freedom
                   of  Baha'is to travel outside or  inside  Iran  is  often
                   impeded by  Iranian authorities  or even denied. Although
                   1997/98 witnessed an increase in the  number  of  Iranian
                   Baha'is given passports, this did not represent a  change
                   in  policy  on  the  part  of  the  Iranian   government.
                   Registration of Baha'is is a police function.


             6.86   It was stated in the USSD report 2001:


                      "However, it has become somewhat easier  for  Baha'is
                       to obtain passports in order  to  travel  abroad.  In
                       addition some Iranian embassies abroad do not require
                       applicants to state a religious affiliation. In  such
                       cases,  Baha'is  more  likely  are  able   to   renew
                       passports."


             6.87 According to the FCO Human Rights Annual Report 2003,  no
                   Baha'i was on death row.  The  latest  FCO  Human  Rights
                   Annual Report 2005 has no mention of any Baha'i being  on
                   death row.


             6.88 According to the USSD report 2001:


                       "Over the past 2 years the government has taken  some
                       positive steps in recognising the rights of  Baha'is,
                       as well as other religious  minorities.  In  November
                       1999, President Khatami publicly stated that  no  one
                       in the country should be persecuted because of his or
                       her religious beliefs. He added that he would  defend
                       the civil rights of all citizens, regardless of their
                       beliefs or religion ... Subsequently the   Expediency
                       Council approved the  "Right  of  Citizenship"  bill,
                       affirming the social  and  political  rights  of  all
                       citizens before the law. In  February 2000, following
                       approval of the bill, the head of judiciary issued  a
                       circular letter to all  registry  offices  throughout
                       the  country,  which  permits  any   couple   to   be
                       registered as husband and wife without being required
                       to state their religious  affiliation.  This  measure
                       effectively  permits  the  registration   of   Baha'i
                       marriages  in  the   country.    Previously    Baha'i
                       marriages were not  recognised  by  the   government,
                       leaving Baha'i women open to charges of prostitution.
                       consequently children of Baha'i  marriages  were  not
                       recognised as legitimate and  therefore  were  denied
                       inheritance rights."


                  However, according to a written  statement  submitted  by
                   the  Baha'i International Community  to the UN Commission
                   on Human Rights on 12 March 2003 "...  the  relevant  law
                   has not been changed; neither Baha'i marriage nor  Baha'i
                   divorce is legally recognised in Iran.


             6.89  According to the USSD report 2002:


                      "In September 2001 the Ministry of  Justice  issued  a
                       report  that  reiterated   that   government   policy
                       continued to aim at the eventual elimination  of  the
                       Baha'is as  a  community.  It  stated  in  part  that
                       Baha'is would only be permitted to enrol  in  schools
                       if they did not identify themselves as  Baha'is,  and
                       that Baha'is preferably should be enrolled in schools
                       that have a strong and imposing religious  ideology".
                       The report also stated that  all those  identified as
                       Baha'is must be expelled from universities, either in
                       the admission process or during the course  of  their
                       studies whenever their identity  as  Baha'is  becomes
                       known.


                  The USSD report 2004 reported that :


                      "In July, for the first time, Baha'i  applicants  were
                       permitted to take part in  the  nationwide  exam  for
                       entrance into state-run colleges.  However  the  word
                       "Islam"  was  pre-printed  in  a   slot   listing   a
                       prospective  student's  religious  affiliation.  This
                       action precluded Baha'i  matriculation,  since  as  a
                       matter of faith, Baha'is do not deny their faith.


             6.90     Members of  the  Baha'i  community  continued  to  be
                   denied the right to participate in  religious  gatherings
                   and   faced   official   discrimination   in   education,
                   employment, travel, and  housing.  According  to  the  UN
                   Human Rights Commission's Special Representative on Iran,
                   seven Baha'is remained in jail in Iran  during  the  year
                   2002 and according to the  USSD report 2004:


                      "According to  Baha'i  sources  outside  the  country,
                      since 2002, 23 Baha'is from  18  different  localities
                      were arbitrarily arrested and  detained  for  a  short
                      time because of their Baha'i   faith.  None  of  these
                      persons was in prison at the end of the period covered
                      by this report.'


             6.91 According to the USSD report 2002:



                     'In what appeared to be a hopeful development, in 2002
                     the government offered the Tehran community a piece of
                     land for use as a cemetery. However, the land  was  in
                     the  desert  with  no  access  to  water,  making   it
                     impossible to perform  Baha'i   mourning  rituals.  In
                     addition the government stipulated that no markers  be
                     put  on  individual  graves  and  that   no   mortuary
                     facilities be built on the site, making it  impossible
                     to perform a proper burial.


             6.92     According to the USSD report 2003:


                      "Adherents of the  Baha'i   faith  continued  to  face
                      arbitrary arrest and detention.  According  to  Baha'i
                      sources,  four  Baha'is   remained   in   prison   for
                      practicing their faith at year's  end,  one  facing  a
                      life sentence, two facing sentences of 15  years,  and
                      the fourth  a  4-year  sentence.  A  small  number  of
                      Baha'is   were and have been in detention at any given
                      time.     Sources  claimed  that  such  arrests   were
                      carried out  to   "terrorise"  the  community  and  to
                      disrupt  the  lives  of  its  members.   Others   were
                      arrested, charged, and then quickly released. However,
                      the charges  against  them  often  were  not  dropped,
                      generating continued apprehension."


             6.93     According to a  FIDH report of July 2004:


                      "Baha'is in many  different  localities  in  Iran  are
                      still  subjected  to  arbitrary   arrest,   short-term
                      detention, and persistent harassment, intimidation and
                      discrimination.  All attempts to  obtain  redress  are
                      systematically  denied  as   officials   continue   to
                      confiscate Baha'i  homes, deny them  their  rightfully
                      earned pensions and inheritance, block their access to
                      employment   or   impede   their   private    business
                      activities.  The  authorities  also   interfere   with
                      classes given to Baha'i  youth in private  houses  and
                      persist in banning  the  sacred  institutions     that
                      perform, in the Baha'i Faith, most  of  the  functions
                      reserved to clergy in other religions.


              94.  A  statement  issued  by  the    Baha'i    International
                  Community on 14 April 2005 stated that:

                      "The Baha'i International  Community  today  expressed
                      its dismay and disappointment at the failure of the UN
                      Commission  on  Human   Rights  to  even  consider   a
                      resolution  on  human  rights  in  Iran,   given   the
                      worsening situation in that country and in  particular
                      the persecution  of the Baha'is.


                      "In  view  of  the  sharp  increase  of  human  rights
                      violations against the Baha'i  community of  Iran,  it
                      is nothing less than shocking that the  Commission  on
                      Human Rights has for the third year in a row failed to
                      renew international monitoring of the situation", said
                      Bani Dugal, principal  representative  of  the  Baha'i
                      International Community to the United Nations.


                      "Over the past year, two important Baha'i holy  places
                      have been destroyed, Baha'i student have  been  denied
                      access  to  higher  education,  and,  most   recently,
                      Baha'is in Yazd and Tehran have been swept up in a new
                      wave of assaults, harassment and detentions"


 UK Home Office Immigration and Nationality Directorate  (IND),  Operational
Guidance Note: Iran, 13/12/2005

60.  The Home Office's Operational Guidance Note  on  Iran  of  13  December
      2005, makes the following comments about the  Iranian  elections  that
      occurred in February 2004 (for the Majlis, the  legislative  assembly)
      and in June 2005 (for the presidency).

             '2.7  The   Majlis  elected  on  20  February   2004,  has   a
                   conservative majority. The Guardians Council disqualified
                   several  thousand  candidates  from   standing   in   the
                   elections, including over  a  quarter  of  the    sitting
                   deputies.  Most of those disqualified were reformists. In
                   protest over 600 candidates refused to take part  in  the
                   elections.  The net result was that in  around  half  the
                   seats   there   was   effectively   no   alternative   to
                   conservative candidates.  The conservatives succeeded  in
                   turning around the reformist majority in  the  parliament
                   and now occupy well over half of the 290 seats.


             2.8 In the Presidential elections  in  June  2005,  Government
                   figures showed more than 17 million  votes  for   Mahmoud
                   Ahmadinejad, 49, the  blacksmith's son who has been mayor
                   of  Tehran since 2003, compared with  around  10  million
                   for Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani, the  former  president  and
                   favourite throughout the  campaign  who  had  gained  the
                   reluctant  backing of the beleaguered reformist movement.
                   Charges of vote-ridging  and  other  violations  surfaced
                   during the elections.'

61.  At paragraph 2.9 of the same Note, it is recorded that there  has  been
      a disappointing 'lack of progress' on human rights issues in 2004  and
      2005.   Although 'some positive legislative developments'  were  noted
      as having occurred in 2004, it is in our view  significant   that  the
      objective evidence of these - the harmonisation of 'blood money'  paid
      to Muslims, on the one hand, and to Christians, Jews and Zoroastrians,
      on the other - specifically  did not apply to Baha'is.  Paragraph 2.12
      of the Note has this to say about religious minorities:

             '2.12 While three religious minorities are recognised  by  the
                   Constitution - Christian, Jewish and Zoroastrian  -  they
                   remain vulnerable in a society governed by  the  laws  of
                   Islam. The Baha'i religion is not officially  recognised,
                   so   members   of   the   Baha'i   community   enjoy   no
                   constitutional  freedoms.  The   Baha'is   face  frequent
                   persecution;  two of their sacred sites  were  demolished
                   in 2004 and they still face considerable problems gaining
                   access to education.  In 2005 Baha'is have reported  that
                   they  have  faced  arbitrary  arrest  and  had   property
                   confiscated.'

Human Rights Watch - World Report 2006: Iran (18/01/2006)
62.  Human Rights Watch, in its January 2006 report on Iran, considers  that
      respect 'for basic human rights in Iran' deteriorated considerably  in
      2005.  Use of torture by the government is said to be routine and  the
      judiciary are recorded as having been at the centre  of  many  serious
      human rights violations.  Reference is  made  to  what  Iranians  call
      'parallel institutions', that is to say paramilitary groups and  plain
      clothes intelligence agents.  Intelligence services are  described  as
      running illegal  secret  prisons  and  interrogation  centres.   Human
      Rights Watch has this to say about the new President:

             'President  Mahmoud  Ahmadinejad,  elected   in   June   2005,
             appointed  a  cabinet  dominated  by  former  members  of  the
             intelligence and security forces, some of whom  are  allegedly
             implicated in the most serious human rights  violations  since
             the Islamic Republic of Iran was  established  26  years  ago,
             such as the assassination of dissident intellectuals'.

63.  According to Human  Rights  Watch,  the  Iranian  judiciary  issued  an
      internal report in 2005 in which they admitted  serious  human  rights
      violations,  including  the  widespread  use   of   torture,   illegal
      detentions and coercive interrogation techniques.   No  safeguards  to
      prevent such occurrences were, however, established. Nor is there  any
      mechanism for monitoring and investigating human rights violations  in
      Iran.  Human Rights Watch believes that the  'closure  of  independent
      media in Iran has helped to perpetuate an atmosphere of impunity'.

64.  Human Rights Watch states that 'Iran's ethnic and religious  minorities
      are subject to discrimination and, in  some  cases,  persecution.  The
      Baha'i community continues to  be  denied  permission  to  worship  or
      engage in communal affairs in a public manner.'

Human Rights Watch, 'Ministers  of  Murder:  Iran's  New  Security  Cabinet'
      (15/12/2005)
65.  In its report of  15  December  2005  entitled  'Ministers  of  Murder:
      Iran's new security cabinet' Human Rights Watch described the election
      in June  2005  of  President  Ahmadinejad  as  causing  'human  rights
      defenders and activists in Iran to view his rise to power  with  great
      concern'. Such concerns are said to have grown with the nomination  by
      the new President for posts in his cabinet of persons who  'hail  from
      security and intelligence background' and who in some cases, at least,
      have been implicated in such things as the executions of 'thousands of
      political prisoners'.

Radio Free Europe / Radio Liberty,' Iran: Preparing for the next  big  vote'
      (01/12/2005)
66    In  an  article  written  by  Bill   Samii   (whose   background   and
      qualifications are not recorded), President Ahmadinejad and  Ayatollah
      Mohammad Taqi Mesbah-Yazdi,  said  to  be  a  'hard-line  cleric  that
      Ahmadinejad follows', are described as allegedly backing 'a  messianic
      interpretation of Islam, in which they hope  that  the  twelfth  Imam,
      known also as the Mahdi and who is in  occultation,  will  return  and
      restore justice to the world.  According to the Islamic Republic  News
      Agency, (IRMA), Ahmadinejad told a 16 November National Conference  of
      Friday prayer leaders that 'our mission is paving  the  path  for  the
      glorious reappearance  of  Imam  Mahdi'.   This  is  followed  by  the
      statement that the  replacement  of  state  officials  by  Ahmadinejad
      appointees, 'has led to  claims  that  Hojjatieh  Society,  which  was
      banished in 1983, is enjoying a revival. This society espouses similar
      views on the return of the Hidden Imam, and  this  would  not  be  the
      first time that there are claims of a Hojjatieh comeback'.

Amnesty  International,  Iran:'  Inquiry  needed  in  the  death  of  Baha'i
      prisoner conscience' (22/12/2005)

67.  Before the Tribunal, both Mr Leith and  Mr  Wheatley  referred  to  the
      death  in  custody  of  a  Baha'i  in  December  2005.   The   Amnesty
      International organisation's public  statement  of  22  December  2005
      confirms that event.  According to AI, Dhabihullah Mahrami,  described
      as a Baha'i prisoner of conscience, was arrested in 1995 and sentenced
      to death for apostasy in 1996.  His death  sentence  was  commuted  to
      life imprisonment in 1999. AI adopted him as  a prisoner of conscience
      in 1996 and campaigned for his unconditional release. According to AI,
      Mr Mahrami was reportedly found dead in his cell in Yadz prison on  15
      December 2005.  His family were apparently informed that he  had  died
      of a heart attack and were given his body but Mr Mahrami was  reported
      to be in good health prior to his  death  and  was  not  known  to  be
      suffering from heart disease, though he had apparently  been  made  to
      engage in strenuous physical labour while in prison, 'raising  concern
      that this may have caused or contributed to his death. He is also said
      to have received death threats.'

68.  Later in the same statement, AI make reference to a letter  which  they
      have written to the head of Iran's judiciary, urging an  investigation
      into the death of Mr  Mahrami  and  also  criticising  'an  apparently
      increasing pattern of harassment of the  Baha'i  community  which  had
      seen at least  66  Baha'is  arrested  since  the  beginning  of  2005,
      apparently on account of their identity as Baha'is or  their  peaceful
      activities on behalf of the Baha'i community in Iran. Most  have  been
      released but at least nine  reportedly  remain  in  prison,  including
      Mehram Kawsari and Bahram Mashhadi, respectively  sentenced  to  three
      and one year prison terms in connection with a letter  they  addressed
      to  former  President  Khatami  demanding  an  end  to  human   rights
      violations against Baha'is.  Six of the seven others were arrested  on
      8 November 2005 but neither they nor the ninth man arrested are  known
      to have been charged or tried.  AI believes that they may be prisoners
      of conscience who should be released immediately and  unconditionally.



69.  The same statement contends that 'members of  Iran's  Baha'i  community
      have reportedly been attacked by  unidentified  assailants  in  recent
      months and Baha'i cemeteries and holy sites have been  vandalised  and
      destroyed.  Some Baha'is have  had  their  homes  confiscated  by  the
      authorities.  Baha'is generally are subject to discriminatory laws and
      regulations which limit their access to  employment  and  to  benefits
      such as pensions, and  for many years young people  belonging  to  the
      Baha'i community have been denied access to  higher  education  by  an
      official requirement that applicants state their allegiance  to  Islam
      or one of the other recognised religions. ..In 2004, despite  promises
      that this designation would be removed, only ten  of  the  800  Baha'i
      applicants who passed were eventually admitted [to higher  education].
      These ten 'refused to attend university in protest at the exclusion of
      their fellow Baha'is.'

AAAS Human Rights Action Network, 'Baha'i  educators  sentenced'  (27  April
      1999)

70.  The American Association for the Advancement  of  Science  published  a
      complaint about the imprisonment of a number of  Baha'i  educators  in
      April 1999.  The source  of  the  information  came  from  the  Baha'i
      international community. It is stated that four faculty members of the
      Baha'i Institute of Higher  Education in Iran, who were among at least
      thirty-six such faculty members arrested between 30  September  and  3
      October 1998,  had been sentenced to prison terms ranging  from  three
      to ten years.  The Iranian authorities were said  to  have  proclaimed
      that the involvement of these persons  in  the  Institute  constituted
      evidence of crimes against national security. One of those  listed  in
      the report is the appellant. He is named and  is  said  to  have  been
      given a sentence of seven  years  imprisonment.  The  appellant's  own
      evidence to the Tribunal was, as has been noted, that  he  received  a
      sentence of ten years but that that was later  overturned  on  appeal.
      According to the report, the faculty members who were  arrested  'were
      asked to sign  a document declaring that the BIHE had ceased to  exist
      as of 29 September and that they would no longer  cooperate  with  it.
      The detainees reportedly refused to sign the declaration. Many of them
      had been barred from teaching in the universities and schools.'

The Tribunal's assessment
71.  It is clear from the evidence before  us  that  Baha'is  in  Iran  face
      substantial discrimination, which extends beyond the purely  religious
      field to such matters as education, work, ownership  of  property  and
      access to justice. The evidence  does  not,  however,  show  that  the
      nature and prevalence of this discrimination is of such intensity  and
      generality as to amount to persecution for the purposes of the Refugee
      Convention.  It is significant that none of the outside observers  who
      have had cause to consider the situation of  Baha'is  has  formed  the
      conclusion that a person is at real risk of persecution in Iran merely
      by reason of being a Baha'i.  That includes Baha'is who practise their
      faith. Each of the witnesses  who  gave  evidence  on  behalf  of  the
      appellant and his wife are Baha'is.   In both their oral  and  written
      utterances, they refer to the Baha'is as being persecuted. Whilst  the
      use  of  such  language  is  understandable,  it  does  not  compel  a
      conclusion on the part of  this  Tribunal  that  any  Iranian  Baha'i,
      practising or not, who makes his or her way  to  the  United  Kingdom,
      should without more be accorded international protection.

72.  The account given by the appellant and his wife  of  their  experiences
      in Iran confirms the conclusion  the  Tribunal  has  reached  on  this
      issue.   The sentences of imprisonment which the appellant  was  given
      can be seen from his evidence to have been inspired by the  fact  that
      the appellant had family connections with prominent Baha'is and,  more
      particularly,  because  of  the  appellant's  own  religious  teaching
      activities within the Baha'i community.  Putting  that  matter  aside,
      both the appellant and his wife were able to study and become  doctors
      and, albeit with difficulty, practise their profession in a variety of
      places in Iran.  The confiscation of their home  was,  we  find,  most
      likely to have been an aspect of the  authorities'  adverse  attention
      towards the appellant as a result for what they perceived  to  be  his
      teaching and community activities.  The appellants were able to travel
      abroad and return without significant difficulties. We say so, bearing
      in mind what the appellant and his wife  described  as  an  unpleasant
      incident at the airport when they returned to Iran in 2001.

73.  In making these findings,  the  Tribunal  is  mindful  of  the  present
      government  in  Iran;  in  particular,  the  presidency   of   Mahmoud
      Ahmadinejad, who was elected in June 2005 and who, it  is  clear  from
      the  evidence,  is  beginning  to  pursue  a  more  conservative   and
      uncompromising set of policies than those of his predecessor. The fact
      is, nevertheless, that according to the latest reports, relatively few
      Baha'is are being arrested and  imprisoned,  considering  the  overall
      size (300-350,000) of the Baha'i  community  in  Iran.    As  we  have
      already noted, even Human Rights Watch, in its 2006  report,  goes  no
      further than to opine that Iran's ethnic and religious minorities 'are
      subject to discrimination  and,  in  some  cases,  persecution'.   The
      express reference to the Baha'is, which follows this quotation, refers
      to the community continuing 'to be denied  permission  to  worship  or
      engage in communal affairs in a public manner'.  That Baha'is are able
      to pursue their religious observances in domestic settings  is  clear.
      It is many years since they were last permitted in general to  worship
      in public halls and the like.  The evidence before us  does  not  show
      such a flagrant denial of a Baha'i's freedom of religion as to  amount
      to an effective denial for that right (Ullah &  Do  [2004]  UKHL  26).
      Similarly, whilst Baha'is are on occasion deprived of  their rights to
      property, the evidence before  us  does  not  show  that  any  Baha'i,
      regardless of his or her circumstances,  is  at  real  risk  of  being
      deprived of his or her home or business.  The evidence before us as to
      the  Iranian  state's  attitude  towards  the  recognition  of  Baha'i
      marriages is, we have to say, somewhat unclear.   On  the  appellant's
      own account, and that  of  his  wife,  official  attitudes  appear  to
      fluctuate. Overall, the Tribunal  does  not  find  that  the  evidence
      discloses such a state of affairs as, when  combined  with  the  other
      matters to which we have referred, can properly lead to the conclusion
      that a Baha'i is entitled to protection under the  Refugee  Convention
      or the ECHR should he or she make such a claim to the  authorities  in
      this country.

74.  As a  consequence  of  these  findings,  the  Tribunal  has  considered
      whether the evidence shows that a particular description  or  category
      of Baha'i in Iran is currently at real risk of  persecution  or  other
      serious  ill-treatment  or  whether  the  undoubted  persecution  that
      certain Baha'is suffer, such as those imprisoned for their  faith,  is
      merely  random  or  otherwise  so  unpredictable  as  to  prevent  any
      particular Baha'i being identified in advance as being at  real  risk.
      At the hearing, Mr De Mello,  Mr  Leith  and  Mr  Wheatley  sought  to
      emphasise the importance of the information contained at paragraph  25
      of Mr Leith's statement:

             '25. There are believed to be 300,000-350,000 Baha'is in Iran.
                   We clearly do  not  expect  the  Iranian  authorities  to
                   prosecute all of them. While  interrogating  one  of  the
                   Baha'is arrested  2005, an intelligence agent stated: 'We
                   have learned how to confront (the Baha'is). We no  longer
                   pursue ordinary (Baha'is); we will  paralyse  your  inner
                   core.'  The comment seems to define the current  strategy
                   of the Iranian authorities in  their  latest  attempt  to
                   undermine  the  long-term   viability   of   the   Baha'i
                   community. The new policy is characterised by identifying
                   and targeting a group of Baha'is who play an ad  hoc  but
                   vital role in providing communal activity and  leadership
                   for the wider community'.

75.  Mr Leith and Mr Wheatley were of the view that the appellant  would  be
      considered to be in that category on the basis of his leadership  role
      in the Baha'i Institute for Higher Education and other areas of Baha'i
      activity.  Taking the  appellant's  account  at  face  value  for  the
      moment, he told us that he ceased to work on behalf of the  Institute,
      at their suggestion, after  he  had  been  released  from  his  second
      sentence of imprisonment.  His evidence was, however,  to  the  effect
      that he had nevertheless pursued the promotion of the Baha'i faith  by
      means of the teaching system produced by the Ruhy Institute.

76.  The Tribunal has adopted a cautious approach to what is  said  to  have
      been the comments of the Iranian intelligence agent,  as  set  out  in
      paragraph 25 of Mr Leith's report.  Although  he  possesses  undoubted
      considerable knowledge of the position of Baha'is in Iran, Mr Leith is
      not (and no doubt would not claim to be) an  impartial  observer.  His
      job is to  foster  the  interests  of  his  co-religionists  in  Iran.
      Furthermore, the comments of the  intelligence  agent  are  unsourced.
      Both Mr Leith and Mr Wheatley told us that they were received as  part
      of the ongoing system of contacts and  information-gathering  operated
      by the external affairs office of the National Spiritual Assembly  for
      the Baha'is in the United Kingdom.

77.  On the other hand, we are mindful that the bodies which  Mr  Leith  and
      Mr Wheatley represent are relied upon by the Home Office, the US State
      Department and others as sources of information about the position  of
      Baha'is in Iran.  The Tribunal has no reason to doubt  that  Mr  Leith
      has,  at paragraph 25 of his report, accurately described what he  has
      been told was said  to  a  Baha'i  by  someone  operating  within  the
      intelligence community within Iran. The real question is  whether  the
      comments  are  reasonably  likely  to    represent   present   Iranian
      government policy or, given the complex nature of  the  Iranian  state
      security apparatus, the policy of some form of  organisation  that  is
      sponsored or at least condoned by those in power and which is able  to
      act against those Baha'is which are regarded as 'inner core'.

78.  It cannot be denied that a policy along the lines of that described  in
      paragraph 25 of the report would make sense, from the point of view of
      a regime that has for long regarded Baha'is as wholly  inimical  to  a
      Shi'ite theocratic state. The targeting of Baha'i teachers in 1998  is
      sufficiently documented and the claimed policy could be said to  be  a
      development of this. Any religion which does not have formal preachers
      but which nevertheless needs  to  subsist  and  flourish  through  the
      efforts of those involved in its teaching and ad hoc  organisation  is
      likely to be weakened by the removal of those who have shown  aptitude
      and inclination in such areas.

79.  The evidence before the Tribunal also demonstrates that the  forces  of
      conservatism and reaction in Iran are gaining in  strength,  following
      the election in June 2005 of  President  Ahmadinejad.   The  reformist
      tendencies of former President Khatami, which  encouraged  Baha'is  to
      write the open letter of 2004, are  in  retreat,  in  the  opinion  of
      outside objective observers.  Paragraph 3 of Dr Ghanea's report refers
      to an expression of 'deep concern at the serious violations  of  human
      rights' in Iran, on the part of the European Union  Council  (November
      2005), whilst in the following month the EU Presidency noted 'that the
      human rights situation in Iran has not  improved  in  any  significant
      respect in recent years, and in many respects has worsened'.   The  US
      Commission on International Religious Freedom considered, even  before
      the election of the new President,  that  'over  the  past  year,  the
      Iranian  government's  poor  religious  freedom  record  deteriorated,
      particularly  for   Baha'is,   evangelical   Christians   and   Muslim
      dissidents, all  of  whom  faced  intensified  harassment,  detention,
      arrest and imprisonment.'

  80. For these reasons the Tribunal is able to place  some  weight  on  the
      comment recorded in paragraph 25 of Mr  Leith's  statement.  The  fact
      remains, however, that as matters stand it is only a  single  comment,
      from an unnamed individual, whose alleged words have,  it  seems,  not
      been passed directly to Mr Leith by  the  person  to  whom  they  were
      spoken. It would accordingly be going too far to use the statement  as
      the basis of a conclusion that  all  Baha'is,  who  comprise,  or  are
      regarded by the Iranian state security  apparatus  as  comprising,  an
      "inner core" are as such at current real risk of persecution.  On  the
      other hand, we do not consider that the totality of  the  evidence  in
      this appeal does no more than show  that  some  Baha'is  are  randomly
      persecuted and  the appellant is a person who happens to have been  so
      persecuted. The appellant has been an active teacher and has  suffered
      previous sentences of imprisonment for  what  were  plainly  religious
      reasons.  That  is  essentially  accepted  by  the   respondent.   The
      credibility of the appellant's claim to  be  in  current  well-founded
      fear was challenged by the respondent at the hearing on the basis that
      the alleged telephone  conversation  and  other  evidence  of  renewed
      adverse interest in the appellant by the  authorities  since  he  last
      left Iran were not believable. Whilst  not  accepting  that  there  is
      evidence of a concerted policy to take  out  the  inner  core  of  the
      Baha'i community in Iran, we nevertheless find that, having regard  to
      the current political  situation,  the  background  evidence  and  the
      evidence of Messrs Leith and Wheatley, shorn of  its  more  rhetorical
      aspects,  provide  support  for  the  appellant   in   assessing   the
      credibility of that part of his claim  which  was  challenged  by  Mrs
      Petterson (see paragraphs 82 to 85 below).

  81.  The  Tribunal's conclusions may be summarised as follows:-
        a)   an Iranian Baha'i is not, as such, at real risk of persecution
           in Iran;
        b)  such a person will, however, be able  to  demonstrate  a  well-
           founded fear if, on the particular facts of the case, he or  she
           is reasonably likely to be targeted by the  Iranian  authorities
           (or their  agents)  for  religious  reasons.  Evidence  of  past
           persecution will be of particular relevance in this  regard.  It
           is doubtful if a person who  has  not  previously  come  to  the
           serious adverse attention of the authorities, by reason  of  his
           or her teaching or particular organisational or other activities
           on behalf of the Baha'i community in Iran, will be able, even in
           the current climate, to show that he or she will be at real risk
           on return.

The credibility of the appellant
82.  Having had the opportunity of hearing the appellant and his  wife  give
      evidence, the Tribunal finds that both  were  credible  witnesses.  We
      have made that finding assessing all the evidence in the round. Whilst
      we are required by law to find that the appellant's failure  to  claim
      asylum when  he  last  arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom  damaged  his
      credibility, in all the circumstances, we do not find that such damage
      is fundamental. Section 8 of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment  of
      Claimants etc.) Act 2004 provides  that  that  section  applies  to  a
      failure by a claimant to make an asylum claim or a human rights  claim
      before being notified of an immigration  decision,  unless  the  claim
      relies wholly on  matters  arising  after  the  notification.  In  the
      present case the appellant was notified  of  an  immigration  decision
      when he was given leave to enter the  United  Kingdom  as  a  visitor.
      That was several months before he claimed  asylum,  in  October  2005.
      The catalyst for that claim is said to be  a  telephone  message  from
      Iran, to the effect  that  the  appellant  should  not  return  there.
      Plainly, on the appellant's own account, any current adverse  interest
      in him on the part of the Iranian authorities must, to  an  extent  at
      least, be referable to his history in Iran, prior to his arrival here.
       The fact is, however, that the  appellant's  evidence  shows  clearly
      that he has suffered imprisonment in the  past for his  Baha'i  faith.
       Mrs Petterson did not seriously seek to challenge that  part  of  his
      evidence; instead, she questioned the supposed telephone  conversation
      of October 2005.  There are  aspects  of  the  account  of  events  in
      October 2005 that, quite apart from the statutory damage inflicted  by
      section 8(5), make this  part  of  the  appellant's  account  somewhat
      problematic.  The evidence regarding the  Iranian  friend's  visit  to
      Iran, and what he discovered there, has undoubtedly been mentioned  by
      the appellant at a later stage than one would expect.

83.  That said, the Tribunal was impressed  by  the  detailed  and  measured
      account given by the appellant and his wife of their  lives  in  Iran.
      There was no attempt at embellishment  in  relation  to  the  couple's
      difficulties in pursuing their medical careers or, indeed, in relation
      to the appellant's past persecution by  the  Iranian  authorities.  It
      cannot seriously be doubted that, had  the  appellant  claimed  asylum
      upon arrival in the United Kingdom on one of his previous visits,  the
      respondent would have had no justification for denying  the  appellant
      recognition as a refugee. We accept that the appellant and  his  wife,
      despite their difficulties, continued  to  wish  to  live  within  the
      Baha'i community in Iran.

84.  The appellant's  account  of  his  experiences  in  Iran  is  not  only
      detailed and consistent (he could, for example,  from  memory  recount
      the precise number of years, months and days he had been  in  prison);
      it also fits precisely with the  history  set  out  in  the  objective
      evidence. Indeed, as we have already noted, the appellant features  as
      an individual in that evidence.  Although the information supplied  in
      its report came from the  Baha'i  international  community,  we  doubt
      whether the American Association for the Advancement of Science  would
      have used  that  information  and  published  it,  if  they  were  not
      reasonably satisfied of its reliability.

85.  The Tribunal accordingly finds, notwithstanding the  damaging  elements
      to which we have referred, that the appellant is a witness  of  truth.
      We accept it is reasonably likely that the appellant claimed asylum in
      October 2005, after being informed  from  Iran  that  the  authorities
      would act against him if he returned.  Given what is known about Iran,
      the authorities would have little difficulty in proceeding against the
      appellant in relation to  the  prayer  meeting  in  2004,  which  they
      undoubtedly know about, having raided it.

Assessment of risk to appellant, if returned
  86. On the basis of the Tribunal's findings of fact, the appellant  is  at
      real risk if he were to be returned to Iran at the present time. He is
      a person with a known history  of  religious  teaching.  He  has  been
      targeted in the past. The fact that he had not for  some  time  worked
      for the Institute for Higher  Education  is  immaterial.   He  had  as
      recently as 2004 been apprehended in the  course  of  carrying  out  a
      teaching programme designed by the Ruhy Institute.   The fact that, at
      the time of the raid, a Muslim quasi-convert to Baha'ism  was  leading
      the particular session increases the risk to  the  appellant.   It  is
      entirely believable that such a person would be given encouragement by
      the appellant by being asked to participate in  the  meeting  in  that
      manner. Indeed, the fact that the Iranian authorities  know  that  the
      appellant has been involved in what they  would  regard  at  the  very
      least as an attempt to convert a Muslim  is  likely,  in  the  current
      climate, to be a significant risk factor.

Decision
87.  The appellant's appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.

      The appellant's appeal is allowed on human rights grounds.






                                               Senior Immigration Judge Lane

                                                         Date: 24 April 2006








































                                    Annex

            REPORTS AND BACKGROUND MATERIALS BEFORE THE TRIBUNAL

Report of Barnabas Leith, with annex
Report of Daniel Wheatley, with annex
Report of Nazila Ghanea-Hercock, with annexes
Home Office Science and Research Group: Iran Country Report (October 2005)
IAS Research Analysis on Baha'is in Iran (January 2006)
US  Dept  of  State,  International  Religious  Freedom  Report  2005:  Iran
(November 2005)
US Dept of State, Country Reports  on  Human  Rights  Practices  2004:  Iran
(February 2005) (excerpt)
Immigration  and  Refugee  Board  of  Canada:  Iran:  Update  regarding  the
treatment of Baha'is, particularly with  respect  to  military  service  and
ability to obtain a passport (January 2001)
Amnesty International: Iran: Inquiry needed in the death of Baha'i  prisoner
of conscience (December 2005)
UNHCR: Written statement submitted by  the  Baha'i  International  Community
(situation of the Baha'is in the Islamic Republic of Iran) (March 2004)
 House of Commons - Foreign Affairs Committee, Human  Rights  Annual  Report
2004; Fourth Report of Session 2004-5 (March 2005) (excerpt)
UNHCR: Ethnic and Religious Groups in the Islamic Republic  of  Iran  (paper
prepared by Nazalia Ghanea-Hercock) (May 2003) (extract)
UNHCR:  Written  statement  submitted  by  Baha'i  International   Community
(Situation of Baha'is in the Islamic Republic of Iran) (March 2003)
Home Office Immigration and Nationality  Directorate:  Operational  Guidance
Note: Iran (December 2005) (extract)
Voice of America News: US Condemns Persecution of Iranian religious  captive
who died in prison (December 2005)
Baha'i World News Service: UN calls on Iran to stop persecution  of  Baha'is
(December 2005)
Baha'i International Community (Switzerland): Situation of  Baha'i  children
in the Islamic Republic of Iran (January 2005)
International Federation for Human Rights: Discrimination against  religious
minorities in Iran (September 2003)
UN Economic and Social Council, Commission on Human Rights: Question of  the
violation of human rights and  fundamental  freedoms  in  any  part  of  the
world; written statement submitted by the Baha'i International Community,  a
non-governmental organization in special consultative status (January 1999)
UN General Assembly: Situation of human rights in the  Islamic  Republic  of
Iran (September 2001)
The White House, statement by the  Press  Secretary:  Imprisonment  of  four
Baha'is in Iran (April 1999)
American Association for the Advancement  of  Science  Human  Rights  Action
Network: Baha'i educators sentenced (April 1999)
AAAS Human Rights Action Network: Letter of appeal from the  AAAS  Committee
on Scientific Freedom and Responsibility (June 1999)
Human Rights Watch: Academic Freedom (1999)
US Dept of State Annual Report on International Religious Freedom for  1999:
Iran, released  by  the  Bureau  for  Democracy,  Human  Rights  and  Labor,
Washington DC (September 1999) (excerpt)
US Dept of State Country Reports on Human  Rights  Practices  -  2001:  Iran
(2002) (excerpt)
Human Rights Watch World Report 2006: Iran (January 2006)
Integrated Regional Information Networks News (IRIN): Iran: Year  in  Review
2005 (January 2006)
Human Rights  Watch:  Ministers  of  Murder:  Iran's  new  security  cabinet
(December 2005) (excerpt)
Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty: Iran:  Preparing  for  the  next  big  vote
(December 2005)
Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada: Iran: Information on the  Hojjatiya
(Hojjatyeh, Hojjatiyeh or Hojjatiyyeh) Society (September 2003)





