

Asylum and Immigration Tribunal

                 FK (FGM - Risk and Relocation ) Kenya CG [2007] UKAIT 00041




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 23 October 2006                            |On 04 April 2007             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE KING
                      SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE SOUTHERN
                                 MRS J HOLT

                                   Between

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Bandegani, of Refugee Legal Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


(1)  Women in Kenya belonging to those ethnic groups (or  sub-groups)  where
    Female Genital Mutilation is practised are a  particular  social  group
    for the purposes of the 1951 Geneva Convention. Uncircumcised women  in
    Kenya are not as such at real risk of FGM.  A woman  will  be  at  real
    risk in her own home area if she comes from an ethnic  group  (or  sub-
    group) where FGM is practised and the credible evidence  shows  she  is
    reasonably likely to be required by her parents or others in a position
    of power and influence over her to undergo FGM.

(2)  Internal relocation will be available in Kenya to a  woman  who  is  at
    real risk of FGM in her home area if the evidence shows; (i) she is not
    reasonably likely to encounter anyone in the place  of  relocation  who
    would be in a position of power and influence over her  and  who  would
    use that power and influence to require her to undergo  FGM;  and  (ii)
    she can reasonably be expected to live in that place, having regard  to
    the  general  circumstances  prevailing  in  it  and  to  the  personal
    circumstances of the appellant (paragraph 3390 of HC 395 (as amended)).
     Such circumstances will include being  able  to  survive  economically
    (see Januzi v Secretary of State for the  Home  department  and  Others
    [2006] UKHL 5).

(3)  There is no evidence that the Mungiki seek to impose FGM upon women  or
    communities other  than  those  who  have  been  initiated  into  their
    particular sect.  The sect generally is not found in areas occupied  by
    those tribes whose ethnic groups (or  sub-groups)  are  not  Kikuyu  or
    significantly so.

(4)  This  decision  records  updated  evidence  and  provides  new  Country
    Guidance as to how issues of FGM and the Mungiki should  be  considered
    and approached in the light of such updated material.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Kenya.  The dependant  to  her  claim  is
    her daughter, born on 28 January 1988.   Her daughter herself has  also
    given birth to a child, born 26 May 2004.

2.   The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom  with  her  daughter  on  7
    October 2002 and claimed asylum shortly thereafter. Asylum was  refused
    and directions for her removal  were  given  by  the  respondent  in  a
    decision dated 27 November 2002.

3.   The appellant sought to appeal against that decision,  the  hearing  of
    which appeal came before an Adjudicator, Mr B Watkins CMG, on  23  June
    2003.   The appeal on asylum grounds was  dismissed  as  was  also  the
    appeal on human rights grounds.

4.   The appellant sought leave to  appeal  against  that  decision  to  the
    Immigration Appeal Tribunal (as it then was) and permission  to  appeal
    was granted by a Vice President on 1 September 2003.

5.   The matter came before  the  Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal  on  23
    January 2006 by way of reconsideration.   The Tribunal found  that  the
    decision of the Adjudicator was one  which  was  materially  flawed  by
    reason of error of law.   The findings of the Tribunal were as follows:-



         "Having  found  the  appellant  to  be  credible,  so  far  as  her
         experiences in Kenya were concerned, the Adjudicator  proceeded  to
         dismiss her appeal, without having regard to  material  aspects  of
         that account. In particular, the Adjudicator failed to consider the
         implications of the account, against the appellant's claim to be in
         fear (together with her daughter) of being compelled to undergo FGM
         in Kenya.  The  Adjudicator  failed  to  have  any  regard  to  the
         background evidence relating to FGM in  Kenya.   In  purporting  to
         find that only one incident, namely the murder of  the  appellant's
         husband, had been reported  to  the  authorities,  the  Adjudicator
         failed to take  account  at  paragraph  7(A2)  of  the  appellant's
         statement of 10 June 2003. In  purporting  to  deal  with  internal
         relocation at paragraph 8 of  the  determination,  the  Adjudicator
         failed to have regard to the appellant's  statement  that  she  had
         tried to relocate to Nairobi but that the Mungiki had traced her to
         that city.


         On 23 January, the respondent (represented by Mr Blundell) and  the
         appellant (represented by Mr Bandegani) were in agreement that  the
         matter should proceed to a second-stage reconsideration,  at  which
         the Tribunal would be  required  to  determine,  on  the  basis  of
         current evidence, whether the appellant would be at  real  risk  on
         return to Kenya of having to undergo (or being compelled to let her
         daughter undergo) FGM and/or other serious harm at the hands of the
         Mungiki sect.  That risk would be assessed on the  basis  that,  as
         effectively found by the Adjudicator, the  appellant's  account  of
         her experiences in Kenya was credible."


6.   At the substantive reconsideration hearing  a  number  of  issues  were
    highlighted for particular attention.

7.   As to the account of the appellant it was not sought to go  behind  the
    general credibility findings which had been made  by  the  Adjudicator.
    There was one  aspect of the evidence which had  not  been  dealt  with
    specifically by the Adjudicator.    That related to  the  circumstances
    in which the members of the sect had come to make enquiries  about  the
    appellant and her daughter in Nairobi as  variously  described  in  the
    accounts of the  appellant.   The  Tribunal  indicated  that  it  would
    proceed on the basis that on one occasion in  Nairobi  members  of  the
    Mungiki sect had gone to a local church to ask  questions  relating  to
    the appellant and to her daughter.   How they had come  to  know  about
    the whereabouts of the appellant and her  daughter  was  not  something
    which was the subject of any finding by the Adjudicator.

8.   Mr Bandegani who represented the appellant, indicated that it  was  not
    his intention to call the appellant to give further evidence as to  the
    substance of her claim.

9.   It was not in issue that the appellant was a person  who  had  come  to
    the attention of the Mungiki sect and was thereby at some risk of  FGM.
    It was not in issue, given the credibility of the appellant's  account,
    that to return to her home village would expose her and her daughter to
    a well-founded fear of persecution at the hands of the  Mungiki  and/or
    expose her and her daughter to a real risk of serious harm,  namely  by
    having FGM imposed upon them and/or worse violence inflicted.

10.  Given the acceptance of the substance of her fear it is  necessary  for
    us to consider therefore the judgment of the Court of Appeal in P and M
    v SSHD [2004] EWCA Civ 1640.

     Both P and M contended that there was a lack of  state  protection  for
    women in Kenya at risk of violence and FGM and that such arose from the
    entrenched societal attitude towards Kenyan women generally.

    The case of P was essentially that she had been ill-treated and  beaten
    by her husband whilst living in Nairobi. It  was  the  finding  of  the
    Adjudicator, as upheld by  the  court,  that  there  was  no  effective
    protection available for her should she return to her  home  area.  The
    issue of internal relocation had not been raised before the Immigration
    Adjudicator and it was considered inappropriate for that to  be  raised
    as an issue before the Court of Appeal.  The case of M stemmed from the
    fact that her father had joined the Mungiki sect.  He had inflicted FGM
    upon the appellant's sister and she fled to avoid the same  fate.   The
    Adjudicator had concluded that state protection for M would be  neither
    adequate nor effective and that there was no reasonable possibility  of
    internal relocation in her case.  The Court of Appeal having regard  to
    the case of Tsagaan v SSHD [2004] EWCA Civ  1506  considered  that  the
    decision of the Adjudicator was 'plainly right' and should be restored.
     The Court recognised that  there  was  a  real  danger  of  an  overly
    technical approach being adopted to  the  application  of  the  Refugee
    Convention.


11.  it is perhaps helpful to set out the closing remarks of  the  Court  of
    Appeal as set out in the Addendum.

    "Addendum


    50.  In view of the reasoning set out above, we should  make  it  clear
        that, particularly in view of Brooke LJ's reasons for giving  leave
        to appeal,  as we see it this case is  more  about  the  situations
        that may give rise to a claim for asylum or a right to a  claim  to
        protection under Article 3, than those situations that do give rise
        to such a claim. The decision does not mean that all women who  are
        subject  to  cruelty  and  violence  by  their  husband   have   an
        entitlement to asylum and protection under Article 3, only  that  P
        is so entitled.  What is more,  in  her  case,  the  issue  of  her
        ability  to  live  safely  in  other  parts  of  Kenya  was   never
        appropriately investigated, so it may be that if it had  been,  she
        would have not been entitled to asylum or the protection of Article
        3.


    51.  In the case of M the position is similar. In her case her fear  of
        FGM appears beyond doubt.  If it is accepted that she could not  be
        expected to avoid the risk of this being carried  out  against  her
        will by residing in a  different  part  of  Kenya  then  her  case,
        technicalities apart, was self evident.  It is  unfortunate  indeed
        that the law has become so complicated that it has to  be  conceded
        that a very experienced IAT should have misdirected  itself  as  to
        the law.


    52.  The real lesson of this case is the importance of appellate bodies
        not seeking to determine appeals to adjudicator's afresh."


     We do not interpret the judgment in P & M as meaning that any woman  in
    Kenya who can demonstrate a risk of having FGM performed  upon  her  or
    being subjected to violence is entitled without more to be regarded  as
    a refugee or fall within the protection afforded by  the  Qualification
    Directive.  The court was concerned with cases which  turned  on  their
    particular facts.  Whether or not internal relocation is  realistic  or
    appropriate  was  seen  as  a   matter   which   requires   appropriate
    investigation.

12.  It is our intention in this determination  to  consider  the  issue  of
    internal relocation in two particular ways:-  The first  is  by  having
    regard to the personal situation and circumstances of the appellant  as
    urged so to do by the principles set out by the Court of Appeal in P  &
    M.  The second is to seek to comment upon the general situation  facing
    women in Kenya and to set out some  guidelines  which  might  assist  a
    decision maker's approach to the question of internal relocation so  as
    to avoid an overly technical approach to that matter.

13.  The central issue in this appeal relates to the question of  relocation
    in Nairobi or elsewhere within Kenya.   The legal framework  now  falls
    to be considered in the light of the  Refugee  or  Person  in  Need  of
    International  Protection  (Qualification)  Regulations  2006  and  the
    amended Immigration Rules, Paragraph 339O of HC395 provides that:-


         (i)  The Secretary of State will not make:


             (a)  a grant of asylum if in part of the country  of  origin  a
               person  would  not  have  a  well  founded  fear  of   being
               persecuted, and the person can  reasonably  be  expected  to
               stay in that part of the country; or


             (b)  a grant of humanitarian  protection  if  in  part  of  the
               country of return a person would not face  a  real  risk  of
               suffering serious harm, and the  person  can  reasonably  be
               expected to stay in that part of the country.


         (ii) In examining whether a  part  of  the  country  of  origin  or
         country of return meets the requirements in (i)  the  Secretary  of
         State, when making his decision  on  whether  to  grant  asylum  or
         humanitarian  protection,  will  have   regard   to   the   general
         circumstances prevailing in that part of the  country  and  to  the
         personal circumstances of the person.


         (iii)     (i) applies notwithstanding technical obstacles to return
         to the country of origin or country of return.


    Such an issue raises three sub-issues, namely:-


    (a)  whether there exists a sufficiency of protection from the  adverse
         attentions of the Mungiki;


    (b)  whether the relocation would itself expose the appellant to a real
         risk of FGM generally;


    (c)  whether relocation would be unreasonable or unduly  harsh  in  all
         the circumstances.


     The Appellant's Situation

14.  We were presented with a  large  volume  of  objective  evidence.   The
    appellant submitted a bundle of documents of some 625 folios.  A number
    of documents and authorities were submitted on behalf of the respondent
    dealing with a number of more recent news bulletins or articles.

15.  The account of the appellant is  set  out  in  a  number  of  documents
    including a SEF with attached statement  dated  15  October  2002;   an
    interview conducted on 11 November 2002, and a further statement dated
    10 June 2003.

16.  The appellant was born in Kiambu in Kenya on 26 June  1965.    She  had
    three children.   Her husband had his own business running  a  printing
    firm.  The family were practising Christians.

17.  The appellant's father-in-law joined the religious sect  known  as  the
    Mungiki.  His initiation into the Mungiki took place in the  middle  of
    June 2002 in a rite which is described in detail by  the  appellant  in
    her statement.    The  father-in-law  came  to  the  appellant's  house
    dressed in his new costume and explained to her husband the  nature  of
    the religion.  There was an argument, her husband  refusing  to  change
    his religion.  In early July 2002 the Mungiki came to the house led  by
    the elder who had initiated the father-in-law.  The appellant's husband
    refused to embrace their sect and he was badly beaten by  a  number  of
    the Mungiki, so much so  that  he  had  subsequently  to  be  taken  to
    hospital.  Thereafter pressure was exerted by  the  father-in-law  upon
    her husband.

18.  On 30 July 2002 the  Mungiki  returned  to  the  house  saying  to  the
    appellant's husband that as his father had joined them it was  now  for
    him as his eldest son to do the same.   On refusal he  was  beaten  and
    eventually stabbed in the heart.  The appellant reported the matter  to
    the local police post who undertook the removal of her  husband's  body
    from the house.   Her husband was buried on 7 August 2002.

19.  On 20 August 2002 the Mungiki returned to  the  home  to  persuade  the
    appellant to join and making enquiries as to the ages  of  her  various
    children.   Initially she refused their demands as a  result  of  which
    her husband's car was burnt and the windows in the house were  smashed.
    In order to avoid further trouble she told the men that she would  join
    the religion and that her daughter would be circumcised when the school
    holidays came.

20.  Subsequently her daughter was taken in  preparation  for  her  FGM  but
    managed to escape and return to her home.   The Mungiki had arrived  at
    the family home and the appellant, her children and  her  sister-in-law
    managed to escape.   From their hiding position they  saw  the  Mungiki
    set fire to the home.      The appellant left her two younger  children
    with her sister-in-law and escaped with her elder daughter making their
    way to Nairobi.

21.  A man gave them a lift to Nairobi where they found  themselves  in  the
    middle of that city dressed only in their nightclothes.    They  walked
    and found a Catholic church and came under the protection of a  priest,
    Father James.   They had arrived at the church on Saturday and  on  the
    following Monday the priest told them that the Mungiki had visited  him
    asking as to their whereabouts.   The priest being frightened that  the
    Mungiki would return arranged for them to  depart  from  Nairobi.  They
    embarked upon a journey via Zimbabwe to the United Kingdom.

22.  The appellant feared  that  if  she  returned  to  Kenya  she  and  her
    daughter would face death and persecution from those  that  killed  her
    husband.  She feared also that she and her daughter would be forced  to
    undergo circumcision in order to save their lives.

23.  The Adjudicator had made specific reference to  the  statement  of  the
    appellant  dated  10  June  2003.  The  statement  essentially  was  to
    highlight certain matters, those relevant  for  the  purposes  of  this
    appeal being that set out in paragraph  8  of  that  statement,  namely
    comments by the appellant as follows:

         "In paragraph 41, I noted that the Father told us about the Mungiki
         asking him about people  he  was  believed  to  be  sheltering.   I
         believe that Mungiki  suspected  that  we  were  with  the  father,
         because Mungiki in Nairobi must have seen my daughter and me in our
         nightdresses on the street and then going to the church.  I believe
         that it was through this that word got back to the Mungiki who  had
         attacked us as to where we were.  The Father had been asked  if  he
         knew where a mother and daughter  were,  rather  than  having  been
         asked for us by name."


     The Expert Evidence

24.  Dr B P Knighton was called to give oral evidence.   He  had  lived  and
    worked in Uganda and Kenya for  a  number  of  years  working  for  the
    Anglican Church. He is an academic and a member of the African  Studies
    Circle in the University of Oxford.  He has a  particular  interest  in
    East Africa.  He lived and worked with the Kikuyu in the region of East
    of Mount Kenya from 1991-1998. He returns to Kenya on a regular  basis.
    He had submitted a report to be found  at  pages  241  to  289  of  the
    appellant's bundle.   He adopted that report as part  of  his  evidence
    and was asked questions by Mr Tarlow on behalf of the  respondent;  and
    then by Mr Bandegani on behalf of the appellant.

25.  It was accepted that the appellant is a member  of  the  Kikuyu  tribe.
    He stated that the names of the appellant were  distinctive  and  would
    identify her as  belonging  to  that  particular  clan.    Dr  Knighton
    preferred to use the term female  genital  cutting  (FGC)  rather  than
    female genital  mutilation.    To  avoid  confusion  however,  we  will
    continue to use the term FGM in this determination.  He indicated  that
    FGM  was  practised  within  the  Kikuyu  tribe,  it  being  considered
    necessary for womanhood, morals, self respect and eligibility to marry.
      The Kikuyu number some six million, the basic social grouping is  the
    "Mbari" or  "sub  clan".    Sub  clans  hold  to  either  Christian  or
    traditionalist customs or a combination of the two.    Some  Sub  clans
    profess their Christian faith and also practice FGM.

26.  Dr Knighton said that there is internal controversy about the  practice
    among the Kikuyu.   Many church groups  or  churches  are  against  the
    practice.  There is much secrecy still surrounding the practice.    The
    practice is condoned in the media.  The more it is spoken of  the  more
    it goes underground.

27.  At paragraph 6 of the report Dr Knighton cites  the  Kenya  demographic
    and health survey which showed a decrease in  FGM  among  Kikuyu  women
    aged fifteen to forty between 1998 and 2003 from 42.5% to 34%. He  also
    indicated that the results needed to be treated  with  caution  as  the
    survey sample was biased to urban areas.  He also said that the surveys
    relied on interviews by young people who had  been  given  only  a  few
    weeks training.   He was of the opinion that women in rural areas  were
    60% more likely to have undergone FGM than those in urban areas.  It is
    possible for women to be circumcised later  in  life,  especially  when
    moving into a family or clan which adheres to the custom.  He indicated
    that it would be reasonable  to  expect  there  to  be  a  much  higher
    proportion of women over forty nine who had undergone  the  initiation.
    Before 1959 the FGC ceremonies were often public,  open  and  communal.
    At present because FGM remains a controversial issue it  is  often  not
    something to be publicised.  He comments that the people on the  survey
    may have been reluctant to have admitted to such initiation.    It  was
    difficult to put figures upon the number  of  persons  undertaking  the
    initiation.  Given that the Kikuyu were regarded as  one  of  the  more
    educated clans, it is a measure of the  persistence  of  the  practice,
    that it has remained.  The report of Dr Knighton would seem to  suggest
    that the practice amongst the Kikuyu exists to the extent of a third or
    half of women of that clan.  In three  quarters  of  cases  the  mother
    takes the decision for their daughters to be cut.  It is  a  transition
    to womanhood and eligibility for marriage.   A major determinant is the
    custom of the sub-clan.

28.  Dr Knighton recognised that the churches have spoken  out  against  the
    practice as have a number of NGOs.   He was somewhat dismissive  as  to
    the influence of such NGOs upon the customs and culture of the  Kikuyu.
     The comment which he makes is that many of the NGOs  are  involved  in
    particular projects and are concerned to attract  media  attention  and
    support and less focused upon the  local  population.    He  recognised
    that  the  law  sought  to  outlaw  the  practice  but  contrasted  the
    application of law with custom.  He contended  that  state  law  was  a
    colonial creation for the most part and that customary law had  greater
    influence.  He contrasted the situation  in  Kenya  with  that  in  the
    United Kingdom.   In the UK FGM has long been  outlawed  but  a  recent
    newspaper  article  indicated  that  some  three  thousand   initiation
    operations had been performed in the UK within the last year or  so  by
    elders coming from abroad.   Dr Knighton used that example to  contrast
    the effectiveness  of  law  with  the  practicalities  of  custom.   He
    indicated that in  May  2006  sexual  offences  were  codified  in  new
    legislation in Kenya but that did not  extend  to  FGM.    Dr  Knighton
    contends in paragraph 8 of his report that there  is  little  political
    will to enforce the criminalisation of FGM in the  foreseeable  future.
    There are a few court cases which hit  the  newspapers  involving  FGM,
    such arise only because of  pressure  from  an  NGO  or  from  feminist
    interests.  The  cases  do  not  generally  reflect  the  will  or  the
    intention of the government.  In terms of police he suggested there was
    still a degree of corruption and a reluctance to be involved with  what
    are regarded as family and personal issues.

29.  Two specific shelters exist in Kenya.  The first was in Naroke, on  the
    main road near to the Tanzanian border.  It is in Masai country,  which
    is dry and hot.   It is designed for young girls  giving  them  shelter
    from FGM.  He contended that it will be difficult to maintain a  family
    life there.   In any event the Masai were a very traditional people and
    those  living  in  or  around  Sabarot   and   Naroke   practice   FGM.
    Dr Knighton contended that for the appellant to live in that area  she
    would either need to marry, otherwise she would need to move away.  The
    other refuge is at Mount Elgon towards the Ugandan border near to Mbale
    and Soroti.  It is a cold and wet area and also designed  as  a  refuge
    for girls only.   He contended that there would not  be  a  sustainable
    future for the appellant in that region.

30.   He  stated  that  church  communities  could  provide  some  temporary
    assistance and did so, particularly for children running away from FGM.
      Normally, however, the churches were unable to provide a  sustainable
    family life but rather would put the children into a  boarding  school.
    Without some community base and support the appellant,  would  find  it
    difficult to support herself and her family.

31.  Our attention of was drawn to  the  US  State  Department  Report  2005
    dated 8 March 2006, particularly to the passage as set out at page  221
    of the appellant's bundle.  It is reported that of the forty two ethnic
    groups only four (the Luo, Luhya, Teso and Turkana)  did  not  practice
    FGM at all.   The Luo and Luhya lived near to Lake Victoria in the west
    of Kenya.  The Luhya was agriculturally based with the main city  being
    Musona.   That was a multi ethnic  town.   There  were  plenty  of  Luo
    churches in the area as churches were an expression of ethnic identity.
      Dr Knighton contended, however, that the churches were not a means of
    long term  hospitality.  They  were  active  and  self  sufficient  and
    expected self sufficiency from those with whom they  had  contact.   Dr
    Knighton contended that the appellant,  as  a  Kikuyu,  would  find  it
    difficult establishing herself  in  that  area  and  finding  work  and
    accommodation.  There would be little  chance,  he  contended,  of  the
    appellant establishing herself  in  terms  of  finding  a  property  or
    ownership.  She was not a trader.  The majority of  Kikuyu  women  were
    farmers, farming coffee, tea, maize and beans.  In the  Kikuyu  culture
    land was extremely important.  Much  of  the  land  in  Kenya  was  not
    fertile so the fertile land was very much in demand.   One  could  only
    acquire land either through family or through  marriage.   Dr  Knighton
    contended that the  appellant  would  face  difficulties  in  marriage.
    There is an effective taboo against  women  who  have  given  birth  to
    children particularly to sons.  The appellant would have to exist  upon
    her own wits by selling food or sewing and there  would  be  plenty  of
    competition in whatever  area  she  chose  to  go  to.   Dr  Knighton's
    comments about the ability of the NGOs to provide  protection  are  set
    out at paragraph 10  of  his  report.   In  summary,  he  was  somewhat
    dismissive of their ability to provide any long term  support  for  the
    appellant or her family.

32.  The expert then turned his attention to the issue of the  Mungiki.   In
    paragraph 14 of the report he takes issue  with  the  Tribunal  in  its
    comments in the judgment of JA (Mungiki, not a religion)  Kenya  [2004]
    UKIAT 00226. The Tribunal found little within the  sect  to  illustrate
    any belief system.  Dr Knighton argues that the Mungiki is  a  politico
    religious movement in succession to many others in Kenya over the  last
    sixty years.  He speaks of members being associated with gangs involved
    with vigilante work, in extortion or protection activities.   It  is  a
    movement seeking to appeal to the hearts and minds of the Kikuyu youth.
     Unlike the mainstream Pentecostal churches with  their  commitment  to
    modernity, western  education  and  development,  the  Mungiki  believe
    strongly that such trends or modern developments  have  let  them  down
    badly so should be opposed.  The beliefs of the  Mungiki  are  in  some
    form  an  attempted  continuity  of  the  traditional  socio  religious
    traditions of the Kikuyu.  It offers a  form  of  morality  seeking  to
    combat the effect of modernity,  offering  an  alternative  of  way  of
    coping in an attempt to reconstruct Kikuyu tradition.  Thereby it seeks
    to impose  a new morality, and self discipline. Such  is  expressed  by
    way of sexual and other social behaviour, defined by  initiation,  oath
    and FGM.  Protection rackets are one form of seeking to impose  control
    or order.  It is a society  requiring  support  and  in  turn  offering
    protection.

33.  Dr Knighton contended  that  notwithstanding  the  strong  words  being
    issued by the government against the Mungiki  little in practical terms
    results from their words. He agreed that there  are  some  thirty  four
    million people living in Kenya, of whom a fifth would be Kikuyu.    The
    potential adherence to the sect is very substantial.  He contends  that
    media pressure leads to many arrests at selected moments  but  for  the
    most part, the police have not been mobilised either to prevent or stop
    meetings of the cult.   Mass arrests have led to most if not all  being
    set free.  An analysis of the media reports  records 2,881  arrests  of
    members of the Mungiki across Kenya since 1999  only  over  eighty  per
    cent of which have been in Nairobi. Of  all  the  reported  arrests  in
    Kenya there have been ninety seven convictions reported  of those three
    carried a  life  sentence;  and  some  eighty  nine  were  given  light
    sentences.   Nairobi is the  location  of  most  of  the  public  order
    offences.  Given the number of arrests in  Nairobi  and  the  resulting
    lack of convictions he contends that that is indicative as to the  lack
    of real intention on the part  of  the  authorities  to  do  very  much
    effectively about it.  Most of the arrests were mass arrests for public
    order offences or for being a member of an illegal  organisation.    He
    submits that most of the arrests only came after media  sensations  and
    he gave various examples.   Thus,  although  thousands  may  have  been
    arrested very few indeed were  ever  dealt  with  before  the  criminal
    courts.

34.  Dr Knighton was unable  to  furnish  statistical  evidence  as  to  the
    numbers of the Mungiki or the number of defectors.  He thought that the
    number was possibly half a million or more.   On such a calculation the
    Mungiki would represent some 1.47% of the total Kikuyu population

35.  He considered that the appellant would  face  difficulty  returning  to
    Nairobi given the proximity of Nairobi to her home village.  The Kiambu
    district was immediately to the north east of Nairobi.  There would  be
    much travel between the countryside and  the  city.   The  Kikuyu  were
    skilled in the art of gossip and rumour,  called  "Mdaku".    Everybody
    would want to know where you were from and where you belonged  to.   It
    would not take long, submits Dr Knighton, for people to make  enquiries
    about the appellant or to have news of her.  The Mungiki were active in
    Nairobi, involved in many aspects of public life there, including mini-
    bus  services  and  the  various  protection   rackets   and   business
    activities.  He submits that the activities of the government in making
    intermittent crackdowns served merely to drive the Mungiki  underground
    and not away.

36.  The Mungiki leader was an important leader and  spiritual  founder  who
    had visions in 1989.   The  members  of  the  sect  looked  for  strong
    leadership within the kikuyu.  The movement is deep rooted.

37.  A number of newspaper articles were shown to the expert concerning  the
    number of arrests and the activities of the government.  There was,  In
    particular, a  newspaper  article  contained  within  the  respondent's
    bundle of documents at page 31,  dealing  with  the  arrest  of  ninety
    suspected Mungiki followers in Nyeri.  The article is dated 9 May 2006.
      Linked  with  that  was  another  article  from  KBC  Radio  via  BBC
    monitoring in Kenya dated March 26 2006,  speaking  of  the  government
    holding nine hundred and seventy members of the sect  in  a  crackdown.
    Dr Knighton gave very little weight  to  those  articles.   As  to  the
    arrest of the nine hundred people, that report was not corroborated  in
    any other press report.  He would  have  expected  to  have  seen  that
    aspect on the local news or in other articles.   The KBC was government
    owned and controlled radio  network.   The  reason  for  that  show  of
    strength had been because there had been  considerable  controversy  at
    the time concerning the action of the authorities  in  strip  searching
    suspected members of the local community and in particular, the  clumsy
    way of seeing whether  women  had  undergone  FGM  and  therefore  were
    possible supporters of the Mungiki.   It was a way,  he  contended,  of
    the  government  trying  to  turn  the  spotlight  away  from  its  own
    behaviour.  As to the other report, Nyeri was a government  centre  not
    designed to hold prisoners, certainly not  ninety  six  of  them.    He
    doubted whether the police station at Kirinyaga was capable of  holding
    very many prisoners.    Again such matters  seemed  not  to  have  been
    supported elsewhere.

38.  Finally, Dr Knighton was asked about Mombassa. He agreed  that  it  was
    the second city in Kenya, and  was  industrial,  commercial  and  multi
    ethnic.   The tribes which surrounded that town in the countryside were
    conservative, mainly a collection of Bantu tribes.  They practice  FGM.
     There had been ethnic problems in 1997  when  Kikuyu  shopkeepers  had
    been chased away by the locals. Seeking to live within that city  would
    be both unstable and unpredictable for the appellant.

39.  As to relocation generally he stated that North Kenya was  mostly  arid
    and desert.  The peoples  nomadic and protective of their  environment.
    The people would be fairly traditional in their outlook and there would
    be little protection for the appellant or her family.

40.  In Malindi, the Lamu  had  a  small  settlement.   They  were  Muslims.
    There would not be many strangers within their culture which  was  also
    conservative.

41.  A summary of Dr Knighton's conclusions are set out in paragraph  17  of
    his report.  In summary, he did not consider that the  appellant  could
    relocate anywhere in safety from the Mungiki.   Even if  she  could  be
    safe from them it is his contention that given her cultural links  with
    Kikuyu, she would find it difficult to exist elsewhere in Kenya outside
    her particular clan or sub-clan.

     The General Objective Evidence

42.  We were not addressed on the wider issue of  risk  to  women  in  Kenya
    generally but we have  regard  in  particular  the  Country  of  Origin
    Research Report prepared by the Immigration  Refugee  Board  of  Canada
    dated 16 February 2005.   This is to be found at pages 1 and 7  to  112
    of the appellant's bundle of documents.  It  provides  in  our  view  a
    helpful overview as to the general situation of women and FGM in Kenya.

    It reports that the Kenya Demographic and Health Survey (KDHS) revealed
        that:-


        "Approximately 32 per cent of Kenyan women between the ages  of  15
        and 49 had been circumcised (Kenya July 2004, 251).  From  1998  to
        2003, the KDHS recorded a seven per cent  decline  in  these  cases
        (ibid., 250).  However, the survey showed that  the  prevalence  of
        FGM varied according to certain factors, such as age, education and
        ethnicity (ibid., 250-251).


        According to the survey, 20 per cent of women between the  ages  of
        15 and 19 had been circumcised, compared with 48 per cent of  women
        between the ages of 45 and 49; 36 per cent of women  who  lived  in
        rural areas had been circumcised, compared  with  21  per  cent  in
        urban centres; approximately 50 per cent of Muslim women  had  been
        circumcised, compared with 33 per cent of non-Muslim women  (ibid.,
        250).  Moreover, the  KDHS  noted  a  strong  negative  correlation
        between FGM and a woman's level of education: 58 per cent of  women
        with no education had been circumcised, while only 21 per  cent  of
        women who had graduated  from  high  school  had  been  circumcised
        (ibid.).


        The following statistics show the percentage of  women  circumcised
        among the various ethnic groups.


        |Embu (43.6)           |Kalenjin (48.1)    |Kamba (26.5)             |
|Kikuyu (34.0)         |Kisii (95.9)       |Luhya (0.7)              |
|Luo (0.7)             |Maasai (93.4)      |Meru (42.4)              |
|Mijikenda/Swahili     |Somali (97.0)      |Taita/Taveta (62.1)      |
|(5.8)                 |                   |                         |
|Turkana (12.2)        |Kuria (95.9)       |Others (17.6) (ibid., 51)|


        Note that Kisiis are  also  known  as  Abagusiis,  Gisiis,  Guziis,
        Kissiis.


        The report went on to indicate  that  elders  are  responsible  for
        making decisions regarding FGM, particularly determining  the  time
        and place for circumcision and the person who should perform it.


43.   The  report  considered  also  the  issue  of  state  protection   and
    availability.  It cites journalistic sources  to  indicate  that  Kenya
    outlawed FGM among girls under the age of 18 and  that  the  Children's
    Act 2004 Section 18 provides that "any  conviction  for  [FGM]  related
    offences carries a penalty of 12 months imprisonment or a fine of Kshs.
    50,000 or both.

     In 2001 the Ministry of Health circulated  a  policy  directive  making
    [FGM] illegal in all health facilities. In December  2003  the  country
    signed the Masuto Protocol in  which  Article  5  stipulates  that  FGM
    should be prohibited and condemned.  The government also implemented  a
    National Plan of Action for the Elimination of FGM in Kenya.  The  plan
    aims to increase the number of communities supporting  the  elimination
    of FGM as well as the number of  health  facilities  providing  support
    services to victims.

     Some sources are said to have noted that, in practice,  the  Children's
    Act is not being enforced or light sentences are being handed down.  It
    is also said that Kenyan Parliamentarians have showed a  reluctance  to
    discuss FGM out of fear of losing votes.

     A  number  of  organisations  and  non-governmental  organisations  are
    specified in the report. Reference is also made to MYVO and its efforts
    to replace FGM with alternative  rites  of  passage,  which  have  been
    successful in various communities.

44.  As for the Mungiki sect the Immigration and  Refugee  Board  of  Canada
    has prepared its report 'Responses to Information  Requests'  dated  23
    February 2005. Such a  report is to be found at pages  113-117  of  the
    appellant's bundle of documents. It perhaps adds little to the evidence
    as already set out but provides a helpful overview and summary  of  the
    situation.

     Submissions

45.  The parties made their submissions.   On behalf of  the  respondent  Mr
    Tarlow relied upon the bundle of documents submitted on behalf  of  the
    respondent.   He also adopted the refusal letter of 19  December  2002.
    He invited us to have regard to the statistical information  which  had
    been placed before us.   Kenya had a population  of  somewhere  in  the
    region of thirty four million people.    The  Kikuyu  was  one  of  the
    largest if not the largest of  the  clans  within  Kenya,  having  many
    million members.  Although generally the Kikuyu  as  a  clan  practised
    FGM,  the  statistical  information  was  that  not  all  Kikuyu  women
    underwent that initiation at whatever level.  The US  State  Department
    Report for 2006 quoted from the Government's  August  2004  Demographic
    and Health Survey that some thirty two per cent of women had  undergone
    FGM.   In an area such as Eastern Nyanza and the Rift Valley there  was
    a very high percentage, in others less so.   Even  putting  a  generous
    interpretation upon Dr Knighton's report some thirty two to  fifty  per
    cent of women had undergone FGM depending  upon  age.    The  appellant
    herself had lived in a community which did not practice FGM.  There was
    no reason at all to suppose that she could not find  another  community
    with equally modern views.

46.  He further submitted the appellant  had  sought  the  assistance  of  a
    Catholic community in Nairobi. There was no reason at all why she could
    not seek the assistance of another church group equally opposed to FGM.
     She would have no need for herself or  for  her  children  to  seek  a
    refuge but rather could establish herself as part of a community.   She
    was resourceful and there is no reason to believe that  she  could  not
    otherwise enjoy her lifestyle.  Our  attention  was  drawn  also  to  a
    letter from the Foreign and Commonwealth Office dated 14 November 2005.
     It was a letter from the British High  Commission  in  Nairobi  to  be
    found at page 42 of the respondent's bundle of documents.  It indicated
    that there were many community  based  organisations,  non-governmental
    organisations, charity organisations and churches which run schemes and
    refuges for women.   These deal with domestic  violence,  assist  girls
    attempting to avoid FGM and early marriage and promote women's  rights.
    A long list of such organisations was  attached  to  the  letter.   The
    letter indicated that it was not easy to  obtain  paid  employment  and
    that unemployment rates were estimated to be between thirty  and  sixty
    per cent.  In particular, the more well educated a woman  may  be,  the
    better her opportunities of gaining employment.  In the general context
    few young women live a life independent of  their  families  in  Kenya.
    Much will depend upon education and employment opportunities.  It  went
    on to say that in Kenya the CBOs, NGOs and self help  groups  did  give
    assistance to the destitute and to those girls and women attempting  to
    avoid FGM.  Mr Tarlow invited us to find  that  Dr  Knighton  had  been
    unduly dismissive of the role and functions of NGOs in that context.

 47. He submitted that there was  freedom  of  religion  and  there  were  a
    number of multi ethnic  towns  to  which  the  appellant  could  go  to
    establish a life for herself.

48.  As to the Mungiki sect, he submitted that there was no reason why  that
    sect would have any interest in  the  appellant  beyond  the  immediate
    events in her home village.   Even accepting  the  credibility  of  the
    account as given by the appellant, such did not answer the question  as
    to how  it  was  that  the  Mungiki  came  to  enquire  of  the  church
    authorities about the appellant and her daughter.   It may well  be  as
    indeed the appellant indicated  in  her  more  recent  statement,  that
    seeing a woman and daughter in their nightclothes in Nairobi  may  have
    excited questions and comments.  There is nothing to indicate that  the
    appellant was being specifically targeted.   Even if that were so, many
    years have now elapsed.

49.  Mr  Tarlow  invited  us  to  find  that  there  was  a  sufficiency  of
    protection available to the appellant against the  activities  of  this
    particular group.  Our attention was  drawn  to  the  various  articles
    which are set out in the respondent's bundle at pages 25 to 32.   There
    is an article from the Daily Nation in Kenya  dated  January  14  2006,
    speaking of the government having announced a fresh  crackdown  on  the
    Mungiki sect, the  police  were  targeting  hideouts  in  a  number  of
    locations.  In October 2005 the General Service  Unit  had  raided  the
    sect's headquarters in Kitengeoa and arrested eighteen  suspects.    An
    article from FM in Kenya dated 2 February 2006  spoke  of  the  Mungiki
    sect leader, Maina Njenja, having been arrested in a raid on  his  home
    The event is then followed by the KBC Radio Report as to the arrest  of
    nine hundred and seventy  members  of  the  outlawed  Mungiki  sect  in
    Central  Kenya.   The  date  of  that  report  being  26  March   2006.
    Thereafter follows  the  report  of  9  May  2006  speaking  of  ninety
    suspected Mungiki followers having  been  arrested.   He  submits  that
    there is clear evidence that the government is motivated to clamp  down
    on that sect and has taken the appropriate action  accordingly.   There
    was no reason to believe that the authorities would not act  on  behalf
    of the appellant were they requested so to do.

50.  On behalf of the appellant Mr Bendegani made his submissions.   On  the
    general issue of FGC we were  invited  to  pay  little  regard  to  any
    statistical analysis.  For the reasons outlined by Dr Knighton  in  his
    report, obtaining any accurate statistical data was problematic.   What
    was clear was that the Kikuyu practised FGM and that such a practice is
    deep-rooted within the custom of Kenyan society.  We were asked to give
    considerable  weight  to  Dr  Knighton's  report  and  to  his  overall
    conclusions. FGM would seem to be imposed when a girl is eight years or
    older.  There would seem not to be any  upper  age  limit.   Much  will
    depend upon sub-clan and the general context in which a woman  conducts
    her life.  Certainly if the appellant seeks to establish any  life  for
    herself and for her children she may well find herself in the  position
    of being compelled either to have FGM for herself or to  encourage  her
    daughter to have the initiation.   We  were  invited  to  consider  the
    comments by the House of lords in the recent decision  in  K  &  Fornah
    [2006] UKHL 46 as to the institutional inferiority of women.   Kenya is
    very much a society that discriminates against women  and  there  is  a
    marked reluctance by the  authorities  to  be  involved  in  family  or
    community matters.

51.  He submitted that the actions of the government towards  expunging  FGM
    were half-hearted and/or sporadic in nature and  ineffective.   Secrecy
    was very much at the heart of the Kikuyu culture and the  colonial  law
    imposed was  less  than  effective  to  deal  with  customary  law  and
    practice.   Our attention was drawn to the article by Gemma  Richardson
    of 11 February 2005 "Ending Female Genital Mutilation".  It  is  to  be
    found at pages 122 to 125  of  the  appellant's  bundle  of  documents.
    Women who abandon the practice  of  FGM  have  a  lot  to  lose,  their
    position in the community is  affected,  and  they  may  find  it  more
    difficult  to  find  a  partner  for  marriage.  Programmes   for   FGC
    eradication require massive resources, time  and  commitment.   It  was
    submitted by Mr Bandegani that such is not in existence at present  in
    Kenya.

52.  Our attention was drawn  to  an  article  from  The  Nation  (Nairobi),
    December 3 2005, dealing with the new rite which has been introduced to
    avoid cutting.  This article is to be found at pages 105 to 106 of  the
    appellant's bundle.   The article makes it clear that,  notwithstanding
    the possibility of an alternative non-invasive  rite  such  alternative
    rites have no validity in the minds of  traditionalists  or  indeed  of
    candidates.

53.  We were invited to find, on the  evidence  of  Dr  Knighton,  that  the
    shelters would be inappropriate for the appellant given her age.  There
    was nowhere for her to live in those areas  and  that  essentially  she
    would be forced either to live in Kikuyu areas and to  succumb  to  FGM
    either herself or her children, should she wish to  maintain  community
    links with that area. Alternatively she might live in  Mombassa  or  in
    Musona in which case she would  find  it  difficult  as  a  lone  woman
    without family support to survive.   We were invited to  find  that  in
    those circumstances applying the principles as set out in Januzi v SSHD
    [2006] UKHL 5 that to expect her to do so would be unreasonable  and/or
    unduly harsh.

54.  Although the appellant may find some temporary  assistance  or  shelter
    such would not suffice in the  long  term.    In  that  connection  our
    attention was drawn to  pages  105,  108,  109,  220  and  221  of  the
    appellant's bundle.  Particular reports were highlighted.   An  article
    dated 3 February 2006 from the Chinese News Agency indicated that  the
    Austrian Embassy in Nairobi and a Kenyan church  intervened  to  rescue
    five  hundred  schoolgirls  from  undergoing  forced  circumcision   in
    November and December 2004.   According to  Global  Feminist  News  one
    hundred students between the age of ten and  eighteen  were  forced  to
    undergo circumcision in the West Pokot District  in  August  2004.   On
    7 February 2003 a BBC Report indicated that one hundred Kenya girls in
    hiding from their parents were attempting to  escape  forced  FGM.   In
    relation to the US State Department Report at page 221 it was said that
    in April 2005 seventeen girls in Marakwet District fled  to  avoid  FGM
    and were given shelter in Eldoret.   Three days later  police  forcibly
    removed the girls from the shelter and then returned to their  village.
    It was submitted there was no effective protection for young  girls  or
    women against the wishes of their community.  Without male patronage it
    is submitted that the appellant is in an even  weaker  situation.   Her
    capacity to earn a living without community support or  marriage  could
    be weakened.   It is particularly so given the fact that  her  daughter
    is now a mother also in her own right.

55.  As to  the  Mungiki  Mr  Bandegani  submits  that  their  influence  is
    widespread throughout all of Kenya.   They  operate  within  the  major
    cities particularly among the Kikuyu population.  The appellant by  her
    name and characteristics would be recognised as Kikuyu.   It  would  be
    noted that she was seeking to exist independently of  a  community  and
    family and that may well expose her to pressure to undergo FGM and  the
    adverse attention of the Mungiki.   The secret society's  main  purpose
    was to take action against those perceived to have western influence or
    of those who have sought to move away  from  traditional  values.   The
    appellant will be seen  as  coming  under  the  western  influence  and
    clearly having moved away from her home area and  family  and  to  have
    contravened the traditional values of Kikuyu society.   It will be very
    difficult for the appellant to fail to come to  the  attention  of  the
    sect particularly if she has her daughter and her grandchild with her.

56.  Our attention was drawn to page 272 of the appellant's bundle  and   in
    particular to part of the report by Dr Knighton when  he  speaks  about
    the numerous hit squads operating in urban centres by the Mungiki.   Mr
    Bendagani submitted that such special groups enforcing  the  discipline
    would very much have the appellant in mind in that connection.

57.  In summary, therefore it is submitted  that  relocation  generally  was
    not available to the appellant it being both unsafe and unduly harsh to
    expect her to live outside the Kikuyu community. The  church  community
    may provide a temporary protection but not a home.  The  appellant  has
    no means of transport, no livelihood , she would find it  difficult  to
    find employment and would be vulnerable as a lone  female  to  rape  or
    attack.   She is without patronage with a young daughter  and  a  young
    baby very much alone.

58.  The appellant also suffers from diabetes and requires  insulin.    Such
    also will require funding with a  degree  of  community  support.   Our
    attention was drawn to pages 211 to  223  of  the  appellant's  bundle,
    which deals with child rape and prostitution, poverty and  destitution.
    A lot of  children  are  on  the  streets  it  may  well  be  that  the
    appellant's daughter or indeed her child in turn would be destitute and
    forced to engage in prostitution or begging to survive.

    Particular Social Group

59.  The general credibility of the appellant's account is not in  issue  in
    this case.  It is right, however, that we  remind  ourselves  that  the
    circumstances of the appellant should  be  placed  within  the  overall
    context of the objective evidence as has been placed  before  us.    We
    have taken account of those particular matters to which  our  attention
    was specifically drawn.   We have attempted to take a holistic view  as
    to the evidence which  has  been  presented,  particularly  the  expert
    evidence, in an attempt to resolve the issues which we have  previously
    identified.

60.  The burden and standard of proof is to the  lower  standard  namely  "a
    reasonable  likelihood"  or  "a  serious  possibility".    We  consider
    whether there is a well-founded risk of persecution in respect  of  the
    1951 Geneva Convention, or a real risk of serious harm being caused  to
    the appellant and/or to those dependent upon her  in  relation  to  the
    issue of humanitarian protection and whether the appellant would face a
    breach of her protected human rights.  We have regard to the  issue  of
    asylum, humanitarian protection and human rights  as  set  out  in  the
    Protection  (Qualification)  Regulations  2006  and  in   the   amended
    immigration rules (Cm6918).

61.  We bear in mind in particular three decisions  of  the  Tribunal.   The
    first being that of JA (Mungiki - Not a Religion)  Kenya  [2004]  UKIAT
    00266, notified in September 2004; JM (Sufficiency of Protection -  IFA
    - FGM) Kenya [2005] UKAIT 00054 notified in February 2005; and JK  (FGM
    - Sufficiency of Protection) Kenya  [2005]  UKAIT  00080,  notified  in
    April 2005.  We also have regard to Januzi [2006] UKHL 5 and K & Fornah
    [2006] UKHL 46.

62.  It is to be noted that the claim of the appellant  is  essentially  two
    fold: the first aspect is that she fears that if returned to Kenya  she
    will be compelled to undergo FGM both to herself and/or in  respect  of
    her children.   Such fear arises out of her membership  of  the  Kikuyu
    tribe and the need to conform to such expectations for the purposes  of
    being accepted within the community.   This we term the general ground.
     The second ground is more focused, namely that she will be targeted by
    the Mungiki and thereby suffer serious harm whether by violence  or  by
    FGM.  Her daughter and child also may  face  similar  treatment.     In
    this particular appeal it  is  accepted  by  the  respondent  that  the
    appellant falls within the definition of particular social group (PSG),
      for the purposes of the 1951 Geneva Convention so as to give rise  to
    the possibility that she will be recognised as a refugee, if  what  she
    fears is accepted as being well founded.  Clearly on the facts as found
    by  the  Immigration  Judge  the  appellant  falls  within  the  narrow
    definition of PSG as formulated.

63.  We consider that the evidence as presented before us strongly  supports
    the view, in the light of the proper legal criteria now clarified by  K
    & Fornah, that Kenyan women belonging to those ethnic groups where  FGM
    is practiced are properly to be regarded as falling within a particular
    social group for the purpose of being a refugee.  It is  not  in  issue
    that the infliction of FGM is capable of amounting to serious  harm,  a
    risk which  if  established  would  lead  to  the  issue  of  grant  of
    humanitarian protection.  We find that  the  imposition  of  FGM  could
    amount to a breach of the protected rights of the appellant in  respect
    of Article 3 of the ECHR.

64.  The House of Lords considered the particular social group issue   in  K
    & Fornah.  We do not propose to repeat the arguments so well  expressed
    by  their  Lordships  in  that  particular  case.   The  scope  of  the
    particular social group has been variously defined.  At paragraph 80 of
    the judgment it was defined as follows:-

         "For these reasons, I am satisfied that the  appellant  belongs  to
         the group of uninitiated  intact  women  who  face  persecution  by
         enforced mutilation.   If I am wrong in choosing that more  limited
         group, then I would, of course, accept  that  the  appellant  falls
         within the larger social group of women and girls who face enforced
         mutilation."


    The slightly wider definition is  set  out  in  paragraph  114  of  the
    judgment, namely:-


         "For these reasons, the  particular  social  group  might  best  be
         defined as Sierra Leonean women belonging to  those  ethnic  groups
         where FGM is practised: then it is quite clear that the reason  for
         the persecution is the membership of that group. But it matters not
         whether the group is stated more  widely,  as  all  Sierra  Leonean
         women, or more narrowly, as intact Sierra Leonean Women from  those
         ethnic groups.  For  all  of  them,  the  group  has  an  existence
         independent of the persecution".


    It was made clear in  the  course  of  the  judgment  in  K  &  Fornah,
    particularly in paragraph 13 thereof, that to identify a  social  group
    one must  first  identify  the  society  of  which  it  forms  part;  a
    particular social group may be recognisable in one country but  not  in
    another.

65.  In the particular circumstances of this case it was not an  issue  that
    the appellant faced a real risk of FGM being imposed upon  her  by  the
    Mungiki were she to have remained in her  home  area.    The  essential
    issue in this appeal is whether the appellant,  her  daughter  and  her
    grandchild could safely and reasonably  relocate  to  another  area  of
    Kenya so as to avoid the risk of FGM being imposed upon them.  It  will
    be necessary therefore  for  us  to  consider  the  objective  evidence
    relating to the matter and to apply it to the personal circumstances of
    the appellant and her dependants.

     A)  Relocation - A Kikuyu Woman Remaining within  Kirkuyu  Culture  and
    Territories

66.  The objective evidence  which  was  placed  before  us  indicates  that
    something in the region of thirty two per cent of Kikuyu women  undergo
    FGM for reasons articulated by Dr Knighton in his report.  We note  the
    comments that are made in the report as to the difficulties in gleaning
    accurate statistics on this matter.  Much would depend upon the  sample
    of women approached, their ages, the areas  in  which  they  live.   It
    follows, even on Dr Knighton's approach, that many  millions  of  young
    girls or young women are not the subject of FGM. We have no doubt  that
    there would be many areas within the  Kikuyu  territory  in  which  the
    inhabitants do not seek to practice or impose FGM.

67.  It is noted  that  there  is  opposition  to  the  practice  from  many
    churches both Pentecostal and Roman Catholic.  Dr  Knighton  speaks  of
    the lack of  feasibility  of  individual  church  congregations  giving
    refuge in the long term.   Such seems to us, however, to  fundamentally
    misunderstand the nature of  the  relocation  which  is  being  sought.
    Clearly it would not be right to expect  an  individual  to  remain  in
    hiding or be sent to some remote area in a dry desert or a cold climate
    to live virtually as a prisoner.  However, from what we  understand  of
    church culture in Kenya a church informs the morality and the community
    spirit of the community which forms around it and worships  within  it.
    There may indeed be churches which, according to Dr Knighton, would say
    one thing and practice another.  We are concerned, however,  with those
    congregations, and we find that there would  be  many,  who  provide  a
    focus for the community.  We do not consider that Dr  Knighton's  view,
    that such church communities would demand that the individual  be  self
    sufficient, is consonant with the evidence showing the active work done
    by the church to help all of the  congregation.   It  is  difficult  to
    understand what he means by such terms.  We can see little reason why a
    caring church community would not offer assistance and  support.  There
    are a number of CBOs and NGOs operating within Kenya.   We have  regard
    to  the  letter  from  the  British  High  Commission  in  Nairobi   of
    14 November 2005.  All these organisations that are  set  out  therein
    could potentially provide support and assistance. The letter  from  the
    British High Commission is, as we  so  find,  fairly  balanced  in  its
    response to the questions posed.  There are  indeed  high  unemployment
    rates, "throughout Kenya the CPO's, NGOs and self-help groups  do  give
    assistance to the destitute and those girls  and  woman  attempting  to
    avoid FGM".   Dr Knighton sought to dismiss that  letter  as  emanating
    from an organisation with a "cloistered existence".   Once  again  that
    is somewhat of an overstatement of reality.  For our part we can see no
    basis for that statement.  It is the function of the embassy to be well
    informed and there is nothing to indicate that it is not so.

68.  The background evidence considered  as  a  whole  indicates  that  with
    better education and a changing society more and more women are seeking
    to avoid FGM.  Much reliance was placed by Mr Bendegani on the article
    from 'The Nation' of 3  December  2005  concerning  the  new  rite  not
    involving cutting, it seemed to suggest it  was  not  really  something
    that was greatly wanted.  It is perhaps relevant in that connection  to
    have regard to what was said by the  Tribunal  in  JM  (Sufficiency  of
    Protection - IFA - FGM) Kenya in  2005.   The  Tribunal  in  that  case
    considered a number of documents and  matters,  paragraph  16  of  that
    decision is particularly worthy of note.  It reads as follows:-

         "Miss Sigley submitted there would be a sufficiency of  protection
         for the appellant. She referred to the Secretary of State's  bundle
         and the US State Department Report covering events in Kenya in 2003
         and published on 25 February 2004. The law prohibited FGM for girls
         under eighteen and prohibited forced FGM on women of any age.   The
         fact that 38% of  women  had  undergone  FGM  demonstrated  that  a
         significant proportion had not. The practice was more widespread in
         some  provinces  than  in  others.   A  report  from   the   German
         Development Corporation entitled 'Promotion of Initiatives  to  end
         FGM and Country Fact Sheet - Kenya GTZ'  gave  statistics  for  the
         prevalence rates among various ethnic groups.  FGM prevalence rates
         in Kenya were declining in  that  material.   The  prevalence  rate
         among the Kikuyu  was  43%.   The  report  showed  that  the  Kenya
         Ministry of Health was coordinating activities in order  to  launch
         the national plan to abolish FGM.  The government were working with
         NGOs and gave the project effective  political  and  administrative
         support . 'By means of networking with  local  authorities  it  was
         possible to save girls  from  the  threat  of  circumcision'.   The
         achievements were listed on page 78 of the bundle - the  prevalence
         rate of FGM in Koibatek district,  for  example,  had  declined  to
         2.2%. The report demonstrated the positive impact where the project
         had been undertaken. Societal attitudes had  changed   One  of  the
         most successful education programmes aimed at  eradicating  FGM  in
         Kenya involved an alternative rite of passage in which  girls  were
         taken  through  all  the  formalities  attending  FGM  but  without
         undergoing the actual cut - see page 80 of the report  prepared  by
         the German Development Organisation. Some five thousand  girls  had
         participated. Those who had been circumcised  were  now  condemning
         FGM in impressive numbers."


69.  We have of course recognised the force of what Dr Knighton had  to  say
    about the pressure of  society  needed  in  many  quarters  to  enforce
    traditional values.  Equally  it  is  clear  to  us  from  reading  the
    objective material before us that positive steps are being  taken  both
    by NGOs and by the government, to educate and to encourage  communities
    to take alternative actions to avoid FGM.   Such matters are of  course
    to be taken in conjunction with the work of the churches and the  local
    communities to which reference has already been made.  The decrease  in
    FGM  among  Kikuyu  women  aged  between  fifteen  to  forty  nine   is
    acknowledged by Dr Knighton in his report.  Such indicating a  decrease
    between 1998 and 2003 of 42.5% to 34%.  Of course statistics have to be
    treated with  great  caution  and  there  may  indeed  be  a  level  of
    unreporting.   We find, however, nothing to cause us to depart from the
    overall conclusions of the Tribunal as set out in JM on that particular
    aspect.

     B)  Relocation - Risk from Mungiki

70.  Whether the Mungiki present a cultural or  religious  movement  perhaps
    matters little in the context in which we come to consider  the  issue.
    It is clear from the  objective  evidence  that  it  is  a  significant
    organisation in general and within the Kikuyu tribe in particular.   It
    is involved with vigilante work, extortion and  protection  activities.
    Evidence is given that it was very much involved  in  the  urban  areas
    with minibuses  and  transport.    It  has  some  degree  of  political
    influence.

71.  Dr Knighton does not attempt to give any figures as to  the  number  of
    Mungiki who may be in existence.   We have  not  been  pointed  to  any
    particular aspect of the evidence in that regard.  Such  would  in  any
    event represent but a  very  small  percentage  indeed  of  the  Kikuyu
    population as a whole.

72.  Some limited assistance  is  given  by  the  Tribunal  decision  of  JA
    (Mungiki - Not a Religion) Kenya [2004] UKIAT 00266.   At  paragraph  9
    of that particular decision the Tribunal cited paragraph  6.72  of  the
    CIPU Report of April 2003 which also reflected that  contained  in  the
    April 2004 report.  That particular paragraph referred to the   Mungiki
    as:-


         "A small, controversial, cultural and political movement  based  in
         part on Kikuyu ethnic traditions, which  espouses  political  views
         and cultural practices which are controversial in mainstream  Kenya
         society.  The number of Mungiki members is unknown, but  the  group
         draws  a  significant  following  from  the  unemployed  and  other
         marginalised segments of society."


73.  We note that similar comments were made in the US Department  of  State
    Report of 31 March 2003 set out at pages 47 to 49  of  the  appellant's
    bundle of documents.  An extract from the Kenya Humanitarian Update  of
    February 2003 is to be found at page 51 of the appellant's bundle.   It
    speaks of the total of 957 Mungiki suspects having  been  arrested  and
    charged in court.   It speaks of the fact  that  in  the  previous  two
    months the police had handled 1,124 Mungiki related cases.  Most of the
    arrests were in Nairobi, the Rift Valley and Central  Provinces.    The
    government had allowed the sect followers an amnesty until 13  February
    but only 167 adherents had surrendered to the police.   Those  arrested
    were charged with murder and with other offences.

74.  A BBC News item of 11 February 2003 provided a  brief  profile  of  the
    Mungiki sect speaking of two days of clashes  with  police  in  Nairobi
    leaving two policemen  dead  and  seventy  of  its  members  in  police
    custody.  The clashes seemingly were sparked  by  a  dispute  over  the
    control of the private minibus  business  in  some  parts  of  Nairobi.
    This followed a similar incident two weeks before  when  thirty  people
    were killed in similar clashes  in  the  Rift  Valley  Province.    The
    article went on to say that police say that more than fifty people died
    in 2002 in clashes involving the sect and owners of private  minibuses,
    known as matatu, in Nairobi alone.   Its  leader  Maian  Njenga  claims
    that he had a vision from God commanding him to reunite the Kikuyu  and
    fight foreign ideologies.   The article records  that  he  was  now  in
    hiding together with his co-leader Ndura Waruinge.

75.  We note also the US State Department Report of 8 March 2006 as set  out
    at pages 208 onwards in the appellant's bundle of documents.   There is
    mention of the Mungiki in that report as follows:-

         "The Mungiki, a banned cultural and political movement and criminal
         protection racket based in part  on  Kikuyu  traditions,  was  less
         organised and was implicated in fewer violent crimes  than  in  the
         past due to a police crackdown.   On February  10  and  March  1  a
         total of thirty seven Mungiki members were  released  for  lack  of
         evidence in their  murder  charges.   On  May  9,  the  High  Court
         acquitted for lack of evidence eleven Mungiki members who had  been
         arrested in 2004 on various charges including  the  killings  of  a
         police officer and Mungiki defectors.


    By the years end police arrested approximately  twenty  four  suspected
    Mungiki members in connection with an upsurge in transportation  sector
    crimes."

76.  The report went on as follows:-

         "There was a large internal security apparatus  that  included  the
         Police  Criminal  Investigation  Department  (CID),  the   National
         Security Intelligence Service  (NSIS),  the  National  Police,  the
         Administration Police and the Paramilitary General  Services  Unit.
         The CID investigates  criminal  activity,  and  the  NSIS  collects
         intelligence and  monitors  persons  considered  subversive.    The
         security forces are under the authority of the  Ministry  of  State
         for Provincial Administration and National Security in  the  Office
         of the President."

77.  There is little clear evidence before us as to the areas in  which  the
    Mungiki inhabit.  Clearly they would seem to be involved in  the  urban
    centres particular in the protection and  minibus  rackets.   No  doubt
    they are in other areas, seeking adherents from the  Kikuyu.   That  is
    not to say of course that they are everywhere.  The ethos of  the  sect
    is to enforce traditional values including FGM.   Clearly  their  ideas
    would not be welcome in areas which  do  not  support  that  particular
    view.  It is significant, as we so find, that the Mungiki would seem to
    be active in the Rift Valley, an area which is very strongly in  favour
    of FGM according to the statistics which have been  placed  before  us.
    For many years the appellant lived in a community which did not embrace
    the ideology of the Mungiki.  It is far from clear as  to  whether  the
    Mungiki have remained in Kiambu or have since left.   Even  taking  the
    analysis of the situation as set out by Dr Knighton, in his  report  at
    page 268 of the appellant's bundle, over eighty per cent of the arrests
    of Mungiki members would seem to  have  taken  place  in  Nairobi.   He
    speaks of his analysis of a media report showing some 2,881 arrests  of
    Mungiki members across Kenya since 1999.   For  that  period  seemingly
    only six have been arrested in Kiambu.   Those six too  were  seemingly
    involved in an attack of residents  of  Karia  Village  in  the  Kaimbu
    District.  There was another incident when two people were injured by a
    group of club wielding louts who took charge  of  the  town  of  Matatu
    Terminus.   Significantly those incidents seem to be  in  2002.   There
    would seem to be little evidence, as can be gleaned from Dr  Knighton's
    report of, any arrests subsequently in that area.

78.  Dr Knighton interprets the lack of arrests  as  indicating  a  lack  of
    opposition to Mungiki in that area by the police.   An alternative view
    of the figures and one that we prefer, is that there is less  activity.
    There seems to be considerable activity of the Mungiki  in  Nairobi  as
    reflected by the large number of arrests.   As Dr  Knighton  indicated,
    these were mass arrests for public order offences or for being a member
    of  an  illegal  organisation.   Once  again  the  sources   for   that
    information would seem to be fairly ancient going back  to  the  period
    2000 to 2004, generally speaking.

79.  More up to date information  is  provided  by  the  respondent  in  the
    bundle of documents provided.  The article from  the  Daily  Nation  of
    Kenya on 14 January 2006 speaks of the fresh  crackdown  on  the  sect
    hideouts in some eleven towns.   It is also believed there are hideouts
    in Muranga,  Maragwa,  Thika  and  Nyandarun  Districts.   Mr  Knighton
    essentially is of the view that such  operations  are  cosmetic  rather
    than reality.   For our part, having looked at the evidence as a whole,
    we do not concur with that opinion.  We note  in  particular  from  the
    article 'FM Kenya' of 2 February 2006  that  the  Mungiki  sect  leader
    Meina Njenga has been arrested by the authorities.    Such  action  was
    unlikely to have been taken lightly  given  the  circumstances  of  the
    situations that exist in Kenya.  Although Dr Knighton was sceptical  as
    to the arrest of nine hundred  and  seventy  members  of  the  outlawed
    Mungiki clan, he did not seek to doubt the arrest of its leader.

80.  Mr Bandegani produced  two  further  documents  at  the  hearing  both
    extracts from 'The Daily Nation'.  The one for May 2006 speaks of  five
    people on a Mungiki links charge freed; and the one in July 2006,  "The
    sect has returned to every corner of the country  and  notably  to  the
    slums of Nairobi and to all Matatu" (public commuter  vehicle  routes).
    We bear in mind that these of course are comments by journalists.  Such
    perhaps adds little to the  overall  picture  which  emerges  from  the
    objective evidence, only that there was great activity  within  Nairobi
    itself in the urban areas and those in which the control  of  transport
    would reflect a lucrative source of income for the sect.

81.  As Dr Knighton highlighted in his report, the  overwhelming  number  of
    arrests would seem to have  been  as  a  result  of  violence,  of  the
    implementation of protection rackets and fights in connection with  the
    minibus businesses and  with  general  disorder  in  the  street.    No
    example has been adduced before us of communities being targeted by the
    Mungiki, particularly to undergo FGM.  If whole communities came  under
    such pressure with such violence, it is perhaps surprising that nothing
    in the media has been published.

82.  There are millions of Kikuyu women in Kenya who live their lives  in  a
    way which might not find approval by the Mungiki sect members.   As  we
    have indicated, there is  nothing  within  the  objective  evidence  to
    indicate any widespread or significant targeting of such women  by  the
    Mungiki sect.   The activities of this sect, as can be gleaned from the
    reports, link  it  more  to  their  criminal  activities  and  business
    interests rather than seeking to enforce the  widespread  use  of  FGM.
    Were an individual to frequent the minibus premises in Nairobi  she  is
    more likely to come to meet Mungiki sect members than were she to  live
    in a town or village that did not  espouse  such  values  as  the  sect
    reflects.

     (C) Relocation - A Kikuyu Woman moving into a non-Kikuyu Area

83.  The objective evidence was to the effect  that  there  were  some  four
    tribes who did not practice FGM but they were located in a defined area
    within  Western Kenya.  In particular the Luo and Luyia  lived  in  the
    region of Lake Victoria the capital being Musoma.   Were the  appellant
    to relocate to such an area,  she  would  be  free  from  any  societal
    pressure as to FGM.  Indeed, it being a non-Kikuyu area there would  be
    little contact with the Mungiki inside of  Musoma.   In  addition,  the
    evidence was that Musoma and Mombassa are multi ethnic towns.

84.  We have regard to the US Department of State Report of  8  March  2006.
    As  to  internally  displaced  persons  generally,  we  note  that  the
    government  provided  assistance  to  IDPs  and  co-ordinated   support
    services of NGOs, particularly the Kenya Red Cross.  We see  no  reason
    why,  if  the  government  is  committed  to  providing  assistance  to
    internally displaced persons and refugees it  would  not  provide  some
    assistance to its own particular citizens.  Women make up approximately
    seventy five per cent of the agricultural workforce and are  active  in
    urban small businesses.  There is also free universal primary education
    and the government  is  seeking  to  enhance  access  to  free  primary
    education.   Primary school enrolment was some  7.4  million  in  2004.
    There is no reason to believe therefore  that  education  will  not  be
    available  to  the  appellant's  grandson  were  he  to  accompany  the
    appellant and his mother to Kenya.

85.  We bear in mind of course that undue  speculation  should  be  avoided.
    It is important that upon any relocation the conditions should  not  be
    unreasonable or unduly harsh.  We turn therefore to  the  reasoning  of
    the House of Lords in their consideration of the case of  Januzi.   The
    reasonableness test of internal relocation was considered at length  by
    Lord Bingham of Cornhill in his judgment.   At  paragraphs  20-21  Lord
    Bingham stated as follows:-


    "20. ... It is, however, important, given the immense  significance  of
        the decisions they make,  that  decision-makers  should  have  some
        guidance on the approach to reasonableness and undue  harshness  in
        this context. Valuable guidance is found in the UNHCR Guidelines on
        International Protection of 23 July 2003. In paragraph 7 II(a)  the
        reasonableness analysis is approached by asking 'Can the  claimant,
        in the context of the country concerned, lead a  relatively  normal
        life without facing undue hardship?' and the comment is  made:  'If
        not, it would not be  reasonable  to  expect  the  person  to  move
        there'.  In development of this  analysis  the  guidelines  address
        respect for human rights in paragraph 28:


             'Respect for human rights


         Where respect for  basic  human  rights  standards,  including  in
             particular non-derogable rights, is clearly  problematic,  the
             proposed area cannot be considered a  reasonable  alternative.
             This  does  not  mean  that  the  deprivation  of  any  civil,
             political or socio-economic human rights in the proposed  area
             will disqualify it from being an internal flight or relocation
             alternative.   Rather,   it   requires,   from   a   practical
             perspective, an assessment of whether the rights that will not
             be respected or protected are fundamental to  the  individual,
             such  that  the  deprivation  of   those   rights   would   be
             sufficiently  harmful  to  render  the  area  an  unreasonable
             alternative.'


              They [UNHCR] then address economic survival in paragraphs 29-
                  30:


         'Economic survival


         The  socio-economic  conditions  in  the  proposed  area  will  be
             relevant in this part of the analysis.  If  the  situation  is
             such that the claimant will be unable to earn a living  or  to
             access accommodation, or where medical care cannot be provided
             or is clearly inadequate, the area may  not  be  a  reasonable
             alternative.  It would be unreasonable, including from a human
             rights perspective, to expect a person  to  relocate  to  face
             economic destitution or existence below at least  an  adequate
             level of subsistence.  At the other end  of  the  spectrum,  a
             simple lowering of simple standards or worsening  of  economic
             status may not be sufficient to  reject  a  proposed  area  as
             unreasonable.  Conditions in the area  must  be  such  that  a
             relatively normal life can  be  led  in  the  context  of  the
             country concerned.  If, for instance, an individual  would  be
             without family links and unable to benefit  from  an  informal
             social safety net, relocation may not  be  reasonable,  unless
             the person would otherwise be able  to  sustain  a  relatively
             normal life at more than just a minimum subsistence level.  If
             the person would be  denied  access  to  land,  resources  and
             protection in the proposed area because he  or  she  does  not
             belong to the dominant clan, tribe, ethnic,  religious  and/or
             cultural group, relocation there would not be reasonable.  For
             example, in many parts of Africa, Asia and  elsewhere,  common
             ethnic,  tribal,  religious  and/or  cultural  factors  enable
             access to land, resources and protection.  In such situations,
             it would not be reasonable to  expect  someone  who  does  not
             belong to the dominant group, to take up  residence  there.  A
             person should also not be required to relocate to areas,  such
             as the slums in an urban area, where they would be required to
             live in conditions of severe hardship.'


        These guidelines are, I think, helpful, concentrating attention  as
         they do on the standards prevailing generally  in  the  country  of
         nationality. Helpful also is a passage of socio-economic factors in
         Storey, op cit, p 516 (footnotes omitted):


             "Bearing in mind  the  frequency  with  which  decision-makers
              suspect certain asylum seekers to be simply economic migrants,
              it is useful to examine the relevance to IFA claims of  socio-
              economic factors. Again, terminology differs widely, but there
              seems to be broad agreement that if life  for  the  individual
              claimant in an IFA would involve economic annihilation,  utter
              destitution  or  existence  below  a  bare  subsistence  level
              (Existenzminimum) or deny 'decent means of  subsistence'  that
              would be unreasonable. On the other  end  of  the  spectrum  a
              simple lowering of living standards or worsening  of  economic
              status would not.  What must be shown to  be  lacking  is  the
              real possibility to survive economically, given the particular
              circumstances   of   the   individual   concerned   (language,
              knowledge, education,  skills,  previous  stay  or  employment
              there, local ties, sex, civil status, age and life experience,
              family  responsibilities,  health,  available  or   realisable
              assets, and so forth). Moreover, in the context of return, the
              possibility of avoidance of destitution by means of  financial
              assistance from abroad, whether  from  relatives,  friends  or
              even  governmental  or  non-governmental  sources,  cannot  be
              excluded".


86.  The Tribunal in HGMO (Relocation to Khartoum)  Sudan  CG  [2006]  UKIAT
    00062 sought to extract several propositions from the opinion of  their
    Lordships in Januzi.

     "First, it is essential when considering internal relocation  to  have
        regard to both considerations of: (1) safety, in the  sense  of  an
        absence of persecution; and (2) reasonableness,  in  the  sense  of
        whether conditions are unduly harsh (Januzi, paragraphs  7,  8,  47
        and 48).


     Secondly, whilst it may be relevant to deciding a particular  case  to
        have regard to whether a person sought to avail himself of internal
        relocation prior to departure, the test of whether someone faces  a
        real  risk  under  the  Refugee  Convention  and  under  Article  3
        essentially concerns whether refoulement  or  return  of  a  person
        would give rise to current risk: see  for  example  Lord  Bingham's
        approval at paragraph 20  of  analyses  made  "in  the  context  of
        return" and Lord Hope's reference in paragraph 48 to  "the  dangers
        of return".


      Thirdly,  there  is  no  presumption  that  internal  relocation   is
        impossible simply because the persecutors in a person's  home  area
        are  agents  of  the  state.   Nevertheless,  evidence   of   state
        involvement, whether that involvement is  direct  or  indirect,  is
        relevant (paragraphs 21, 48 and 49).


     Fourthly, the issue of reasonableness or whether conditions are unduly
        harsh is a rigorous one (Lord Carswell, paragraph 67);  and  it  is
        wrong to decide this, is urged by Hathaway/New Zealand approach, by
        reference to whether those  conditions  meet  the  requirements  of
        international human rights  law  in  full.  The  issue  is  whether
        "conditions in that country generally as  regards  the  most  basic
        human rights that are universally recognised - the  right  to  life
        and the right not to be subjected to cruel or inhuman  treatment  -
        are so bad that, it would be unduly harsh to  expect  a  person  to
        seek a place of relocation" (Lord Hope, paragraph 54). At most  all
        that can be expected is  that  basic  human  rights  standards,  in
        particular non-derogable rights, are not breached.


     Fifthly, it is of particular importance  in  the  context  of  whether
        internal relocation is reasonable in the sense of unduly harsh that
        matters are looked at cumulatively, taking account of "all relevant
        circumstances": the importance of this approach  is  manifest  from
        paragraphs 20-21 and 50 of their Lordships' opinions. "

87.  It is to be recognised that there  may  be  a  distinction  between  an
    individual living in an area where  her  clan  or  a  sub-clan  have  a
    presence and  that  where  they  do  not.   Clearly,  religious  and/or
    cultural considerations are important, not only to the relative comfort
    of an individual and of her family but also as to the potentiality  for
    support.   We note, however, that in the Kikuyu tribal  areas  and  the
    multi-cultural multi-ethnic urban centres a Kikuyu woman would  not  be
    entirely divorced from her cultural roots.  It would be  reasonable  to
    expect there to be some possibility of assistance being  given  to  her
    through that medium as well  as  through  the  NGOs  and  other  caring
    agencies or churches.   Little by way of objective  evidence  has  been
    placed before us to indicate that a Kikuyu woman would not be tolerated
    in a non-Kikuyu area or be without such support as would enable her  or
    her family to standards of human basic rights.

88.  Dr Knighton comments in paragraph 16 of his report that, "It  is  one's
    own extended family or sub-clan which is the guarantor of security  and
    the only recourse of the homeless widow, since the  state  provides  no
    social security". We find such  a  comment  to  be  unduly  wide.   The
    generalised statement by  Dr  Knighton  seems  not  to  factor  in  the
    question of the ability to work so as to maintain oneself by one's  own
    efforts or the help of others.  It would be a surprising result  indeed
    if a potential claimant for asylum or for  other  protection  would  be
    able to avoid  any  possibility  of  relocation  simply  by  giving  no
    assistance or information as to his or  her  family  situation  in  the
    country of origin.

     (D) The Situation of the Appellant


89.  The starting point for our consideration is the personal  circumstances
    of the appellant and of her family.   Little is said about her  parents
    but she conducted married life  in  the  village  of  Kianbu  with  her
    husband and three children.  It was a  Christian  household  and  quite
    clearly it was a family which did not practice FGM.  They lived without
    incident in the village and without pressure to undergo any form of FGM
    for many years.   It was only when the Mungiki converted her father-in-
    law in June 2002 that any difficulties are said  to  have  arisen.   At
    that time the appellant was thirty seven years  of  age,  one  daughter
    twelve years old, another fourteen years old.    Very  little  is  said
    about the wider family context or indeed of the community in which  she
    lived.   Before the arrival of the Mungiki FGM seemed not to have  been
    an issue for the appellant or the family.  The other children now  live
    with the appellant's sister in Kenya, once again little is  said  about
    their situation and circumstances.

90.  Dr Knighton in his report  adds  very  little  to  the  overall  family
    profile other than indicating that the appellant had distinctive Kikuyu
    names.  According to Dr Knighton Kaimbu District was largely rural and
    "notoriously Kikuyu".  As he made clear in his report it is  often  the
    membership of the sub-clan which determines  whether  or  not  FGM  was
    practised.  No evidence has been  given  that  the  appellant  and  her
    husband were not otherwise than living an ordinary and  community  life
    within their village.  There has been  no  suggestion  that  they  were
    ostracised or distinct from their neighbours in any significant way.

91.  Dr Knighton makes the following comment in paragraph 3 of  his  report,



         "Clearly the appellant is in a 'social group' of a Mbari,  or  sub-
         clan, which is still devoted, or renewed in its  devotion,  to  the
         custom of female genital cutting (FGC), long  considered  necessary
         by Kikuyu both for womanhood, morals, self respect and  eligibility
         for marriage".

      Such  a  comment  does  not,  in  our  view,   however   address   the
    practicalities that the appellant was married and has produced children
    but felt under no compulsion or requirement to  undergo  FGM.    Little
    enquiry would seem to have  been  made  of  the  appellant  as  to  the
    community in which she resided or indeed to identify with  any  clarity
    any particular sub-clan of which she was a member.   We find  therefore
    such generalised comments to be without particular focus and  unhelpful
    in our enquiries; and undermining of the weight which we can  attribute
    to the report as a whole.

92.  The appellant's family lived in a rural area, indeed in  the  heartland
    of President Kenyatta's elite,  seemingly  without  any  difficulty  or
    compulsion in relation to FGM, until of course the Mungiki arrived.

93.  The appellant in her village worshipped as part  of  Christian  family.
    There is no reason to believe that she would not be  welcome  in  other
    churchgoing communities.   We  have  no  doubt  that  a  caring  church
    community would offer assistance to the appellant in order for  her  to
    establish herself and her family.  After all, her  own  experience  has
    been of receiving considerable generosity from a church with which  she
    had only the briefest association; the Priest being willing  indeed  to
    provide the funds for her to come to the UK.  It is  of  course  to  be
    recognised  that  without  her  husband  the  appellant  may  be  at  a
    disadvantage.  However, there must be many widows  who  survive  within
    the Kikuyu community.

94.  We of course acknowledge that, were the appellant  to  move  away  from
    her village to relocate to another area within the Kikuyu tribal  areas
    there would be considerable disadvantages.  She would lose the interest
    in the land which she and her family perhaps had.  Once again  that  is
    not an issue which has been dealt with any clarity as to whether or not
    it was her husband's land or whether it was land  which  she  inherited
    from her parents.  She will be without the support of her  husband  and
    it may well be, given the mores of the culture, that having given birth
    to a child she would be less likely to secure  a  marriage.   That  may
    also apply to her daughter now aged eighteen with her  child,   however
    she being younger may fare better, thereby establishing a  family  unit
    of some sort.   It is to be noted that the appellant  has  demonstrated
    initiative in moving from Kenya into Zimbabwe  and  on  to  the  United
    Kingdom.  She has had to learn to adapt to a new culture in the  United
    Kingdom and bring up her child in that culture.   There is  nothing  to
    indicate  that  the  appellant  would  be  unable  to  cope  with   re-
    establishing a lifestyle for herself and her family in Kenya.    As  we
    have indicated before, there is no reason to suppose  that  the  church
    community would not be helpful and supportive to the  establishment  of
    an adequate lifestyle for the appellant,  particularly  as  she  has  a
    young daughter and a young grandchild.  Mr Knighton in his report seems
    to postulate the matter on the basis of the  worst  possible  scenario.
    We find that that is not something that we would agree  with.   In  our
    view the evidence indicates that  the  caring  Christian  community  in
    which the appellant grew up and in which she married  could  again,  be
    replicated elsewhere.  We find that there are a number of agencies that
    would help the appellant to develop her life and establish herself.  We
    do not find that to expect the appellant to relocate to a community not
    dissimilar from that of her own would be, in the circumstances, unsafe,
    unreasonable or unduly harsh.  There is an additional factor of  course
    and that is the appellant's sister and the appellant's other  children.
    It is not clear where they are or what circumstances they  are  facing.
    Once located they, themselves,  may  be  also  an  additional  limb  of
    support.

95.  We return to where we started in relation to  this  aspect,  namely  to
    the family profile  of  the  appellant.   It  is  far  from  clear  how
    extensive or otherwise is the sub-clan of the appellant.  It  would  be
    reasonably likely, given the appellant did not practice FGM,  that  the
    sub-clan of which she is a  member  does  not  either.   No  doubt  the
    appellant's sub-clan would also be an additional element of support  to
    her in any relocation, if present in that new area.

96.  The position adopted and adhered to by Dr Knighton was that  without  a
    family network and clan support an individual would be unable  to  live
    even on a basic level of economic subsistence other than  by  resorting
    to prostitution or exposing herself  or  her  family  to  exploitation.
    For our part we find that conclusion  to  be  heavily  overstated.   We
    found that  the  report  of  Dr  Knighton  tends  to  concentrate  upon
    generalities rather than focusing upon  the  particular  situation  and
    circumstance of the appellant.   It is helpful in furnishing background
    information about the general situation in Kenya relating to FGM and to
    the Mungiki,  but  less  helpful  when  it  comes  to  evaluating  this
    information.  For example Dr Knighton commented that "the church cannot
    provide sanctuary and neither the government nor  NGOs  can  provide  a
    livelihood or a place to live.  There are few  parts  where  she  could
    settle without being destitute, because of the importance of the family
    network".  We find such a comment to go well  beyond  the  evidence  he
    relies upon and as lacking particular reference. Dr Knighton goes on to
    talk about the fact that the appellant is not free  to  exercise  legal
    rights in Kenya nor free to live a lawful life with  all  her  children
    without any real fear of persecution,  revenge  or  intimidation.    We
    find little basis in substance for such wide and  emotive  expressions.
    In many ways we find the report to  be  particularly  partisan  in  its
    approach and lacking in objectivity.

97.  As we have already indicated, being without a husband, without  a  home
    and without settled lands and having to move from  her  own  particular
    community, will pose difficulties for the appellant as they  would  for
    anyone seeking to move elsewhere from a long established presence in  a
    particular part of the country.  That having been said the appellant is
    someone who has shown herself to be resourceful in that she has removed
    herself from a village in Kenya and managed to  travel  internationally
    and establish a life for herself and her children in a strange country,
    namely the United Kingdom.   Little detail has been given as to  family
    profile or as to the occupations of her  parents  or  of  her  extended
    family.  She spoke of her husband running a printing firm and employing
    two people.  There is a paucity of information  as  to  her  background
    experience whether in  farming  or  agriculture  or  in  a  more  urban
    setting.  She is, however, of mature years with experience of  managing
    a household and a family.   The preponderance of the evidence before us
    does not indicate that she would be  unable  to  work  to  provide  for
    herself and her dependants.  We find that there would be  some  support
    available to her.  Her Christian faith  would  give  her  access  to  a
    church community. She has already  had  experience  of  the  assistance
    which such a community was able to give  her  financially  through  the
    good offices of the priest.  There would also be NGOs able and,  we  so
    find, willing to provide a measure of support.  There is no  indication
    from the objective evidence that has been placed before us  that  there
    is any active animosity as between the tribes, in particular as between
    the Luo and the Kikuyu.  There is nothing to  suggest  that  there  are
    ethnic groups that exist otherwise than in harmony in the  main  cities
    and towns.  The appellant's daughter is of an age  to  work  to  assist
    with the finances of the household.

98.  Dr Knighton in his comments before us indicated the majority of  Kikuyu
    women were farmers living off the land.   It would  have  been  helpful
    had he clarified precisely the experience of the appellant.  It may  be
    that she was indeed used to farming and agriculture; equally it may  be
    that she assisted her husband in his  business.   In  fairness  to  the
    appellant we bear in  mind  the  high  incidence  of  unemployment  and
    balance  that  with  the  perception  that  she  is  somebody  who  has
    initiative and drive as evidenced by her immigration history  to  date.
    We do not accept the proposition  advanced  by  Dr  Knighton  that  the
    factor  of  marriage  and  land  ownership  and  occupation   are   the
    determining factors in an ability to maintain  a  reasonable  and  safe
    lifestyle in Kenya.

99.  There has been a paucity of information, as we have already  commented,
    about the family situation and circumstances of the appellant as to her
    lifestyle and expectations whilst living in Kenya.  There is  almost  a
    total absence of information about her parents and  their  occupations,
    whether or not she has an extended family and if  so  where  and  their
    occupations.  The claim of the appellant has been presented on  a  very
    narrow basis based very much upon the appellant's personal experiences,
    without in any sense placing that within the wider context of  life  in
    Kenya.

100. Mr Bandegani submits, essentially, that the appellant would be at  risk
    from the Mungiki wherever she went  in  Kenya.   Either  she  would  be
    sought after by the Mungiki "intelligence units", because of the events
    in her home village or she would be perceived as being  non-traditional
    because of her single status and that of her dependants.   She would be
    isolated and therefore the object of their attention.

101. We find little support for that generalised statement in the detail  of
    the evidence which has been presented to us.  There  is  no  reason  to
    suppose that the appellant was, or remains, of any particular  interest
    to the sect on account of the activities which  she  has  described  in
    Kiambu in the summer of 2002.  Violence and extortion of the vulnerable
    would seem to be part of the general mode of  operation  by  the  sect.
    There is nothing to indicate in the circumstances if the  appellant  or
    her father which would cause those members of the Mungiki  involved  to
    have any reason to remember them.

102. Mr Bandegani stresses the ability of the sect to  trace  the  appellant
    to  the  church  in  Nairobi.    We  do  not  find  that  the  evidence
    necessarily supports  that  interpretation.    The  appellant  and  her
    daughter fled the village at night arriving  in  Nairobi  literally  in
    their pyjamas walking around until they found  a  church.   It  is  not
    stated in the statement of the appellant dated 15 October  2002  or  in
    the more recent statement of 10 June 2003 that  the  enquiries  of  the
    priest by the sect put a name to the appellant or to her daughter.  The
    appellant attributes the interest in  them  to  be  occasioned  by  the
    possibility that they were sighted going into  the  church  dressed  as
    they were in their night things.  In the statement of 10 June  2003  at
    paragraph 8 the appellant said as follows:-

     "In paragraph 41, I noted that the father told us  about  the  Mungiki
        asking him about people  he  was  believed  to  be  sheltering.   I
        believe that the Mungiki suspected that we were  with  the  Father,
        because Mungiki in Nairobi must have seen my daughter and me in our
        nightdresses on the street  and  then  going  to  the  church.    I
        believe that it was through this that word got back to the  Mungiki
        who had attacked us as to where we  were.    The  Father  had  been
        asked if he knew where a  mother  and  daughter  were  rather  than
        having been asked for us by name."

     It is clear from the objective evidence that the Mungiki sect are  very
    active in  Nairobi  particularly  in  the  minibus  and  transportation
    business.  The appellant and her  daughter  were  dropped  at  the  bus
    station in Nairobi and it is reasonable to expect that there would have
    been a Mungiki presence in  or  around  that  location.   Such  is  far
    removed, however, from the suggestion that without such a sighting  the
    Mungiki would have been able to or wished to have traced the  appellant
    in Nairobi.

103. As we have indicated before, we find that  there  are  areas  in  Kenya
    occupied by the Kikuyu where FGM is not  practiced  or  welcomed.   The
    Mungiki sect would not be welcomed either.   The  significance  of  the
    account as given by the appellant of  her  experiences  in  Kaimbu  was
    precisely because the sect gained a foothold with the conversion of her
    father-in-law.  There is nothing to indicate that he had been reluctant
    to be converted.  Those who had been reluctant had been herself and her
    husband.   There is no evidence as to the response of the wider village
    community to the Mungiki or as to the current situation in that area or
    village.

104. There is no reason to suppose  that  the  appellant  necessarily  would
    stand out were she to  live  among  such  communities.   The  objective
    evidence would seem to indicate that the Mungiki as a sect expect those
    initiated into the sect to conform to traditional  standards  including
    FGM.  There is nothing advanced before us to indicate  that  they  seek
    systematically to impose FGM upon non-initiates  or  upon  a  community
    basis.  In the circumstances we do not find there  to  be  a   real  or
    significant risk to the  appellant  or  her  family  arising  from  the
    activities of the Mungiki sect.  We find that there are many  areas  in
    Kenya  where  the  Mungiki  have  no  interest  or  influence  or   not
    significantly.

105. In all the circumstances we find that the appellant may return to  live
    elsewhere in Kenya.  To do so would not expose her or her dependants to
    a real risk of being the subject of FGM forced upon them either by  the
    community generally or by the Mungiki in particular.  We  do  not  find
    that any such relocation would be unreasonable or unduly harsh  in  all
    the circumstances. We do not find there to be a  well-founded  fear  of
    persecution for a Convention reason nor do we find a  risk  of  serious
    harm so as to qualify for humanitarian protection.  We do not find that
    her protected human rights are infringed.


106. We were not addressed at any length in relation to Article 8.


107. It is right that we bear in mind also the appellant's health.  We  note
    the correspondence in relation to that matter to be found at  pages  21
    to 43 of the appellant's bundle of documents.  We  note  in  particular
    the letter from the Diabetes Specialist Nurse, Dartford and  Gravesham,
    relating to a visit on 2  November  2004.    it  would  seem  that  the
    appellant had been started on insulin.  There is  very  little  medical
    evidence before us dealing with that aspect.  She attended  the  annual
    diabetic clinic on 1 April 2005 and no complications are noted.


108. The  other  matter  would  seem  to  be  intermenstrual  bleeding.   An
    ultrasound scan has confirmed material suggestive of a fibroid  to  the
    left of the uterus and fundus.  We note this from the medical  note  of
    Dr Moriarty of  27  June  2005.   There  is  very  little  up  to  date
    information concerning the appellant.   From  the  paucity  of  medical
    information available it would seem that the diabetes is controlled  by
    medication.  It manifests no peculiarities other than that  insulin  is
    needed.   It is far from clear as to what progress if any has been made
    in relation to the fibroids.


109. We were not addressed in any detail as to the health of  the  appellant
    or to its effect upon her return.   Nothing was  placed  before  us  to
    give any indication that  treatment  would  not  be  available  to  the
    appellant in Kenya.   Certainly nothing was advanced before us  by  way
    of argument that Article 3 of ECHR was engaged by reason thereof.    It
    is right of course that we note the health of the appellant as  one  of
    the factors to be considered in the overall question to be  determined,
    namely whether or not relocation is possible and if so whether it is in
    the circumstances unreasonable or unduly harsh to expect the  appellant
    so to relocate.


110. We have no doubt that the appellant will be able to  find  a  community
    not dissimilar from her own community even if  not  the  same  sub-clan
    which at the very least would share  her  tribal  characteristics,  her
    Christian faith and would  not  be  a  community  which  encouraged  or
    practised FGM.   In such a community we  can  see  no  reason  why  the
    appellant would be unable to establish  a  life  for  herself  and  her
    dependants and be able to survive economically.  See Januzi v SSHD  and
    Others [2006] UKHL 5.


111. Applying the guidelines in Januzi  as  we  do  we  find  no  reason  to
    suppose that the  appellant  would  be  reduced  to  the  situation  of
    economic annihilation or utter destitution or existence  below  a  bare
    subsistence level were she to return to another non-Kikuyu area or to a
    non-Kikuyu area or to an urban city.  We find no reason to doubt that a
    measure of community support would be available to her,  together  with
    assistance from various agencies to aid her and her children  in  their
    resettlement.


     Wider Considerations of risk from FGM and Relocation Generally

112. It seems  to  us  that  the  principles  employed  in  considering  the
    specific case of this appellant can be employed in every  situation  in
    which FGM is in issue.  In assessing the risk to a particular  claimant
    and the possibility of relocation it will be necessary to consider  the
    following factors:-

    a)   The particular clan or sub clan of the  claimant  and  whether  in
        general such practices FGM and the degree to which it is  practiced
        or enforced.


    b)   If so to  consider  the  claimant's  particular  family,  extended
        family and community.  It is clear from the objective evidence that
        the degree to which FGM is practiced varies from clan to  clan  and
        from area to area within Kenya.  It is also  clear  that  within  a
        particular  clan  area  there  may  be  a  particular  sub-clan  or
        community which does not foster or  encourage  FGM.  The  objective
        evidence speaks of the influence of elders and  church  leaders  to
        influence their respective communities. Thus the attitude  of  such
        influential community figures is an important factor to be borne in
        mind.


    c)   If a claimant does live within a community  which  practices  FGM,
        the particular risk  to  her  that  it  may  be  enforced  must  be
        considered. It will be necessary to consider in  that  context  the
        ability of the family to protect her or the ability  of  the  state
        authorities to offer protection.  Given the nature of the objective
        evidence as has been placed before us it is unlikely that effective
        protection in such circumstances could be provided by state bodies.


    d)   In determining whether a claimant can be expected to  relocate  to
        another area or community within her clan  or  sub-clan's  area  it
        will be necessary to consider the family profile of  the  appellant
        including her education, her skills  and  family  responsibilities.
        To such should be applied the principles  as  set  out  in  Januzi,
        paragraphs 20-21, and in  HGMO.   It  will  be  necessary  for  the
        decision maker to focus upon the issue of fundamental human rights,
        community support and economic survival to determine whether such a
        relocation would  be  unreasonable  or  unduly  harsh  in  all  the
        circumstances.


    e)   In determining whether a claimant can be expected to  relocate  to
        another area in Kenya, outside  her  own  clan  territory,  similar
        considerations will need to be applied as in (d). It is to be borne
        in mind that the larger cities are by and  large  multi-ethnic  and
        multi-cultural and there are clear areas in Kenya in which  FGM  is
        not practiced. Although it was suggested by  Dr  Knighton  that  it
        would be impossible for  a  woman  of  one  clan  to  live  in  the
        territory or community of another clan, we could find no  objective
        evidence to support such a bold assertion. There is little  in  the
        objective  material  drawn  to  our  attention  to   indicate   any
        significant hostility being  exhibited  as  between  the  clans  in
        Kenya. Clearly the claimant will  be  a  new  arrival  and  initial
        outsider in such regions. The issue of her ability to live and work
        in  a given area will need to be addressed as an important  factor.
        There is nothing to indicate significant  hostility  or  inter-clan
        conflict in the cities, or in the region surrounding Lake  Victoria
        occupied in the main by the Luo and Luhya.

113. The Tribunal's conclusions may be summarised as follows:

    (1)  It is important to determine whether the claimant  belongs  to  an
        ethnic group, amongst which group FGM is practiced.  If so she  may
        be a member of a particular social group for the  purposes  of  the
        1951 Geneva Convention.


    (2)  All uncircumcised women in Kenya, whether Kikuyu or not,  are  not
        as such at real risk of FGM.   The statistical evidence shows  that
        at least fifty per cent, if not more, of women in  Kenya  have  not
        been  the  subject  of  FGM.    The  objective  evidence  shows  an
        increasing pressure to abstain from such a practice both by many of
        the  churches  and  communities,  by  the   government   and   non-
        governmental  agencies,  by  the  promotion   of   an   alternative
        "initiation rite".


    (3)  The decision to undergo FGM is one made by the individual if adult
        or by the parents if a child.   Such a decision will  no  doubt  be
        reflective of the cultural norms which exist within the  particular
        community in which the woman or child resides.    It  is,  however,
        possible for a woman not wishing to embrace the initiation  of  FGM
        for herself or her family to live in a  community  which  does  not
        subscribe to such  practises.   Those  who  practice  FGM  are  not
        reasonably likely (particularly in urban areas) to seek to  inflict
        it upon women from non-practising ethnic groups (or sub-groups).


    (4)  A woman will only be at real risk if  she  comes  from  an  ethnic
        group (or sub- group) where FGM is practised and the evidence shows
        that she is reasonably likely to be required by her parents  or  by
        others, in a position of power and influence over  her  to  undergo
        FGM.


    (5)  There is no evidence that the Mungiki  seek  to  impose  FGM  upon
        women or communities other than those who have been initiated  into
        their particular sect.    The  objective  evidence  speaks  of  the
        Mungiki as being involved in  organised  crime,  transportation  in
        urban areas and in public order offences.   There  is  no  evidence
        that they are engaged in any significant activity such as  imposing
        FGM  on  groups  or  communities   who   do   not   support   their
        political/cultural aims.


    (6)  The authorities are motivated to act against the  Mungiki  and  in
        the past a significant number of arrests including  the  arrest  of
        one of the leaders.   The Mungiki seeks to reflect the  traditional
        or cultural base of the Kikuyu.  The sect generally is not found in
        areas occupied by those tribes whose ethnic groups (or  sub-groups)
        which are not Kikuyu or which do not  contain  an  element  of  the
        Kikuyu.


    (7)  Internal relocation will be available in Kenya to a woman  who  is
        at real risk of FGM in her home area if the evidence shows, (i) she
        is not reasonably likely  to  encounter  anyone  in  the  place  of
        relocation who would be in a position of power and  influence  over
        her and who would use that power and influence to  require  her  to
        undergo FGM; and (ii) she can reasonably be  expected  to  live  in
        that place, having regard to the general circumstance prevailing in
        it and the personal circumstances of the appellant (paragraph  3390
        of HC 395 (as amended).  In the case of a woman from a  rural  area
        in Kenya, internal relocation to some other region or urban  centre
        will not be available unless her circumstances are  such  that  she
        will be able to survive economically (see  Januzi  v  Secretary  of
        State for the Home Office and Others [2006] UKHL 5).


     (8) In considering internal relocation it is important to bear in mind
        the religious and/or cultural context particularly whether there is
        any family or sub-clan support available to the woman in  the  area
        proposed.   It may be considered that it  would  be  easier  for  a
        member of the Kikuyu tribe to relocate to an area  with  a  similar
        tribal culture and support, rather than relocating into a different
        area.   That having been said, however, much will depend  upon  the
        individual circumstances of the woman and of the availability of  a
        support structure within the proposed area of return.


    (9)  Credibility will  usually  have  an  important  part  to  play  in
        determining whether a woman is at risk.  In considering  the  issue
        of relocation it is important that the family and  extended  family
        situation and context  be  examined  particularly  as  to  cultural
        context, education, economic lifestyle and work experience.


114. The primary concern of the Tribunal in this determination has  been  to
    reconsider the appeals of the appellant.  However, general guidance  is
    given as to the approach  to  be  adopted  in  determining  "Particular
    Social Group" in the light of the decision in K and Fornah.  Similarly,
    guidance is given, in the light of the decision in Januzi, as to  those
    circumstances and situations in  which  internal  relocation  would  be
    reasonably open to those women in Kenya seeking to avoid FGM.

115. For the reasons which we have set out above we do  not  find  that  the
    appellant (or her family) has a well-founded  fear  of  persecution  or
    faces a real risk of having FGM  inflicted  upon  her  (or  them)  upon
    return to Kenya.  We find that internal relocation is  reasonably  open
    to the appellant (and her family) in all the circumstances.  We do  not
    find that the appellant's protected human rights will  be  breached  by
    such a return.  We  have  borne  in  mind  the  issue  of  humanitarian
    protection but  do  not  find  that  it  has  any  application  in  the
    particular circumstances of this appeal and in the light of such  facts
    as we have found.

116. The original decision of the Tribunal  shall  stand,  namely  that  the
    asylum appeal is dismissed.  The appeal on human rights grounds is also
    dismissed.






Signed                                  Date

Senior Immigration Judge King, TD

                             Index of Documents

Map Of Kenya

BBC News Article (04/03/05)

UNHCR Guidelines and Position Papers (07/05/02)

Kenya Humanitarian Update (Jan 03)

IRIN News Article (07/02/03)

BBC News, Profile: Kenya's Secret Mungiki Sect (11/02/03)

Extract from Kenya Humanitarian Update (28/02/03)

US State Department Report on Kenya 2002 (31/03/03)

Extract from Kenya Humanitarian Update (30/04/03)

Newspaper Articles: East Africa Press (various dates)

Reply to RLC from UNHCR (02/07/03)

Report Centre for reproductive Rights of Kenya (2003)

Newspaper Articles and Responses to Information from Canada Refugee Board
(Various dates)

'Ending Female Genital Mutilation' - Gemma Richardson 11/02/05.

Country of Origin Report 16 - February 2005 prepared by Immigration Refugee
Board of Canada.

Responses to Information Request - 23 February 2005, Immigration and
Refugee Board of Canada.

IRIN Report of FGM (March 2005)

US State Department Report on Kenya 2005 (08/03/06)

Letter from FCO Nairobi re Women and FGM (14/11/05)

Articles from Daily Nation (20/05/2006, 31/07/2006)

Operational Guidance Note - Kenya V1.0, (01/06/06)

WHO Article on FGM (02/06/06)

Article from East Africa Standard (20/06/2006)

Afro News Report on Kenya (26/06/06)

News Articles on FGM Kenya (various dates)

Expert Report Dr D P Knighton (25/07/06)

Various Articles from religionnewsblog.com (14/01/06, 02/02/06, 06/03/06,
09/05/06)

Authorities

P& M v SSHD [2004] EWCA Civ 1640

RM (Sufficiency of Protection - IFA - FGM) Kenya CG [2004] UKAIT 00022

JA (Mungkiki - not a religion) Kenya [2004] UKAIT 00266

JM (FGM - Sufficiency of Protection) Kenya [2005] UKAIT  00050

AK (FGM - Sufficiency of Protection) Kenya [2005] UKAIT 00080

Januzi (FC) v SSHD and Others [2006] UKHL5

A and Fornah [2006] UKHL 46.




