

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

    Goudey (subsisting marriage - evidence) Sudan [2012] UKUT 00041(IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Sheldon Court, Birmingham            |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 14 December 2011                           |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         MR JUSTICE BLAKE, PRESIDENT
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                                ELHAM GOUDEY
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                        ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER CAIRO
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Koulang of Attar Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Smart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


     i) GA ("Subsisting" marriage) Ghana * [2006] UKAIT 00046   means  that
        the matrimonial relationship must continue  at  the  relevant  time
        rather than just the formality of  a  marriage,  but  it  does  not
        require  the production of particular evidence of  mutual  devotion
        before entry clearance can be granted.


    ii) Evidence of telephone cards is capable of  being  corroborative  of
        the contention of the parties that they communicate  by  telephone,
        even if such data cannot confirm the particular number the  sponsor
        was calling in the country in question. It  is  not  a  requirement
        that the parties also write or text each other.


   iii) Where there are no countervailing factors generating  suspicion  as
        to the intentions of the parties, such evidence may  be  sufficient
        to discharge the burden of proof on the claimant.

      DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal from a decision of Judge Birk sitting in  the  First-
    tier Tribunal, Immigration and Asylum Chamber in a decision promulgated
    on 13 July 2011.  The decision was to dismiss  the  appellant's  appeal
    from a refusal of entry clearance to join the  sponsor  in  the  United
    Kingdom as his wife.

 2. Two reasons were relied on by the respondent to refuse the application.
     First, at the date of the application the  appellant  was,  by  a  few
    months, under the age of 21.  Second, the Entry Clearance  Officer  was
    not satisfied with the material submitted to him demonstrated that  the
    parties intended to live together as husband and wife and the  marriage
    was subsisting. The onus was on the appellant to  satisfy  the  ECO  of
    these matters under paragraph 281(iii) of the Immigration Rules.

 3. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted  on  14  October
    2011.  By that stage it was apparent from the decision of  the  Supreme
    Court (upholding the Court  of  Appeal)  in  the  case  of  R  (on  the
    application of Quila and Others) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2011] UKSC 45 that the requirement of the  Rules  that  the
    applicant be aged over 21 was an unlawful and disproportionate  one  in
    the context of entry for the purpose of settlement  as  a  spouse.   Mr
    Smart cannot and does not rely on the  first  ground  as  supporting  a
    refusal of entry clearance. The second ground remains disputed.

Factual basis of claim

 4. The background to this case is that the sponsor is a national of  Sudan
    originally from the Darfur region who came to the  United  Kingdom  and
    was granted refugee status. In due  course  he  was  naturalised  as  a
    British citizen, the status he held  when  he  sought  to  sponsor  the
    admission of his wife.  He states that there  were  family  discussions
    about finding him a wife and a relationship had begun in 2008  when  he
    was in the United  Kingdom  and  his  wife  was  in  Sudan.   From  the
    appellant's entry clearance application she  says  that  she  moved  to
    accommodation in the city  of  Omdurman  about  two  years  before  the
    application for entry clearance was made.

 5. On 4 August 2010 the appellant was issued with a passport.  Between  18
    August 2010 and 14 September 2010 the sponsor was in Egypt.   There  is
    evidence that the appellant joined him during this period unaccompanied
    by any chaperone. Two photographs were taken of them together in Cairo.
    On 20 August 2010 the application for entry clearance was made.  It was
    refused on 8 November 2010 without interview.

 6. The appellant in the entry clearance application  form  answers  fully,
    clearly and consistently all 151 questions.  In the course of that form
    she says that she has lived at her present address for two  years;  she
    gives her telephone number in Sudan which is a mobile number;  and  she
    gives the telephone number of her husband in the United  Kingdom  which
    is again a mobile number.  She says that she contacts  her  husband  by
    telephone.

 7. A considerable volume of  material  by  way  of  the  sponsor's  mobile
    telephone bills was placed before the judge at the appeal.  From  those
    it is apparent that he had contacted telephone numbers that matched  up
    to telephone cards that he had purchased; a great many of  these  cards
    were copied into the bundle of evidence. The period  of  the  telephone
    contact revealed by this material suggests that this extended  back  to
    2008.  The sponsor explained that he used telephone cards as that was a
    cheap way of phoning Sudan.  We understand the methodology  is  that  a
    person purchases a pre-paid card, dials the number on the card and then
    enters a pin number supplied that enables the call to be transferred to
    the telephone number of the recipient. However, the billing  data  only
    indicates the neutral intermediary number that is being telephoned  and
    not the eventual end user. The judge made the point that therefore  the
    cards by themselves were not  direct  evidence  that  the  sponsor  had
    telephoned his wife.

 8. The sponsor further had submitted evidence  of  remittances.   He  says
    that he paid money into a company in Birmingham, they telephoned  their
    principal office in London and remittances  were  sent  to  the  Sudan.
    There was a letter from the remittance company saying that the  sponsor
    had supplied money that was sent to his wife at a regular rate but  the
    judge was troubled that no receipts for individual remittances had been
    submitted.

 9. In his determination  the judge says this:

        "15.     The parties claim to telephone each other since 2008.   It
             is clear that texting is an available option. I do  not  accept
             as credible that there would be no texts  over  this  time.   I
             accept that there are telephone calls made to the  020  number.
             However, there is no confirmation that  the  appellant  is  the
             person who is being telephoned.


        16.      I also find that there was contradictory  evidence  as  to
             the reason why there has been no written communication  between
             them.  Firstly the sponsor stated plainly  that  there  was  no
             postal service and then he states that there  is  a  very  poor
             service.  He did not explain when first asked that it  was  not
             worth sending correspondence due to a poor postal  service.   I
             find he was only prepared to give a more accurate account  when
             asked in cross-examination and I find this reduces  the  weight
             that I place on his explanation. "

Error of Law
10. In our judgement the judge has mis-directed himself as to the weight to
    be attached to the total documentation relating to the telephone calls.
    Whilst it is true that this documentation does not of itself prove that
    the sponsor has been speaking to his wife as opposed to someone else in
    the Sudan, the material gives  corroborative  support  for  the  wife's
    account  in  the  entry  clearance  application  and  the   appellant's
    testimony in the appeal. It is clear that a great many telephone  calls
    have been made using the telephone  cards  during  the  period  of  the
    relationship. This is substantial support for the proposition that they
    conducted their relationship by telephone. It is  improbable  that  all
    this communication was with someone else rather than the person who the
    sponsor has married and wants to bring to the United  Kingdom.  Parties
    who intend to conduct a relationship by telephone do not also  have  to
    demonstrate that they conduct a relationship by written  correspondence
    in order to show that they intend to live together as man and wife. The
    suggestion that they may have texted each other is speculation  on  the
    judge's part. As we understand the position it would be more  expensive
    to text and the telephone cards cannot be used for  that  purpose.  The
    judge was therefore imposing his own view  of  how  the  parties  could
    reasonably be expected to conduct  their  relationship  as  opposed  to
    evaluating the consistent and supported evidence that was before him as
    to how they actually did.

11. Everything else is neutral in this case.  There is no evidence of lies,
    poor immigration history  or  deception.  There  is  some  evidence  of
    financial sponsorship though the judge was entitled to  be  unimpressed
    by it for the reason he gave the absence of receipts is  not  a  factor
    that goes to the discredit of the application.

12. Accordingly we find that  there  has  been  an  error  of  law  in  the
    assessment of this case and whether the requirements of the Immigration
    Rules had been met. It may be that the ECO  and  the  judge  considered
    that the requirement to  show  a  "subsisting  marriage"  imposes  some
    significant burden to produce evidence other  than  that  showing  that
    there was a genuine intention to live together as man  and  wife  in  a
    married relationship.  If so we conclude that that is an error of  law.
    The authority of GA ("Subsisting" marriage) Ghana * [2006] UKAIT 00046;
    [2006] Imm AR 543 only requires that there is a  real  relationship  as
    opposed to the merely formal one of  a  marriage  which  has  not  been
    terminated. Where there  is  a  legally  recognised  marriage  and  the
    parties who are living apart both want to be together and live together
    as husband and wife, we cannot see that more is required to demonstrate
    that  the  marriage  is  subsisting  and  thus  qualifies   under   the
    Immigration Rules.

Re-making the decision

13. We therefore re-make the decision and conclude on what we have read and
    seen we are satisfied on the evidence taken as a whole that  the  Rules
    are complied with and allow the appeal on that ground.

14. Applying common sense the appellant and the sponsor are single, are the
    right age for each  other,  and  the  sponsor  as  a  young  man  would
    undoubtedly be of an age when he would want to have the  company  of  a
    wife.  She appears to have moved homes  when  the  marriage  was  being
    arranged. He travelled to Egypt to meet his  wife  and  there  is  some
    evidential support for the proposition given in his oral  account  that
    the relationship was conducted by telephone. We see no basis  on  which
    the judge could dismiss the consistent evidence that they  intended  to
    live together as man and wife as lacking in credibility.

15. We agree with the judge that if the parties had been unable to  satisfy
    the Entry Clearance Officer or the judge on appeal that  they  intended
    to live together as man and  wife  and  the  marriage  was  subsisting,
    Article 8 would not require the appellant to be admitted  and  so  that
    part of the decision is undisturbed.

Decision

16. The judge made a material error of law. His decision is set  aside.  We
    remake the decision by allowing the appellant's appeal.

17. We direct that upon receipt of this determination the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer promptly grants entry clearance.


                           Signed


                                Mr Justice Blake
                     President of the Upper Tribunal
                           Immigration and Asylum Chamber


                           Date:   13 January 2011


