


Asylum and Immigration Tribunal

          RH (Para 289A/HC395 - no discretion) Bangladesh [2006] UKAIT 00043

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 14 March 2006                                |On 18 April 2006           |
|Prepared                                        |...........................|
|                                                |............               |

                                   Before

                  Miss K E Eshun, Senior Immigration Judge
                   Mr C P Mather, Senior Immigration Judge

                                   Between



                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  Respondent

The documents specified under para 289A(iv) of HC395 (and to be found in
section 5 of chapter 8 of the IDIs)  are not subject to interpretation and
the requirements do not allow for the use of discretion as to the
acceptance of other documents by an Immigration Judge.

Representation:

For the Appellant:      Mr A Pipe, Counsel instructed by Heer Malek,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:     Mr J Jones, Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh and  was  born  on  16  August
    1982.   She married in Bangladesh in about  1999  and  initially  lived
    there with her husband for about six months.   Thereafter  her  husband
    returned to the United Kingdom for a short period of time  and  in  due
    course the appellant applied for entry clearance to  join  him  in  the
    United Kingdom as his spouse.   She  came  to  the  United  Kingdom  in
    November 2003 and was granted  leave  to  enter  on  that  basis  until
    September  2005.   They  lived  together  in  Croydon.   The   marriage
    deteriorated and in October 2004 the appellant says  that  her  husband
    severely  assaulted  her.  With  the  help  of  a  female  friend  from
    Birmingham she moved to that area. Despite attempts by her friend,  and
    encouragement  from  her  mother,  she  was  unable  to  come  to   any
    arrangement with her husband.  Following threats by her husband to kill
    her if she returned to the matrimonial home she made a complaint to the
    police in the West Midlands about the treatment she had received.    On
    2 November 2004 she went to a police station where she  made  a  formal
    complaint. She was assisted by a  PC  Ali,  a  Bengali-speaking  police
    officer, who arranged for an interpreter to attend so  that  she  could
    make a statement.  This was then forwarded to the  police  in  Croydon.
    PC Ali then assisted the appellant by taking her to a  women's  refugee
    run by a Mrs Butt in Coventry.  She has remained  there  since.  Since
    arriving in Coventry she has registered with a General Practitioner.

2.   On 25 January 2005  the  appellant  applied  for  indefinite  leave  to
    remain on the basis that she was the victim of domestic  violence.  She
    relied upon the provisions of paragraph 289A of the Immigration  Rules.
     Paragraph 289A then read as follows:-

         "The requirements to be met by a person who is a victim of domestic
         violence and who is seeking  indefinite  leave  to  remain  in  the
         United Kingdom are that the applicant:


         (i)  was admitted to the United Kingdom or given  an  extension  of
             stay for a period of two years  as  the  spouse  of  a  person
             present and settled here;  or


         (ii) was admitted to the United Kingdom or given  an  extension  of
             stay for a period of two years as the unmarried partner  of  a
             person present and settled here; and


         (iii)    the relationship with their spouse or  unmarried  partner,
             as  appropriate,  was  subsisting  at  the  beginning  of  the
             relevant period of leave or extension of stay referred  to  in
             (i) or (ii) above; and


         (iv) is able to produce such evidence as may  be  required  by  the
             Secretary of State to  establish  that  the  relationship  was
             caused to permanently break down before the end of that period
             as a result of domestic violence.


    That paragraph was inserted into  the  immigration  rules  as  from  18
    December 2002.  It has since been amended by HC582 with effect from  24
    October 2005.  The amendments do not have any relevance to this appeal.
     It should be noted that the rule as printed in Phelan 4th Ed  contains
    errors.  It refers to 12 months in sub-paragraph (i) not 2  years;  and
    puts the word 'or' at the end of sub-paragraph (ii) when it  should  be
    'and'.


3.   There is a reference in paragraph 289A(iv) to "such evidence as may  be
    required".   In this case the appellant received  a  letter,  dated  16
    February 2005, setting out the respondent's requirements.  That  letter
    reflects  the  terms  of  the  respondent's  Immigration  Directorate's
    Instructions of 2004 (IDI).  Section 5 of Chapter 8 of  the  IDI  deals
    with domestic violence applications and the relevant parts say this:-

    "5.2 Standard of Proof


         In order to establish a claim of domestic violence evidence should
         be sought in the form of:


         i.   an injunction, non-molestation order or other protection order
             made against the sponsor (other than an ex  parte  or  interim
             order); or


         ii.  a relevant court conviction against the sponsor; or


         iii. full details of a relevant police caution issued  against  the
             sponsor."


4.   At 5.7 under the heading "Other acceptable proof of domestic  violence"
    the IDI goes on to say this:-

         "It is often difficult for victims of domestic violence to  produce
         documentary evidence of violence as set out at 1.2 (sic) above, and
         there is often unwillingness or insufficient evidence to  take  the
         matter to court. Although caseworkers should still  try  to  obtain
         police or court evidence confirmation of domestic  violence,  where
         this is not possible, acceptable evidence may take the form of more
         than one of the following [emphasis in the original]:


          . A medical report from a  hospital  doctor  confirming  that  the
            applicant has  injuries  consistent  with   being  a  victim  of
            domestic violence;


          . a letter  from  a  family  practitioner  who  has  examined  the
            applicant and is  satisfied  that  the  applicant  has  injuries
            consistent with being a victim of domestic violence;


          . an undertaking given to a court  that  the  perpetrator  of  the
            violence will not approach the applicant who is  the  victim  of
            the violence;


          . a police  report  confirming  attendance  at  the  home  of  the
            applicant as a result of a domestic violence incident;


          . a letter  from  a  Social  Services  Department  confirming  its
            involvement in connection with domestic violence;


          . a letter of support or report from a women's refuge.


    For the avoidance of doubt, the  Immigration  Judge   quotes  from  the
    respondent's letter in the determination. There, the  requirements  are
    referred to not as  bullet  points  but  paragraphs  (a)  to  (e).  The
    provisions are otherwise identical.

5.   The appellant's  application  was  refused  and  there  is  a  detailed
    explanatory statement  dated  25  July  2005  setting  out  why.    The
    statement says (inter alia) this:-

         "3.2.....The only documentary evidence the appellant had  submitted
         was a letter dated 3/05/2005 from her  GP,  Dr  Kakad  (J2),  which
         stated that she had first gone to her doctor's on 29/03/2005  where
         she mentioned an assault that took place in October 2004.  However,
         the report did not confirm that  the  appellant  was  examined  and
         found to have injuries consistent with being a victim  of  domestic
         violence.  An extract from  a  police  officer's  notebook  (B3-B4)
         which had not been substantiated with a crime reference or a  crime
         report (sic).  Furthermore, Home Office enquiries with  the  police
         showed no trace of  an  incident  involving  the  appellant.   Also
         submitted was a letter dated 08/04/2005 from The Sisters Haven (G2)
         which confirmed that the appellant was residence  (sic)  with  them
         and  that  they  were  supporting  her,  however,  this  alone  was
         insufficient evidence to  prove  the  appellant  was  a  victim  of
         domestic violence.   The  Secretary  of  State  was  therefore  not
         satisfied  the  appellant  had  produced   sufficient   documentary
         evidence to meet the requirements  of  paragraph  289A(iv)  of  the
         Immigration Rules.


         3.3 Furthermore, in light of the above the Secretary of  State  was
         not satisfied the appellant had within a reasonable  time  produced
         the  evidence  requested,  to  establish  her   claim   under   the
         immigration rules and accordingly, he was not prepared to  exercise
         discretion in her favour."


6.   At paragraph 3.4 the respondent went on to say that it was  clear  that
    the appellant's marriage had broken down  and  that  the  appellant  no
    longer met the conditions of her stay in  the  UK  under  her  original
    leave to enter.  He curtailed her leave.  The  appellant  appealed  the
    decision to refuse the application but not the decision to curtail  the
    extant leave.  The respondent made some initial observations concerning
    the notice of appeal at the  end  of  the  explanatory  statement.   He
    concluded there was no reason established in the grounds of  appeal  to
    make it appropriate for him to alter his decision.  Part of the grounds
    of appeal, and an accompanying letter in support,  suggested  that  the
    law  discriminated  against  immigrant  women  who  were  subjected  to
    violence.  The respondent noted that no evidence had been submitted  in
    support of that assertion and said he was satisfied that Article 14  of
    the European Convention on Human Rights  had  not  been  engaged.  That
    issue was not argued before the Immigration Judge.

7.   In coming to her conclusions the Immigration Judge  said  at  paragraph
    27:

         "The  appellant's  representative  asked  me   to   interpret   the
         requirements of paragraph 289A generously."


    There was no  disagreement  between  the  parties  that  the  appellant
    satisfied the requirements of paragraph 289A(i) and (iii).   The  judge
    said the difficulties that have  arisen  are  in  connection  with  the
    interpretation of paragraph 289A(iv). She then went on to consider  the
    evidence which had been adduced before  her.   She  observed  that  the
    appellant had made her original complaint to Pc Ali and that  she  been
    given a copy of the entries in  his  notebook.    She  said  they  were
    contemporaneous notes from  which  it  was  clear  that  the  appellant
    complained on 2 November 2004 she had been physically assaulted by  her
    husband and that she had lived with him at 34 Priory Road, Croydon.  It
    was also clear that PC Ali then arranged for a statement  to  be  taken
    through a police interpreter and took  the  appellant  to  The  Sisters
    Haven Refuge in Coventry.  The notes also confirm  that  paperwork  was
    sent to Croydon Police Station.


8.   The Immigration Judge also had a copy of a police log  which  confirmed
    the date of the complaint, namely 2 November 2004  and  the  fact  that
    information was passed from Coventry  to  Croydon.    That,  she  said,
    confirmed complaints by the appellant of physical and verbal abuse over
    the previous year and that all her documents  had  been  taken  by  her
    brother-in-law. The Immigration Judge said that she was satisfied  that
    this evidence had been  given  to  the  police  and  that  it  was  the
    appellant's intention that the complaint would be  actioned.   She  was
    satisfied that the  appellant  made  a  formal  complaint  of  domestic
    violence by her husband.   She then compared that with the requirements
    for documentary evidence in 5.7 of the IDI. She said that  the  nearest
    equivalent item in that list, to the evidence she  had  seen,  was  the
    requirement for a police report confirming attendance at  the  home  of
    the  applicant.   She  acknowledged  the  police  did  not  attend  the
    appellant's address in Croydon and said that the  complaint  "therefore
    does not technically satisfy those requirements but nevertheless  I  am
    satisfied that the police report was made".


9.   At paragraph 35 of her determination, the  Immigration  Judge  observed
    that  the  appellant  had  not  reported  her  concerns  to  a  General
    Practitioner until she registered with  a  doctor  in  Coventry.    She
    said, by then, the  physical  effects  of  the  domestic  violence  had
    disappeared. She acknowledged that  the  doctor  stated  the  appellant
    appeared low in mood and attributed this to  the  possible  effects  of
    domestic violence but the Immigration Judge went on to say that this

         "is not sufficient to satisfy the requirements of paragraph (a) - a
         medical report from a hospital, doctor  or  letter  from  a  family
         practitioner confirming that  your  injuries  are  consistent  with
         being a victim of domestic violence".


    We should emphasise, that the requirement   she  refers  to  is  not  a
    report from a hospital or doctor  (as  implied  by  the  comma  in  the
    Immigration Judge's paragraph 35) but from a hospital doctor.

10.  The Immigration Judge went on at paragraph 36 to say this:-

         "I was significantly influenced by the evidence given by Zakia Butt
         particularly with regard to the manner in which she  described  how
         in her experience the general demeanour of the appellant  satisfied
         her that she had been a victim of domestic violence.  She  referred
         to the appellant's tearfulness, general distress, feeling  of  lack
         of worth and I am satisfied to the necessary standard that she  was
         genuinely satisfied the appellant had been the victim  of  domestic
         violence.


    37.  I have taken into account the  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer's
         view that Mrs Butt was only able to repeat the information provided
         by the appellant but I also take into account that Mrs Butt  is  an
         experienced hostel worker (she told me that she had had  more  than
         fifteen years experience of working with abused women) - she  is  a
         Muslim woman  herself  and  I  am  satisfied  that  she  is  highly
         experienced in this field.   I  am  therefore  satisfied  that  the
         letter which Mrs Butt had provided and the oral evidence which she
         gave before me more than satisfies the requirement  at  (e)  of  "a
         letter of support or report from a women's refuge".


11.  At paragraph 38 the Immigration Judge said,

         "I find that it would be impossible for the  appellant  to  produce
         evidence which would satisfy paragraph (b) - an  undertaking  given
         to a court that your partner will not approach  you  -  that  would
         have required the appellant to have  instituted  civil  proceedings
         against her husband for an injunction or a non-molestation order  -
         as she was no longer living in Croydon at  the  relevant  time  and
         felt unable to report her concerns  I  discount  that  as  being  a
         possibility."


      She went on to say


         "Similarly, insofar as (d) is concerned - a letter  from  a  Social
         Services department confirming its involvement in  connection  with
         domestic violence towards you I find that  such  involvement  would
         only have been raised if the couple's children were involved -  the
         couple have no children thereby this requirement is irrelevant".

12.  The Immigration Judge then concluded at paragraph 39:-

         "As indicated above I am satisfied that part of paragraphs (a)  and
         (c) have been satisfied and that together with the evidence of  Mrs
         Butt satisfies me to the necessary standard that the appellant  has
         been the subject of domestic violence.


         Accordingly, I am satisfied the requirements of paragraph  289A  of
         the immigration rules have been satisfied and on that basis I allow
         the appellant's appeal".


13.  The respondent applied for a review of that decision and an  order  for
    reconsideration was made on 1 September 2005.  The grounds  in  support
    of the application start by saying:-

    "1.   The  Immigration  Judge  has   used   her   discretion   in   the
         interpretation of the immigration rules when it was not open to her
         to do so. "


    The grounds then go on to argue why that is demonstrated to be the case
    in the determination.   Later in the grounds there is also criticism of
    the observations that the appellant could  not  have  instituted  civil
    proceedings for an injunction or non-molestation order because she  was
    no longer living in Croydon, and that she  could  not  have  approached
    Social Services because she had no children, when that is not the case.




14.  Before us it was accepted that the appellant could not strictly  comply
    with the requirements of the IDI.  As Mr Pipe put it, she could produce
    none of the primary documents required by the IDI but she was  able  to
    satisfy about one and a half of the necessary minimum of two  documents
    in the secondary list.  By this he meant that the Immigration Judge had
    accepted (and there was no challenge to this) that the letter from  the
    women's refuge was such a document.   The 'half' was the report to  the
    police which it is accept did occur but which does not comply with  the
    requirement for a 'home visit as a result of  domestic  violence'.   He
    conceded, for the purposes  of  this  reconsideration,  that  the  home
    referred to in the IDI is the matrimonial home, on the basis that there
    would be no purpose in such a visit if it was otherwise.

15.  The question we had to decide was whether the Immigration Judge  has  a
    discretion to accept evidence that is not specified in the IDI.

16.  Mr Pipe referred first of all to the provisions of paragraph  289A(iv).
     He argued that the words "may require" in  relation  to  the  evidence
    that an applicant needs to produce to the Secretary  of  State  clearly
    gives a discretion.   However, he had to agree that the effect of  that
    rule is to enable the respondent to specify  what  evidence  is  to  be
    provided before a decision maker can be satisfied that the  appellant's
    relationship was caused to  permanently  break  down  as  a  result  of
    domestic violence.   The respondent has so specified and he has done so
    in the IDI.  It would not be practicable or fair for the respondent  to
    have different provisions in every case.  It is entirely reasonable for
    him to have set the requirements out in an IDI.  It is true  that  they
    have not been incorporated into a rule but they have been specified  as
    a result of a power contained in a rule.  The use of the word "may"  is
    clearly intended to enable the Respondent to make such provisions,  and
    he has done so.  That was the extent of the discretion imposed  by  the
    rule and it is not one that is reviewable by an Immigration Judge.

17.  He then moved on to look at the terms of the IDI.   We  have  described
    the  first  documents,  specified  in  paragraph  5.2  as  the  primary
    documents.  Those documents  are  the  ones,  ideally,  the  respondent
    requires in order to establish the  position.   They  are  designed  to
    provide proof where an applicant has satisfied a court,  or  where  the
    partner has admitted the conduct to a police officer.   It  was  common
    ground that the appellant could not provide any of those documents.

18.  Mr Pipe moved on to the list of documents  we  have  described  as  the
    secondary documents. That requires an applicant to  produce  more  than
    one in order to satisfy the respondent.  The requirement for more  than
    one clearly arises because none of the specified documents has the same
    degree of objectivity as does a  court  order,  conviction  or  caution
    administered after an admission to a senior police officer.  That there
    is a discretion as to what documents can be provided  is  demonstrated,
    said Mr Pipe, because of the  use  of  the  words  "when  this  is  not
    possible, acceptable evidence may take the form of..." [our  emphasis].
    He argued that the  word  'may'  shows  that  the  documents  are  only
    examples of the type of documentation that would be accepted  and  that
    the category of documents is not closed.   He argued that the IDI gives
    the respondent a discretion as to what documents he will  accept.    We
    do not accept Mr Pipe's argument.   What the IDI says  is  effectively:
    'I would like to see one of the documents in the primary category  but,
    if you cannot produce such a document, then I will permit you to  (i.e.
    you may) produce two of the documents from the secondary list.'   "May"
    is used in a permissive way to  allow  an  applicant  to  produce  less
    satisfactory evidence in the event that a  document  from  the  primary
    category cannot be produced.

19.  Of course,  the  respondent  always  has  a  discretion  to  allow  any
    immigration application outside the rules but that is not a  discretion
    which is challengeable if it is  not  exercised  in  the  way  that  an
    applicant would like.  That is because the  ground  of  appeal  from  a
    respondent's  decision  in  section  84(1)(f)   of   the   Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (the Act) provides
        "that  the  person  taking  the  decision  should  have   exercised
        differently a discretion conferred by the immigration  rules"  [our
        emphasis].
    We accept that the IDI is  not  an  immigration  rule  but  a  document
    created using a power conferred by an immigration  rule.   In  fact  we
    know, because it  says  so  in  the  explanatory  statement,  that  the
    respondent did consider exercising his discretion outside the rules  to
    grant the application notwithstanding the inability of the appellant to
    comply with the rule, but he declined to do so.

20.  Quite apart from the fact that any discretion perceived by Mr  Pipe  in
    the IDI is not a  discretion  conferred  by  an  immigration  rule,  no
    discretion is conferred by the IDI.   The  language  of  5.7  is  quite
    clear in that it says that the evidence "may take the form of more than
    one of the following".   It does not do anything to  suggest  that  the
    list is not exhaustive, or that it comprises examples of  the  type  of
    document that will be acceptable. Nor does it give any indication  that
    the respondent may be prepared to accept any other documents. It merely
    gives an applicant the option  of  producing  two  secondary  documents
    rather than one primary one.

21.  It therefore follows that the Immigration Judge was wrong  to  exercise
    a discretion herself.   She could only have done so if  the  respondent
    had been exercising a discretion conferred by him under the immigration
    rules in which case she would, by virtue of  Section  86(3)(b)  of  the
    Act, have been able to allow the appeal on the basis that 'a discretion
    exercised in making a decision against which the appeal is  brought  or
    is treated as being brought should have  been  exercised  differently'.
    That is not the situation here.

22.  The parties agreed that the appellant could not comply  with  the  rule
    289A and the IDI as published.   They  agreed  that  having  found  the
    Adjudicator made an error of law by exercising a discretion  which  she
    did not have, that disposed of the appeal.

23.  The Immigration Judge having made that error of law we  substitute  our
    own decision:-

         The  appellant's  appeal  against  the  respondent's  decision   is
         dismissed on immigration grounds.







Signed                                  Date

C P Mather
Senior Immigration Judge

Approved for electronic distribution.





