

       WD (Lebanon - Palestinian - ANO - risk) Lebanon CG [2008] UKAIT 00047

Asylum and Immigration Tribunal


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |                           |
|On 6 & 7 March 2008                             |                           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       Senior Immigration Judge Allen
                       Senior Immigration Judge Eshun
                               Mrs G Greenwood

                                   Between

                                     WD
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:         Mr D Blum, Counsel, instructed by Knights
Solicitors
For the Respondent:        Mr G Saunders, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The Abu Nidal Organisation ("ANO") exists  now  as  no  more  than  separate
cells and individuals operating on their own, and hence is very unlikely  to
pose a real threat to an individual who has in the past been the  object  of
its hostility.

1.   The appellant is a Palestinian,  a  former  resident  in  Lebanon.   He
    appealed to an Adjudicator against the Secretary of State's decision of
    11 August 2004 to remove him as an  illegal  entrant  from  the  United
    Kingdom.   In a determination  promulgated  on  16  December  2004  the
    Adjudicator dismissed his appeal.  The  appellant  subsequently  sought
    permission to appeal  to  the  Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal.   A  Vice
    President refused  permission  on  22  February  2005.   The  appellant
    thereafter sought statutory review,  and  on  7  April  2005  Silber  J
    reversed the decision of the Tribunal refusing leave.  The appeal  then
    came before a panel of the AIT on 9 May 2006 as  a  reconsideration  of
    the Adjudicator's decision.   The Tribunal did not find there to  be  a
    material error of law in the  Adjudicator's  decision  and  accordingly
    ordered that his decision dismissing the  appeal  was  to  stand.   The
    appellant thereafter sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Court  of
    Appeal.   This was refused by a Senior Immigration  Judge  on  22  June
    2006, but on application to the Court of Appeal permission was  granted
    by Neuberger LJ on 16 August 2006.   Subsequently  by  consent,  in  an
    order made by Laws LJ on 26 September 2006, the order of  the  Tribunal
    of 10 May 2006 was set  aside  and  the  matter  was  remitted  to  the
    Tribunal for a  consideration  of  whether  the  determination  of  the
    Adjudicator disclosed an error of law.

2.   The matter came before a panel of the Tribunal on 24 November 2006  and
    it was determined that the Adjudicator's decision was materially flawed
    and that there must be a full reconsideration in the case.  It stated:

         "1.  (repeats the above paragraph 1)


         2.   The  appeal  came  before  us  on  24  November  2006.   Mr  P
             Richardson,  instructed  by  Knight  Solicitors,  appeared  on
             behalf of the appellant.  Mr C Hearsum appeared on  behalf  of
             the Secretary of State.


         3.   We heard submissions from Mr Richardson and  Mr  Hearsum.   It
             was agreed that all the issues that were argued as  errors  in
             the   Adjudicator's   determination   were   before   us   for
             consideration.  In  addition  Mr  Richardson  argued,  and  Mr
             Hearsum did not disagree, that it was open to him to argue the
             issue of whether Fatah  could  be  regarded  as  an  agent  of
             protection.  Mr Richardson argued that a basis for this  could
             be found in the broad challenge to the  findings  on  risk  on
             return in the original grounds, in that arguably, the  finding
             on sufficiency of protection was related to  that  issue.   Mr
             Hearsum agreed that there was a material error of law in  that
             regard as well as with regard to the other  matters  contended
             for in the original grounds.


         4.   The grounds of appeal against the Adjudicator's  determination
             contend firstly that the credibility findings are flawed.   In
             this regard it is said that paragraph 11 of the  Adjudicator's
             determination provided no reasoning for  the  conclusion  that
             the appellant was not a courier for  Fatah  as  he  suggested.
             The point is made that there  was  an  error  in  the  refusal
             letter upon which the Adjudicator  relied,  at  paragraph  11,
             wrongly stating the date of Abu Nidal's death as being  August
             2003 when in fact  it  was  August  2002.   In  addition,  the
             Adjudicator had not addressed his mind to the answers given by
             the appellant in his statement of 18 August 2004 at paragraphs
             23 to 37 to the respondent's challenges to his credibility  in
             the refusal letter.


         5.   The next ground concerns the failure  by  the  Adjudicator  to
             take account of the evidence of the appellant's wife, Mrs  HW.
             Thirdly it is argued that the findings on risk  on  return  at
             paragraph 11 do not deal with  the  essential  issues  in  the
             case.  It is argued that the objective evidence referred to by
             the Adjudicator was contradictory  and  it  was  unclear  what
             objective evidence he was referring to in the relevant part of
             his determination and it was therefore impossible properly  to
             analyse his approach to the appellant's case in the  light  of
             the objective evidence.  The fourth ground comprises in effect
             a challenge to the IAT in KK [2004] UKIAT 00293.  As is noted,
             the Adjudicator did not rely on this decision but decided  the
             appeal in line with  the  guidance  given  in  that  decision.
             Reference is made to the fact that permission had been  sought
             to appeal KK to the Court of Appeal and it was argued that the
             conclusion of the Adjudicator in stating that  the  systematic
             discrimination suffered by Palestinians  in  Lebanon  did  not
             cross the Article 3 or persecutory threshold was an  error  of
             law.


         6.   We agree that all of these matters identify errors of  law  in
             the Adjudicator's determination.  The grounds  are  terse  and
             coherent, and we see no  particular  benefit  in  paraphrasing
             them as they make the points contained within  them  perfectly
             clearly.  The only comment we might make with regard to ground
             4 is that subsequently the Court of Appeal  refused  to  grant
             permission to appeal in the case of  KK.   That  in  no  sense
             however precludes the issue being  revisited  given  the  fact
             that by the time this appeal is heard again the best  part  of
             three years will have elapsed between the consideration of the
             evidence in that regard in KK and that hearing and it may well
             be appropriate for  the  issues  to  be  revisited.   We  also
             consider that an error of law was identified as agreed between
             the representatives and as noted  above  with  regard  to  the
             issue of the ability of Fatah to protect the appellant against
             the Abu Nidal organisation as a matter of law.   We  make  the
             further comment that it is in our view  necessary  or  at  the
             very least highly desirable for there to be expert evidence to
             deal with several of the issues that will arise on  the  stage
             two hearing  of  this  appeal.   Evidence  is  needed  on  the
             influence and reach of the Abu Nidal organisation and also  of
             the  ability  of  Fatah  to  protect  against  the  Abu  Nidal
             organisation.  Also expert evidence is needed on the  question
             of the extent to which Fatah has de facto control  over  parts
             of Lebanon which arguably is the relevant  test  in  assessing
             whether as a matter of law it is able to afford protection  to
             a person such as the appellant.


         7.   For the above  reasons  we  conclude  that  the  Adjudicator's
             determination is materially flawed and as a consequence  there
             must be a full reconsideration in this case."


3.   The stage 2 hearing took place before us on 6 March 2008.  Mr  D  Blum,
    instructed by Knights Solicitors, appeared on behalf of the  appellant.
    Mr G Saunders appeared on behalf of the Secretary of State.

4.   The appellant, WD, gave evidence as follows. He confirmed his name  and
    his address as on the file.  He had  made  three  statements,  the  SEF
    statement of 21 June 2004, a further statement on 18 August 2004, and a
    third statement of 15 November 2006. These had all been translated  and
    read back to him and he was aware of their contents and to the best  of
    his knowledge they were true and accurate and he was  willing  to  have
    them stand as his evidence-in-chief today.




Discussion
5.   In his first statement, the SEF statement,  dated  21  June  2004,  the
    appellant said that he had lived in Al-Rashidieh camp  in  the  Lebanon
    all his life.  He had decided to join and support Fatah at the  age  of
    fourteen.  He was sent for training in east Sidon  and  after  that  he
    became a fully fledged member of Fatah in 1995  when  he  was  nineteen
    years old.  After the year 2000 he became a messenger for Fatah and  at
    that time his leader was IK who was in charge of security, and who  was
    the personal guard to Soultan Aboul al Nein.  His task as messenger was
    to deliver letters, photographs and  messages  for  Fatah  between  the
    different refugee camps in north and south Lebanon.  He  described  the
    people to whom he delivered items and messages in the camps.  He had to
    deliver items about two times a week and he  did  this  by  hiding  the
    letters under his clothes and took taxis and  buses  to  the  different
    camps and went by various routes also.

6.   He married his wife on 13 January 2002.  He said than she came  from  a
    family with a strong history in Fatah and was also a member of Fatah.

7.   He said that his problems began when the  Fatah  Revolutionary  Council
    (which, as is noted at paragraph 14 below, we refer to as the ANO,  and
    will be referred to hereafter as the ANO) became aware of him.  He said
    that they were another refugee group in Rashidieh and  knew  he  was  a
    messenger  for  Fatah  and  wanted  him  to  divulge  confidential  and
    sensitive information  to  them.  He  said  they  wanted  to  know  the
    identities of the people he dealt with in the  other  camps.   He  said
    that the first time he was approached by the  ANO  was  about  a  month
    before he left Lebanon, may be some time in April  2004.   He  said  he
    received a letter from them, slotted through the  door  to  his  house,
    asking him to attend a coffee shop in Tyre.  He did not  go.   About  a
    week after he received the letter he was telephoned by a person calling
    himself Abo Rad, who said that the appellant had not responded  to  the
    invitation to attend the coffee shop.  He threatened him in respect  of
    his daughter and wife and said that they would be kidnapped if  he  did
    not cooperate.  The appellant hung up. He told IK about the call and he
    gave him a gun and told him to  protect  himself.   He  had  asked  for
    protection but this was all he was able to do.

8.   On 19 May 2004 a guard at the kindergarten where his daughter  attended
    told him that a person had been there and asked him "Do you  know  WD's
    daughter?". He became very suspicious and even more fearful then.

9.   He said that two days later, about a week before he left  Lebanon,  the
    ANO tried to kill  him.  He was walking home from  his  parents'  home.
    The electricity had gone out and it was about midnight.  He was walking
    near a canal and heard two shots fired at him but as it was pitch black
    he did not seen anyone.  He jumped into the canal and hid there for two
    or three minutes and then came out and ran home.   He realised that the
    ANO were serious about killing him so he decided he had no  option  but
    to take his family to safety and arrangements were made over  the  next
    few days during which he hid at his own home and at his father-in-law's
    house and they left Lebanon with an agent on 28 May 2004,  arriving  in
    Turkey on 30 May and in the United Kingdom on 13 June  2004.   He  said
    that they did not inform Fatah that they were leaving because they knew
    that they would never be allowed to leave with all the information that
    they had.  He also said that he could not obtain  protection  from  the
    Lebanese government.

10.  The appellant made a further statement, it seems on 18 August 2004,  in
    response to the reasons for refusal letter of the  Secretary  of  State
    which is dated 6 August 2004.  In that he responded to  various  points
    made by the Secretary of State in the refusal letter.  First of all  he
    said that although he said that he did not work outside the camp before
    2000 it did not mean that he had never been  outside  the  camp  before
    that year.  He provided an explanation for an alleged discrepancy as to
    the number of camps that he said that he mentioned.  He  admitted  that
    he did not know who killed  Abu  Nidal  but  said  that  this  was  not
    something he thought that he should have  known.   He  denied  that  he
    collected intelligence but  said  that  he  was  a  messenger  who  was
    involved in delivering messages and not collecting information and that
    he had not said that he collected information.  He denied the relevance
    of his stating at interview that the ANO wanted him to give them  a  CD
    with information on him, a matter that he had not mentioned in the SEF,
    on the basis that it was  simply  another  formal  method  of  carrying
    information.  With regard to the point made by the Secretary  of  State
    that killing him would not enable the ANO to get information on  Fatah,
    he said that the ANO would only kill him as they saw this as a form  of
    punishment for failing to cooperate.  He disagreed that the  ANO  would
    not have the capacity to attack him in Rashidieh camp.

11.  The appellant made a third statement on 15 November  2006  in  response
    to findings of the Immigration Judge.  He made the  point  that  if  he
    returned to Lebanon at present he would be killed by the  ANO's  active
    agents who work in secret cells.  He referred to a recent incident of a
    Fatah agent who worked in two of the camps being killed by the ANO.  He
    also said that as  he  left  Fatah  without  their  permission  he  had
    betrayed their oath and the punishment for  betraying  their  oath  was
    that he would be killed.  He said he strongly believed that they  would
    view him as a traitor and hold him responsible for passing confidential
    information to the ANO.  The fact that  he  had  left  Lebanon  without
    their permission or at least telling anyone, would prove to  them  that
    he had betrayed them.  Fatah had a  significant  presence  in  all  the
    Palestinian camps in Lebanon as well  as  an  active  intelligence  and
    security system.  As a traitor to them he could never expect to receive
    their protection. He also  considered  that  the  Lebanese  authorities
    would seek to investigate his real intentions if he returned to Lebanon
    and he would not be treated in a fair manner because he is Palestinian.
     He said that the ANO is a  very  dangerous  and  secretive  undercover
    organisation who can find whatever information they are seeking due  to
    the structure of their organisation.  He said that they have a presence
    in all the  camps  in  Lebanon  and  active  agents  who  operate  with
    ruthlessness.  He also said that as a well known Fatah  member  if  was
    not possible for him to relocate within any of the other refugee  camps
    or elsewhere in Lebanon. He said that his activities with Fatah  for  a
    significant period of time were considered as  illegal  and  there  was
    every risk that he would be detained and interrogated by  the  Lebanese
    authorities and treated as an enemy of the state.  He referred also  to
    the fact that his wife's position is similarly  dangerous  as  she  was
    responsible for downloading confidential information into the computers
    of Fatah's offices in Rashidieh via CDs.  His involvement had  been  to
    collect the CDs from Fatah agents in other camps and  forward  them  to
    Fatah. He referred also to photographs he received  in  2005  from  his
    mother after the hearing in November 2004.  He had left the photographs
    in the safekeeping of his mother as he knew that it was  too  dangerous
    to bring the photographs by himself to the United Kingdom.

12.  Mr Blum had a  few  questions  for  the  appellant.  He  was  asked  to
    identify the people in the photograph at page 13 of the  bundle  A.  He
    said that they his wife, himself and Soultan Aboul al Nein who was  the
    leader of Fatah in the Rashidieh camp.

13.  He was asked whether he  had  ever  learned  or  been  told  about  the
    specific details of the information that he couriered and he said,  no,
    he just transferred the information. He had never been told  by  anyone
    as to the general nature of the information that he couriered.

14.  He was referred to his answers  at  question  15  and  question  18  at
    interview.  He had said that he used to  bring  information  about  the
    Revolutionary Council and his job was to collect information about  the
    Revolutionary Council.  He said that he had not collected  information.
    His role was to bring and carry this information to them.  He was asked
    how  he  knew  that  the  information  related  to  the   Revolutionary
    Council/the Abu Nidal Organisation (The appellant referred  to the  Abu
    Nidal Organisation by another of its names, the  (Fatah)  Revolutionary
    Council.  We shall refer to it for the sake of brevity,  as  the  ANO).
    He said he knew as the information he carried was from the  camps  that
    were controlled fully by the ANO. He  was  asked  whether  any  of  the
    people he delivered messages to and from ever indicated to him that the
    information ever related to the ANO and he said yes, of course, and  he
    had been told this by his superior, IK.  It was correct that he had not
    personally  gathered  information  himself  about  the  ANO  or   other
    factions.

15.  He was referred to his answer at question  41  at  interview  where  he
    said that the  Lebanese  authorities  had  become  aware  that  he  had
    monitored them and collected information about their  people.   He  was
    asked how he had become aware of that.  He said that  usually  when  he
    moved around he took a taxi and on one  occasion  he  was  stopped  and
    investigated and searched and they looked up his ID. IK  had  told  him
    that he would need to go around on secret  paths  and  not  the  normal
    path. IK was the bodyguard of Soultan  Abu  al-Einein  (the  leader  of
    Fatah in Lebanon).  He was asked whether he knew whether  the  Lebanese
    authorities knew he was a courier, and he replied of  course,  as  they
    had agents in his area and in his camp and IK had told  him  this.   He
    had become aware of this when he fled in April. He was asked whether it
    was before or after he received the first communication  from  the  ANO
    and he said it was before he received the letter.

16.  He was referred again to  the  incident  when  he  said  his  taxi  was
    stopped  and  his  ID  was  looked  at.   He  said  that  the  Lebanese
    authorities had checkpoints around all the Palestinian camps and anyone
    going in or out would be searched. He was asked whether  this  was  the
    incident that caused him or IK to realise that the Lebanese authorities
    knew he was a courier. He replied no and said his problems  began  with
    the ANO, and not only with the Lebanese authorities.   He  agreed  that
    he was saying that IK had told him the Lebanese  authorities  suspected
    or knew that he was a courier.  IK became aware of this  as  he  had  a
    security network in Lebanon which informed him.  He was asked what  was
    the relevance of the time when he was stopped in the taxi  and  his  ID
    was checked.  He said it could be that it was to ascertain that he  was
    himself a person entering or leaving the camp, as he  used   to  do  so
    twice as week. There was a routine check on all inhabitants in the camp
    as well. He had been allowed to go on with his business and  leave  the
    camp.  Subsequently he used to leave the camp on secret paths.

17.  He was referred to a point made at paragraph  11  of  the  reasons  for
    refusal letter in connection with him not having  initially  said  that
    the ANO wanted him to locate one of their members.  He was asked why he
    had not mentioned this in his initial statement and told his solicitors
    about it.  He said that he had not been asked specifically  about  this
    piece of information and had not thought it was  important  information
    he should tell his solicitors about.

18.  The letter from the ANO had been given by him to his  leader.   He  had
    known it was from the ANO as it was written in it and illustrated  that
    they needed to meet  him in a coffee shop in Tyre.  It was  handwritten
    and signed and stamped with the logo of the ANO.

19.  He was asked why  he  thought  Fatah  would  think  he  had  passed  on
    information to the ANO and he said  it  was  as  he  had  fled  without
    telling his leader and he had been afraid.  He had not told his  leader
    as he would not have allowed him to  go  as  he  was  in  the  security
    division.  He did not think his wife would have been allowed  to  leave
    as well. She had special designated room on the computer and  she  knew
    what type of work she put on to the computer but he did not know as  he
    was not allowed to.  It was confidential information.

20.  The appellant was then cross-examined by  Mr  Saunders.   He  confirmed
    that he had left Lebanon on 28 May 2004.  He was asked how long  before
    that had he been stopped in a taxi by the Lebanese authorities  and  he
    said his problems began in April 2004 when he was stopped and  searched
    and then he had to change his plans.  This had  therefore  happened  in
    April and he said that it was in the early middle of April. It was  put
    to him that being stopped and having their ID checked happened all  the
    time to Palestinians in Lebanon and he said yes, in general, but anyone
    suspected had to get from the car and  they  were  searched.    He  was
    asked whether they did  not  do  that  all  the  time  at  checkpoints,
    carrying out harassment, and replied yes.  He  had  been  acting  as  a
    courier since 2000.  He had therefore been working  as  a  courier  for
    about four years when this happened.  He had not been  stopped  before.
    When  he was stopped and checked he had been allowed to go on his  way.
    He had carried on with his duties as a courier thereafter  but  he  had
    done this secretly, using unusual paths and  routes.   After  the  time
    when he was stopped he continued to make trips twice a week.  This went
    on up until 21 May when he received the ANO letter.  He was asked  when
    he had received the  letter  and  said  it  was  the  week  before  the
    shooting.  He agreed that he was shot at on 21 May.  It was put to  him
    therefore that it was on about 14 May that he got  the  letter  and  he
    said that that was  approximately  so.   The  letter  was  the  initial
    contact he had had from the ANO.  He had received the telephone call  a
    week after he got the letter.

21.  He was referred to his SEF statement dated 21 June 2004,  at  paragraph
    13 of  which he said that he got the letter maybe in  April  2004.   It
    was put to him that he had today said it was approximately mid-May  and
    he was asked which it was and he said it was not around mid-May; rather
    his problems started with  the  ANO  in  April.   He  agreed  that  his
    evidence was that after he had been stopped by the Lebanese authorities
    he continued as a courier by secret paths and did this twice a week  up
    to 21 May when he was shot at.  He had received the letter about a week
    before that and he said that  that  was  approximately  the  case.   He
    agreed that he would have received the letter a day or two either  side
    of 14 May and that that letter was the first communication he had  from
    the ANO   He was asked why therefore in the statement had he said,  and
    he had now just said, that his problems with the ANO  began  in  April.
    He said that the ANO had learned that he was courier in April.   He was
    asked what had happened after they learned that and he said  that  they
    sent the letter to him asking him to meet them at the  coffee  shop  in
    Tyre.  He had got that  letter  in  April  two  weeks  before  he  left
    Lebanon.  He agreed that he had left Lebanon on 28 May.  He  was  asked
    what had happened in April to do with the ANO  and  he  said  in  April
    after  they  had  learned  that  he  was  a  courier  they  established
    communication with him around mid-May, a week or two  weeks  before  he
    left Lebanon.  His leader told him they  had  learned  that  he  was  a
    courier and he was to be careful.

22.  He was asked what communication if any he  received  from  the  ANO  in
    April and he said in April  the  ANO  approached  him  before  he  left
    Lebanon.  He was asked who told him the ANO had  discovered  he  was  a
    courier and he said when the message was received, IK told him. He  had
    told him this in May.  IK had known this  because  he  had  a  security
    network.  He was asked when IK told him that the authorities also  knew
    he was a courier and he said this happened after  he  was  stopped  and
    searched.   He was asked whether that was in April and he said it could
    be in April.

23.  He agreed that he said someone shot at him on 21  May.   He  had  heard
    two shots.  He was asked how he knew they were fired at him and he said
    that there was nobody  else  in  the  street.   They  were  fired  from
    relatively close, up to 10 - 15m.  He was targeted.  Up to then he  had
    just been walking  along  the  street  on  the  way  home  holding  his
    automatic gun.  He had reported the matter to IK afterwards and he  had
    told him to be careful and to look after himself.  He had told IK about
    the shooting.  IK had believed him and had given him the  automatic  to
    defend himself with.

24.  He was asked whether, since he had left Lebanon, he had  heard  of  any
    measures that Fatah had taken against him or to find out where he  was,
    or to indicate that they suspected him of acting against them. He  said
    he did not know and he had left and he had no communication with anyone
    at all in Lebanon.  He had worked for Fatah since he was  fourteen,  in
    1990.  His wife also worked for Fatah but he did  not know when she had
    joined.  He was asked whether she had family  connections  with  Fatah,
    and initially said no, but then said that her father was in  Fatah  and
    that was all he knew.

25.  On re-examination he was asked whether he became  aware  that  the  ANO
    knew he was a courier before or after he gave  IK  the  letter  he  had
    received from the ANO.  He was unsure which information was meant.   He
    was asked whether, before he received  the  letter  from  the  ANO  and
    showed it to IK, IK had ever before then said the ANO  were  interested
    in him.  He said that IK had never mentioned it to him and  if  he  had
    told him he would have stopped working as he would  have  been  afraid.
    He did not know whether IK knew before the  appellant  got  the  letter
    that the appellant had worked for the ANO.  He had only said be careful
    and look after himself.

26.  The next witness was the appellant's wife.  She confirmed her name  and
    address. She had provided two statements of  similar  content,  one  at
    page 29 of bundle A and one at page 80 of bundle B.  They had both been
    translated and read back to her and they were true and accurate and she
    was willing to have them stand as her evidence-in-chief today.

27.  The appellant's wife was asked by Mr Blum what type of information  she
    had processed on behalf of Fatah  and  she  said  it  was  movement  of
    individuals of ANO, and where meetings had been held for the ANO  about
    prisons the groups abducted people to, and people from ANO working  for
    Fatah at the same time. The most  important  information  was  about  a
    person from the ANO who had been  recruited  from  Fatah  to  kill  and
    poison the leader of Fatah. This information was ascertained  by  Fatah
    and approved and the person was arrested and  detained.   She  did  not
    discuss all this information with her husband but sometimes they  spoke
    briefly about general matters.

28.  She was asked when her husband received the letter  from  the  ANO  and
    she said it was in very late April. It was put to her that he had  said
    today that he got the letter  around 14 May and she said no, it was not
    in May and his problems with the ANO  began  in  late  April.   He  had
    showed her the letter and then he  had  shown  it  to  IK  and  it  had
    remained with IK. She was  asked  why  she  thought  her  husband  gave
    evidence today that he received the letter around mid-May and she  said
    she knew her husband and he had problems with dates and she was sure he
    had been confused about dates and that could be the  reason.   She  was
    asked how she could be sure that it was late April and she said she was
    sure of that and after a week he was telephoned by the ANO telling  him
    he did not come to the meeting in the coffee shop and that was  a  week
    after the receipt of the letter.

29.  When cross-examined by  Mr  Saunders  the  witness  was  asked  whether
    anything happened to her husband after the  letter  and  the  telephone
    call.  She said yes, there was an assassination attempt on 21 May,  and
    on 19 May there had been an attempt to kidnap  her  daughter  from  the
    nursery.  There were 22 or 23 days between the receipt  of  the  letter
    and the assassination attempt. It was put to her that her  husband  had
    said it was about a week and she said no, that was not correct.

30.  She was asked whether she was in touch with   anyone  in  Lebanon,  and
    she said with her father.  Sometimes he went to Dubai.   When  she  had
    been in Lebanon she had lived with her father  but  he  did   not  live
    there now.  She had a sibling in Dubai and her father  would  go  there
    for about six months and then back to Lebanon to make sure   his  house
    there was all right and then back to Dubai.  He lived mainly in  Dubai.
    She spoke to him on feast days and on  family  occasions  such  as  the
    occasion when she gave birth to her son.  She also spoke to her mother-
    in-law, by telephone.  She lived in the camp in which they had lived in
    Lebanon.  She was asked whether her  mother-in-law  had  said  anything
    about the consequences of her and her husband fleeing and said yes, and
    her father had spoken to her about it after their arrival in the United
    Kingdom and he had said that IK was very angry about their  actions  as
    they had not told him they would be leaving and they were now  in  very
    serious trouble with Fatah.

31.  On re-examination the witness was asked why, with regard  to  the  last
    piece of evidence, this was not in her statement and why  had  she  not
    told the solicitor at the time. She said that mainly all the  questions
    were directed to her husband when taking this  statement  and  she  was
    dependent upon his asylum claim and they had not asked her  much.   She
    had never been asked specifically by the  representatives  if  she  had
    spoken to or contacted anyone in Lebanon or to her father after she had
    left.

32.  The next witness was Professor Yezid Sayigh.  He has provided a  report
    dated 26 March 2007 and also a brief supplementary report in  the  form
    of a letter dated 18  July  2007.   Professor  Sayigh  has  provided  a
    detailed cv which shows that  he is at present working as Professor  of
    Middle Eastern Studies in the Department of War Studies in  the  School
    of Social Science and Public Policy at Kings College  London.   He  has
    previously been an Assistant Director  of  Studies  at  the  Centre  of
    International Studies at the University of Cambridge between  1994  and
    2003, has been a Visiting Scholar as Pembroke  College  Cambridge  from
    2004 to 2005, and has been a Visiting Professor in  the  Department  of
    Political Science and Public Administration at the American  University
    of Beirut between 2003 - 2004, and between 2005  -  2006.   He  is  the
    author of a significant number of books and articles  and  chapters  in
    books.  He lived in Lebanon between September 2003 and  June  2004  and
    again between September 2005 and June 2006 and at the time  of  writing
    his report had most recently been in Lebanon between 13 and 16  January
    2007.  In his evidence he said that he was due to go to Lebanon in  two
    weeks time for a four month period and was most recently there in  June
    2007.

33.  He had recently read his report and to the best  of  his  knowledge  it
    was accurate, and likewise  with  the  letter  of  18  July  2007.   He
    currently taught a course on the international politics of  the  Middle
    East and a course on conflicts, security and develpment. He  was  aware
    of his duties to the Tribunal.

34.  As regards the information he had on the camp in  which  the  appellant
    lived in Lebanon at Rashidieh, he  got  this  information,  as  he  did
    generally with regard to the camps in  Lebanon,  mainly  from  personal
    contacts who were Palestinians working in such jobs as social work  and
    were activists working and living in the Lebanese camps.  As to how  he
    ensured the information he obtained was accurate, although he could not
    be sure, he obtained the information mainly from people  he  had  known
    for a long time  and  independent  of  each  other  so  he  obtained  a
    convergence of information which would  sometimes  be  corroborated  by
    information in the media.

35.  He identified the person at page 13 of bundle  A  as  Soultan  Abu  al-
    Einein who was the military commander of Fatah in Lebanon and could  be
    the political representative also now.

36.  He was asked whether he knew if there was actual infiltration  or  fear
    of infiltration by factions of the Lebanese government into Fatah.   He
    thought that there was real infiltration as well as  the  fear  of  it.
    The various factions infiltrated each other for information. The Syrian
    and  Lebanese  intelligence  organisations  were  interested   in   the
    Palestinian factions and there had been  active  recruitment  recently.
    There had been particular problems last year in the Nahr El-Bared  camp
    between the Lebanese army and Palestinian Islamists who had broken away
    from  the  Fatah-Intifadah  group  and  some  of  those  people   would
    previously have been members of Fatah.  It was an illustration  of  how
    Fatah members would be recruited but would end  up  breaking  away  and
    fighting for another group, and ultimately people would fight for their
    paymaster.

37.  He was asked to what extent Fatah had been  infiltrated  in  2004.   He
    said that it had always had been heavily infiltrated by rival factions.
     Some members could feel greater loyalty to another faction, but it was
    Fatah that paid them.  The same had been true in the opposite direction
    in the past  when  Fatah  members  had  infiltrated  other  Palestinian
    factions and also the Lebanese authorities. This was certainly true  in
    the 1970s and 1980s.  Fatah's capabilities were  far  reduced  now  but
    they would seek information and find  friendly  sources  or  had  other
    bases of obtaining information.

38.  Professor Sayigh was asked what Fatah would do  if  they  perceived  or
    knew  that  the  appellant  or  his  wife  had  divulged   confidential
    information to the authorities or in particular to another faction such
    as the ANO.  He said that if they thought they had given information to
    an outside party then they would view this with high suspicion.   Fatah
    proceedings were very informal and personalised.  Certainly they  would
    have been questioned  and could have been detained and the  questioning
    could include rough treatment.  That would  be  the  situation  if  the
    appellant had remained in Lebanon and that had happened  then.    There
    would at least have been detention as a result.   If the appellant were
    to return now and this perception existed, then he would be  seen  with
    distrust and suspicion.  It was more difficult to  predict  what  Fatah
    would do. If he was seen not  to  have  returned  as  part  of  another
    faction and was not carrying on any further activity, then there  could
    still be questions if he returned to his  own  camp  and  he  might  be
    questioned over coffee and his reasons could be probed and he would  be
    asked what he was doing now.  It was rather doubtful whether  any  more
    formal action would  take  place  and  it  would  depend  on  what  was
    believed. There might be social ostracism and  denial  of  services  or
    protection, although services would still be accessible from the United
    Nations Relief Works Agency (UNRWA).  They could refuse to put him back
    on the payroll.  That was Professor Sayigh's  expressed  assessment  on
    the information he had. The situation in the camps was  fluid,  and  it
    was hard to predict.  There were  higher levels of distrust  since  the
    problems last year. There was a fear of the Lebanese army  taking  over
    violently.  The risk was higher this year  as  Fatah  had  generally  a
    higher threat perception and the situation was more sensitive now.   It
    was the case that there was a higher level of distrust and of fear.

39.  He was asked whether the Lebanese authorities, had  they  become  aware
    at the time when the appellant lived  there  in  2004  that  he  was  a
    courier, would have been interested in him?  He replied that they would
    have been.  Lebanon was then  under  overall  Syrian  control  but  the
    Syrians had left in April 2005.   At that time the Syrian and  Lebanese
    authorities were in conflict  with Fatah and it was likely the  Syrians
    would have known if the Lebanese knew.  That  did  not  mean  that  the
    appellant would  necessarily have been interrogated  or  arrested.   He
    would not normally have been subject to direct action, but  they  would
    have noted his activity and kept an eye on him,  and  it  could  be  he
    would have been monitored, and the information about him, could be kept
    on a file.

40.  Professor Sayigh was referred to what he said at paragraph  2(b)(i)  in
    his report, at page 155 of bundle C, concerning the decline of the  ANO
    and the fact that its nature was secretive and its remaining activities
    were covert.  He was asked  whether  they  would  be  interested  in  a
    courier carrying confidential information. He said yes they would  have
    been at the  time  quite  definitely  have  been  interested  in  Fatah
    especially in the south, as the ANO was in fear of action there.  Since
    the ANO had gone into covert presence  from  the  1990s  onwards  there
    would nevertheless still be interest in Fatah and key figures, officers
    and people involved in security and people who connected such people as
    a courier, and they would have interesting information and  they  could
    be unclear as to what the appellant did.  As regards what  he  said  at
    paragraph 2(c) of the report, at page 156  of  the  bundle,  concerning
    present risk to the appellant, he said that there were  potentially  at
    least two types of risk.  The  first  would  be  from  the  ANO  as  an
    organisation. A senior person or committee might take explicit note  of
    the appellant and order further action.  Also, it  was  the  case  that
    individuals could act more autonomously on a more personal  basis  even
    if the ANO did not still exist as a coherent organisation. Such  people
    could, for example, belong to other factions.

41.  Though Mr Blum was not seeking to argue  that  the  conditions  in  the
    camps were at a level giving rise per se to breach of  the  appellant's
    human rights,  this  issue  having  been  recently  determined  by  the
    Tribunal, (in MM and FH [2008]  UKAIT  00014)  he  asked  whether  with
    regard to the camps in general the appellant's presence was  likely  to
    become known to other political factions such as the ANO or individuals
    associated with the ANO or other factions.  Professor Sayigh said  that
    if the appellant went back to his own camp or to any camp, his presence
    would be noted, as the Palestinians were very close knit and had strong
    social bonds.  To an extent the situation in the camps  replicated  the
    situation in their villages prior to 1949.  They would find out who  he
    was, what his origins were and who his relatives were. Also, each  camp
    had a popular committee which was not elected, but it  represented  the
    main factions in the camp.  There would be family elders on it and  the
    head of the local UN school, for example, and they  would  collect  and
    discuss issues.   Also the UNRWA, if they were there,  required  people
    to register with them in order to receive services. Their  local  staff
    would need to identify where the person in question was from and  there
    would be an entire family record.  Therefore such a  person's  presence
    and identity would be known to anyone who had  an  interest,  and  this
    could be assumed.

42.  Professor Sayigh was asked what the likelihood was  if  the  appellant,
    who was known before to be associated  with  Fatah,  moved  to  another
    camp, and if he had been targeted, for example, by the ANO of him being
    protected from other Palestinian factions or militias.  He said that on
    balance the appellant would not be protected in a formal way. There was
    no reason for a faction to feel obliged to do so. It  was  likely  that
    because of the very strong social  network  and  the  dynamics  of  the
    network that the factions were part of the local community  that  there
    would  be  a  more  informal  fluid  situation.   There  was  a  strong
    opposition to violence and a tendency to resolve disputes,  and  family
    elders would intercede between factions.  There was no formal mechanism
    for protection, but informal  processes  came  into  play  and  it  was
    unpredictable what kind of protection they would provide.

43.  He was asked what difficulties a person  who  could  not  live  in  the
    camps would experience in trying to live outside the camps.  He replied
    that it was automatically more expensive.  The rents in the camps  were
    far lower and services were provided  by the UNRWA.   Services  outside
    the camps posed a general problem for Palestinian refugees. They  would
    have no social security and for a long time there were 72 areas of work
    in which they could  not  be  employed.   This  had  now  been  reduced
    significantly since 2005, but in practice that had not filtered down to
    the bureaucracy.  It was not possible to get  a  job  in  some  of  the
    legalised areas.  It was more polarised also, since the  fighting  last
    year, in that there was hostility to Palestinians, and cases of refusal
    of accommodation recently to Palestinians  in  Lebanon  on  account  of
    fear.  Also the Sunni Muslims of Lebanon,  who  had  historically  been
    closest to the Palestinians,  now  regarded  them  to  an  extent  with
    hostility in the light of the many casualties last year  so  there  was
    now a backlash and it was hard to get  accommodation  and  jobs,  which
    would only be available in the private sector anyway.  Health  services
    and public services generally would  not  be  available  outside  UNRWA
    because of the arrangement that they would  provide  such  care.  There
    were limits on the care that could be provided and also on  the  extent
    of available schooling.

44.  He was asked with regard to the fluidity amongst the factions how  this
    would manifest itself vis-�-vis the ANO and what would  be  the  likely
    consequences to the appellant.  Professor Sayigh said that the ANO  had
    broken off from Fatah in the 1970s and people had  continued  to  leave
    Fatah and join the ANO which was more extreme.   They  had  fused  with
    Fatah Intifadah and there had been a civil war in 1983 and there was  a
    constant to and fro between the ANO and  Fatah  Al  Islam.   In  recent
    years Fatah Al Islam members  had  joined  the  ANO  or  other  extreme
    organisations.  The ANO was a covert organisation then.   It  could  at
    least be said that  former  Fatah  members  who  had  joined  Fatah  Al
    Intifadah had in some cases joined Fatah Al Islam.

45.  He was asked about the risk to a person such as the appellant  who  had
    been approached before by the ANO from a person who had  now  joined  a
    more radical group. He said there was a risk if previous members of the
    ANO knew the appellant and had been in the same area in the  south,  if
    they  had  more  personal  reasons  or  he  had  acted  against   their
    organisation or interests and harmed them.  If there was no such  clear
    reason then they would not seek to do anything to him and if they  were
    not with the same organisation.  He was asked about Fatah's ability  to
    protect the appellant in the light  of  what  the  appellant  said  had
    happened to him and in the light of Fatah's present structure.  He said
    that Fatah had come out openly, as did  the  PLO,  in  support  of  the
    Lebanese army against Fatah Al Islam with regard to the  problems  last
    year.  Fatah had urged a non-violent  solution.   It  had  suggested  a
    peacekeeping force to be recruited and deployed in the camp to  prevent
    infiltration by Fatah al Islam.  The Lebanese army had turned down  the
    offer and other factions could not agree a common  policy.   Fatah  had
    therefore  been  unable  to  pull  together  an  agreement  from  other
    Palestinian factions as to what to  do,  and  this  demonstrated  their
    declining influence.  They had found it difficult even to  find  enough
    men to put into the field. They were shown to  have  reduced  political
    influence and logistical and military capability.

46.  When cross-examined by Mr Saunders, Professor Sayigh was asked  whether
    he knew of cases where the  kind of suggested possible reprisals by the
    ANO or its members had actually occurred in similar cases.  He said  he
    knew the ANO in the past had taken violent  action  to  the  extent  of
    assassination of Fatah members or officials. He was asked whether there
    were any examples of risk from an individual on the basis  of  personal
    animus or vendetta.  He said he could not give  any  specific  examples
    but could say that in various camps, such as Ein El-Hilweh, there still
    were individual clashes where fights were  picked.   He  did  not  know
    whether any of these involved people who had previously been members of
    the ANO but there was a general pattern  of  cases  of  violence  which
    could extend to  deaths.   He  agreed  that  there  was  a  generalised
    situation where fights occurred for personal or factional reasons.   He
    was asked what was the last violent action or serious activity  by  the
    ANO as the ANO and he said it had been some years and he could not  say
    that there had been anything after 1999 to 2001.  Its  activities  were
    now covert.

47.  He was referred to his second report in the letter of 18 July 2007  and
    the point that he made there at paragraph  2(c)  that  everybody  could
    resort to extended families or to rival factions  for  protection.   He
    was asked why the appellant could not do  that given his  family  links
    via his wife to Fatah.  Professor Sayigh  had  not  meant  that  anyone
    could go to any faction but if someone picked on a person who  belonged
    to a faction they would usually get some protection.  Most Palestinians
    from the local community had such protection.  The appellant  would  be
    able to go to his family if he could not go to Fatah and try and  bring
    pressure to bear.  He referred to what he had said  earlier  about  the
    intervention  that  could  be  made  by  elders.   It  was  all  highly
    personalised and it could work in a person's favour  as  above  but  it
    underlined the absence of clear predictable procedures.  He agreed that
    there was a close knit social structure in the  camps.   He  was  asked
    whether if a person from a rival faction turned up would they be unable
    to operate, for example, if  they  came  to  the  appellant's  camp  at
    Rashidieh.  He said  that  they  would  be  known.   There  were  rival
    factions there and  some  had  an  overt  presence.   Fatah  had  never
    physically prevented any of the other PLO factions operating  where  it
    was.  If the ANO had a presence in  Rashidieh and tried to operate,  it
    was very unlikely that they would try to operate covertly. If a  person
    was assumed to be sympathetic to another faction but was not   hostile,
    for example in the  form  of  intelligence  gathering,  they  would  be
    tolerated.  If a person was an ANO member from a local family then they
    would have some right to be there as opposed to the situation of an ANO
    member from outside the camp.  It depended on the case as to whether  a
    person who had gone away from their camp, supported the  ANO  and  came
    back, would be tolerated on return.  It would depend, for  example,  on
    what they were seen as doing before.  It  helped if they had been there
    before but it did not guarantee an absence of interest in them  on  the
    part of Fatah.

48.  The appellant could go to any other camp.  It was  possible  to  enter,
    and there were various degrees of checks or absence  of  checks  but  a
    person who asked questions might well have enquiries  made  about  them
    and might be followed.  Identification was  not required on entry. Such
    a person would be noticed as a stranger and also  if  they  spent  time
    there beyond simply walking through.

49.  He was asked if there was any reason why the appellant's history  would
    become known and he said, not necessarily. He could enter and  take  up
    residence and if he lived there and sought UNRWA services his  identity
    would come to be known.  Whether they  would  bother  to  seek  further
    information about him was something that could  happen  or  if  he  was
    known to a person there from his original camp.  He agreed that the ANO
    broadly speaking would have bigger fish to fry than be interested in  a
    person with the appellant's history. Confrontations would  be  avoided.
    People told Professor Sayigh that the ANO did have a presence still  so
    it was not likely that they would go active to take action in  relation
    to a person in the appellant's position.  The ANO was  something  of  a
    sleeper organisation. It was not  clear  if  they  were  funded  beyond
    funding from Syrian intelligence.  It was possible that  the  Islamists
    funded them.  In a crisis such as that occurring in Lebanon now, it was
    very possible that the Syrians, if no one else,  might  reactivate  the
    ANO as a distinct  label  to  carrying  out  its  business  in  Lebanon
    separately as the ANO or otherwise.  It was  the  case  therefore  that
    left alone they would not seek to go  out  of  their  way  to  harm  an
    individual but if they were activated in  this  way  there  were  other
    potentials, and there were other extremists groups.

50.  The ANO did not have an office but they were believed to have a  covert
    presence.  It was hard to say how, if  at  all,  they  would  retain  a
    record  of  the  appellant.   They  might  still  have  information  on
    computers or CDs.  He did not say it was impossible,  but  he  did  not
    assert it.  There was risk on the basis of a perception that he  was  a
    courier between Fatah commanders who  were  opposed  to  the  ANO,  and
    questions might be asked about whether he was still  active  and  still
    performing the same role and had the  same  connections  in  performing
    covert activity.  Those were the questions to be  asked  if  they  were
    aware of his presence.

51.  On re-examination Professor Sayigh was asked  about  the  mechanism  of
    going to the family for protection.   He said that if a  family  member
    contacted a person they knew in Fatah they might ask for help for their
    relative or  friend  and  it  would  be  a  personal  appeal.   Certain
    families, if  well  organised,  who  had  a  strong  and  clear  family
    structure, would have this mechanism for bringing together  the  elders
    and sending an emissary to the person to  whom  they  needed  to  talk.
    This would not be so for weaker families.  Alternatively they could ask
    a stronger family to intercede on their  behalf.   The  case  could  be
    taken to the popular committee to intercede on such a  person's  behalf
    and that was more formal.  There was no formal structure for  a  family
    to bring pressure to bear on Fatah.

Submissions
52.  In his submissions Mr Saunders asked us to make an adverse  credibility
    finding against the  appellant.   He  pointed  to  the  differences  in
    chronology that appeared in  the  appellant's  oral  evidence  and  the
    discrepancy between the appellant and his wife's evidence about contact
    with those  now  in  Lebanon.   The  chronological  inexactitudes  were
    material, given the limited period within which those events took place
    and the fact that the appellant had been quite clear about the dates of
    the claimed assassination and when he received the letter. These should
    be found to be significant.  The evidence was not reliable. It  was  in
    any event curious that the appellant should have worked for four  years
    and suddenly have been told by his superior IK that the authorities and
    the ANO independently had become aware that  he  was  a  courier.   His
    claim about the shooting was a matter  for  the  Tribunal  but  it  was
    argued that it was untrue.

53.   With  regard  to  the  fears  contended  for  by  the  appellant,   in
    particular from the ANO, the evidence was  clear  that  the  ANO  might
    exist but it had done nothing active since 1999 to 2001.   This  was  a
    fear that was said to be linked to fear from supporters  from  the  ANO
    who might have joined other organisations.  The expert had agreed  that
    they would have bigger fish to fry and they would have no  interest  in
    the appellant, it was argued, even if they came across  him  some  four
    years on.

54.  As  regards  the  claimed  fear  from  the  Lebanese  authorities,  the
    Tribunal was referred to the passage at page 164 of  bundle  C  in  the
    expert report where it was said that he faced  little  risk.  This  was
    very fair.  He had been stopped when he was carrying out his activities
    as a courier and his ID had been checked.

55.  As regards  the  claimed  fear  from  Fatah,  this  depended  upon  the
    credibility findings.  There was clearly an evidential difficulty here.
     Even if the claim were true, the experts  said  that  there  could  be
    distrust and suspicion now and given the passage of time there could be
    informal questions but this came nowhere near persecution or breach  of
    Article 3 rights.  This was even without seeking  the  intervention  of
    their apparently present family.

56.  There was no need therefore to consider relocation,  which  was  argued
    in any event to be possible within the camps.  It was  not  a  case  of
    living outside the camp.  No concession was made in that regard  as  to
    whether or not he could do so.  It was clear that a person  could  turn
    up and register and there was a chance of  anybody  there  drawing  his
    presence to the attention of a person more interested in him.  He could
    go to a different camp from the one he lived in before.

57.  It was argued that as  a  matter  of  law  Fatah  could  be  actors  of
    protection for the purposes of the law.   Reference  was  made  to  the
    decision of the Tribunal in DM (Somalia). A pragmatic view  was  to  be
    taken.  The camps were like city states and were run de  facto  by  the
    dominant factor and this was Fatah in the appellant's camp.  The  camps
    had been there for sixty years.  Therefore in the area of  the  country
    most relevant to the appellant there were parties or  organisations  in
    the form of Fatah which could provide  him  with  protection.   It  was
    accepted that the system they had was loose and  unformulated,  but  it
    was a system to which he could have recourse. It  was  similar  to  the
    situation of majority clans in Somalia. If the  Tribunal  rejected  the
    evidence that the appellant was of any interest to Fatah, there was  no
    reason why they should not be willing  and  able  to  offer  protection
    against a threat which in any event it was contended was not made  out.
    They had believed what he said about the ANO and gave  him  a  gun  and
    were well disposed to him as a long standing operative and  whose  wife
    had long standing connections with the organisation.  The appeal should
    be dismissed.

58.  Mr Blum relied on and expanded his skeleton argument.

59.  With regard to the issue of credibility, the  events  had  taken  place
    nearly four years ago and the appellant had always given  his  evidence
    in terms of approximation.  His wife had  said  that  he  got  confused
    about dates and that was quite common, particularly in the pressure  of
    an adversarial setting and the fact that he had been  through  quite  a
    traumatic experience.   It was true that he had not  had  communication
    with anyone in Lebanon other than his mother and there was no  evidence
    that she had told him that Fatah was interested in him so there was  no
    conflict in fact between his and his wife's evidence.  The account  had
    been said by the experts to be plausible.  There was the evidence as to
    how his superior IK was able to find out information and the likelihood
    of an approach by the ANO was borne out  by  Professor  Sayigh.   As  a
    courier, the appellant would possess confidential information, and  had
    the contacts in the various camps so it was likely the ANO would target
    him for that intelligence. The ANO  were  highly  secretive  and  there
    might be very little objective material but that did not mean that  the
    claim failed with regard to both targeting and risk.

60.  Professor Sayigh's expertise had not been challenged  by  Mr  Saunders.
    He  had  clearly  found  the  appellant's  account  to  be   inherently
    plausible.  With regard to the failure in the SEF to  mention  the  ANO
    asking about the whereabouts of one of their members, the appellant had
    said that he did not appreciate the importance of this,  and  this  was
    plausible.  Also, it did not lack credibility that his wife  would  not
    have realised that what she said about IK telling  her  father  he  was
    angry with them would not have been mentioned before, as many claimants
    were unsophisticated and not aware of what was important to  claim  and
    advisers did not always ask for the relevant information that could and
    should have been sought from a witness.

61.  With regard to risk, it was clear from the expert report that  the  ANO
    would definitely be interested in the appellant.  They would still want
    to  process  and  obtain  confidential  information.   As  regards  the
    shooting incident, it was unclear whether  it  was  done  to  kill  the
    appellant or cause him fear.  The fact that he was not  killed  perhaps
    showed that they were  simply  seeking  to  instil  fear  in  him,  and
    although this was speculative  it  was  reasonable  and  based  on  the
    evidence.  Professor Sayigh had contrasted risk from the ANO itself and
    what he described as residual risk from  individuals.   Although  there
    might be bigger fish who would interest the ANO members, that  did  not
    mean  the  appellant  was  not  targeted  initially.   As   a   sleeper
    organisation,  its  previous  members  could   regard   adversely   the
    appellant's snubbing of them and refusal to give information.   He  was
    at risk on the basis of effectively having rebuked them.

62.  The expert evidence should be borne in mind with regard to the  claimed
    fear from Fatah. It was clear that  if  he  had  divulged  confidential
    information there would be a real  interest  in  him  even  after  four
    years.  He would be detained and could expect rough  treatment  and  it
    was for the Tribunal to decide whether that crossed the threshold.

63.  He would not be able to relocate, as his identity would  become  known.
    It was a question of what a particular group would do.  The  rebuke  to
    the ANO was still alive in their memory. There was a reasonable  degree
    of likelihood that he would be known to a former or current ANO member.



64.  On the question of actors of protection we indicated to  Mr  Blum  that
    we did not need to hear from him since we  were  satisfied  that  as  a
    matter of law Fatah were not capable of being actors of protection.

65.  We reserved our determination.

66.  We have set out the appellant's oral evidence above.

67.  Clearly issue has been taken with the appellant's credibility,  as  can
    be seen from our summary above of the submissions of Mr Saunders, quite
    apart from the points made in the refusal letter.  In our view the main
    challenges to the appellant's credibility are the  points  made  by  Mr
    Saunders in his  submissions.   Clearly  there  are  contrasts  in  the
    appellant's evidence as to the chronology of the events  that  he  said
    occurred in April and May 2004 from the time when he said  he  received
    the letter from the ANO until his departure from Lebanon.    There  are
    also discrepancies as between his and his wife's evidence, on  the  one
    had as to the timing of these events and  also as to whether or not  he
    and/or she had any contact with anyone in Lebanon after their departure
    and in particular whether the  threat  uttered,  it  is  said,  to  the
    appellant's wife's father by IK, was in fact made.

68.  We bear in mind as we must  the  points  made  by  Mr  Blum  about  the
    difficulties of recall after a period of  time,  and  also  the  stress
    which may be experienced by people in particular giving  oral  evidence
    at a Tribunal.  To an extent also it is true that the appellant was not
    always categorical about dates. For example, as we have noted above, in
    the SEF statement he referred to the first approach by  the  ANO  being
    "maybe sometime in April 2004".  But in the end the chronology he  gave
    was clear, and contrasted with what he had said in his  statements  and
    also with what his wife said.

69.  There is the  further  point  concerning  the  claimed  attack  on  the
    appellant.  The Secretary of State's point in the  refusal  letter  was
    that it made little sense for there to be an attempted killing  of  the
    appellant  as  it  would  not  have  enabled  the  ANO  to  obtain  the
    information they sought.  The appellant in his  second  statement  said
    that they would only kill him because they deemed it to be  a  form  of
    punishment for failing to cooperate.  Mr Blum surmised  that  it  might
    have been done by way of a threat in order to put him in fear and  make
    it more likely that he would provide information rather than an attempt
    to kill.

70.  In any event, the evidence in this regard is  distinctly  vague.    The
    appellant could say no more than that he was walking home on a night at
    the time the electricity had gone out and he said he  heard  two  shots
    fired at him which in oral evidence he said were from 10 or  15m  away.
    There appears to have been no follow up to his having jumped  into  the
    canal and hidden there  for  two  or  three  minutes.   It  is  unclear
    therefore whether these shots were aimed at him (and in this regard  we
    bear in mind the fact that he said there was no one else around) and it
    is entirely unclear what the purpose of the shots was, and there was no
    follow up to them.  It also, and to  this  extent  we  agree  with  the
    Secretary of State's comment, makes little  sense  so  soon  after  the
    approach made to the appellant for an attempt to be made as he  thought
    was the case to kill him.  The suggestion by Mr Blum that it  was  done
    to frighten  him  and  make  it  more  likely  that  he  would  provide
    information we regard as no more than supposition.

71.  In this context we  must  of  course  bear  in  mind  the  evidence  of
    Professor Sayigh, part of the general thrust of which was to state  the
    plausibility of the appellant's overall account in the context  of  the
    background evidence.  Thus,  he  regarded  it  as  plausible  that  the
    appellant would have joined Fatah in the way in which he  claimed,  had
    the training and been given the duties which he claimed to have had and
    also the access to information and meetings that he  clamed.   He  also
    found his account of his duties as a  Fatah  courier  and  the  methods
    followed in conducting his duty to be  entirely  plausible.   Professor
    Sayigh, of course, does not purport to comment on the specific  matters
    that the appellant claimed occurred in the  form  of  the  letter,  the
    telephone call, the claimed interest in his daughter at the nursery and
    the claimed attack, though he found the claimed  shooting  to  be  "not
    implausible".

72.  Bearing in mind the comments of Professor Sayigh  we  accept  that  the
    appellant worked for Fatah and was a courier carrying out the  kind  of
    work that he claims to have carried out.  We  do,  however,  have  real
    doubts about the claimed adverse interest in him on  the  part  of  the
    ANO.  It is relevant to bear in mind the point  made  at  page  155  of
    bundle C in Professor Sayigh's main report that the ANO  posed  a  very
    great risk to Fatah members and PLO officials in the  1980s  and  early
    1990s.  He stated that the ANO reached the peak of  its  power  in  the
    Palestinian refugee camps in the  mid-1980s.   However  it  effectively
    imploded in very bloody internal purges and mass  executions  in  1987.
    He said that retained some continued  presence  up  to  the  mid-1990s,
    especially in the Sidon area, and continued to  attack  Fatah  and  PLO
    officials. Its members  and  operatives  were  generally  based  inside
    refugee camps, especially after 1991. It became less active  after  the
    mid-1990s, in part because it lost Syrian patronage as it  founder  and
    leader Abu Nidal found sanctuary in Iraq and was killed in  Baghdad  in
    August 2002.  He goes on to comment that  the  ANO  has  retained  some
    presence in Palestinian refugee camps in  Lebanon,  especially  in  the
    northern camps and indeed in the southern  camps  also  and  that  this
    presence is almost entirely covert and the ANO no  longer  maintains  a
    public presence such as offices, spokespersons  or  media  and  is  not
    known  to  have  undertaken  any  overt  activity  for  several  years,
    including assassinations, although it is believed  to  have  maintained
    covert activity related to surveillance and information  gathering  and
    network building.  To the  best  of  his  knowledge,  Professor  Sayigh
    considers that the ANO would still have had some residual presence  and
    covert activity in 2004 in camps  including  Rashidieh,  and  may  have
    engaged in intimidation of the type stated by the  appellant,  but  was
    not known to have conducted any assassinations for a number  of  years,
    perhaps going as far back as the mid-1990s.  He also comments that  the
    ANO's membership may no longer form a single  clandestine  network  and
    may have dissolved into separate cells and individuals working on their
    own; some may have joined other Palestinian factions, some may work for
    various intelligence agencies or non-Palestinian organisations  engaged
    in covert activity in Lebanon and some may still regard  themselves  as
    belonging to and loyal to the ANO and to  have   "gone  to  ground"  as
    "sleepers".  It was also possible that some  ANO  members  have  joined
    newly emerging militant Islamist groups and that these might pose a new
    type of threat.

73.   This  evidence  is  helpful  in  assessing  the  credibility  of   the
    appellant's claim as to what  happened to him.   Bearing  in  mind  the
    discrepancies both within his evidence  and  as  between  his  and  his
    wife's evidence concerning the relevant dates,  the  vagueness  of  the
    evidence concerning the claimed shooting,  and  the  expert's  evidence
    about the significantly curtailed activities of the ANO at the time  in
    question, we conclude that we do  not  find  credible  the  appellant's
    claim to have been approached and threatened and attacked by the ANO in
    the manner in which he claims.

74.  Nor do we find credible the appellant's wife's claim that she,  through
    her father, was told by IK that her husband and she were regarded  with
    disfavour by Fatah.  This  went  directly  contrary  to  her  husband's
    evidence about contact with family in Lebanon, and  also  perhaps  even
    more significantly is not  evidence  that  has  been  provided  by  her
    previously. We do not think that this can be explained either by a lack
    of awareness on her part or the significance of such  evidence  nor  by
    failure on the part of representatives to ask relevant  questions.   It
    would clearly be a significant aspect of risk on return bearing in mind
    specific remarks made by the appellant in his statement about risk from
    Fatah, and we reject the evidence in this regard.

75.  In the  light  of  what  we  have  said  above  about  the  appellant's
    credibility, we reject the claim that he is at risk  from  the  ANO  on
    return to Lebanon.  Nevertheless we consider that it is appropriate for
    us to assess risk to the appellant on returning if he  had  experienced
    the adverse interest in him on the part of the ANO that he  claims  was
    exhibited.  In considering his evidence we have benefited significantly
    from the detailed report and follow up letter of Professor Sayigh, who,
    as we have set out above, also gave oral evidence before us.   We  have
    set out briefly above Professor Sayigh's qualifications, experience and
    credentials.   We  find  him  to  be  impressively  knowledgeable   and
    objective.  He addressed specifically risk to the  appellant  from  the
    ANO, and we have set out some of his evidence  above  in  that  regard.
    The particular  paragraph  that  it  is  relevant  to  mention  is  one
    concerned with present risk to the appellant.  This is to be  found  in
    Professor Sayigh's report. There he says the following:

         "(c) Present risk to the client.  As noted above, the  ANO  is  not
             known or  considered  to  have  engaged  in  assassination  in
             Lebanon for a number of years. Its presence and capability are
             not ended, but they are significantly degraded.  The  ANO  may
             have still had the presence and activity to be  interested  in
             the client and to seek to intimidate or actually harm  him  in
             2004 as he states,  but  is  much  less  likely  to  have  the
             interest or capability now.  There remains  a  residual  risk:
             given the personalised nature of much of Palestinian factional
             politics and the absence of  effective  law  enforcement,  the
             client might be at risk of some form of retribution  from  ANO
             members who are based locally  and  know  him  personally  and
             might carry on a vendetta if they happen to see him or hear he
             had returned."

76.  Professor Sayigh provided some further detail and updating with  regard
    to matters  dealt  with  in  the  report  in  his  oral  evidence.   He
    distinguished between risk that the appellant might face from  the  ANO
    as an organisation or on the residual basis of risk from an  individual
    no longer a member of the ANO who might be now associated with  another
    faction, possibly an extremist faction.  However we did not  understand
    him to state that the level of the risk that the appellant  would  face
    was materially  different from that stated in his report.

77.  The evidence in this regard has to be seen in the context of  Professor
    Sayigh's other evidence concerning the  dissolution  of  the  ANO  into
    separate cells and individuals working on their own  or  having  joined
    other organisations.  The level of risk described by him  in  paragraph
    2(c) of the report does  not  to  our  mind  equate  to  a  real  risk.
    Professor Sayigh could not say whether the ANO  retained  any  kind  of
    record system and indeed the ANO as an organisation in any event exists
    only covertly and whereas it might not be appropriate to rule  out  the
    possibility of somebody somewhere possessing a CD or some other form of
    record containing the appellant's  name  on  it,  if   his  account  of
    adverse interest in him by the ANO were  to  be  true,  the  degree  of
    likelihood of that manifesting itself into to harm to the appellant  on
    return is to our mind a very low one indeed.  Quite apart from anything
    else, he has been away from Lebanon for nearly  four  years,  and  even
    anybody identifying him as the person in whom the ANO had  an  interest
    four years ago would, we think, be unlikely to be of the view  that  he
    would now be able to give up-to-date information  of  any  interest  or
    value.  But the likelihood to our mind in any event of meeting  such  a
    person,  whether  as  it  were  institutionally   via   their   ongoing
    involvement with the ANO or as an individual who  had  previously  been
    aware of the appellant is, as we say, to our mind at a very  low  level
    of risk, and certainly not one that equates to a real risk.  We bear in
    mind in this  context  also  what  was  said  by  Professor  Sayigh  at
    paragraph 4(a)(ii) of his report referring to the  possibility  of  ANO
    members joining the Fatah Intifadah faction in Lebanon and Syria  after
    the death of their leader in 2004 (we think  this  must  in  fact  mean
    2002) and the decline of the organisation, and to it being  conceivable
    that some of them may now have returned to Lebanon in the new guise  of
    Islamic militants.  But all  this is again in our view at  a  very  low
    level of possibltity and not such as to equate to the  real  risk  test
    required to show persecution, serious  harm  or  breach  of  Article  3
    rights on return in that  regard.   Likewise  with  the  mention  of  a
    residual risk of individual ANO members or cells still present  in  the
    Tyre region pursuing a personal  vendetta  against  a  person  if  only
    because he would be an easy and minor target, again the level  of  risk
    stated is low, and it is relevant to note the nature of the target,  in
    particular that he would  be  a  minor  target  that  Professor  Sayigh
    describes the appellant as being.

78.  We go on next to consider the position  with  regard  to  risk  to  the
    appellant from Fatah, on the basis that he left Lebanon without telling
    people that he was leaving.  As set out above, we  do  not  accept  the
    evidence of the appellant's wife  that  her  father  was  told  by  the
    appellant's former superior IK that they were in serious  trouble  with
    Fatah, for the reasons given above, and do not propose to consider this
    aspect of our adverse credibility findings on an alternative  basis  as
    if it was true.

79.  Professor  Sayigh  refers  to  Fatah  as  being  a  loosely  structured
    organisation  which is very lax in applying  rules  and  criteria.   He
    says that a member  would have had  to  be  guilty  of  a  particularly
    egregious act, such as murder or major embezzlement, to run the risk of
    serious consequences,  and  these  would  normally  not  extend  beyond
    detention and imprisonment.  He goes on  to  say  that  this  does  not
    altogether preclude the possibility that  the  appellant  might  suffer
    some  negative  consequence  were  he  to  return  to  Rashidieh   camp
    specifically, as this is where Soultan Aboul al Nein and IK  may  still
    reside, and he states that they could conceivably require him to submit
    to disciplinary proceedings.  His oral evidence essentially  bore  this
    view out.  He referred to the kind of dispute resolution  systems  that
    exist and in particular that there is a strong  norm  against  violence
    and a tendency to resolve disputes.  We do not accept that  Fatah  have
    displayed any adverse interest in the appellant.  At most he  would  be
    criticised  for  having  left  without  obtaining  permission,   having
    previously told his superior of the ANO's  adverse  interest  in   him.
    But we see no reason to suppose that Fatah would  ascribe  to  him  the
    concerns that he expressed in  his statement that it would  be  assumed
    that he had passed information over to the ANO. Again the level of risk
    described by Professor Sayigh does not in our view  equate  to  a  real
    risk of persecution, serious harm or breach of his  human  rights  from
    Fatah.

80.  Nor do we consider that the  appellant  has  shown  any  real  risk  of
    persecution or breach  of  his  Article  3  rights  from  the  Lebanese
    authorities.  On his evidence he was stopped once and had to leave  the
    taxi and his ID had to be shown and he was allowed to go on   his  way.
    There is no evidence of any other interest in him on the  part  of  the
    authorities, and accordingly we consider that he has not made  out  his
    claim in that regard either.

81.  In the light of our findings on these matters we do  not consider  that
    we need to go into the issue of relocation.  We heard some evidence  on
    this and there is evidence in the bundle, but in light of  our  finding
    that the appellant does not face a real risk from the ANO or from Fatah
    or the Lebanese authorities, on our  findings  he  can  return  to  his
    former home in the  Rashidieh  camp  without  facing  a  real  risk  of
    persecution or breach of his human rights.

82.  The remaining issue for consideration is that of  protection.   In  the
    light of our findings on risk, again this is not a matter on  which  we
    need to say very much. If the appellant is not at risk  from  the  ANO,
    then he is not in need of protection from Fatah.  The issue of  whether
    Fatah could provide protection within the terms  of  the  directive  is
    addressed in some detail in Mr Blum's skeleton argument  and  was  also
    addressed in the   helpful  submission  from  the  UNHCR  and  also  in
    Professor Sayigh's evidence.  We indicated to Mr Blum that we  did  not
    need to hear submissions on this. We are  entirely  satisfied  for  the
    reasons set out in the skeleton in particular, and also in the light of
    the other evidence to which we have referred above, that the  Fatah  in
    Lebanon which currently only owns one refugee camp, cannot be an  agent
    of protection as it  does  not  control  a  "substantial  part  of  the
    territory of the State" as defined in Regulation 4 of  the  Refugee  or
    Person in Need of International Protection (Qualification)  Regulations
    2006, enacted subsequently in regulation 4 of the Refugee or Person  in
    Need of  International  Protection  (Qualification)  Regulations  2006.
    There is a clear distinction between the situation of Fatah,  which  in
    Rashidieh, the only camp which it controls, is in  a  refugee  camp  of
    less than 2 sq. miles in contrast to  the  total  area  of  Lebanon  of
    10,452 Km and the  contrasting  populations  are  as  in  the  case  of
    Rashidieh, 26,000 people; in Lebanon, slightly under 4,500,000  people.
    We take these figures from the quotations in the  sources  set  out  at
    paragraph 38 of Mr  Blum's  skeleton.   Although  clearly  the  process
    cannot be a purely mathematical one, we consider that there is a  clear
    contrast between the situation here  and  that  as  considered  by  the
    Tribunal in DM (Majority clan  entities  can  protect)  Somalia  [2005]
    UKAIT 00150 concerning the situation  of  majority  clans  in  Somalia.
    Accordingly we conclude as a matter of law  that  Fatah  cannot  be  an
    agent of protection for the purposes of the Directive and  of  domestic
    law.  That finding has to be seen in  the  context  of  our  conclusion
    above that the appellant does not face a real risk from the ANO.

83.  This appeal is dismissed.


Signed                                  Date
Senior Immigration Judge Allen

                        Materials before the Tribunal




            'Guardian Unlimited' article - Mystery death of Abu Nidal, once
        the world's most wanted terrorist - 20 August 2002, pages 1-5


        Syria After Lebanon, Lebanon after Syria
        Middle East Report No 39 12.4.05


        Amnesty International Annual Report 25 May 2005


        Freedom House Report dated 11 August 2005


        IRN News Lebanon: Palestinian refugees dated 2 October 2005


        Council  of  Foreign  Relations  Article  Oct.   2005   Abu   Nidal
        Organisation (Iraq, extremists)


        Lebanon Managing the Gathering Storm
        Middle East Report No 48 5.12.05


        US Department of State Country Reports on Human Rights Practices  8
        March 2006


            COIR - Lebanon July 2006


        International  Crisis  Group   Report   Israel/Palestine   Lebanon:
        Climbing out of the Abyss Middle East Report no 57 25.7.06


        'Palestinians warn Israel to stay away from Lebanon camps.'  2.8.06
        Khaleej Times

        UNHCR Consideration on the Protection Needs  of  Persons  Displaced
        Due to Conflict in Lebanon and on Potential Responses 3.8.06


        'Israel attacks Palestinian base in Lebanon' World Net Daily 9.8.06


        Operational Guidance Note - Lebanon - 20 September 2006, pages  14-
        37


        International Crisis Group article: 'A  New  Middle  East'  21.9.06
        Robert Malley


        International Crisis Group article: 'The US Must Look  to  its  own
        Mideast Interests' - International Herald Tribune 29.9.06


        International   Crisis   Group   Report   Israel/Hizbollah/Lebanon:
        Avoiding Renewed Conflict Middle East Report no. 59 1.11.06


        UN Position Paper on the International Protection Needs of  Asylum-
        Seekers From Lebanon Displaced as a Result of The  Recent  Conflict
        15.11.06


        Freedom in the World 2007

        Amnesty International Report 2007


        Refugee Resentment Simmers as Fighting Escalates
        Jackson Allers, Electronic Lebanon 4.6.07


        Fighting halts at second Palestinian camp in Lebanon
        Reuters Foundation 4.6.07


        Lebanon refugee camps breeding ground for extremism
        Agence France-Presse (AFP) 4.6.07


        UNRWA appeals for $12.7 m as clamp clashes spread south
        Electronic Lebanon Report 4.6.07


        USSDR - Lebanon - 6 March 2007, pages 38-52


        US Department of State Country Report 2006  6.3.07


        Expert Report of Mr Yezid Sayigh Professor of Middle  East  Studies
        in
        Dept. of  War Studies, King's College, London 26.3.07


        Splinter Groups rise in Refugee Camps
        Scott Wilson, Washingtonpost.com 22.5.07


        Fighting immigration history Lebanon dashes ceasefire hopes
        Hassan M Fattah International Herald Tribune 23.5.07


            'ABC News' article - What is Fatah Al-Islam?  -  23  May  2007,
        pages 6-11


        Jihadist groups fill a Palestinian power vacuum
        Steven  Erlanger, Hassan M  Fattah,  International  Herald  Tribune
        30.5.07


        Amnesty International Public Statement 12.6.07 News Service No: 108


        Rights group: End abuse of Palestinians fleeing refugee camp
        Human Rights Watch  13.6.07


        Palestinians in Lebanon stage pro-Fatah rally
        iLoubnan-News 15.6.07


        Collective Punishment of Palestinian civilians in Lebanon
        Sophie McNeill, Electronic Lebanon 22.6.07


        Diaries: Lives from Lebanon 'They  see us all as criminals'
        Caoimhe Butterly, Live from Lebanon 22.6.07


        The Palestinian Refugee Camps  in  Lebanon  More  than  a  Lebanese
        Problem.   Nubar Hovsepian Z Net/Iraq 24.6.07


        Battles rage at Lebanon camp Nazih Siddiq Swissinfo July 12, 2007


        Rumours and violence fuel Lebanon anxiety
        Martin Asser BBC News 9.7.07


        Fierce clashes despite beefed up peacekeeping
        Thalif Deen, Electronic Lebanon 10.7.07


        Lebanon: People flee Nahr al-Bared camp  ahead  of  expected  final
        assault.     IRIN News  11.7.07


        World Refugee Survey 2007 11.7.07


        Palestinian Refugees Flee Camp in Northern Lebanon
        Voice of America News.  VOA News 11.7.07


        Year later, Lebanon paralysed by  crises.  Caught  in  struggle  to
        influence Mideast.    Chicago Tribune Liz Sly 12.7.07


        Refugee crisis threatens Lebanon
        BBC News Martin Asser 13.7.07


        Lebanon army advances into camp.  Reuters 15.7.07


        At  Nahr-al  Bared  and  Bedawwi,  it's  the  next  fire  that  has
        responders worried.   The Daily Star 16.7.07


        Further letter from Professor Sayigh: 18.7.07


            'BBC News' article - Lebanon troops 'close in  on  camp'  -  18
        July 2007, pages 12-13


        Abu Nidal Organisation (ANO) Site Institute
        The Search for International Terrorist Entities


        FMO Research Guide: Palestinian Refugees in Lebanon
        Sherifa Shafie


        News Article on Fatah Revolutionary Council


        News Article on Fatah Revolutionary Council


        The Law, the  loss  and  the  lives  of  Palestinian   Refugees  in
        Lebanon. CMI Working Paper Are Knudsen WP 2001: 1

        Fatah   -   Revolutionary   Council   (Abu   Nidal    Organisation)
        www.ict.org.il
